1024 Suncook Valley Hwy, C5 
Q PO Box 1071 
Epsom, NH 03234 
PROPANE GAS ASSOCIATION OF NEW ENGLAND 
March 21, 2023 
TESTIMONY OF LESLIE ANDERSON 
President and CEO of the Propane Gas Association of New England 
BEFORE THE MAINE COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION 
In Support of LD 534 An Act to Allow Commercial Driver's License Holders Who Are 18 to 20 Years of Age 
to Haul Hazardous Materials Intrastate 
The Propane Gas Association of New England (PGANE) is pleased to have the opportunity to offer its 
comments regarding LD 534. 
The Propane Gas Association of New England is a regional alternative energy trade association 
representing members of the propane industry in the 6 New England States. We exist to serve the propane 
industry by promoting safety, education, and public awareness of the uses of propane. Our membership 
includes propane companies and suppliers, including numerous small companies who are often family 
owned and operated, many for several generations. Using propane furthers the fundamental 
environmental goal to Reduce, Reuse, and Recycle as promoted by EPA and DEP. Most people do not 
realize that propane is a biproduct of natural gas processing. About 5% of natural gas processing produces 
propane. If propane is not captured and beneficially used to offset another energy source, it is simply 
burned off. Propane is a partner with renewable energy as it is the perfect backup for solar installations 
and wind turbines. It is a recognized clean alternative fuel by EPA under the 1990 Clean Air Act, and it is an 
essential backup for our ever-increasing use of the electric grid. Renewable propane is also a viable 
innovation and under development from renewable sources like waste oils, plants, and recycled plastic 
bottles. 
We support LD S34 an Act which would allow trained commercial drivers aged 18~2O to obtain a Hazmat 
endorsement for intrastate travel. The propane industry relies on over-the-road transportation to deliver 
fuel to homes, schools, businesses, and farms across the state. However, the current shortage of 
commercial drivers threatens the industry's ability to deliver propane efficiently. 
Our association has had workforce development as a strategic goal for the last ten years and one of the 
reasons we continue to face challenges bringing on new younger drivers, is because we lose them 
between the ages of 18 and 20. This bill would allow us to find drivers as young people enter the 
workforce. Eighteen —year-olds are driving military vehicles in defense of our country, yet we restrict their 
ability to drive hazmat vehicles and embark on a highly paid career in a field sorely needed by our state. 
Not all 18-year-olds have the same maturity, and from a safety standpoint, our members are going to 
make sure that they fully train and certify their new drivers and that they hire the strongest and safest 
most mature candidates. We are not going to put inexperienced or immature drivers into a $150,000 
propane bobtail and risk danger to that vehicle. Many of today's trucks are outfitted with the latest
safety technology, including active braking collision mitigation systems, forward facing event recording 
cameras, backup cameras, speed limiters set at 65 miles per hour or less, and automatic or automatic 
manual transmissions. Our members transport fuel over the road by highway transport trucks, which 
deliver propane to bulk plant facilities, or by local bulk delivery trucks, called bobtails. We also transport 
tanks to customer locations and need hazmat certifications for placarded multiple customer tank delivery 
vehicles. Over 95 percent of propane marketers are motor carriers designated as small businesses, with 
some possessing regional operations. Attracting and training new people to the transportation sector is 
vital for the propane industry. 
Should this bill move forward we would work with our federal Senators to pursue an exemption from the 
federal hazmat age requirements. Maine faces one of the highest average ages of commercial driver 
pools in the country, and we have all suffered recently the shortages from grocery items to high tech 
electronic parts over the recent years. Prices in Maine continue to outpace the rest of the country on 
many items because we depend on trucks to move our products throughout the state to a large degree. 
Maine should take the lead and set the example for other states because driver shortages are causing 
problems across our nation. Seventy percent of the nation's freight is carried by commercial trucks, and 
while demand is projected to increase over the next decade, the threat posed by the driver shortage 
stands to disrupt the continuity of the supply chain. This is especially problematic as the nation and our 
economy recover from the monumental impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. According to a recent 
estimate, the trucking industry needs an additional 60,800 truck drivers immediately ——a deficit that is 
expected to grow to more than 160,000 by 2028. In fact, when anticipated driver retirement numbers are 
combined with the expected growth in capacity, the trucking industry will need to hire roughly 1.1 million 
new drivers over the next decade, or an average of nearly 110,000 per year. The COVlD-19 pandemic 
further exacerbated the truck driver shortage, and the temporary closures of state DMV's and truck 
driver training schools dried up the already fragile pipeline of new drivers entering the trucking industry. 
And because of the already crippling driver shortage, companies in supply chains across the economy are 
facing higher transportation costs, leading to increased prices for consumers on everything from 
electronics to food. 
I thank you for the opportunity to comment before the committee and ask you to please support LD 534 
to support the continuation of Maine's domestic energy reliability and infrastructure.
