. 
,_7 
,T Department of the Secretary of State .. rm--- U -Q, W _,. I 
1 Z11 
(,1‘ 
,,,;' O 
, »~;,~1U Bureau of Motor Vehlcles ig-T’~. ??§>I)~‘i 
\l7.-l 77$}? 
She Ben Catherine Curtis ma ows 
Deputy Secretary of State Secretary of State 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION 
Testimony of Sherma Bellows Secretary of State 
Department of the Secretary of State 
March 21, 2023 
Testifying In Opposition To 
L.D. 534 “An Act to Allow Commercial Driver’s License Holders Who Are 18 to 20 
Years of Age to Haul Hazardous Materials Intrastate"" 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, my name is Shenna Bellows and I am the Secretary of 
State and chief motor vehicle officer. I am speaking today in opposition to L.D. 5 34. 
Today’s economic environment has certainly impacted the hiring process for all 
employers; we feel the same pressures here in state government. As a northern state, 
Mainers know that energy transportation is one of our most critical career ﬁelds during 
winter months. Certainly, the wider public conversation this winter about the 
challenges faced by our fuel transporters has been an important conversation. 
But as we think about ways to sustain and improve that career ﬁeld, we need to be 
mindful of how much risk we can and should accept. I would like to talk about three 
categories of risk today, related to the potential adoption of this bill—regulato1y risk, 
funding risk, and public health risk. 
To start, it is important to note the Bureau’s ability to allow drivers younger than 21 
years of age to haul hazardous materials —or HAZMAT for short—is currently limited 
by federal regulation, state law and state rule. Title 49 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations (49 C.F.R.). addresses the general qualiﬁcations of commercial motor 
vehicle drivers (including the baseline requirement of 21 years of age) and the 
movement of dangerous goods, and the prohibition from using the instrastate exemption 
for the transportation of hazardous materials. 
29 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0029 
ht!/J."//www.maine.20v/$03/bmv; tel. 207-624-9000
To begin, the regulatory implication of passing this bill should not be dismissed. Our 
CDL licensing program at BMV submits annually to a program review from the Federal 
Motor Carrier Safety Administration. In those reviews, our program undergoes a 
thorough evaluation for compliance. Implied within those reviews is the idea thata 
state licensing program deemed non-compliant could lose its authority to issue licenses 
allowing inter-state operation. I know our State Police colleagues undergo similar 
compliance inspections, but I defer to them to describe the impacts this bill could have 
on their programs. 
Second, the funding risk associated with falling out of compliance could be signiﬁcant. 
I defer again to our State Police to describe the funding risks that their program might 
face. From a licensing perspective, itis worth recalling that as recently as 2021, Maine 
was warned we would lose highway funding if we failed to comply with the new CDL 
road exam criteria. To prevent that ﬁscal crisis, BMV altered their exam process and 
achieved compliance on July 1, 2022. If we were to lose federal highway funding due 
to non-compliance, the negative impacts to Maine’s roadways, and the safety of 
everyone who uses those roadways, would be extensive, to say the least. 
Third, in addition to understanding if we can accept this risk, I think we have a wider 
responsibility to think about whether we should accept this risk or not. Unlike many 
things our respected motor carriers and commercial drivers move every day, a spill of 
hazardous goods have the potential to leave a lasting impact on property, lives, water 
sources and the wider environment. In other words, the impact of a HAZMAT accident 
could potentially extend well beyond the footprint of the immediate accident site.A 
recent HAZMAT crash in Arizona, and the HAZMAT train accident in East Palestine, 
Ohio, serve as serious reminders of the risk and the irreversible consequences. While 
we are indeed fortunate that our HAZMAT drivers here in Maine have historically been 
very safe, I strongly recommend we not risk that record by empowering a younger, less 
mature set of drivers to move these materials. There is too much at risk. 
Last, while I do feel strongly these are not risks the State should accept, I am committed 
to ﬁnding additional ways to help this industry thrive. In fact, our BMV team—as 
recently as this past fall—worked alongside the Maine Energy Marketers Association to 
facilitate their stand-up of an entry-level driving course for their association members. 
This same team, under guidance and direction from my office, also put in placea 
handful of signiﬁcant program and process changes to eliminate the backlog of exams 
we faced last summer. I am conﬁdent those same measures will prevent a return ofa 
large backlog. 
For these reasons, we are in opposition to this bill. Thank you and I am happy to answer 
any questions. 
29 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0029 
http://www.mainagov/190$/bmv," tel. 207-624-9000
