                                         
March 21, 2023
TESTIMONY OF SUE WALTZ                   
Owner / CFO of Waltz & Sons Propane
 
BEFORE THE MAINE COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION
Concerning LD 534 An Act to Allow Commercial Driver’s License Holders Who Are 18 to 20 
Years of Age to Haul Hazardous Materials Intrastate
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the Transportation Committee, I am 
pleased to have the opportunity to offer my comments regarding LD 534 An Act to Allow 
Commercial Driver’s License Holders Who are 18 to 20 Years of Age to Haul Hazardous Materials 
Intrastate.
I, on behalf of my company, Waltz & Sons Propane, respectfully request that the committee 
vote PASS on this bill LD 534.
We are a family owned and operated Propane company located in Buxton that has been in 
operation for over 25 years. I currently employ 14 employees, 11 of which hold a State of Maine 
Propane and Natural Gas Technician License, and Maine CDL license with Hazmat Endorsement. 
The other 3 are CSRs who have taken the CETP Basics course which is the foundation of all CETP 
licenses. 
We are very proud to have a young, energetic staff of managers, technicians, and drivers. The 
average age of our management staff is 41. They lead our crew whose average age is 30 ½. 
Our youngest employee is 24 and he has been with us since he was 19. Our company’s culture is 
attractive to the younger generation, and by passing this bill, it would allow us to recruit 18–20-
year-olds before they choose another career which includes driving for another industry. 
In Maine, 18–20-year-olds can currently hold a Class A, B or C commercial Driver’s License. This 
allows them to drive commercial vehicles such as dump trucks and 18-wheelers. 18–20-year-
olds can also handle and dispense propane at your local hardware store. However, 18–20-year-
olds cannot transport propane without a hazardous materials endorsement on their CDL license. 
18–20-year-olds can hold a State of Maine Propane and Natural Gas Technicians License and 
have up to 5 certifications on their license. Each module within a certification is tested, and after 
all modules within a certification are complete, there is a State of Maine examination. Even 
when an 18–20-year-old completes the Delivery Technician, or Tank Setter and Outside Piping, 
they cannot delivery or transport tanks without a Hazardous Materials Endorsement on their 
CDL license. 
For each employee, Hazmat training is required within 3 months of employment, and every 3 
years afterwards. 18–20-year-olds must take this training, however, they cannot delivery or 
transport tanks without a Hazardous Materials Endorsement. 
Since February 2022, to obtain a CDL license one must meet ELDT requirements which require 
both Theory and Behind-The-Wheel training. There is an additional ELDT training requirement 
for the “H” Hazardous Materials endorsement. Upon completion of ELDT training, one must 
then pass the State of Maine CDL written exams for A or B which includes air brakes, Tanker, 
and Hazardous Materials Endorsements. Upon completion of passing the written portion they 
need to pass a road test. In addition, they also need to pass a medical examination, and TSA 
Background check. 
These extensive training and licensing requirements ensure that 18-20 years old are well versed 
in Hazardous Materials, and the transportation thereof. I feel that if an 18–20-year-old can 
complete all these requirements, they should be allowed to obtain an Intrastate Hazardous 
Materials endorsement on their CDL license.
For these reasons, I, on behalf of my company, respectfully request that the committee vote 
PASS on this bill.
Thank you for your consideration.
