ieanne Lambrcw, pal). 
(ﬂm HIISSIOHCY ""‘”“'§’ hm“ T_ Mm?’ F‘ Maine Department of Heaith and Human Sen ices 
i 
Division of Licensing and Certiﬁratmn (‘ovcrnor ; 2"‘
I 
I I State House Station, =ﬂ Anthony Avenue 
Testimony of Director William Montejo, RN 
Division of Licensing and Certiﬁcation 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services 
In Support of LD 636 - An Act to Authorize the Department of Health and Human Services to 
License and Ensure the Quality of Personal Care Agencies 
April 10, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Bill Montejo, I am the Director of the Division of 
Licensing and Certiﬁcation for the Department of Health and Human Services. I am here today 
to help introduce and speak in strong support of LD 636, An Act to Authorize the Department of 
Health and Human Services to License and Ensure the Quality of Personal Care Agencies. The 
Department is grateful to Representative Craven for sponsoring this proposal. 
As many of you recall, the Committee heard a bill from Senator Maxmin a few years ago that 
sought to address constituent concerns about oversight of personal care agency staff. These staff 
are in the homes of vulnerable and dependent adults who can be at risk. While the vast majority 
of personal care staff are professional, kind, and excellent in their jobs, the Committee also heard 
stories of theft, exploitation, and a lack of accountability or repercussions when these issues 
occurred. This conversation resulted in Resolves 2021, Ch. 117, which directed the Department 
to review its current regulatory and oversight authority. In addition to the review, the Department 
also held stakeholder events to gather preliminary concerns and suggestions for improving the 
quality of personal care service. Both stakeholder events were held virtually due to the public 
health emergency. 
The stakeholder feedback and preliminary analysis conducted by the Department clearly 
identiﬁed the following: 
0 importance of training and ensuring quality of personal care staff; 
0 Strengthening the administrative process for establishing a personal care agency; and 
0 Clarifying and strengthening the Department ’s investigative and enforcement authority 
over quality issues and complaints. 
in response to this engagement and review, the Department is putting forth this proposal to create 
a licensing structure for Personal Care Agencies similar to other agencies currently licensed by 
the Division of Licensing and Certiﬁcation. 
LD 636 will replace a registration process with a licensing process for personal care agencies. 
This includes providing the Department with the statutory authority to create licensing rules and I , 
. 
Augusta, Mame 04333-0011 
r 
Tei.: (207) 2219300; Toll Free: (sen) rnansts 
'r'rY= Din! 7!! (Maine Relay); (201) zstusais
a quality assurance process for personal care agencies that serve older adults and adults with 
disabilities. 
Finally, in what amounts to a technical change, the bill also removes “placement agencies ” from 
registration or licensing requirements as there are few of these agencies and the involve little to 
no direct client contact. 
We appreciate the Committee ’s and stakeholder ’s engagement on this topic over the years and 
are looking forward to taking this next step to ensure quality care for people in Maine. We hope 
you will vote ought to pass, and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have and 
will plan to attend the work session.
