 
The Maine Long-Te rm Care  
OMBUDSMAN 
Program    61 Winthrop  Street  • Augusta,  ME 04330  
1-800-499-0229  • Fax 207-621-0509  
MLTCOP@MaineOmbudsman.org
 
 
 
TESTIMONY 
 
In Support of 
 
LD 636; An Act to Authorize the Department of Health and Human Services to License 
and 
Ensure the Quality of Personal Care Agencies 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
April 10, 2023 
 
Maine Long - Term Care Ombudsman Program 
 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services.  
 
The Ombudsman Program staff are pleased to provide testimony in support of this legislation 
that requires regulatory oversight of Personal Care Agencies that is necessary to assure the 
quality of care provided by these agencies. 
 
The Ombudsman Program is a nonprofit agency that provides statewide advocacy for older and 
disabled residents of nursing homes, residential care, assisted living and for recipients of home 
care services. Additionally, the program serves patients in hospitals who experience barriers in 
accessing the long-term services and support they need when they are ready for discharge.  
 
It is critical that personal care agencies be licensed and subject to licensing rules that can be 
enforced by the Department of Health and Human Services, Division of Licensing and 
Certification. Over the years, we have observed several problems with personal care agency 
services such as: ending staffing for older adults and people with disabilities without notice, 
complaints about staff employed to provide care who lack sufficient training, and recently, a 
personal care agency that for an extended period, failed to pay wages for staff providing care. 
Strengthening quality measures, mandatory minimum training requirements, supervision 
requirements and providing technical support for administrative processes will make a direct 
improvement to the health and safety of home care consumers.  

 
The Ombudsman Program staff participated in the stakeholder groups held by the Department 
of Health and Human Services to provide input for this legislation. Personal care agencies 
provide services for older and disabled persons with a range of care needs. Regulatory 
oversight is critically needed to protect and promote quality of care.  
 
We urge your support for this legislation. 
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.maineombudsman .org 
