bridges 
/iic>i».ae$sierivic:§§ ““ 
Testimony in Support of 
LD 636, An Act to Authorize the Department of Health and Human Services to License and 
Ensure the Quality of Personal Care Agencies 
April 10, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Jeff Johnson. lam a resident of Manchester andI 
serve as the Vice President of Home & Community Based Services for Bridges Home Services 
and Spectrum Generations. We are also a member of the Home Care & Hospice Alliance of 
Maine. 
Bridges Home Services is a registered personal care agency located in Augusta, which provides 
more than 125,000 hours per year to recipients of PSS services throughout the State. 
I'm here today to testify in support of LD 636, An Act to Authorize the Department of Health 
and Human Services to License and Ensure the Quality of Personal Care Agencies. 
Personal care agencies, such as Bridges, assist those that need support with Activities of Daily 
Living (ADLs) including eating and mobility; as well as more intimate care such as bathing, 
dressing and toileting. 
Licensing standards can help to ensure that personal care agencies are staffed with qualified 
and competent caregivers who have the necessary training and experience to provide safe and 
effective care. Standards that also require background checks and criminal history screening for 
employees can help prevent abuse or neglect of MaineCare's vulnerable population choosing to 
receive care in their home. 
Increased oversight through licensure would: 
0 Help ensure that personal care agencies are staffed with qualified and competent 
caregivers who have the necessary training and experience to provide safe and effective 
care. 
0 Prevent the spread of illness or disease among clients and staff through health and 
safety protocals. 
0 Protect clients from fraudulent or unethical practices by personal care agencies. The 
establishment of clear guidelines for billing, documentation, and other business 
practices can help to prevent agencies from overcharging clients or engaging in other 
unethical behaviors.
lorid es 
gﬁéwaiiané 
Members of the Home Care & Hospice Alliance of l\/laine request that their registered PCA 
members be invited work with Licensing and Certification in the development of quality 
measures, personnel qualifications, training and other critical components of this bill. 
Together, I believe we can establish measurable, meaningful standards for personal care 
agencies designed to ensure MaineCare beneficiaries receive safe, high-quality care from 
qualified and competent caregivers. 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak in support of this important legislation. I welcome any 
questions that you have. 
Jeffrey A. Johnson 
VP, Home & Community Based Services 
Spectrum Generations/Bridges Home Services 
iiohnson@spectrumgenerations.org 
(207) 620-1679
