  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso  on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence  
LD 1439  “An Act to Promote Family -centered Interventions for Substance Use Disorder Treatment”  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on  Health and Human Services  
Wednesday , Ma y 3, 2023  
  
Senator  Baldacci, Representative  Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Comm ittee on 
Health and Human Services,  I am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
(MCEDV)1 to raise concerns with LD 1439, “An Act to Promote Family -centered Interventions for 
Substance Use Disorder Treatment.”  
MCEDV deeply appre ciates the intention behind  this proposal . However, where abusive 
people can use systems and community responses against their partner, they will find a way to do so, 
and this bill does not provide any of the guard rails that would be necessary to prevent that . While 
many family members might be sincerely seeking substance use intervention services for their loved 
one with the best of intentions , and they may be an appropriate and positive source of support for 
that loved one, we cannot write that assumption into our laws given the high prevalence of domesti c 
abuse and violence in our state  – abuse that is perpetrated by family members or others who may fall 
under the “authorized person”  category.  While  certainly positive social and family support is 
associated with successful recovery, negative social and fa mily involvement , to specifically include 
interpersonal conflict , is related to increased  risk of substance use. Without proper screening and 
assessment, the requirements on health care facilities outlined in  the draft of LD 1439 risk causing 
great harm.  
 
 
1 MCEDV serves a membership of the eight regional domestic violence resource centers  (DVRCs)  across the 
state, as well as the Immigrant Resource Center of Maine.  Last year, these programs together served more than 
12,000 Maine survivors of domestic abuse and violence and their children.   
MCEDV   Page 2 of 5 
As drafted, LD 1439 does not provide any way for either health care facilities  or the person 
affected to identify or account for whether the family member or friend seeking to get involved is a 
positive or negative support . An “authorized person ,” under the bill, means any family member or 
friend who requests an intervention , regardless of the nature, quality or context of their relationship 
with the affected person  or how the affected person feels about their involvement . This is in direct 
contrast to the recommendations from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration  Advisory around involving family in any sort of intervention or counseling  from the 
advisory that was provided to the Committee in support of th e bill . The  SAMHSA  recommendations 
call for fairly  comprehensive screening for  circumstances in which family -based interventions would 
be “inadvisable, inappropriate, or counterproductive ,” and specifically cite domestic violence and 
abuse dynamics as concerns. The recommendations further note the importance of giving the 
impacted p erson “choice” over who participates and of honor ing that person’s choices. There are 
clearly many factors to be thoughtfull y explored and accounted for before a third party is involved in 
the treatment of a patient; none of those factors appear to be acco unted for in this proposal.  
 It also appears that a “person in need” means any person hospitalized for any reason, as the 
only place where the hospitalization is specifically limited to hospitalization for treatment of 
substance use disorder is in section  1, subparagraph 4.  Therefore, u nder the current proposal, could 
a woman who is hospitalized to give birth be faced with an “intervention” and  two  compulsory 
substance use evaluations based on substance use disorder allegations made by the child’s fathe r 
who, unbeknownst to the health care facility, has a history of domestic abuse and violence towards 
this person?  
The language of LD 1439 would permit  any family member or friend of a person hospitalized 
for any reason to “request an intervention.” It is unclear if the intervention that must then be 
offered by the facility can be refused by the patient.  Can the  patient decline to have the facility move 
forward with the intervention? If not, how  will this forced intervention be paid for ? We understand 
from our colleagues at the Office of Behavioral Health  and the Maine Hospital Association  that such 
practices are not covered by health insurance . Will the patient be responsible for  the cost of an 
intervention they had no  option to refuse ? The proposal  further directs that the facility is compelled 
to include in the intervention the “authorized person” who requested it and other family members 
or friends. Again, we note that this would not seem to allow for any structure or process to 
determine  whether the authorized person or other participants is not a positive source of support. 
Such a determination is also likely to be difficult for providers to be expected to  accurately make in 
  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
the context of an emergency room response, where  providers have not yet established a 
relationship of trust with the patient, such that disclosures about abuse  could be reasonably 
expected  from a person who is already in a vu lnerable place .  
Section 3 of the bill directs two substance use evaluations, in which all of the patient’s 
medical history must be provided and reviewed and through which the authorized person and any 
other family or friend would be able to give whatever information they want. The bill is unclear what 
launches this requirement. Is it the request for intervention by an authorized person? The fact of 
hospitalization of a person for substance use treatment? Can the patient refuse these examinations? 
There is no process referenced in the bill language for the p atient to contest the need for such  
compulsory evaluation s or to seek to limit who is appropriate to provide  information to the 
evaluators.  In the context of domestic abuse and violence, we would expect t o see abusive family 
members manipulating this process and later seeking to use these medical records for harm – for 
example in an ongoing or subsequent family court  or child welfare proceeding .  
 Lastly, section 4 of the bill requires any discharge plans developed to “include the authorized 
person and family members,” without any opportunity for the patient to have input into whether 
that authorized person or other family members are positive supports or would be inappropriate to 
be participating in any recovery plans. It is unclear what it means for a discharge plan to be 
“include[d].” Does it mean that the discharge plan, with potentially confidential medical/health 
information, is shared with these 3rd parties? Does  it require  the person in need to work with or share 
information with these interested parties?  How would facilities screen  and account for whether 
someone who qualifies as an authorized person has a history of sabotaging the p atient’s  prior 
attempts at sobriety? The language in this bill does not provide flexibility to facilities to fully consider 
and respond to the individual circumstances of the patient in front of them.  
It is not uncommon for perpetrators of domestic abuse and violence to be the reason the 
victi m is using substances in the first place – whether that be due to coerced use or where the use is 
MCEDV   Page 4 of 5 
a means to cope with abuse. And it is not uncommon for a perpetrator to then manipulate that 
substance use against the victim, to impair credibility, to gain leverage around child custody, to use 
state systems like the child welfare system to advance their own agendas, etc. This proposal risks 
codifying a health care response that facilitates such abuse, and  it goes further – seemingly 
compelling certain action s and information sharing before the subject person is even determined to 
be a person in need of substance use treatment.  
Giving family members or close associates power to compel health care interventions (and 
their own involvement with them) without sub stantial guard rails and off ramps would  be very 
dangerous  to victims of domestic abuse and violence . This is especially true for those victims who 
have additional vulnerabilities , including those who may already have a harder time than an 
“authorized pers on” communicating with health care professionals in these situations.  MCEDV asks 
this Committee to deeply consider the complex nature of family dynamics and ensure that any 
requirements around family involvement in health care responses have appropriate protections to 
guard against abuse.  
Thank you for the opportunity to provide our perspective. MCEDV is happy to work with the 
Committee and any interested parties as your wor k on this proposal continues.  
 
Contact Information:    
Andrea Mancuso, Esq.    
Public Policy Director   
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)   
Ph: (207) 650 -4356  
Email:  andrea@mcedv.org   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
 
 
 
  
