 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of Behavioral Health  
11 State House Station  
41 Anthony Avenue  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -2595 ; Fax: (207) 287 -9152  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
May 3 , 2023  
 
Senator  Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1439, An Act to Promote Family -centered Interventions for Substance Use Disorder 
Treatment . 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meye r, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Ser vices:  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide information for the Committee’s consideration regarding 
LD 1439, An Act to Promote Family -centered Interventions for Substance Use  
Disorder Treatment.   
 
It is well established through literature that those individuals with Substance Use Disorder ( SUD ) 
who have social and family support tend to have better  sustained recovery. Often, family members 
can serve as a catalyst for individuals to engage in treatment because they are able to recognize signs 
and sympt oms of problematic use. The Office of Behavioral Health (OBH) strongly s upports 
treatment providers in any level of care  — hospital or outpatient  — to involve family, friends, 
guardians , and significant others when it is clinically appropriate and legal to  do so.  
 
There are, however, limitations to the ability of treatment providers to involve others in the treatment 
of SUD, primarily 42 CFR Part 21 which protects the confidentiality of SUD patient information and 
records. To even acknowledge that an individual has a n SUD, the individual must sign a consent 
form that permits disclosure and or information exchange and that protection extends to family, 
friends, and significant or involved others. Treatment providers are obligat ed to maintain the 
confidentiality  of individuals with SUD. To ensure, to the best of their ability, that treatment 
providers are able to actively involve family members  and others  in the treatment of individuals with 
SUD  and when clinically appropriate, conversations occur that encourage patients to sign consent 
forms . Ultimately , however,  it is the patient’s right to decline the involvement of others in their 
treatment. It is also their right to decline treatment .  
 
One practice , developed 20 -30 years ago, that has been used to encourage individuals  to engage in 
treatment is the substance use disorder “intervention ” and those who facilitate this practice are known 
as professional interventionists.  Although  the number is quite limited, some professionall y licensed 
clinicians are also trained as interventionists.  The intervention usually takes the form of a meeting 
staged by family , friends , or guardians  with the goal of convincing a person struggling with SUD to 
seek treatment. This is not considered an e vidence -based practice,  nor is it a service recognized by 
payor sources such as commercial or governmental insurers. Overall, there is a dearth of research to 
                                                 
1 https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title -42/chapter -I/subchapter -A/part -2  
DocuSign Envelope ID: F7A921B4-224B-498D-B8C5-0A45219BA7AD
 
 indicate either the effectiveness or lack thereof of the use of formal interventions. There is co ncern 
from substance use treatment professionals that interventions can become confrontation al and there is 
risk that a person struggling with SUD will feel blame and shame . An environment that risks causing 
blame and shame runs counter to the principles o f a trauma informed care environment  and runs 
counter to current clinical philosophy that promote s partnering with individuals in self -directed care . 
Moreover, individuals with SUD don’t often know that an intervention will happen,  and this removes 
their v oice and choice from the situation.  
 
The State of Maine does not license professional interventionists  and does not recognize 
interventions as an evidence -based practice. This is not a modality reimbursed by MaineCare  nor by 
federal grant  dollar s. The Office of Behavioral Health does not support nor endorse clinical practices 
or other intervention services that are not evidence -based and that do not have professional literature 
available to support and ratify the practice. It would be beyond the sco pe and role of  of a recovery 
coach to be utilized for an  “intervention ” and further, Maine likely does not have sufficient Licensed 
Alcohol and D rug Counselors (LADCs) to support the approach  broadly.  
 
Additionally, provided the re is independent capacity , OBH fully endorses the right to informed 
consent for any treatment intervention  prior to the delivery of the service.  The Department does not 
support (a) treatment without the consent of the individual  who has independent capacity  and (b) the 
use of trea tments that are not evidence -based best practice.  
 
The Office of Behavioral Health addresses many of the objectives of the bill through its recently 
expanded program of placing recovery coaches in emergency departments. Coaches provide 
information to indi viduals and their support networks, extract information that can help doctors make 
better diagnoses, and make referrals to treatment and recovery programs. It is a voluntary service in -
line with evidence -based best practice and supported with federal dolla rs.  
 
OBH’s public awareness initiative and harm reduction campaign, OPTIONS (Overdose Prevention 
Through Intensive Outreach Naloxone and Safety), also supports the goals of this LD. The OPTIONS 
co-responder initiative embeds licensed behavioral health clinicians within local emergency medical 
services (EMS) and law enforcement agencies in every county across Maine. Liaisons work 
alongside their first responder counterparts to provide brief therapeutic interventions when 
appropriate; conduct proactive ou treach with at -risk communities; de -escalate behavioral health 
crises when possible; and engage in post -overdose follow up and help with referrals. The OPTIONS 
public awareness campaign connects people affected by the opioid epidemic with local prevention,  
harm reduction, recovery, treatment, and general support resources, among other activities.  
 
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide information. Please let us know how else we might be 
of service.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Sarah Squirrell  
Director, Office o f Behavioral Health  
DocuSign Envelope ID: F7A921B4-224B-498D-B8C5-0A45219BA7AD

