_ HoUSE or REPRESENTATIVES ﬁg »~.r3?§»>., ‘fl 
2 STATE HOUSE STATIoN 
L AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
H_ Sc0t,“,;,nd,.y Jr_ TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
137 Shephe1'd ’s Lane 
Farniington, ME 04938 
Residence: (207) 491-9041 
Scott Landry@,1egislat1Ire.maine.g0v 
May l, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Scott Landry presenting 
LD 1525, An Act to Provide for Administrative Suspension of 
Licenses and Certificates Issued Under the Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife Laws 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Good morning, Senator LaFountain and fellow members of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Committee. I am Representative Scott Landry and I represent the towns of Chesterville and 
Farmington in House District 75. I am here to present LD 1525, An Act to Provide for 
Administrative Suspension of Licenses and Certiﬁcates Issued Under the Inland Fisheries 
and Wildlife Laws. 
I was asked to put in this bill by a friend and former member of this committee, the Honorable 
Tim Theriault. The goal of LD 1525 is to prevent habitual offenders of game laws from using the 
legal system to avoid losing the privilege of hunting, ﬁshing or trapping by dragging out the 
legal process to avoid conviction. 
This bill creates an administrative license suspension process for the Department of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife similar to what exists for the Department of Marine Resources. 
The process allows the Commissioner of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to determine if license 
suspension is necessary without criminal conviction or civil adjudication upon recommendation 
of the Game Warden Colonel when a violation of inland ﬁsheries and wildlife laws has been 
committed. This determination is to be based on a preponderance of the evidence. 
The commissioner must notify the individual in Writing of the pending suspension and include 
instructions for requesting a hearing. If requested, a hearing must be held -within 30 days of the 
commissioner receiving the request, except if a delay is requested by the individual, in which 
case the hearing must be held no later than 60 days from receiving the request, except by mutual 
agreement between the individual and the commissioner. 
District 75: Chesteiyille and Farmington
The commissioner may suspend any license or certiﬁcate for a period of time not to exceed the 
maximum amount of time allowable for a criminal conviction or civil adjudication of the same 
violation. A decision of the commissioner to suspend a license or certiﬁcate pursuant to this 
section may be appealed to the Superior Court within 30 days of the decision. If the 
commissioner suspends a license under this section, the commissioner may not suspend or 
extend the suspension of the license because of a criminal conviction or civil adjudication for the 
same violation. 
Thank you. 
District 75: Chesterville and Fannington
