TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST L.D. 1525 
"An Act to Provide for Administrative Suspension of Licenses and Certiﬁcates Issued 
Under the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Laws" 
SPONSORED BY: Representative LANDRY of Farmington, 
COSPONSORED BY: Senator Black of Franklin and Representative Dill of Old Town 
DATE OF HEARING: May 1, 2023 
Good morning Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland Fisheries 
and Wildlife Committee. l am Tim Peabody, Deputy Commissioner of the Department of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, neither for nor against L.D. 1525 
The bill creates an administrative license suspension process without criminal conviction or civil 
adjudication similar to Department of Marine Resources current law. Upon recommendation of 
the Game Warden Colonel based on knowledge that a violation of lnland Fisheries and Wildlife 
law has been committed the Commissioner can suspend a person's license(s). This knowledge of 
violation is based on a preponderance of the evidence. 
The Department understands that the intent of the bill is to stop persons from continuing to 
engage in a regulated activity i.e. hunting, fishing, trapping, while a case is pending within the 
legal system, but feels the proposal in LD 1525 is too broad. 
The Commissioner currently has an administrative suspension process for civil trespass while 
hunting and a provision to suspend, revoke or fail to issue a guide license for certain situations 
that do not require a criminal conviction or civil adjudication. If the Committee chooses to move 
this bill forward these are current sections of law that could be amended. 
In closing, we are supportive of a discussion but concerned about creating a new subchapter of 
law without considering the provisions for suspension currently in Title 12 Part 13. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
