‘ 
Janet T_ Ming Maine Department ofHealth and Human Services 
Governor V ->1 Administrative Hearings 
'“T§€% ll State House Station 1 
109 Capitol Street 
J"“““‘*.M' L‘"“b"“" PM)‘ Augusta, Maine 04333-0011 C°""“'“'°“°' Tel.: (207) 624-5350; Fax: (207) 287-8448 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay) 
Testimony of the Division of Administrative Hearings 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
In opposition to LD 1287, An Act to Establish an Appeal Process for Child Care Providers 
Hearing Date: April 10, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is Joseph Pickering. I am the Chief 
Administrative Hearing Ofﬁcer of the Division of Administrative Hearings in the Department of 
Health and Human Services. I am here today to testify in opposition to LD 1287, An Act to 
Establish an Appeal Process for Child Care Providers. 
As noted by Director Landry, this bill is not necessary as there is already an appeal process in 
place for Department licensing decisions regarding a child care facility or family child care 
provider. In addition to Director Landry’s testimony, it is important for you to understand the 
existing administrative appeals process. 
The Division of Administrative Hearings handles all administrative appeals of DHHS decisions. 
We are not associated with the Office of Child and Family Services or any other service- 
providing Office within the Department. We are under the purview of the Commissioner ’s 
Office. We conduct hearings pursuant to the Administrative Procedure Act and the Department ’s 
Administrative Hearing Regulations (10-144 Cl\/LR Ch. 1). Hearing Ofﬁcers are required to be 
unbiased and to have no prior involvement in the decision being appealed. The parties are not 
allowed to have contact with the Hearing Officer without the other party being present. Hearings 
are conducted under a de novo review standard. Facts are detennined anew. There is no 
presumption made for or against the Department. Testimony is submitted under oath subject to 
cross-examination. The appellant may call his or her own witnesses or subpoena witnesses if he 
or she wishes. The Hearing Ofﬁcer is required to issue an independent decision without 
deference to the action being appealed. 
For an appeal of a civil penalty, the Hearing Officer’s decision would constitute the ﬁnal agency 
action of the Department. If the Hearing Ofﬁcer upholds the civil penalty, the appellant can 
appeal to the Superior Court. For more serious licensing actions such as a denial of an 
application for a license, the issuance of a conditional license, or the revocation of a license, the 
Hearing Ofﬁcer issues a Recommended Decision to the Commissioner. The parties are given 
twenty days to submit exceptions and responses to the Recommended Decision. The 
Recommended Decision and any exceptions and responses are then submitted to the 
Commissioner, who makes the ﬁnal decision. If the Commissioner upholds the Recommended 
Decision, then the appellant can appeal to the Superior Court.
As noted by Director Landry, there is no appeal process for the minor decisions made in 
inspection reports. However, if the Department were to base an appealable licensing decision 
upon such inspection reports, the Department would be required to prove those minor violations 
at the hearing under a de novo standard. The appellant would have an opportunity to dispute 
them at the hearing. 
Thank you for your consideration. I am happy to answer any questions you may have and to 
make myself available for the Work session.
2
