Janet 'l' 
. Mills Maine Departnrent ofllealtlr and Human Sci noes 
Governor w (Io:mrrissimrcr ’s Olﬁu “""':|_ 
[é§Hl:' r;:;Vé B. 
“ l l State House Strtiou 
,. , . .I 
. 109 Capitol Str ect 
:,:'I:il:;):'§; “bre“’ PM)‘ Augusta, mam 04333-001 r 
" ' 
Tel: (207) 2874707; Fax: (207) 287-300% 
TTY: Dial 7ll (Maine Rein) 
Testimony of the Office of Child and Family Services 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
In opposition to LD 1287, An Act to Establish an Appeal Process for Child Care Pr0via’ers 
Hearing Date: April 10, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, I am Todd Landry, Director of the Ofﬁce of Child 
and Family Services. I am here today to testify in opposition to LD 1287, An Act to Establish an 
Appeal Process for Child Care Providers. 
LD 1287 would require the Department to establish an appeal process for a child care facility or 
family child care provider subject to a licensing decision of the Department. 
OCFS is opposed to this bill as an appeal process already exists in licensing rules. Section 2l(M) 
of the Child Care Facility Rules (10-148, Chapter 32) and Section 20(0) Family Child Care 
Rules (10-148, Chapter 33) provides a right to appeal which applies to Department actions and 
includes the opportunity for a hearing before an Administrative Hearing Officer pursuant to the 
Administrative Hearing Regulations (10-144, Chapter l). Of note the Family Child Care Rules 
are Major Substantive rules which were reviewed and approved by the legislature. This is the 
same process that is afforded to other clients and providers for decisions made by the 
Department. Under rule, Department actions are defined as denial of a requested waiver, 
issuance of a conditional license (including amendment or modiﬁcation of a license when 
required in conjunction with a conditional license), emergency suspension of a licensing, voiding 
of a conditional license, refusal to issue or renew a full license, and civil penalties. 
It is the Department ’s understanding, based on the manner in which the funding is structured in 
this proposal, that it is intended for the Department to contract for this service, but it is not clear 
if this is to be in addition to the above outlined appeal process and, if so, where such a review 
would occur in the process (i.e., prior to the administrative hearing or afterthe administrative 
hearing — at which point the appellant already has the right to ﬁle in Superior Court). 
Another possibility that the Department has considered is whether this bill is targeted at 
appealing ﬁndings made by licensing during inspections as inspection reports are made available 
on the Child Care Choices website. OCFS believes that the on-site licensing inspection 
conducted with the provider is a transparent process. The Licensing Specialist reviews the 
inspection report with the provider at the end of the inspection, including the violations (which 
includes a citation to the portion of rule that the provider is not incompliance with). The majority 
of these ﬁndings are minor in nature (for example, a missing required piece of the child care
provider ’s handbook or a lack of thermometer in a refrigerator) and do not impact a provider ’s 
license, they are made public pursuant to federal regulations in order to increase the public’s 
knowledge and understanding of child care providers. 
Within OCFS’ Licensing team processes already exist for a supervisor to review each inspection 
report for completeness, consistency, and clarity. If a supervisor has questions or concems with 
anything noted in the report then the report can be reviewed by Licensing ’s Compliance 
Advisory Panel (CAP), which consists of Licensing Specialists, three Licensing Supervisors, the 
Licensing Program Manager, and the Compliance Supervisor. Even with these robust quality 
assurance safeguards, the Department recognizes that Licensing is not immune from making 
mistakes, as a result the Department implemented an Informal Dispute Resolution (IDR) process 
in 2017 that affords child care providers the opportunity to dispute rule violations identified 
during routine inspections and complaint investigations that do not result in a formal appealable 
licensing action. The IDR process affords providers the opportunity to present evidence to 
contest each disputed violation. When the provider ’s documentation supports that the provider 
was, in fact, in compliance with licensing rules the IDR results in the amendment or removal of 
the disputed information. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have 
and to make myself available for questions at the work session.
