 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LDs 994 and 1545  
(NFNA; Drafting Option)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 994, An Act to Include Possession of Compounds, Mixtures or Substances Containing a 
Detectable Amount of Certain Scheduled Drugs to Prove the Offense of Unl awful  
Trafficking of Scheduled Drugs  
 LD 1545, An Act to Reduce Drug Overdose  and Death by Expanding the Crime of 
Aggravated Trafficking of Scheduled Drugs by Including Compounds, Mixtures or 
Substances  
 
DA: April 18, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal L aw Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony  neither for nor against  LDs 994 and 1545.     
 
 The bills seek to premise criminal liability on the existence of any amount of the identified 
illegal substance s in the mixture, compound or substance at issue.   For the most part, the proposed 
changes reflect what is already in the current law, and are therefore unnecessary.  This is bec ause 
Maine’s statutes currently incorporate this concept , given the definitions of cocaine, fentanyl, and 
heroin in 17 -A M.R.S. § 1101, which use the terms “in any quantity” or “any quantity.”     
 
 The Legislature ha s not taken the same approach with respect to the statutes related to  
amphetamines and methamphetamine .   Thus  if the Legislature chooses to treat drug crimes 
involving those substances consistently with the illegal substances  as above , the statutes require 
amendment .  CLAC did not have sufficient time to develop  a technically correct drafting 
recommendation  that woul d best serve such a goal .   If in fact the Committee opts for such an 
approach  and the Committee ’s analyst requests further input , one or more of our members will 
attempt to assist.   
  
*CLA C is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitio ner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislatu re’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
