  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. M organ  
 
Treasur er 
Walt er F. McKee 
 
Secretary  
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph M ekonis 
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swans on 
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXECU TIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523-9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
April 14, 2023  
 
 
Senator Anne  Beebe -Center, Chair  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public  Safety  
100 State House Station Room  436  
Augusta, ME 04330  
 
RE: LD 1545 – An Act to Reduce Drug Overdoes and Death by Expanding  
 the Crime of Aggravated Trafficking of Scheduled Drugs by Including  
 Compounds, Mixtures or Substances  
 
Dear Senator Beebe -Center , Represe ntative  Salisbury, and Mem bers of the Crimin al 
Justice and Pu blic Safety Committee:  
 
MACDL opposes  LD 1 545. 
 
As with LD 994, this bill would be a backward step w hen it comes to addressing the 
drug crisis in Maine.  Despite the title of the bill, t his Act will not actually reduce 
drug overdoes and death at all but  will instead have the net effect of significantly 
increasing potential prison sentences for those wh o are addicted to drugs and 
possessing them.  
 
This bill would make trace amounts of drug s that are contained in non -illegal 
compounds to be considered  as if the trace amount was the weight of the non -illegal 
compound.  As noted in MACDL ’s opposit ion to LD 994, if there was a mi croscopic 
amount of an illegal drug contained in a teaspoon of baking soda, then a person 
possessing that microscopic amount would face a potential full-blown Class A felony 
crime.  
 
As it stands now, the law ha s significant  and se vere penalties for those who possess 
significant amounts of actual illegal drugs.  Allowing for these major penalties for 
trace amounts of drugs contained in non -illegal compounds does nothing to advance 
the cause of reducing drug overdoes at all.  Law enforcement  officers and prosecutors 
have already a massive number of tools to arrest and prose cute th ose who are 
trafficking in actual drugs; this bill would  cast a wide felony net that would  only 
result in capturing the small amount possessors of drugs wh ile at the same time 
sweeping up those who would have been netted in the more appropriate net of our 
current drug trafficking laws.  
 
Please vote  ought not to pass on this bill and avoid movin g backwards when 
addressing drug overdo ses and drug trafficking.  
 
 
 
 
Page 2  
April 14, 2023  
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Walter F. McKee  
Chair , Legi slative Committee  

