   
 
  
 
 
May 2, 2023  
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary,  
 
We join you today  on behalf of the Maine Women’s Lobby  in support of LD 1516, An Act to 
Establish Alternative Sentencing for Primary Caregivers , and thank Speaker Talbot Ross 
for sponsoring this important bill.  
 
In 2002, there were only 25 women in Maine’s state prison. That number has grown almost ten 
times, to approximately 10 times that number1. 
In Maine, women are the sole, primary, or co -caregivers in 75 percent of families.1 
The significant rise in incarcerated women  in our state means that there is , by definition , 
a significant rise in incarcerated primary caretakers and in families separated by 
incarceration.  
We recognize that this bill is gender neutral, and we are in strong support of that approach, but 
we do not  want to overlook the unique harms that come specifically to women in the carceral 
system.  
Incarcerated women are five times more likely to have their children placed in foster care 
and have their parental rights terminated than incarcerated men.2 
Additionally, i ncarcerated women have substantially higher levels of lifetime trauma and of 
sexual  and domestic violence than the public . In many cases these experiences, or the resultant 
mental health needs or drug involvement that can stem from them, can interrupt or challenge 
people’s best efforts at parenting. Incarceration adds a further layer of harm to these families.   
Carceral syst ems that create barriers between children and parents contribute to 
intergenerational trauma.  LD 1516 can begin to break that cycle of trauma.  
The challenge of increasing numbers of women in prison and jail, and the resultant separation 
of families, is no t unique to Maine. States across the country are facing this same concern, as 
our nation’s carceral system has swe lled to nearly two million3 – far larger than the population of 
the state of Maine. As communities grapple with this impact,  twelve states have moved 
 
1 Sarah Jane Glynn, “Breadwinning Mothers Continue to Be the U.S. Norm” (Washington: Center for 
American Progress, 2019), available at https://americanprogress.org/issues/women/reports/2019/05/10/4  
2 The Marshall Project. (2018). How incarcerated parents ar e losing their children forever. Retrieved from 
https://www.themarshallproject.org/2018/12/03/how -incarcerated -parents -are-losing -their-children -forever  
3 Prison Policy Initiative. (2023). Mass Incarceration: The Whole Pie 2023. Retrieved from 
https://www.prisonpolicy.org/reports/pie2023.html#:~:text=Together%2C%20these%20systems% 20hold
%20almost,centers%2C%20state%20psychiatric%20hospitals%2C%20and   

   
 
 forward with policy solutions specific to  decreasing the harm of incarceration on  
caregivers, ranging from increased diversion, changing fa mily contact laws, and 
proposals like this one.  
All of them make an effort to respond to the issues of family separation and mass incarceratio n, 
and we support this proposal – but we are supporting it alongside work to end the 
incarceration of our family members, and bring them home where they can have access 
to the basic needs, dignity, and healing that they deserve.  
We hope you will vote Ought to Pass.  
 
Sincerely,  
Destie Hohman Sprague  
Maine Women’s Lobby  
 
