 
 
 
TO: The Judiciary Committee  
RE: LD 1516: An Act to Establish Alternative Sentencing for Primary Caregivers  
May 1, 2023  
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the  Judiciary Committee , 
This testimony  is being submitted to provide  background  and a summary of relevant research  to the Committee 
to aid your consideration of this important bill.  
Research shows that parental incarceration is a known adverse child hood experience (ACE)1 which affects 
thousands of Maine’s children . A recent study (2020)  that we led showed that in Maine, there were a total of 
3,403 children with at least one parent incarcerated at a state prison facility from 2015 -2020. There were 345 
incarcerated or formerly incarcerated mothers during the same period.2 This study also showed that parents 
who are Black and Native American are disproportionately impacted by parental incarceration in Maine . 
Parental incarceration is associated with an increased risk for trauma, as well as  mental and behavioral health 
problems in childhood and throughou t adolescence. Children who have been impacted by parental 
incarceration are more likely to experience homelessness, economic instability, school drop -out, and future 
justice system involvement .3 In addition, our research shows that the negative consequen ces of parental 
incarceration are even greater for children with incarcerated mothers . These children  are more likely to come 
from a family environment with histories of extreme poverty, substance use, sexual abuse, domestic violence, 
and mental illness .4 
To mitigate the impacts and trauma associated with parental incarceration, research shows that parenting and 
family support programs and the maint enance of  appropriate and consistent parental involvement  in their 
children ’s lives  is key . The maternal bond is especially important in the early childhood development years and 
can have long -term impacts on the child’s wellbeing when it is disrupted .5 The CDC (2019) recommends the use 
of family support and parenting skills programs as a key strate gy to reduce harm and lessen the impact of ACE’s 
such as parental incarceration .6    
Furthermore, this bill requires the court to consider the risk a defendant poses to society and their family in 
order to receive alternate sentencing . While the populatio n of incarcerated women in Maine is small in 
comparison to men (134 vs. 1446 in February 2022) ,7 research shows that women  pose less of a risk to public 
safety, are more likely to be revoked for technical violations than new crimes , and the financial and social costs 
 
1 Felitti, V. J., Anda, R. F., Nordenberg, D., Williamson, D. F., Spitz, A. M., Edwards, V., Marks, J. S. (1998). Relationship of Childhood Abuse and Household Dysfunction to Many of 
the Leading Causes of Death in Adults, The Adverse Childhood Experiences ( ACE) Study. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 14(4), 245 -258. Retrieved from 
https://www.ajpmonline.org/action/showPdf?pii=S0749 -3797%2898%2900017 -8 
2 Foley, J., King, E., & Benner, C. (2020). Place Matters: Breaking the Cycle: Interrupting Generati onal Incarceration in Maine. Portland, ME: University of Southern Maine.  
https://placemattersmaine.org/wp -content/uploads/2021/01/BreakingtheCycle.pdf  
3 The Pew Charitable Trusts. (2010). Collateral Costs: Incarceration's Effect on Economic Mobility. Washington, DC: The Pew Cha ritable Trusts.  
Murphey, D., & Cooper, P. M. (2015). Pa rents Behind Bars, What Happens to Their Children? Bethesda: Child Trends, Inc. Retrieved from https://www.childtrends.org/wp -
content/uploads/2015/10/2015 -42ParentsBehindBars.pdf  
Wakefield, S., & Wildeman, C. (2018, January). How Parental Incarceration Har ms Children and What to Do About  It. National Council on Family Relations, 3(1).  
4 Volunteers of America/Wilder Research. (2010). Childhood Disrupted: Understanding the Features and Effects of Maternal Incarc eration.  
5 Foley, J., King, E., & Benner, C. (2020). Place Matters: Breaking the Cycle: Interrupting Generational Incarceration in  Maine. Portland, ME: University of Southern Maine.  
6 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2019). Preventing Adverse Childhood Experiences: Leveraging the Best Available Ev idence. Atlanta, GA: National Center for Injury 
Prevention and Control, Cente rs for Disease Control and Prevention.  
7 According to the most recent MDOC (2022) data report on state facility populations. https://www.maine.gov/corrections/sites/m aine.gov.corrections/files/inline -
files/popreport2 -14-22.pdf  
of incarcerating women are extremely high .8 Furthermore, women from backgrounds of poverty and BIPOC 
women are  overrepresented and less likely to receive bail or community supervision . The most recent data 
shows that the majority (72%) of women in Maine who are incarcerated are there for drug or theft charges and 
an estimated 90% have a history of childhood trauma  themselves .9 There is a breadth of research on gender -
responsive practices and policies that emphasizes the fact that women have unique pathways and experiences 
that lead them to the justice system and thus require gender -specific interventions  to reduce  recidivism and 
improve their long -term wellbeing.  
In sum, the relevant research indicates that every effort must be made to keep primary caregivers in the lives of 
their children to mitigate the negative effects of  separation caused by incarceration. Alt ernatives to 
incarceration provide pathways for caregivers and their children to remain safely in contact , promoting healing 
for all.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Erica King, MSW  
Senior Policy Associate , University of Southern Maine, Cutler Institute  
Senior Manager, Center for Effective Public Policy  
 
 
Jillian Foley, MPPM  
Policy Associate , University of Southern Maine, Catherine Cutler Institute  
 
 
Madison Burke  
Research Analyst, University of Southern Maine, Catherine Cutler Institute  
 
 
8 National Resource Center on  Justice -Involved Women. (2012). Ten Truths that Matter When Working with Justice Involved Women, Executive Summary, U.S. Bureau of Ju stice 
Assistance, Washington, D.C. Retrieved from https://nicic.gov/ten -truths -matter -when -working -justice -involved -women  
9 Neumann, D. (2019, July 18). 72% of women in Maine's prisons are there on drug -related charges. Maine Beacon. Retrieved from https://mainebeacon.com/72 -of-women -in-
maines -prisons -are-there -on-drug -related -charges/  

