 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1516 (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1516, An Act to Establish Alternative Sentencing for Primary Caregivers  
 
DA: May 2, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testim ony opposed to LD 1516 . 
 
 CLAC members unan imously oppose  LD 1516 as unnecessary.   All of the listed factors 
proposed to be addressed on a “motion  for alternative sentence ” are factors already considered at 
the time of sentenc ing.   Opportunities  to address errors or other wise appeal sentences are available 
by virtue of direct appeal, sentence appeal, and Maine Rule of Unified Criminal Procedure 35.   In 
addition , the bill  drafting is unclea r, and r aises legal issues as to whether this procedure is in effect a 
re-sentencing, and how it affects deadlines for appe al and other post -judgment d eadlines.  The 
reference to “alternative sentence under section 1502 ” seems to be a reference  to what  are the listed  
“sentencing  alternatives ” already available under the C riminal Code.    Overall, t he proposal is 
duplicative and introduces confusion into the sentencing an d appeal process.    
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
