PO Box 88Belfast, ME 04915Phone: (207) 761-5616www.sierraclub.org/maine
To:Members of the Joint Committee on Energy Utilitiesand TechnologyFrom:Becky Bartovics, Sierra Club MaineDate:February 28, 2023Re:Testimony in Opposition to L.D. 43:Act An Actto Create Equal Opportunity Access toClean Energy by Removing the 100-megawatt Limit on Clean Energy Sources; and in oppositionof the identical L.D. 622:An Act to Create EqualOpportunity Access to Clean Energy byRemoving the 100-megawatt Limit on Clean Energy Sources Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler and Members of the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilitiesand Technology,
I am submitting the following testimony on behalf of Sierra Club Maine, representing over22,000 supporters and members statewide. We work diligently to amplify the power of our 3.8million members nation-wide as we work towards combating climate change and promoting a justand sustainable economy. We urge you to vote “ought not to pass” on L.D. 43 and the identical L.D.622.Sierra Club Maine strongly supports moving towards an all electric economy while doing soin a responsible manner as relates to the protection of all. Hydroelectric dams are increasinglyrecognized as significant emitters of methane, an extremely potent greenhouse gas.1Hydropowerdams disrupt flow of water, fish spawning and increase temperature of the water. Impounded waterbehind dams are increasingly understood to provide algal blooms and methane release previouslymisunderstood and known as major pollutants.  All of these issues result in economic hardships forlocal residents, damage to the riverine ecosystem above and downstream, as well as  an increase inemissions of potent greenhouse gasses, CO2 and methane.  This is going in the wrong direction forMaine. Included below is a presentation about dams by Friends of Sebago Lake.2
We urge you to remove Hydroelectric generators from the allowed list of generators in bothL.D. 43 and L.D. 622. We also caution that increasing sizes of all generating capacities will notpromote locally scaled micro grids and energy efficiency, which in turn promote local economicgrowth. Instead, development of these facilities in Maine will favor out of state entities whosebottom line is shareholder value, not ratepayer satisfaction or lower costs. While we are determinedto address impacts that are hurting residents of Maine, we urge this committee to proceed carefullyand not to increase hydroelectric capacity beyond present limits.
With great appreciation,
Becky Layton Bartovics- Sierra Club Volunteer Leadership
2https://www .friendsofmerrymeeting bay.org/pages/w hat_w e_do/e vents/Speak er%20Series%202021-2022/Meg a%20Dams/Meg aDams.htm1https://climat e.mit .edu/ask -mit/w hy-do-w e-compar e-methane-car bon-dio xide-o ver-100-y ear-timefr ame-ar e-we-underrating

