 
 
 
February  28th, 2023  
 
Hon. Senator Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair  
Hon. Representative Paige Zeigler, House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC Testimony in Opposition to  L.D. 43: An Act to Reduce the Cost of Electricity by Removing 
the 100 - megawatt Limit on Renewable Resources of Energy and L.D. 622: An Act to Create Equal 
Opportunity Access to Clean Energy by Removing the 100 -megawatt Limit on Clean Energy Sources  
 
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
Committee:  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide 
business organ ization consisting of a network of more than 5,000 small and large employers across Maine. The 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce is submitting  testimony in opposition to L .D. 43 and L.D. 622.  
 
We recognize this is a policy conversation that the EUT committee has dealt with  in previous legislative 
sessions. We also understand what the goal of th e proposed legislation is seeking to accomplish  – removing the 
100 MW cap to get Canadian Hydropower to qualify for the RPS. This proposal has been rejected by  previous 
EUT committees, and while the Chamber supports getting more Hydropower connected to the grid to lower the 
cost of energy, there are better alternatives than what is proposed today, and we would hope that this committee 
would reject this idea as p revious legislative committees have.  
 
The State Chamber believes state policies creating subsidies or incentives must be designed to maximize 
benefits for Maine companies and Maine -based projects. That was the original intent of Maine’s Renewable 
Portfolio Standard, to spark Maine -generated clean energy projects that would diversify our energy portfolio, 
encourage investment and economic development, create new jobs, and help the environment. All accomplished 
by Maine -based companies in order to deliver benefits  to our state. Unfortunately , lifting the 100 MW cap 
would do the opposite and does not protect in -state projects, which is a core reason the RPS exist s. Right now, 
there are no projects in Maine that are currently negatively impacted by the cap, and to our knowledge to date, 
no company or entity has asked for this change. We would argue that the 100 MW cap helps Maine companies 
and that the proposed legislation is a solution in search of a problem . 
 
 
 
 Additionally, if L.D. 43 or 622 were to pass, the likely outcome of this change would be flooding the RPS 
market with thousands of megawatts of new supply that would essentially collapse the market. This is very 
concerning as it would hurt projects and investments that have already been made. Since the RPS was enacted, 
we have seen significant investment into Maine for new renewable projects. They have created jobs, created 
economic development, generated tax revenue, and we should be doing everything in our power to pro tect these 
investments and encourage more of them through the RPS.  
In closing, we would respectfully encourage the committee to vote, “ought not to pass” on L.D. 43 and L.D. 
622. We believe there are better ways to lower the cost of energy and we look for ward to working with the 
committee to accomplish that. Thank you, I am happy to answer any questions and I will be available for the 
work session.  
 
 
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
