Clayton  Dan McKay
Dixfield
LD 43
                            Chairman Lawrence, Chairman Zeigler and Honorable Persons on 
the EUT Committee
LD 43 proposes to "to Reduce the Cost of Electricity by Removing the 100-megawatt Limit on 
Renewable Resources of Energy."
To receive renewable resource standing in the RPS, an electricity provider must 
purchase renewable energy credits from a resource deemed qualified to offer 
Renewable Energy Credits(REC). I believe the logic used to contemplate a "reduction
in the cost of electricity" is to increase the supply of RECs by allowing plants with a 
nameplate capacity of over 100 megawatts to be qualified as a renewable resource. 
Renewable resource RECs are traded in a market completely separate from the 
wholesale market, but its price is subject to price and demand parameters. As such, 
the logic is correct. 
To reduce electric costs, the added supply of RECs must be of such a significant 
amount to satisfy compliance and keep up with the accelerated increases all New 
England States have recently adopted, some of which have proposed a goal of 100% 
renewable by 2040. Much of this increased REC supply is counting on offshore wind.
Recent concerns about whale deaths due to turbine survey activity, the financials 
ahead for offshore wind projects and disgruntled fishermen have dampened the rosy 
outlook of these ventures. 
In consideration of apparent delays or outright rejection to offshore wind, nuclear 
production should be considered as a renewable resource.
Better yet, to avoid the impending colossal rise in REC prices, the RPS program should be 
repealed. It isn't working. Maine ratepayers have spent a trackable $154,520,393 on RECs 
from 2008 to 2020 (more when 2021 and 2022 are recorded by the PUC) 
and the trend of decreasing carbon emissions from electrical generation has reversed course,
according to RGGI data. With caps on emissions set by law, carbon allowance costs paid by 
ratepayers will surely go up. There has also been an uptick in production from Maine sited 
natural gas-fired and oil-fired power plants, which is apparently a reaction to the actions 
adopted by Southern New England states within ISO-NE. We all know what has happened 
with supply costs of electricity and it is as much due to Augusta energy policies as it is to 
Russian policies. 
THE CHASE FOR CARBON ZERO IS FUTILE.
Dan McKay   Dixfield
