WEEKLY SCHEDULE
Energy, Utilities and Technology
Week of 3/14/2023 - 3/3/2023
Testimony LD43 and LD622
Dear Senators Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and distinguished members of EUT committee.
My Name is Clifford Krolick a resident of Parsonsfield, Maine.  I hold memberships in various 
organizations.  I have extensive experience and research with clean power and have been a very 
early adopter of solar electric.  Today I speak as a senior and longtime supporter of truly clean 
and renewable energies.
I have read numerous journals and studies and I can find no current conclusive evidence that 
these LD’s will work.  One project from Institute For Self Reliance followed a Lawrence Berkley 
Labs survey of tens of thousands of solar projects each year and concluded that Distributed 
Generation/roof top solar is considerably cheaper then utility-provided solar which averaged 
about 14 cents higher per kilowatt-hour then distributed, roof top solar https://ilsr.medium.com/the-
free-delivery-farce-in-solar-223e4f032c1  Logically, the claims these bills purport could be true in some 
instances, in some states.  But the current trends and guidelines that still control electric rates in 
Maine and several other states do not support the intention of these bills.
Our transition to clean energy spirited by the governor’s enthusiastic efforts “Maine Will Not 
Wait” does not appear to have led to decreased electric rates or does it support an equitable 
energy transition.  On the other hand, Distributed Generation, local roof top solar with Net 
Metering has a clear track record considerably lowering consumer electric costs. 
Long distance distribution and transmission of electricity costs appear to remain elusive as long 
as for profit driven fossil fuel companies, like CMP’s parent company, remain in charge.  Their 
transmission fees will prevent larger solar or wind farms from providing much needed relief to 
lower electrical rates for Maine consumers
.I would like to see the EUT committee lead the way on responsible legislation that directly 
controls pricing and guarantees Mainers equitable and affordable rates.  Presently Maine has 
some of the highest electric rates in the US.  We also have larger populations of underserved, and 
elderly.  
Permitting larger corporate mega energy farms, whether it’s wind, solar or hydro without 
guarantees and permanent price protections for Maine people will be irresponsible and ruinous 
for Maine’s environment 
At the present time I would urge a no vote on both LDs.
.

