sea,~ 
’=‘ STATE OF MAINE 
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION 
Philip L Bartlett, ll Harry Lanphear 
CHAIRMAN ADMINISTRATNE DIRECTOR 
Randall D. Davis 
Patrick J. Scully 
COMMISSIONERS 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
Neither for Nor Against 
LD 43, An Act to Reduce the Cost of Electricity, by Removing the 100-megawatt 
Limit on Renewable Resources of Energy (and LD 622, An Act to Create Equal 
Opportunity Access to Clean Energy by Removing the 100-megawatt Limit onS 
. ' 
Clean Energy Sources) ~' 
March 28, 2023 
Senator Lawrence,'Representative Zeigler, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Deirdre Schneider, testifying neither for nor 
against LD 43, An Act to Reduce the Cost of Electricity by Removing the 100-megawatt Limit on 
Renewable Resources of Energy}A 
General Description of Portfolio Requirements _’ 
This bill amends the Stat/e’s resource portfolio requirement (3 5-A M.R.S. §32lO)*to remove the 100 
MW eligibility cap on certain generation resources? A resource portfolio requirement, also typically 
referred to as a renewable portfolio standard or an RPS, is a market mechanism used to encourage the 
development and operation of legislatively designated types of generating facilities (usually renewable’ 
resources). Generally, the purpose of a renewable resource portfolio requirement is to promote 
renewable resources and resource diversity in a competitive generation market. It does so by creating 
an additionalsource of revenue over electricity wholesale market prices for resources that might not 
otherwise be developed or operated. The mechanism works by creating a mandatory demand for 
designated resources by mandating that pre-speci ﬁed percentages of a retail electricity provider ’s load 
must be served by the designated resources. The market then operates to meet this legislatively created 
demand at the lowest cost. The result of the portfolio requirement mechanism is that a premium over 
wholesale electricity market prices is created for the designated renewable resources. This premium is 
paid for by electricity ratepayers through the supply portion of their bills. The speciﬁc amount of the 
premium varies over time depending on the supply/demand balance for the Maine RPS as well as RPSs 
in other New England states. 
1 
This also serves as testimony on LD 622, An Act to Create Equal Opportunity Access to Clean Energy by Removing 
the 100-megawatt Limit on Clean Energy Sources as these two bills are the same. 
2 Generation resources under §32l0(2)(B-3)(1) include fuel cells, tidal power, geothermal installations, hydroelectric, 
biomass, and anaerobic digestion. Generation resources under §32lO(2)(C)(2) include fuel cells, tidal power, solar, wind 
power, geothermal installations, hydroelectric, biomass and generators fueled by municipal solid waste in conjunction 
with recycling.- 
. A,-t . V711/\\ Y V\’ 1-; _‘1_ __- ,__ 1\_;_.a r1..u,....an ‘A rt‘ n/17/1'7 T\/l ATT 10 Qt-1+» ‘LJ/um» Q4--14-2.-m Anmu-h, AMI‘ l\A'.l'1'2_ ﬁﬁ1Q
. 
qq 
\‘ 
PUC Testimony ——LD 43 (and LD 622) March 2s, 2023 
Maine’s Portfolio Requirements' 
Maine currently has four portfolio requirements: 
l. A new renewable capacity resources requirement (referred to as Class 1); _
K 
2. A new renewable capacity resources requirement other than a resource that for at least 2 years 
was not operated or was not recognized by the ISO-NE as a capacity resource and, after 
o C 
September l, 2005, resumed operation ‘ or was recognized by ISO-l\lE as a capacity resource 
(referred to Class LA);' 
_ - 
~' 
3. An eligible resource requirement (referred to as Class ll); and,
, 
4. A thermal renewable energy credit requirement (referred to as TREC). 
Maine s original restructuring legislation included a 30% eligible resource3 portfolio requirement that 
became effective in 2000 (3 5-A M.R.S. § 3210(3)), ln 2007, the Legislature enacted a new renewable 
resource portfolio requirement that deﬁnes eligibility as a renewable resource that began service,' 
resumed operation, or was substantially» refurbished after September 2005 (35-A § 321 0(3 -A))4. 
The percentage requirement started at one percent in 2008 and increased in annual one percent ~ 
increments until it reached ten percent in 2017 and remains at ten percent thereafter. In 2019, the 
Legislature enacted a new resource portfolio requirement for Class IA resources. The percentage 
requirement started at 2.5% in 2020 and increases annually until it reaches 40% in 2030 and remains at 
40% thereafter. The statutes limit portfolio requirement resource eligibility to generation facilities that 
are 100 MW or less, except for wind and solar facilities for Class l and Class IA eligibility. . 
For the most part, suppliers demonstrate compliance with Maine’s portfolio requirement by obtaining 
renewable energy credits (RECs) that are created and tracked by the New England Generation 
Information System (GlS)5 This system allows for the trading of the renewable attribute separate from 
the energy commodity. Eligible generators receive RECs from the GIS and may sell the RECs to retail 
electricity suppliers at market driven prices, thus creating a premium over market prices for theq 
generators. Suppliers then use the purchased RECs to satisfy the portfolio requirements in Maine and 
the other New England states.' 
_- 
LD 43‘‘ 
LD 43 would amend the portfolio requirement statute to remove the l-00 MW eligibility cap for all 
generators for both the Class l, Class IA and Class ll requirements. The primary effect of this changeV 
would be to allow large hydro facilities (likely to be located in Canadian provinces) to‘ 
qualify for 
Maine’s portfolio requirements. The determination of the speciﬁc types of resource, such as large 
Canadian hydroelectric facilities, that should be designated as eligible for a state’s portfolio y‘ 
requirement (and thus receive a ratepayer funded premium above market prices) is an issue of general 
energy policy that should be determined by the Legislature. As described above, a portfolio' 
requirement creates a premium above market prices that is paid for by all ratepayers in the State 
through their electricity bills. Thus, a portfolio requirement generally applies to speciﬁc resources that. 
the Legislature determines are both desirable ﬁom an energy policy perspective and require ratepayer 
funded support to be developed or operated. Accordingly, LD 43 raises the energy policy issue as to 
whether large hydro facilities located out of the State should be provided Maine ratepayer support. 
3 
ClassH 4 
Class I'
‘ 
4 .' 
5 
Northern Maine uses the North American Renewable Registry, a REC tracking system similar to the ISO-NE GIS 
system and run by the same company. _ 
6 Also LD 622 -
»
PUC Testimony~LD 43 (and LD 622) March 2s, 2023 
The Commission notes that Maine REC prices for Class l/IA and Class H have risen signiﬁcantly over 
the last couple of years. Currently, Maine Class l RBCs have a-value in the range of $30 -3 5/MWA h. 
Maine REC prices for Class ll have a value of $10-l5/MWh. The expansion of the portfolio eligibility 
requirements to large ‘generating facilities could have the effect of increasing the eligible supply for 
Maine’s portfolio requirements, thus placing downward pressure on prices for Maine RECs which 
could simultaneously reduce costs for electricity consumers and reduce the value of the RPS to 
renewable facilities. However, there are other means to lower the cost; for example, the Legislature 
could consider requiring a lower altemative compliance rate. 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the work session.
'2
