  
1 
 
 
 
Francis Pullaro  
Executive Director  
www. renewne.org  
 
 
Maine State Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
 February 28, 2023   
 
Testimony of RENEW Northeast in Opposition to  
 
LD 43 - An Act to Reduce the Cost of Electricity by Removing the 100-megawatt Limit on 
Renewable Resources of Energy  
 
LD 622 - An Act to Create Equal Opportunity Access to Clean Energy by Removing the 100 -
megawatt Limit on Clean Energy Sources  
 
Chairs  Lawrence and Zeigler , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities 
and Technology , I am Francis Pullaro the Executive Director of RENEW Northeast, Inc. (RENEW).1 
RENEW submits thi s testimony in opposition to these bills  as they  would allow large , Canadian 
hydropower to be eligible under the Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) . 
 
RENEW urges the Committee to recall the sound reasoning behind the prior decisions by all 
state legislatures in New England that established Class I RPS re quirements without eligibility for large 
hydropowe r.  RPS requirements are intended to facilitate deployment of new, sustainable technologies 
that need financial incentives to be deployed at utility scale and ensure existing resources remain viable 
for the  duration of their life spans.  
 
Over the long term, average Renewable Energy Certificate (“REC”) prices should reflect what is 
necessary  to provide new resources with the revenue to cover their incremental capital costs. Flooding 
the market with legacy large, Canad ian hydropower resources will decrease the amount of REC revenue 
that developers of new renewable projects will expect to receive during the operating life of their 
projects. It can also be harmful to the survival of some of Maine’s  non-contracted renewable resources 
like small hydropower  and wind . Depressing the REC price, which decreases the incentive to build 
renewable energy, also makes it harder for the state to meet its policy goals.  
 
 Keeping  REC prices low for the benefit of consumers  is best accomplished by issuing RFPs for 
new resources to ensure an adequate supply of RECs. The Committee’s procurement policies enacted 
over the years were designed to ensure a steady pipeline of new renewable energy projects and their 
RECs. Competitively sourced long -term fixed -price pow er purchase agreements enable developers to 
 
1 The comments expressed herein represent the views of RENEW and not necessarily those of any particular member of 
RENEW.  RENEW is a non -profit association uniting environmental advocates and the renewable energy industry whose 
mission involves coordinating the ideas and resources of its members with the goal of inc reasing environmentally sustainable 
energy generation in the Northeast from the region’s abundant, indigenous renewable resources. RENEW members own 
and/or are developing large -scale renewable energy projects, energy storage resources , and high -voltage tra nsmission 
facilities across the Northeast. They are supported by members providing engineering, procurement and construction services 
in the development of these projects and members that supply them with multi -megawatt class wind turbines. RENEW seeks 
to promote policies that will increase energy diversity, promote economic development, and achieve policy goals including 
those found in the Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS)  
2 
 offer a REC price less affected by short -term supply and demand and more reflective of their projects’ 
incremental costs.  
 
The ISO New England markets , particularly its Forward Capacity Market (FCM) , have never 
worked to induce renewable energy resources to be developed. The RPS provides an alternative market 
for renewables by encouraging the production of their emissions -free energy. The energy -based 
incentive encourages owners to keep their resources at a high sta te of readiness. The FCM design never 
contemplated the arrival of low -cost renewable resources on a massive scale. It has always promoted  a 
resource mix of low capital cost , high operating cost resources like combined cycle natural gas units  as 
opposed to the high capital cost, low operating cost resources like wind , small hydro,  and solar. It favors  
fossil -fueled generators even when they are not the most economically efficient.  State RPS laws are 
designed to erase that disadvantage by promoting renewable energy in a way that is compatible with the 
federally regulated competitive electricity markets.  
 
For the foregoing reasons, RENEW urges the Committee to reject these  bills. Thank you for the 
opportunity to provide these comments.  
 
