Greg C. Robie95 Mineral Springs RdHighland Mills, NY  10930April 19, 2023Utilities, Energy, and Technology CommitteeState House Station Augusta, Maine 04333 Maine State Legislature, Joint Committee on Utilities, Energy, and Technology LD 43: a 131st Legislature BELTWAY OF BILLS* billRe: LD 43; ONTP – especially if it includes solar.Chairpersons Lawrence and Zeigler , and Honorable Members of the Joint Committee on Utilities, Energy, and Technology: Thank you for considering my remarks and perspective, particularly from a BELTWAY OF BILLS* perspective.: The removal of the 100 MW cap is at best, premature, particularly when the best interests of Maine and our public utility rate payer Mainers. And except for monopolistic aspirations of the stacked LLC business model of the solar industry, it is superfluous to the electrical energy needs of Mainers. Any significant benefit accrues to grid operators and the transmission of electricity out of state via the equipment gateways that currently have the capacity to do so. As interstate power generation, the profitably of this accrues primarily to the distributed generation entities and the grid owners.  While LD 43 addresses multiple approaches to distributed energy, and all of them variously qualifying for RECs, the content of the MPUC workshopping on the grid that is underway, already outlines that local and/or regional distributed generation is where the changes will likely be require, and this is to accommodate local and regional distributed generation projects. LD 496 (OTP-AM by this Committee) adds batteries to solar panels that will be permitted under Site Location of Development permits, but, as with solar decommissioning, battery decommissioning will be vetted under wind turbine decommission rule triggers. The use of wind decommissioning rules is not supported by the DEP’s liaison on rulemaking. Furthermore, wind and solar 
are defined under MPUC law as a “Distributed Energy Resource,”while batteries are an “Energy Storage System” (35-A MRS §3481(5. & 6.). Each have unique life cycles and regulatory issues, including decommissioning. The people of Maine and its environment benefit when each has their own rules. Our Board of Environment Protection is responsible for effecting such rules and has not done so for solar. The text of LD 496 makes a voluntary change regarding this inaction and batteries less likely. To remove the 100 MW cap and increase the size and scope of solar projects/increasingly required by economics and grid capacity to be solar/battery projects, without first redressing the lack of rules, is problematic. Please be aware that DEP applications are process under the rules in place at the time of the application.Thank you for your time and consideration. If helpful, I am a happy to answer any questions this written testimony may engender.(845) 534-7291robie@hvc.rr.comor at the above address.=)Greg*  *  (…this is a work-in-progress, and a first draft (4/19/23):LD 9, for this to apply to the Commissioner it applies to the pre-application meeting/hearing where a permit for a permit by rule may be qualified for as LD 9 (and as amended) states. The amendment helpfully appears to give our Commissioner more time, but in the Permit by Rule process that since 1983 (new); 1991 (amended); 2011 (amended) has been a Board function. The Board in 1983 is not what our restored to authority version of it is today (since 2019). The reference to section 7 is specious; problematic re MAPA rights stuff; but essential to the in lieu fee program (ILF) that gets underway/permitted in an unrecorded application (and has a two year lifetime). A pre-application meeting is effected under the auspices of our Commissioner.Why this qualifies as a #BeltwayOfBills bill is that integral to a functionally confidential hearing a project will be adjudged to qualify for the ILF 
Program, file a pre-permit-by-rule application and have a timeframe established by which the DEP wraps up its review processes for retailed applications. Originally, and still, the Permit was a Board action, and still, under section 7 is a final action that only requires our Board to notify our Commissioner. Because, in practice this is happening differently, balancing citizen involvement is structured out of the process, and consequences happen.That this seems to have became a common, and at best, extralegal process, could be how stacked LLCs become, and until [perhaps] now, remains a practice that if stopped cuts the State coffers off from the in lieu fees generate. Or a ‘perfect”NOT! storm of traditionally accepted practice that is not justified in law; that has embolden the solar industry that relies on stacked LLCs to snooker Maine to:1. effect the 2019 solar gold rush,” and2. lay there regulatory ground work for the next phase of the snookering.LD 399, This seems to relate to what might be best thought of in terms of RECs. Particularly as it can and has been applied to defense contractors and gaining points in the bidding process for military contracts the place value of such a database, base certification. LD 496, Lumps batteries (defined as an “energy storage system”), with solar panels (defined as a“distributed energy resource), and there by makes different things with different regulatory concerns and decommissioning issues treated as though they are wind turbines, another “distributed energy resource” as meriting a common triggering mechanism. Solar/battery projects are integral to the next phase of the stacked LLC business models expansion. And treated as the single “person” in law that they are not, exploit the exempt member transfer language in this bill and the law (FWIW, this exemption arrived by amendment in 2021), which thereby allow snookering that facilitates abandonment under the guise of ’successful’ decommission plans.LD 1134, amends subdivision statue under the DEP to both conflict with subdivision law under land use law (Title 30-A, Chapter 187), and regardless of that regulatory nightmare, does all for the phase leasing of land for solar 
projects on large tracts of land without this also triggering a subdivision review [by the DEP].LD 1135, sets the stage for tree growth classified land in the large tracts the solar industry will be able to exploit under LD 1134, to be similarly exploited to be incorporated into the unfolding and maturing global carbon offset credit markets. LD 1648, sets the stage for open space and farmland classified land, and whether in large tracts of not in the large tracts, to be similarly be exploited to be incorporated into the unfolding and maturing global carbon offset credit markets. LD 1232, indirectly regulates land use law (Title 30-A, Chapter 187), but this through Title 25, to build a growing inventory commercial rood are for the stacked LLC solar business model to exploit.LD  1591, creates a subsection specific regulation within MPUC law (Title 35-A) for the stacked LLC solar business model to twice snooker snooker Maine farmers.
Greg Robie
Highland Mills/Winslow/China
LD 43
An after-the-public-hearing submission intended for the workshop April 19, 2023. 
Thx
