                              http://northeastmegadamresistance.org/
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of EUT committee.
My name is Joan Saxe of Freeport. I am a member of the North American Megadam Resistance 
Alliance (NAMRA), composed of NGO members and individuals in Canada and the United 
States.  
I am submitting testimony regarding the specific list of total power production capacities and 
amendments that are listed in LD43, 
“An Act to Reduce the Cost of Electricity by Removing the 100-megawatt Limit on 
Renewable Resources of Energy" containing hydro power. I am requesting that the specific 
power producer, hydro power be removed from the list of acceptable renewable energies.  
Its time to negate the myth that hydropower is clean, renewable energy.
Scientist have reported recently that electricity produced by dams emit more green house gases 
than those emitted by fossil fuels.
There are hundreds of independent third-party studies reporting that hydroelectric reservoirs are 
a consequential source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in boreal, temperate and tropical 
regions.
http://savetheworldsrivers.org/scientific-bibliography-dams-and-reservoirs-emit-greenhouse-
gases/
"The Myth of Clean Hydro": http://savetheworldsrivers.org/public-education-about-how-dams-
cause-climate-emissions/
For over 15 years, the IPCC has recommended that all U.N. countries report reservoir methane 
emissions, but it wasn’t until an update to the IPCC protocol in 2019 that made it easier for 
countries to report.
Further, for the first time in history in 2022, the U.S. government reported the methane 
emissions from dams and reservoirs across the U.S. to the United Nations using the 
recommended protocol from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, IPCC. 
 UNFORTUNATELY, the dam-building hydropower industry has turned out to be an extreme 
political force – greenwashing their environmental damage, outright lying about the greenhouse 
gas emissions from their electricity production, and working to make sure that not only decision-
makers and the public are misinformed but also that anti-dam activist are marginalized and 
often threatened.
I recommend voting NO on LD 43 and going back to the drawing board while taking a more 
serious approach to transitioning Maine’s energy policy which will expedite the reduction in 
GHG, promote alternatives like Micro grids connected to large battery storage with localized 
generation of electricity as the way to move toward our future cost controls and a resilient grid, 
while saving money for electricity customers. 
Thank you,
Joan Saxe 
Freeport Maine  
joansaxe@gmail.com
2.27.23
