Testimony in Support of to LD 43:
“An Act to Reduce
the Cost of Electricity by
Removing the 100-megawatt Limit on Renewable Resources of Energy,” and
LD 622
,
“An Act to Create Equal Opportunity Access to Clean Energy by Removing the
100-megawatt Limit on Clean Energy Sources”
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and the distinguished members of the
Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology, my name is Nick Murray and I serve as
director of policy for Maine Policy Institute. We are a free market think tank, a
nonpartisan, nonprofit organization that advocates for individual liberty and economic
freedom in Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on LD 43 and LD 622.
We commend the sponsors of these two bills for identifying a much-needed
change in Maine’s energy policy. LD 43 and LD 622 would strike the 100-megawatt
capacity limitation for energy generation sources other than wind and solar power under
the definition of “renewable resource” in Maine’s Renewable Portfolio Standards (RPS)
program.
1
Today, the state only recognizes clean energy projects larger than 100-megawatts
to be “renewable” if they generate electricity via wind or solar power. Why does the
capacity of a particular generation project matter if the technology used generates no
emissions and contributes to lowering greenhouse gas emissions, the stated goal of the
RPS program?
This question alone highlights the farce that is RPS. Instead of being aligned to
environmental health and the goal of making power without harmful emissions, it
instead has become a cudgel for activists and politicians to mold the state and its
residents to their radical values.
For argument’s sake, let’s assume that the environmental activists who pushed
this scheme through in the first place are right to forcibly restrict energy production that
emits greenhouse gasses, because of the effects on the global climate. Today, various
cutting-edge energy production technologies which also do not produce greenhouse gas
emissions may not count toward the state’s renewable energy goals. Why not?
Since the inception of RPS, the only technologies which may be considered
“renewable,” no matter the size of the project, are wind and solar power. Given the
state’s ambitious renewable energy portfolio goals, one would think that those who
1
35-A MRSA §3210: Renewable resources
Maine Policy Institute | mainepolicy.org| themainewire.com | Post Office Box 7829 Portland Maine 04112 | 207.321.2550

support renewable energy would not want to limit what sorts of clean power generation
will count as “renewable.”
Is it any wonder why only solar and wind—despite being among the lowest
generation capacity resources per square mile
2
and
requiring mountains of government
subsidies for even the illusion of profitability—are the only sources exempted from the
illogical 100-megawatt cap? It is because these technologies have been held up by green
activists as the most virtuous power sources, despite being unreliable energy producers.
Instead of being measured by its ability to diminish greenhouse gas
emissions—the alleged goal of RPS—the law punishes projects which utilize clean,
efficient, high-density power sources like nuclear and hydroelectric plants. This should
raise red flags for anyone engaged in a good-faith effort to promote clean energy.
Ultimately, the program has not helped Maine people lead better lives.
In 2012, the Beacon Hill Institute estimated that RPS will raise the cost of
electricity by $83 million by 2020 for the state’s residential consumers, increasing
electricity prices 1.24 cents per kilowatt-hour (kWh) in the medium-risk scenario.
3
In
reality, the average monthly retail electricity price in Maine grew from 11.8 cents/kWh
in 2012 to 13.5 cents/kWh in 2020, about 1.7 cents greater than the worst-case scenario
in the Beacon Hill Institute report.
4
Heightened energy prices hurt Maine households and businesses and, in turn,
inflict significant harm on the state economy.
5
This
is the reason why several states such
as West Virginia, Wisconsin, and Ohio have recently taken action to repeal or reform
their RPS requirements.
6
The best case scenario for Maine ratepayers would be a quick and unceremonious
repeal of RPS, but if it must exist, there is no reason to discriminate between
clean-emitting energy sources by capacity size. The 100-megawatt cap is an absurd and
nonsensical policy that should be repealed immediately.
Please deem LD 43 or LD 622 “Ought To Pass” to take politics out of energy
markets, increase supply to put downward pressure on electricity prices, and diversify
the power grid. Thank you for your time and consideration.
6
Brief: State Renewable Portfolio Standards and Goals | National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL).
https://www.ncsl.org/energy/state-renewable-portfolio-standards-and-goals
5
Bryce, Robert. The High Cost of Renewable Electricity Mandates. The Manhattan Institute. February 2012.
https://www.manhattan-institute.org/pdf/eper_10.pdf
4
Electricity Data Browser. EIA.gov.
https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/browser/#/topic/7?agg=0
3
The Economic Impact of Maine’s Renewable Portfolio Standards. September 2012.
http://mainepolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/Path-to-Prosperity-Maine-RPS-Standards-092712.pdf
2
https://ourworldindata.org/land-use-per-energy-source
