J g L HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE House STATION 
AUGUSTA, ivmma 04533-0002 
(207) 2s7-1440 
§“"‘“““ TTY: (207) 287-4469 
Steven D. Foster 
56 Silvers Mills Rd. 
Dexter, ME 04930 
Residence: (207) 924-4409 
Steven F0ster@legislature.maine.gov 
March 28, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, fellow members of the Committee on Energy, 
Utilities, and Technology, I'm Steve Foster, Representative for House District 32, serving 
the residents of Charleston, Dexter, Exeter, Garland, Stetson, and a part of Bradford, in 
my third term on this committee, here to testify neither for nor against LD43, "An Act to 
Reduce the Cost of Electricity by Removing the 100-MW Limit on Renewable Resources 
of Energy” .* 
”l will likely never understand why we pit natural energy sources against each other and 
that is why I stand here again to argue against the 100 megawatt cap on Hydroelectric 
power. We have beat up this issue four times in the past eight years and my assertion 
each time has been consistent. Someone will profit or someone will lose and the 
ratepayers generally get stuck with the bill. 
The mills, along with renewable energy companies continue to argue that the measure 
would change the rules of the game after they had invested millions. They said large0 
Canadian hydro plants could crowd out the smaller players. Indeed, it could, but it could 
also lead to new innovative technology and investments in the efforts to build a better 
product by those very some renewables. 
As we speak, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island and New Hampshire are looking 
to the benefits of hydro and incorporating it into their energy portfolios. With the 
retirement of oil, coal and nuclear plants it has been estimated by ISO New England that 
another 8,300 megawatts of generation capacity will be lost by 2020, and they say we 
will require another 6,300 megawatts of gas- ready capacity to replace them." 
That was part of the testimony from the Honorable Beth O'Connor, a former member of 
this committee, in support of her bill, LD532 on March 2"“ , 2017. in 2017 and as late as 
2020, Class I and Class ll Renewable Energy Credits were quite plentiful and relatively 
inexpensive. As we've heard recently, due to demand outpacing supply, these credits 
have increased greatly in price and now add a larger cost to Maine rate payers. 
With that in mind, let's consider testimony submitted in 2019 regarding another bill to 
remove the IOOMW cap, LD1027. in testimony submitted by the PUC neither for nor 
against which I've provided for you today, besides a good description of the Renewable 
Portfolio Standard and how RECs affect electric rates, the testimony makes one point 
very clear. Beginning at the bottom of page two, it states ”The expansion of portfolio 
District 32 Charleston, Dexter, Exeter, Garland, Stetson, Bradford (part)
eligibility requirements to large generating facilities could have the effect of increasing 
the eligible supply for Maine's portfolio requirements, thus, placing downward pressure 
on prices for Maine RECs which could simultaneously reduce costs for electricity 
consumers and reduce the value of the RPS to renewable facilities" . 
ln another neither for nor against testimony submitted by the Public Advocate for the 
same bill, which you also have before you, we're reminded of similar bills submitted in 
the 127"‘ and 128"‘ Legislatures. The last sentence of the 2"“ paragraph reads "After 
many attempts the OPA believes the 100-megawatt figure should be reviewed and 
reassessed" . The testimony also provides good explanation of aspects of the RPS, Recs, 
and the effects on electric rates. The last paragraph on page two begins, “If this bill were 
to be enacted it is virtually certain to lower electricity costs for Maine ratepayers." 
Further testimony describes a much different supply and cost of RECs in 2019 compared 
to today. Finally, it provides a summary on page 4 of what the bill would likely mean if 
enacted. 
You may ask how l could end up testifying neither for nor against LD43. Well, l had that 
same question of others in 2019, when l heard these testimonies. l've also found myself 
wavering between those testifying against the bill, those representing industries taking 
advantage of RECs that employ Mainers in the wood products arena and our long 
standing Maine hydro generation and Maine rate payers. 
So, as you consider LD43, take time to look back through past testimonies. As you do, 
consider the changes from the days of plentiful and inexpensive RECs to what we see 
today. Most importantly consider today's ratepayers and how much more they are 
paying and will likely pay going forward. 
Thank you for your time. l look forward to working with you to give this bill the full 
consideration it deserves. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Steve Foster 
State Representative 
District 32 Charleston, Dexter, Exetcr, Garland, Stetson, Bradford (part)
iiij 
1 
5 STATE or MAINE 
~=r:€ 
?;,é, PUBLlC UTlLlTlES COMMISSION 1- --.~- - 1 
“NJ: -95;‘ 
Mark A. Vannoy Harry Lanphear 
crwmm ADMINISTRATIVEDIRECTOR 
R. Bruce Viﬁltiarnson 
Randall D. Davis 
commrssrousns 
March 19, 2019 
Honorable Mark W. Lawrence, Senate Chair 
Honorable Seth A. Berry, House Chair 
Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
Re: LD 1027, An Act To Eliminate the 100-megawatt ‘ Limit on Hydroelectric 
Generators under the Renewable Resource Laws 
Dear Senator Lawrence and Representative Berry: 
The Public Utilities Commission (PUC) testiﬁes neither for nor against LD 1027, An Act 
To Eliminate the 100-megawatt Limit on Hydroelectric Generators under the Renewable 
Resource Laws. The bill would amend the State’s resource portfolio requirement (35-A M.R.S. 
§ 3210) to remove the 100 MW eligibility cap on hydroelectric generation resources. 
General Description of Portfolio Requirements 
A resource portfolio requirement, also typically referred to as a renewable portfolio 
standard or an RPS, is a market mechanism used to encourage the development and 
operation of legislatively designated types of generating facilities (usually renewable 
resources). Generally, the purpose of a renewable resource portfolio requirement is to 
promote renewable resources and resource diversity in a competitive generation market. lt 
does so by creating an additional source of revenue over electricity wholesale market prices for 
resources that might not otherwise be developed or operated. 
The mechanism works by creating a mandatory demand for designated resources by 
mandating that pre-speci ﬁed percentages of a retail electricity provider's load must be senred 
by the designated resources. The market then operates to meet this legislatively created 
demand at the lowest cost. The result of the portfolio requirement mechanism is thata 
premium over wholesale electricity market prices is created for the designated renewable 
resources. This premium is paid for by electricity ratepayers through the supply portion of their 
bills. The speciﬁc amount of the premium varies over time depending on the supplyldemand 
balance for the Maine RPS as well as RPSs in other New England states. 
LOCATION: I01 Second Stmct, Hallowell, ME 04347 MAIL: 1 8 State House Station, Auglmi» ME04333-0018 
PHONE: (207) 287-3831 (VOICE) TTY: 711 FAX: (207) 287-1039
PUC Testimony on LD 1027 March 19, 2019 
Maine's Portfolio Requirements 
Maine currently has two portfolio requirements: 1) a new renewable capacity resources 
requirement (referred to as Class l); and 2) an eligible resource requirement (referred to as 
Class ll). Maine's original restructuring legislation included a 30% eligible resource portfolio 
requirement that became effective in 2000 (35-A M.R.S. § 3210(3)). In 2007, the Legislature 
enacted a “l'l6V\/' renewable resource portfolio requirement that deﬁnes eligibility asa 
renewable resource that began service, resumed operation or was substantially refurbished 
after September 2005 (35-A M.R.S. § 321 O(3-A)). The percentage requirement started at one 
percent in 2008 and increased in annual one percent increments until it reached ten percent in 
2017 and remains at ten percent thereafter. The statutes limit portfolio requirement resource 
eligibility to generation facilities that are 100 MW or less, except for wind facilities, for Classl 
eligibility. 
For the most part, suppliers demonstrate compliance with Maine's portfolio requirement 
by obtaining renewable energy credits (RECs) that are created and tracked by the New 
England Generation lnfonnation System (GlS).1 This system allows for the trading of the 
renewable attribute separate from the energy commodity. Eligible generators receive RECs 
from the GIS and may sell the RECs to retail electricity suppliers at market driven prices, thus 
creating a premium over market prices for the generators. Suppliers then use the purchased 
RECs to satisfy the portfolio requirements in Maine and the other New England states. 
Approximately 74.8% of electricity produced in Maine in 2017 (the most recent year for which 
U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) data is available) came from renewable 
TGSOUTCGS. 
LD 1027 _. 
LD 1027 would amend the portfolio requirement statutes to remove the 100 MW eligibility cap on hydroelectric generators for both the Class I and Class ll requirements. The 
primary effect of this change would be to allow large hydro facilities (likely to be located in 
Canadian provinces) to qualify for Maine's portfolio requirements. The determination of the 
speciﬁc types of resource, such as large Canadian hydroelectric facilities, that should be 
designated as eligible for a state’s portfolio requirement (and thus receive a ratepayer funded 
premium above market prices) is an issue of general energy policy that should be detemﬂned 
by the Legislature. As described above, a portfolio requirement creates a premium above 
market prices that is paid for by all ratepayers in the State through their electricity bills. Thus,a 
portfolio requirement generally applies to speciﬁc resources that the Legislature detennines are 
both desirable from an energy policy perspective and require ratepayer funded support to be 
developed or operated. 
The Commission notes that Maine REC prices for Class I continue to be lower than they 
have been in prior years, likely a result of an abundance of qualifying resources for Maine's 
portfolio requirement. Currently, Maine Class l RECs have a value in the range of $3.50lMWh, 
or less than one half of one cent per kWh. Maine REC prices for Class ll have a value of 
$1 .30/MWh. The expansion of the portfolio eligibility requirements to large generating facilities 
could have the effect of increasing the eligible supply for Maine's portfolio requirements, thus, 
1 
The northem Maine system is not part of ISO-NE and, accordingly, providers had historically 
demonstrated compliance though contractual documentation and market data. More recently, 
northern Maine has started to use the North American Renewable Registry, a REC tracking system 
similar to the ISO-NE GIS system and run by the same company.
PUC Testimony on LD 1027 March 19, 2019 
placing downward pressure on prices for Maine RECs which could simultaneously reduce 
costs for electricity consumers and reduce the value of the RPS to renewable facilities. 
The Commission looks forward to working with the Committee on LD 1027 andl 
would be happy to respond to any questions the Committee has at this time. The 
Commission will also be present at the work session should the Committee have any 
additional questions in its consideration of this bill. 
C. 
Sincerely, 
WW0 /l/l(sL_5@_ 4-¢~ 
Paulina McCarter Collins, Esq. 
Legislative Liaison 
cc: Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee Members 
. Lucia Nixon, Legislative Analyst
LD 1027 t€‘.;‘i{‘:.§If§!l'2§2:t.iJ'2§.J$;2Li2 “Ji.i.‘:. N FNA Y 
the Renewable Resources Laws 
__i' 
»;~ 
_ State of Maine JQIMT M1118 
Oﬂice of the Public Advocate GOVERNOR 
1“ 
|_- 
V‘ 112 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 0112 Barry Hobbms 3;")-‘e '- 
(207) 624-3687 (voice) 711 (TTY) www.Mame.gov/meopa PUBLIC ADVOCATE 
U- 
March 19, 2019 
Chairman Lawrence, Chairman Berry and Members of the Energy, Utilities and 
Technology Committee, 
The Ofﬁce of the Public Advocate (“OPA”) testiﬁes neither for nor against 
LD 1027 “An Act To Eliminate the 100-megawatt Limit on Hydroelectric Generators 
under the Renewable Resources Laws” which removes the 100-megawatt capacity 
limit for a hydroelect ﬁc generator that meets all state and federal ﬁsh passage 
requirements applicable to generators to qualify as a renewable capacity resource and 
for a hydroelectric generator to qualify as a renewable resource for the purpose of 
meeting the State's renewable resource portfolio requirement. 
For those of you who may not be aware LD 1027 is the resurrection of LD 532 
which was heard in the 128*“ Legislature which was the resurrection of LD 132 which 
was heard in the 127*‘ Legislature. I was the House Chair when the prior Public 
Advocate testiﬁed in support of LD 132 and he also later testiﬁed in support of LD 
532. After many prior attempts the OPA believes the 100-megawatt ﬁgure should be 
reviewed and reassessed. 
A renewable resource portfolio requirement has two primary purposes. It 
offers a way for a state to “keep score” about where its electricity comes from, and 
ensure that it is meeting identiﬁed renewable energy goals and promotes development 
of renewable resources by providing a premium over electricity wholesale market 
prices for resources that might not otherwise be developed or operated based on 
wholesale market pricing alone.
1
LD 1 027 $553. E3512’:i22§§:J'&2. ‘L?;';1,‘ii“;'!$;. NFNA the Renewable Resources Laws 
A renewable portfolio standard (“RPS”) does both by mandating that a certain 
percentage of a retail electricity provider's load comes from renewable resources. This 
creates demand for renewable energy that is satisﬁed through tradable renewable 
energy credits (RECs) created for each MWh of renewable energy production. 
Suppliers purchase enough RECs to meet their statutory obligation. The market for 
these R.ECs functions to meet this legislatively created demand at the lowest cost, so 
that the price of the REC reﬂects the premium associated with renewable energy. 
Electricity suppliers pass the cost of purchasing RECs on to their customers, who pay 
through the supply portion of their bills. 
Maine has two renewable portfolio standards, one for renewable resources 
constructed since September 1, 2005 (Class I), and one for resources constructed 
prior to that date (Class II). Together, these two requirements now require that 40°/lo 
of Maine’s energy supply comes from renewable resources. This bill broadens the 
category of renewable resources that “count” for score—keeping purposes of Maine’s 
Class I renewable portfolio requirement to include hydro-electric resources greater 
than 100 MW (the current standard excludes such resources). The question of what 
should count is a policy question for the Legislature, on which the OPA takes no 
position. 
If this bill were to be enacted it is virtually certain to lower electricity costs for 
Maine ratepayers. The OPA does support this aspect. The price of Maine renewable 
energy credits, and thus the overall cost of the renewable portfolio standard is set by 
supply and demand. Demand, in this case is set by the percentage of Maine’s load 
which must be met by new renewable capacity resources. Supply is determined by the 
number of facilities that meet the eligibility requirements. The bill would increase the 
supply of renewable energy credits by expanding the eligibility requirements to include 
hydro facilities greater than 100 MW. We can reasonably expect that the result of this 
increase in supply will be a decrease in the cost of Maine Class I RECs, and in the
2
An Act To Eliminate the 100-megawatt 
D 1 Limit on Hydroelectric Generators under N 
the Renewable Resources Laws 
overall cost of compliance with the Class I Renewable Portfolio Standard, possibly to 
neat zero. 
The example of the Maine Class II renewable standard is instructive here. 
Supply of Class II renewable resources exceeds the demand (30%) established by 
statute, so the average price of a Class II REC for the 2011 compliance year was $0.18 
per M\X/'11, for a total cost of $627,094. Increasing supply by the change in deﬁnition 
proposed in this bill is likely to have a similar impact on the price of Maine ClassI 
RECs. 
Maine’s RPS does a poor job of achieving the second goal of an RPS: it is 
largely irrelevant to the construction of new renewable energy generation in Maine. 
This is true for the hydro facilities that would be added to the RPS under the bill: they 
have been and will be built regardless of what Maine elects to do with its Class I RPS 
Standard. Because of decisions both inside and outside of Maine, the price of Maine’s 
Class I RECs has dropped sharply compared to neighbor states, though they 
rebounded in 201 6. 
Because of this volatility, Maine Class I RECs do not provide a predictable 
revenue stream that can be used to ﬁnance the substantial up-front investment 
associated with new renewable generation. This is a general weakness of RPS’s in 
restructured markets: even states with comparatively high REC prices such as 
Massachusetts, Connecticut and Rhode Island have concluded that long term 
contracts are a more cost-effective way to meet their renewables and carbon emission 
goals. Reducing the overall cost of compliance by expanding supply would more 
closely align the cost of the program with the beneﬁts received by ratepayers. The 
cost of the Maine Class I Renewable Portfolio Standard for the 2014 compliance year 
was more than $6.9 million, a number that is likely to rise signiﬁcantly as prices have 
rebounded.
3
LD 1 021 L?.,?l":.§ I.‘;.§1L'£§22§.fi:'2§e?. ‘l‘1;2'L‘i%,“:¥.i,‘;. N F NA the Renewable Resources Laws 
It might be that Maine’s RPS is intended to achieve third purpose, other than 
the two described above. While the Maine RPS has not incented the construction of 
new renewables, it has provided consistent revenue to Maine biomass producers, and 
by extension served to support Maine’s forest products industry. 
Let me reiterate a few points as a general overview of this bill as the OPA sees 
it: 
If enacted this bill is virtually certain to lower electricity costs for Maine 
ratepayers; 
The proposed changes would increase the supply of Maine Class I Renewable 
Energy Credits by allowing large scale hydro from outside New England to qualify, 
which would decrease the overall cost of meeting the Class I Renewable Portfolio 
Standard (RPS); 
Maine’s RPS does not incentivize the construction of renewable generation in 
Maine or New England. Reducing the overall cost of compliance by supply 
would more closely the cost of the program with the beneﬁts received by 
ratepayers; and 
Maine RPS does provide a meaningful revenue stream for Maine-based 
biomass generators. 
Thank you for your time, attention and consideration of this testimony. The 
Ofﬁce of the Public Advocate looks forward to working with the Committee on LD 
1027, and will be present at the work session to assist the Committee in its 
consideration of this bill. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Jgansﬁéjmm 
Barry J. Hobbins 
Public Advocate
4
