 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
May 5, 2023  
 
Senator Anne Carney, Chair  
Representative Matt Moonen, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 771 – An Act to Protect a Woman’s Right to Withdraw Consent for an Abortion  
  LD 1197 – An Act to Prevent Coerced Abortion  
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary:  
 
This letter is to provide information regarding the opposition of the Department of He alth and 
Human Services to both LD 771, An Act to Protect a Woman’s Right to Withdraw Consent for an 
Abortion  and LD 1197, An Act to Prevent Coerced Abortion .  
 
LD 771 would make changes to the informed consent laws in 22 MRS by changing language from 
“abo rtion is performed” to “fetus has died” and requires that a provider not “knowingly perform or 
aid in the performance of an abortion” after a minor or adult has withdrawn their consent for 
abortion.  
 
LD 1197 would amend the informed consent  to abortion  laws by requiring that the health care 
professional performing an abortion provide orally and in writing a  host of information , including an 
offer to call law enforcement on the patient’s behalf,  as well as  to provide a refund if consent for a  
procedure is withdrawn.   
 
DHHS is not aware of concerns with the strength of Maine’s consent laws  and requirements. Further, 
singling out abortion care for this unnecessary and overly prescriptive information perpetuates stigma 
about the situations in wh ich individuals seek abortion.  
 
According to the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology, laws that require physicians to 
give, or withhold, specific information when counseling patients, or that mandate which tests, 
procedures, treatment alternativ es or medicines physicians can perform, prescribe, or administer are 
ill-advised.  Abortion providers —like all medical providers —are ethically bound to provide patients 
with information about options, procedure details and any other information a provider d eems 
pertinent after assessing each patient’s unique health needs and circumstances. Providers are also 
required to obtain informed consent, which means they must verify that patients possess the capacity 
to make decisions about their care, that their part icipation in these decisions is voluntary, and that 
they receive adequate and appropriate information1. 
 
 
1 Guttmacher Institute , (Jan. 202 0); https://www.guttmacher.org/evidence -you-can-use/mandatory -counseling -
abortion  
 
Both of these bills seek to  limit access to a safe, legal, routine medical procedure that Maine people 
should be able to access when determined by the mselves and their doctor.  For these reasons, the 
Department is opposed, and we urge the Committee to vote ought not to pass.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  

