Representative Kattina Smith
Palermo
LD 1197
Senator Carney, representative Moonen and members of the judiciary committee. My 
name is Katrina Smith and I represent district 62 China Palermo, Windsor, Somerville
and Hibberts gore and I am here today to speak to support each and every bill that has
been presented here this morning. 
I believe it is important that we take a step back from all of the emotion and rhetoric 
that has built around this issue prior to today and specifically look at these bills for the
protections they are attempting to put into place for women. We need to acknowledge 
that women are amazing, nurturing and loving and that an abortion is an incredibly 
difficult decision to make. Women should absolutely be provided with all of the 
information of the physical, emotional and mental trauma that can arise from an 
abortion whether in a doctors office or at home.
How could we say that it would be a bad thing to ensure that women know all of their 
rights as Representative Arata has proposed? How can It be a bad thing that we would
ensure a woman is physically ready to take an abortion drug by ensuring a doctor 
physically check her vitals, the age of her fetus and her overall health? All the 
opponents of this bill have stated pregnancy is dangerous, if it is so dangerous then 
we have to ask how can we allow a woman to risk taking the abortion drug without 
seeing a doctor physically?? Is it worse to allow a woman to see a child within her 
womb or is it worse to pretend that it is not a life growing within? 
Proponents of abortion, say that abortion is to protect women, but without the 
measures presented today women are absolutely not protected . We must seriously 
consider how we safeguard women from the harmful effects of an at home abortion 
prescribed through telehealth, we must consider the emotional trauma that a woman 
undergoes in a doctors office, whether she goes through with an abortion or not, and 
give them the tools to help them to think through these life changing decisions.  The 
bills presented before you today are common sense and compassionate bills and 
speaking for women around this state I insist you give them fair consideration for the 
good they will do. Please vote Ought to Pass on each bill. 
Thank you.  

