HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION _. 
‘. 
LN‘ AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Anne-Marie Mastraccio TTY3 MAINE RELAY 711 
23 Lebanon Street 
Sanford, ME 04073 
Phone: (207) 432-1453 
Anne-Marie.Mastraccio@legislaturemaine.gov 
April 18, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Anne-Marie Mastraccio in support of 
LD 849, An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Working Group to Review the 
Process for Ongoing Review of Tax Expenditures by the Legislature 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and esteemed Members of the Committee on Taxation, I 
am Anne-Marie Mastraccio, representing House District 142, part of the City of Sanford and the 
Village of Springvale. I am before you today to testify in favor of LD 849, An Act to 
Implement the Recommendations of the Working Group to Review the Process for 
Ongoing Review of Tax Expenditures by the Legislature. 
I am not testifying today on behalf of the Govemment Oversight Committee (GOC), but asa 
legislator with experience serving on and chairing that committee. I am in agreement with most 
of the working group’s conclusions and recommendations that are before you. My only argument 
is with the proposed changes regarding committee membership. 
Currently, the membership of the committee and the selection of chairs are established by joint 
rule of the Legislature. Begiming with the 132nd Legislature, the working group has 
recommended that at least two members of the committee must be members of the joint standing 
committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over taxation matters and at least one member 
must be a member of the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over 
economic development matters. 
What the Government Oversight Committee is lacking right now is the broad representation of 
the committees of oversight. GOC has 12 members, six of one party with the greatest 
membership and six of the party with the second highest membership. Nothing happens without 
a bipartisan vote. It is not like any other standing committee in that one never knows what types 
of issues might be before it. Therefore, it is important that no one committee be over represented. 
In the 131st legislature, the GOC has ﬁve members who also serve on the Appropriations 
Committee and two members who are in leadership. That is the opposite of broad representation. 
My suggestion would be to add language to this section that addresses this issue, rather than 
leave it to be established by joint rule. For example, “The membership of the Govemment 
Oversight Committee shall be comprised of no more than two members from any one 
District 142: Sanford (part) and Springvale (part)
committee ” and “Beginning with the l32nd Legislature, at least one member of the committee 
must be a member of the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over 
taxation matters and at least one member must be a member of the joint standing committee of 
the Legislature having jurisdiction over economic development matters. ” 
The Taxation Committee should be represented, but one required member with experience on 
that committee would be sufﬁcient as would one member representing matters of economic 
development. While the review of tax expenditures is an important function of the Govermnent 
Oversight Committee, it is not their only function and the committee membership should reﬂect 
that. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
