TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: Tuesday, April 18, 2023 
LD 849 — “An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Working Group to 
Review the Process for Ongoing Review of Tax Expenditures by the Legislature ” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good aftemoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
providing testimony at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against 
LD 849, “An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Working Group to 
Review the Process for Ongoing Review of Tax Expenditures by the Legislature. ” 
The Administration supports the important tax expenditure review work 
performed by the Government Oversight and Taxation Committees, and the Ofﬁce 
of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability (“OPEGA”). The 
Administration does not have a position on most elements of this bill. However, 
there are important teclmical and substantive issues with the bill that should be 
addressed. 
Among other changes to the tax expenditure review process, this bill shifts 
information collection responsibilities for expedited tax expenditure reviews from 
the Office of Program Evaluation and Govemment Accountability to Maine 
Revenue Services, requires additional infonnation to be reported in the Maine 
State Tax Expenditure Report, and establishes a new category called “limited 
analysis projects ” that the Taxation Committee can request OPEGA to perform on 
a 30-day rapid review basis.
1
With the bill proposing to add limited analysis projects, the Administration 
respectfully suggests that the time has come to remove the category of expedited 
reviews, which would leave in place the full review projects, and the new limited 
review projects. Since the ﬁrst expedited tax expenditure review in 2016, the 
Taxation Committee, with support from OPEGA, has completed one cycle of 
expedited reviews and begun to review the same expenditures a second time. 
These reports served as an information source for the Legislature but did not result 
in signiﬁcant action on these expenditures. Further, much of the statistical 
information remains available to the Committee via the biemial tax expenditure 
report already required under 36 MRSA §l99-B. The Administration respectfully 
suggests that the Committee consider the expedited review process complete. 
Removing that category would free up Committee time, Legislative staff resource, 
and Department staff resource to better focus on current Legislative priorities and 
the OPEGA full reviews and limited analysis projects. 
MRS would like to note the following important technical concerns. 
0 The bill would require the MRS Ofﬁce of Tax Policy to report on the take- 
up rate for tax expenditures targeted at low-income taxpayers as part of the 
Tax Expenditure Report. This is a complicated analysis requiring the Ofﬁce 
to estimate the number of eligible non-claimants, including among the 
population who do not ﬁle an income tax return. The Qfﬁce lacks data to 
determine eligibility among non-claimants and cannot simply assume that 
observationally equivalent claimants and non-claimants are similar on 
unobserved dimensions. The estimates that the Ofﬁce would be required to 
report would be both time consuming to produce and unreliable. Instead of 
biennial reporting of this information, the Administration respectfully 
suggests that the Ofﬁce provide this information when it is requested by the
2
Legislature for particular consideration. For instance, the Ofﬁce provided 
similar estimates for the Working Group to Study the Consolidation of 
Payment of Cost-of-Living Tax Credits in 2020. 
The bill requires OPEGA to complete limited analysis projects within 30 
days. It is unclear what role, if any, MRS would have in these projects. 
However, I would like to note for the Committee that MRS would have very 
limited ability to provide information to OPEGA within these time 
constraints during the middle of the income tax ﬁling season and Legislative 
Session. If MRS involvement is envisioned, then the Administration 
respectfully suggests that these projects be initiated and completed between 
Sessions. 
Section 6 of the bill adds additional yearly reporting requirements to the 
biennial Tax Expenditure Report. The annual report requirement should be 
removed as inconsistent with biennial reporting. 
Section 6 of the bill requires reporting of information that appears similar to 
the existing reporting of the biennial Tax Expenditure Report and the new 
reporting requirement in Section 9 of the bill. The Administration 
respectfully recommends removing these expanded reporting requirements 
as unnecessary. 
Section 8 of the bill states that tax expenditures that do not go through the 
proper Taxation Committee bill analysis “may not be enacted into law.” It is 
not clear how this provision is intended to apply to such bills if they are 
enacted into law. The Administration respectfully recommends removing 
this provision as unenforceable and adequately addressed by the rest of the 
Section.
3
The estimated administrative costs are approximately $135,000 for one Tax 
Policy Analyst (Economist) position and related costs to process and analyze the 
additional information required to be included in the Tax Expenditure Report and 
the expedited tax expenditure reviews. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional infonnation and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions. I would 
be happy to respond to any questions you may have now.
4
