Christine Cooney   
State Government Affairs Manager, New England  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
April 24 , 2023  
 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
Testimony by Cigna in Opposition to:  
LD 1407 - An Act to Amend the Maine Insurance Code Regarding Payments  
by Health Insurance Carriers to Providers  
 
 
Good Afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance 
and F inancial Services Committee, I am Christine  Cooney, Cigna's State Government Affairs Manager 
for New England .  Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony  on behalf of Cigna and offer 
comments in opposition to LD 1407, An Act to Amend the Maine In surance Code Regarding Payments 
by Health Insurance Carriers to Providers .  
 
For background, The Cigna Group (either individually or collectively referred to as “Cigna”) is a global 
health services organization committed to improving health and vitality and enhancing the lives of our 
clients, customers, and patients.   Our Cigna Healthcare and Evernorth Health Services divisions are 
major providers of medical, pharmacy, dental, and related products and services, with over 190 million 
customer relationships in the more than 30 countries and jurisdictions in which Cigna ope rates. The 
company and its businesses  employ more than 70,000 people.  In all of the segments Cigna serves, the 
company strives to deliver health care that is affordable, predictable, and simple  – so people can live 
healthier, more vibrant lives.  
 
Cigna is concerned that this proposal could have unintended negative consequences for health plan 
customers  in Maine  if it were enacted, and that it  would interfere with long-standing contracts between 
Cigna and  its providers.  
 
LD 1407  would interfere with Cigna's provider and client contracts and profoundly disrupt well -
established mechanisms for communicating evolving cover age and reimbursement standards.  Contracts 
between Cigna and network providers specifically state that the provider agrees to abide by Cigna's 
administrative guidelines (including coverage and reimbursement policies) as a condition of participating 
in our network.  Administrative guidelin es are used , in part , to adopt emerging industry standards, and to 
administer our client benefits more accurately with the advent of new technology and processes.  Cigna 
agrees to provide  advance notice of material change s to Administrative Guidelines, and  the provider has 
the right to terminate the agreement if they object to a change in the Administrative Guidelines . This 
allows the parties’ relationship to evolve with changing coverage and reimbursement policies without  
having to continually amend contra cts.  If contract amendments were required every time a guideline 
changed, or if amendments to the administrative guidelines could not be implemented within 18 months 
of the notice of the amendment, Cigna’s  ability to administer client accounts in step wit h emerging 
industry practices would be severely compromised.  This would hamper innovation and limit Cigna's 
ability to meaningfully keep pace with industry and clinical developments.  
 Routing  B6LPA  
900 Cottage Grove Road  
Bloomfield , CT 0 6002  
Christine.Cooney @Cigna.com  

 
 
Administrative guidelines are often used to communicate new reimbursement policies, such as billing 
protocols  for new services. They are also used to inform providers of new coverage policies that align 
with customer certificates and benefit plans. Administrative guidelines are not, and cannot, be used to 
make changes to customer insurance certificates or negotiated reimbursement rates with providers. I t is 
important to recognize that i n the ev ent of an inconsistency between the provider contract and the 
administrative guidelines, the provider contract controls.  
 
The pr actice  of allowing changes through administrative guidelines is a well -established and transparent 
process . It provides for  advance notificati on of any changes, a portal to pull information from and a point 
of contact if any questions arise from providers.  Administrative guidelines and provider manuals are the 
key to communicating beneficial changes in a rapidly evolving health care field. We have an obligation 
to constantly pursue options that improv e the quality of, and access to, care.    
 
This legislation would impede an insurer’s  ability to innovate and adapt as better care develops and  
would  impact our ability to implement policies that align with customer benefit plans. If enacted, this 
legislation would give Maine  providers the ability to impact the adoption  of national coverage an d 
reimbursement policies, would increase the total cost of care, and would require constant negotiation of 
provider contracts at enormous operational expense.   
 
We hope you will consider the detrimental impact this unnecessary legislation could have on th e health 
care system as whole, but most importantly on customers and patients, and agree that this bill Ought Not 
To Pass.  
 
Once again , thank you for the opportunity to weigh in on this proposed bill .  
 
If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact me at (804.904.3473) or 
Christine.Cooney@cigna.com . 
 
 
