l\/IAINE Assoc1A'r1<)i\1 
or 
HICALTH Pi./xns 
Testimony of Dan Demeritt — 4/24/23- 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
In Opposition to LD 1407 
An Act to Amend the Maine Insurance Code RegardingA 
. Payments by Health Insurance Carriers to Providers 
r
- 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
My name is Dan Demeritt, the Executive Director of the Maine Association of Health Plans 
(MeAHP). Our plans include Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Cigna, CVS / Aetna, 
Community Health Options, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, and United Health Care. Our private 
and non-proﬁt insurance carriers provide or administer health insurance coverage to about 
600,000 Maine people. Our mission as an association is to improve the health of Maine people 
by promoting affordable, safe, and coordinated healthcare. 
The Maine Health Data Organization reports that the median proﬁtability ratios at Maine’s 
hospitals are the highest in ﬁve years in terms of operating margin, total margin, return on 
equity, net operating income, and total surplus.1I 
Former Superintendent of Insurance Eric Cioppa noted in testimony to the 130th legislature that 
there are few provisions in the Insurance Code pertaining to carriers ’ agreements with providers. 
These agreements, his testimony reported, have largely been left to private contract negotiation 
with carriers and providers? 
LD 1407 proposes to fundamentally change that. The bill before you creates advantages for 
providers in private contracts that can be used to protect revenue streams and block updates to 
contracts for up to a year-and-a-half. 
If this bill becomes law, providers can unilaterally and without justification prevent updates that 
may be needed to modernize practices, enhance affordability, adjust to statutory or regulatory 
changes, or improve patient outcomes. . 
1 Maine Health Data Organization, Standardized Hospital Financial Data Report l, profitability ratios, p.6-12. 
https://mhdo.maine.gov/ pdt/20221017 Report l 2017-2021 v6.pdf 
2 
Testimony on LD 945, 130"‘ Legislature 
Qtjtp://WWW.maineiegisiatui'e.org/legis/biils/gettestimom/Doc.asp?id=150058 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
The most notable provision of this proposal is that carriers must provide a good faith estimate of 
the total ﬁnancial impact of an amendment. This insinuates that decisions about changes 
allowed by contract should be made based on a ﬁnancial impact to providers. 
Not evidence-based medicine. 
Not affordability. 
Not better care or outcomes for patients. 
This bill would essentially legislate a one-sided advantage in private payor-provider contracts 
based on the provider ’s bottom line. This is not good for patients. 
The contracting process is a sophisticated negotiation between two parties and decisions about 
what changes can or can’t occur in the middle of a contract cycle should be left to the parties. 
This legislation would result in unfair legal precedent and bad healthcare policy. 
I will ﬁnish my testimony with a mention of the MaineCare provider agreement by way of 
comparison. 
Our state’s public payor-provider agreement is never subject to negotiation and is updated 
automatically the day a new law or regulation goes into effect. A provider objecting to the 
change has 30 calendar days to notify the Department it is terminating the agreement and failure 
to notify is deemed acceptance of the change.3 
Providers can adjust to changes required of them by public payors. Private-party negotiations 
between health plans and providers allow for negotiations and is a model that is workable in its 
current form. 
Thank you for your consideration. We strongly urge you to vote “ought not to pass” on L.D. 
1407.
3 
httpsiffmainecare.maine.gov,fProvider%2OForms; ‘Provéder%2OEnrollmentf ﬁov Agrmt Medicaid2018061S 84004 
Mi.;2s Cgdf 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
