l\/.[aineHealth 
Testimony of Katie Fullam Harris 
MaineHealth 
' 
In Strong Support of LD 1407 
“An Act to Amend the Maine Insurance Code Regarding Payments by Health 
Insurance Carriers to Providers ” 
Sponsored by Representative Anne-Marie Mastraccio 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the ]oint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services, I am Katie Fullam Harris, of Mainel-Iealth, and I am here to testify in 
strong support of LD 1407, “An Act to Amend the Maine Insurance Code Regarding Payments by Health 
Insurance Carriers to Providers. ” This bill will take an important step towards creating a level playing ﬁeld 
between health care providers and health insurance carriers in Maine. 
The Problem 
Private and commercial health care payments systems are primarily based on the HIPAA required coding 
and data sets, which are peiiodically updated. As a result, most contracts between health care facilities and 
health insurance carriers allow for mid~contract policy changes to adjust coding in alignment with mid-year 
changes made by the AMA, NUBC, and other governing bodies. Mid-year changes made by these entities 
are generally technical in nature, and they have never represented material changes to payments. 
In recent years, health insurance carriers have begun iinplementing mid-contract policy changes that havea 
material ﬁnancial impact on providers. In other words, we negotiate a contract with a carrier, develop an 
annual operating budget based upon the agreed upon contractual terms, then the carrier unilaterally issuesa 
policy change that materially changes the amount we are paid for the service. In some instances, the changes 
are clinical in nature, but often with a ﬁnancial implication. In other cases, they are strictly ﬁnancial 
reductions. In all cases, they represent an unpredictable environment in which to treat patients and ensure 
ﬁnancial stability for our future.A 
How LD 1407 Would Help 
When a carrier implements a mid-contract policy change, health care providers are left with two formal 
options: 
We can appeal the change to the carrier, with no enforcement entity overseeing the appeal. Or we can 
choose to terminate our contract. The “appeal” process is often ignored by the carriers. For example, only9 
of the 46 policy appeals ﬁled by MaineHea1th resulted in suspension or retraction of the objectionable 
~~ 
1 rpolicy, and 3"of those only after a termination notice was issued. And it’s fair to assume that we all agree that 
contract termination is a major and highly disruptive step. 
This bill intends to provide a middle ground by doing the following: 
110 Free Street ' Portland, ME 04101 Phone: 207-661-7001 Fax: 207-661-7029 mainehealthcrg
1. It amends the statute governing notice of amendments to provider agreements to provide 5' 
formal opportunity for a provider to object to policy change, including the estimated ﬁnancial 
impact of the change on all providers in the state. 
2. If a provider objects to the policy change, the bill provides an 18 month window before the 
change can take effect unless the provider and the carrier reach agreement on the change 
before the 18 months has expired. 
3. It provides for oversight of this process by the Superintendent of insurance. 
4. lt restricts the authority of a carrier to retroactively deny a previously paid claim to no later 
than 24 months from the payment date. At present, there is no limit on carriers ’ ability to 
retroactively deny claims for certain circumstances. 
These are relatively modest changes that would provide stability to our health care system in Maine. Maine’s 
hospitals and other health care providers are under tremendous strain due to labor shortages and the 
ﬁnancial challenges of maintaining access to high quality care in this environment. It is also noteworthy that 
nearly all of Maine’s larger hospitals are struggling ﬁnancially, while insurance carriers continue to post 
record proﬁts. This bill would address the unreasonable situation in which we are being forced to chase 
down unilateral policy changes and Weather the iinpact of ﬁnancial reductions that were not contemplated in 
our contract negotiations. 
Thank you, and I would be happy to answer questions.
