northernlighthealth.org
This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
 
 
Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 1407 An Act to Amend the Maine Insurance Code Regarding Payments  
by Health Insurance Carriers to Providers 
 
Testimony in Support 
April 24, 2023  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance 
and Financial Services Committee, my name is Lisa Harvey-McPherson RN.  I am here 
today providing testimony on behalf of Northern Light Health and our member 
organizations speaking in support of  this bill.  Northern Light Health member 
organizations include 10 hospitals located in southern, central, eastern and northern 
Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air and ground ambulance, behavioral health, addiction 
treatment, pharmacy, primary and specialty care practices and a state-wide home care 
and hospice program.  Ninety three percent of Maine’s population lives in the Northern 
Light Health service area.  Northern Light Health is also proud to be one of Maine’s 
largest employers with more than 10,000 employees statewide. 
 
I want to begin by thanking Representative Mastraccio for sponsoring this important 
legislation.  This bill establishes important criteria regarding amendments to existing 
provider agreements.  
 
Today carriers must provide participating providers with notice of proposed 
amendments to provider agreements at least 60 days prior to the effective date of the 
change.  Unfortunately the lack of transparency in carrier communication of what the 
change is often results in significant time and research by our team to try and determine 
exactly what has changed.  Here is what we experience.   
 
On a regular basis (generally monthly) we receive email communication that includes 
links to information about medical polices and guidelines that that are material changes 
in coverage or payment policies.  This email communication starts the 60-day timeline 
for notice.  The communication states that there is a revised medical or clinical guideline 
that might result in services that were previously covered now being considered not 
medically necessary or investigational.  Our staff then review a document regarding the 
guideline.  The documents are generally 10-15 pages long with lots of information, 
descriptions and codes.  What the document does not identify is what exactly the 
change is, there is no underlining, no highlighting, no “look here at this section – this is 
what’s new or changed”.  Codes for treatments and procedures in the document are for 
“informational purposes” and do not imply coverage.   Some months there are as many 
as 5 material changes/amendments.  So our staff are looking at 5 different policies, 50 
or more pages of information trying to figure out what exactly has changed.  Now 
expand this to all of the carriers and all of the material changes and amendments to 
coverage and payment policies and it readily becomes clear this is an unnecessary 
administrative burden created by the carriers.  Our staff spend weeks and months 
working to identify the detail of the change and then incorporate the change into our 
billing protocols.  Sometimes we get it right, other times we find out about the material 
 change when a prior authorization is denied or a claim for our service is denied.  
Sometimes we understand the change after our extensive research and believe it 
violates terms of our contractual agreement, carriers should not be able allowed to 
violate the terms of our contract with this type of notice between contracting periods.   
 
This bill is a critical step forward to resolve the challenge.  This bill states that the 
provider has an opportunity to reject the change and further states that the carrier 
notice must include the carrier's good faith estimate of the total annual financial impact 
of the amendment on the aggregate amount of payments made by the carrier to all 
providers within the State with whom the carrier has a provider agreement.  The bill 
also states that if a provider objects to an amendment before the expiration of the 60-
day notice period, the amendment to the provider agreement or manual, policy or 
procedure document takes effect 18 months from the date the carrier notified the 
provider, except that, if there are less than 18 months remaining on the current term 
and the provider agreement is not renewable, the amendment may not take effect 
during the current term of the provider agreement. 
 
The bill also establishes important timeline limits on the ability of carrier to 
retrospectively deny claims.  Today the law states that the retrospective denial of a 
previously paid claim may be permitted beyond 12 months from the date of payment 
under certain criteria.  This bill sets a timeline of no later than 24 months from the date 
of payment. 
 
We ask that you support this important legislation.  Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
