April 24, 2023  
 
Senator Donna Bailey  
Representative Anne Perry  
Members of the Join t Standing Committee on  Health Coverage,  Insurance, and Financial Services  
Cross Building, Room 220  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 0433 3 
 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standi ng Committee on 
Health Covera ge, Insurance, and Financial Services ; 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share thoughts on LD s 1407  and 1244. I appreciate the sponsors ’ efforts 
on these bills,  and interest in ensuring fair treatment of h ealth care providers  in their contracts with health 
insurance companies . I would urge the committee, however, to be cautious in imposing restrict ions on 
health carriers which may indirectly increase costs for consumers in the form of higher premiums.  
 
Rece nt events in Maine have surfaced cha llenging dy namics in provider -carrier negotiations and 
contracting. I agree with the sponsors and co -sponsors of these bills that those dy namics are worth y of 
examination  and potential intervention by the legisla ture. I also believe it ’s likely, however, that t here are 
problem atic pr actices in use by b oth parties in volved . In addressing these challenges , and considering 
how contracting and payme nt process es can be impr oved, I would encourage the committee to consider 
crafting a  compre hensive piece of legislation which addresses both providers and carriers.  
 
In the commercial market, health insurance c arriers bear significant re sponsibility for managing 
increasing costs of health services, a nd providing consumers with some protection from those co sts. To be 
effective in that role, it is important that carriers be able to utilize tools available to them in the contract 
management process to adjust policies  to changing informati on, and to exercise some resistance in cases 
of disagreement about claims . While some insurance payment practices may be problematic, especially 
for small indep endent providers , there may also be unintended consequences from moving forward with  
broad pro hibitions on existing practices . I also note that the application of the se requirements to self-
insured plans may be pre -empted by federal law. That preemption coul d place the on us for compliance 
with these requirement s only on fully -insur ed and state regulated plans, which represent  a mino rity of the 
commercial ly-insured lives in Maine , and are often a more volatil e and challenging market s for carriers to 
operate  in. 
 
Moving forward with restrictions focused on ly on carriers, particularly provision s to increase interest on 
unpaid claims or significantly extend the timeline for effective date of contract ame ndments, could result 
in higher premiums for consumers . I encourage the committee to carefully study the potential impact  of 
proposed changes  and consider an approach w hich balances simpli city and predictability for providers 
with efforts to control costs . I would be h appy to assist the committee with assessing the underlying 
challenges and assessing impacts of various proposals.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Meg Garratt -Reed  
Executive Director, Offic e of Affordable Health Care  

