 
      April 24, 2023  
 
 
The Honorable Donna Bailey  
The Honorable Anne Perry  
Members, Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
Cross Building, Room 220 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333  
 RE: LD 1 407 An A ct to Amend the Maine I nsurance Code Regarding Payments by Health 
Insurance Carriers to Providers ; Opposed  
 
Chair Bailey, Chair Perry  and Members of the Committee,  
 
My name is Sam Hallemeier, Director of State Affairs , and I am writing on behalf of the 
Pharmaceutical Care Management Association (PCMA). PCMA i s the national association 
representing America’s pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs). PBMs administer prescription drug 
plans and operate mail -order and specialty pharmacies for more  than 275 million  Americans with  
health coverage through large employers, health insurers, labor unions, and federal and state-
sponsored health programs . 
 PCMA  opposes LD 1407,  which deals with contracts between health insurance carrier s to providers . 
PCMA  is concerned that this proposal could have unintended consequences for PBM contracts with 
pharmacies  if it were to be enacted. Pharmacists have provider status in Maine due to a public law 
amending the Maine Pharmacy Act to  officially define the practice of  pharmacy as the provision of 
health care services and recognize pharmacists as provi ders of health care services .  
 
Contracts between a PBM and network pharmacies specifically  state that the pharmacy agrees to 
abide by the PBMs prov ider manual updates. Provider manuals are documents created and 
distributed by  a PBM . The provider manual  outlines  the regulations and requirements pharmacies 
must adhere to.  If Maine were to add a new  law or the Bureau of  Insurance issued a new regulation, 
a PBM would have t o comply with this and update the provi der manual , and LD 1407 would allow for 
a pharmacy to object to the manual changes a nd the pharmac y could be out of compliance with state 
law for up to 18 months. One of our main concerns is  whether  the change is a safety issue or an 
issue related to fraud, waste,  or abuse.  The PBM would  not be able to make a pharmacy  comply for 
18 months if they object .  
 
Allowing  changes through provider man uals is a well-established and transparent process. It 
provides for advance notification of any changes, a portal t o pull information from , and a point 
of contact if any questions arise from pharmacies . Provider manuals are the key to 
communicating beneficial changes in a rapidly evolving healthcare field. If equal or better 
services can be  delivered to members at a decreased cost to them and the system as a whole, 
 
 then we must  pursue those options while improving the quality of  and access to care.  
 
LD 1407 would impede a PBMs  ability to inn ovate and adapt as bet ter care develops and would 
impact our ability to implement policies . If enacted, this legislation would give Maine pharmacies  the 
power  to impact the adoption of national coverage and reimbursement policies,  would increase the 
total cost of care, and would require constant negotiation of provider contracts at an enormous 
operational expense.  
 
For those reasons listed above,  I urge you to vote ought not to  pass on LD 1407.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Sam Hallemeier  
Pharmaceutical  Care  Management  Association 
(202) 579- 7647 
shallemeier@pcmanet.org 
 
 
 
 

