April 21, 2023 
Testimony Submitted by:  
Catherine R. Ryder, MSED, LCPC, ACS 
Chief Executive Officer, Tri-County Mental Health Services (TCMHS) 
 
Testimony in support of; LD 1417 "An Act Regarding State Review of 
Compliance with Licensing Rules of Certain Facilities and Program Having 
National Accreditation” 
 
SUMMARY: LD 1417:  This bill amends the laws regarding licensing of certain 
facilities and programs, including substance use disorder treatment facilities and 
programs, facilities for children and adults and agencies or facilities providing 
mental health services, to provide that if such a facility or program receives and 
maintains accreditation from a national accrediting body, it is exempt from 
Department of Health and Human Services inspection for compliance with state 
licensing laws and rules under certain circumstances.  The bill requires the 
department to approve by rule the Joint Commission, the Commission on 
Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities and Social Current as national accrediting 
bodies for the purpose of exempting entities from such inspection. 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the committee, 
Good morning, 
My name is Catherine Ryder and I serve as the chief executive officer for Tri-
County Mental Health Services (TCMHS) which serves Western Maine and 
Northern Cumberland County.  I submit this testimony in support of LD 1417 
asking for your support as well. In so doing you would help to reduce the 
administrative burden placed on our service organizations which is significant in 
terms of time and expense. To clarify, there are literally months of preparation and 
then weeks of virtual review followed by on site review.  I’m sure you can imagine 
that this in tandem with a state side licensing review translates to months of 
preparation, facilitation and both clinical and administrative staff being taken off 
line for the purpose of interacting with reviewers.  
Several years ago, state leaders encouraged agencies to become accredited as a 
demonstration of excellence in both policy and practice. At that time there was a 
promise that were we successful in achieving accreditation from a nationally 
recognized organization such as CARF, JCAHO, COA, etc., the additional burden 
of state licensing reviews would be removed and we would be given “deemed 
status”.  
In TCMHS’s last national accreditation review we performed exceptionally well, 
and I share the following letter of congratulations from our Council on 
Accreditation reviewers: 
 Dear Ms. Ryder:  
On behalf of the Council on Accreditation (COA), I am delighted to inform you 
that Tri-County Mental Health Services has been reaccredited.  In addition, Tri-
County Mental Health Services was expedited through the Pre-Commission Review 
Report (PCR) process as a result of not receiving any out of compliance ratings in 
any of the fundamental practice standards.  Congratulations on this amazing 
achievement! 
Shortly after receiving the letter, I received notice that state licensing would be 
arriving within the month for their onsite review. While we were successful in 
reducing the breadth of the review by providing the results of our accreditation 
visit, we still needed to go through the paces of preparation, facilitation and 
response.  
Over the many years I have served in this field there has been an increase in 
regulatory requirements with very little review of the impact this has on an 
organization.  You support of this bill would have significant positive impact on 
our already overwhelmed and under resourced organizations.  
Please accept my gratitude you for your time and attention.  I remain available to 
answer any questions you may have.  
Best Regards, 
Catherine  
Catherine R. Ryder, MSED, LCPC, ACS 
Chief Executive Officer 
Tri-County Mental Health Services 
 
 
