295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 1417 
" An Act Regarding State Review of Compliance with Licensing Rules  
of Certain Facilities and Programs Having National Accreditation " 
Sponsored by Representative Gramlich  
April 21, 2023  
 
Good morning  Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and esteemed  members 
of the Health and Human Services  Committees.   My name is  Malory Shaughnessy 
and I am the Executive  Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health 
Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of 
Maine’s community based mental health and substance use treatment providers , 
providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children . The Alliance 
advocates for the implementation of sound policies and evidence -based practices 
that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care 
system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 1417, “An Act 
Regarding State Review of Compliance with Licensing Rules  of Certain Facilities 
and Programs Having National Accreditation .” This is an incredibly important 
piece of legislation for the providers of the Alliance. We thank Representative 
Gramlich for bringing this forward today.  
 
This bill amends the laws regarding licensing of certain facilities and programs,  
including substance use disorder treatment facilities and programs, facilities for 
children and adults and age ncies or facilities providing mental health services, to 
provide that if such a facility or program receives and maintains accreditation 
from a national accrediting body, it is exempt from Department of Health and 
Human Services inspection for compliance w ith state licensing laws and rules 
under certain circumstances. The bill requires the department to approve by rule 
the Joint Commission, the Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities 
and Social Current as national accrediting bodies for the  purpose of exempting 
entities from such inspection.   
 
We know that compliance with laws and regulations is absolutely crucial to 
patient safety  and we fully support high standards for this reason. Safety 
standards in healthcare help promote high -quality c are for patients. Regulations 
keep operations running smoothly and ensure that staff follow proper 
procedures. National accrediting agencies, such as the Joint Commission, serve to 
evaluate healthcare organizations and ensure that safety and quality of car e are 
of the highest order.  These standards and guidelines help organizations establish 
a more consistent approach to care, which ultimately reduces the risk of error.  
 
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) grants “deeming authority” 
to appro ved accrediting agencies like the Joint Commission. This means that the  
 
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
 
 
agency has the power to confirm that an institution meets Medicare and Medicaid certification 
requirements. Healthcare organizations that achieve certification through a Joint Commission 
"deemed status" accreditation are determined to meet or exceed Medicare and Medicaid 
requirements. In simple terms, “deemed status” demonstrates that an organization not only me ets 
but exceeds expectations for a particular area of expertise.   
 
“The Joint Commission’s accreditation, certification and verification programs are widely relied upon 
by at least one agency in each state, across multiple provider types, in making licensu re decisions, as 
well as for participation in a state’s Medicaid program. The most common form of state reliance on 
accreditation is to accept The Joint Commission’s survey process in lieu of the state agency 
conducting a routine licensure inspection . In addition, some state regulations will mandate 
accreditation as a condition of licensure or certification .”1 
 
Many agencies in Maine have taken the steps to seek and gain national accreditation to assure that 
they are achieving the highest standards and pro viding the best quality care for the people they 
serve. This legislation would assure  that the state of Maine accepts  that accreditation and not subject 
agencies with limited staff and time to respond to the multiple offices that currently seek to inspect 
these agencies  on a regular basis. Agencies must pull staff off of regular work duties multiple times a 
year to pull files and spend countless hours meeting with various agencies within the state for 
inspections.  
 
This legislation would allow agencies to show they are attaining quality standards, but still spend the 
bulk of their time on the mission driven work that they do and provide the needed services they 
offer.  
 
Again, we thank Representative Gramlich  for bringing this proposal forward and urge an o ught -to-
pass vote by committee members. Thank you.  
                                                           
1 https://www.jointcommission.org/resources/news -and-multimedia/fact -sheets/facts -about -federal -deemed -
status/   
