Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Opposition of 
LD 122 - An Act to Eliminate Television Recycling Fees for Charitable Entities
January 30, 2023
Sen. Brenner, Rep. Gramlich and distinguished members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham and I submitting testimony in opposition to LD 122, 
An Act to Eliminate Television Recycling Fees for Charitable Entities, on behalf of the Maine Municipal 
Association, which represents the interests of municipal government before the Legislature. The positions 
of the Association are established by our 70-member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC), who are 
elected by the councils and selectboards of municipalities in each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts.
Municipal solid waste is an expensive management task that falls on the shoulders of municipal 
government and the taxpayers who pay for the duty. While officials are generally sympathetic to the 
enormous waste costs shouldered by non-profits who resell secondhand material to provide services for 
community members, these entities are excluded from property tax obligations that directly support solid 
waste management in their communities. 
The management of television sets in the solid waste stream requires staff time, building space, 
and paperwork that is a cost burden and thus many waste management entities charge all disposers of 
such products a nominal fee to offset that cost. As such, the fee burden is proportional to the management 
necessary and only becomes burdensome on the disposer when they dispose of such items in great 
quantity. Where donation streams are unsupervised, and available during closed hours, they will attract 
the “generous donation” of non-functional material that easily allows individuals to avoid paying for an 
appropriate disposal fee. To combat such behavior, best practice is to not allow such donations to occur 
unsupervised, rather than eliminating the fee, which will only encourage continued inappropriate disposal. 
In fact, it is the application of this disposal fee that serves to protect the non-profit reseller by 
allowing them to illustrate the cost burden that is shamefully placed on them by individuals who do not 
dispose of material appropriately. 
Officials feel it the best path forward is to encourage non-profits to manage their donated material 
in ways that do not burden on their own operations. Municipal officials do not believe that removing the 
ability for a municipality or non-profit waste management operation to leverage a fee on another non-
profit waste contributor is sensible, fair or serves the best interest of the property taxpayer funding solid 
waste operations in service of the solid waste hierarchy. However, it is important for the committee to 
note that any non-profit may work more closely with their community leaders and solid waste service 
providers to address acute waste needs and fees locally, rather than on a statewide fee exemption basis. 
