      Harold “Trey” L. Stewart IIITHE MAINE SENATE3 State House Station
     Senator, District 2 131st Legislature Augusta, ME 04333
     Senate Republican Leader                                                      
Testimony of Senator Harold “Trey” Stewart
Presenting L.D. 127, An Act to Eliminate Television Recycling Fees for Charitable Entities
Before the Environment and Natural Resources Committee
January 30, 2023
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee: I am Trey Stewart and I have the honor of representing the people of Senate 
District 2, which includes communities in Aroostook and Penobscot counties. I am before you 
today to present L.D. 127, An Act to Eliminate Television Recycling Fees for Charitable Entities.
I am sure many, if not all, of you have donated an unwanted item from your home at some point 
in time. Donating an item to a charitable organization is often a positive experience for the donor; 
you are generously giving something away that may benefit another individual or organization 
while also keeping an item out of a land fill. However in doing so, this may unintentionally be 
burdensome to the recipient. I submitting this legislation after hearing from a non-profit 
organization in my district that has had junk televisions left on their doorstep, either by witting or 
unknowing donors. While the intention may be good, the organization is then forced to cover the 
cost of recycling the television, cutting into their bottom line and the good work they do. This 
legislation would prevent that from happening in the future. 
As currently drafted, a municipality or consolidator would be prohibited from charging a nonprofit 
organization, which employs 100 or fewer individuals, a recycling fee. After spending some time 
thinking this through and also hearing from a consolidator in my district, I would ask that if the 
Committee proceeds forward with the proposal, you would amend it so that the cost would be 
shifted away from municipalities and consolidators and rather absorbed by the state.
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
