Anna Sommo
Maine Environmental Education Association
LD 1817
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pleuker, and the honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry,
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD 1817 and share 
my perspective as a former outdoor school educator. From 2004-2006 I worked at 
Multnomah County Education Service District’s Outdoor School Program, based out 
of Portland, Oregon. I was hired as an educator to work at the residential program that
took place at a summer camp campus for 8 weeks each fall and spring. Sixth graders 
from around the county would come out to the site for 5 nights and 6 days of Outdoor 
School and as they left each week I would hear from them how impactful the 
experience was.
Students would bond with each other and their teachers through field study– learning 
about plants, animals, soil and water- but also through the experience of being 
together for an extended period of time. Shared meals, evening campfires, doing 
chores, recreational time- all built connections between students, teachers and the 
natural world. It was such a special place where kids explored and created unique and 
yet shared  life long memories. For a good portion of the students this was the first 
experience of this kind- being in a new place, away from home, learning outdoors. 
Many of my coworkers and the teachers who attended had their own Outdoor School 
story from when they were in sixth grade and I know of many of my fellow staff 
members who decided to go into teaching- and specifically to teach sixth grade- 
because they knew that Outdoor School would be part of their yearly ritual. It was an 
experience that these classrooms of teachers and students would both build towards 
and build upon throughout that sixth grade year. I still keep in touch with many of 
them all these years later. 
I also know of multiple generations who had all experienced Outdoor School- and 
how that shared memory was a common thread amongst nearly the entire community.
The program has existed for more than 40 years now. It is such a special connection 
that people from such a wide range of backgrounds and experiences share. The 
experience for all of us was enhanced knowing that we were part of a tradition that 
stretched across both time and throughout the state. It would be amazing to have 
something like this in Maine. Therefore, I encourage you to support LD 1817 to 
ensure that Maine youth have equally empowering outdoor experiences. 
Sincerely,
Anna Sommo
Director of School and Community Partnerships
Maine Environmental Education Association

