Arthur N. Pearson  
52 Lewis Road        62 Sargent Drive  
Belmont, MA 02478        Northeast Harbor , ME 04662  
 
Page 1 of 2 
  
 
Statement of Support to LD 1817  
An Act to Support Outdoor Education by Establishing the Outdoor School for All Maine 
Students Program  
May 10, 2023   
 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the distinguished Committee 
on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry. My name is Arthur N. Pearson . I live in 
Belmont MA and I am a third gene rations summer resident of Northeast Harbor, ME .  I 
serve as  a volunteer advisor to the Maine Outdoor Schools fo r All and passionately endorse 
their vision and mission.  I  am submitting testimony in support of LD 1817.   
Outdo or education  in Maine has transformed my life and inspired my 48 year career as 
educator .  I grew up explor ing the islands of Maine  and at age 16  a 26-day program at 
Hurricane Island Outward Bound School in Rockland changed my life .  I worked there for 
many years as an instructor, field supervisor, p rogram administrator , and trustee .  For the 
last 18 years I have served as  CEO of Thompson I sland Outward Bound in Boston .  I 
founded the Outward Bound Professional L earning Lab, a research based national 
organization , and I serve as a field cons ultant for  the Natio nal Summer Learning 
Association and as an ambassador for the Afterschool Alliance . 
The last 18 yea rs of my career in Boston have been dev oted to develo ping the kind of 
partnership LD 1817 will create between K -12 public schoo ls and outdoor education 
program providers.  I have read the research and perso nally  witness ed the impact on 
children, schools and families , particularly children growing up in unders erved 
communi ties at or below the pover ty line.  Maine is world famous as a spectacular venue 
for outdoor recreation and this Ac t will provide equi table access to those resources for 
thousands of Main e’s own children  across the state.  
The framers of the Act did their homework.  The benefits of the Act are in disputable:  
Children benefit  from outdoor education and less than 25 percent of Maine 
students are able t o access outdoor education and this inequity needs to be 
addressed because data shows that it supports the child’s educational journey, the 
child’s emotional and mental health, and the child’s connection to Maine’ 
incredible outdoor heritage.   
Teachers  and schools benefit  from outdoor education. For example, teachers’ 
relationship with their students grows after an outdoor education program, because 
it allows each to experience the other in a new light; and   
 
Page 2 of 2 
 The community benefits  from outdoor educa tion programs. For example, it 
benefits in regard to workforce development. This would have a significant impact 
on full -time employment jobs opportunities for people in Maine right now. Oregon, 
with about triple the number of students that Maine has, note d that outdoor school 
programming would support more than 600 jobs and more than 27 million dollars 
of income in Oregon on an annual basis.   
For these reasons, I would ask you to support LD 1818 and vote to pass on this bill. Thank 
you to the sponsor s for bringing forward this bill and thank you to the committee members 
for your w ork on this Committee.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Arthur N. Pearson  

