Caroline Moore
Winter Harbor
LD 1817
Statement of Support to LD 1817
An Act to Support Outdoor Education by Establishing the Outdoor School for All 
Maine Students Program
May 10, 2023 
 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the distinguished 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry. My name is Caroline Moore. I 
currently live in the town of Winter Harbor.   I am submitting testimony in support of 
LD 1817. 
I strongly believe that all Maine students should have access to a welcoming, 
supporting, outdoor education experience.  As a middle school public school educator
and current outdoor educator, I have seen the positive impact that outdoor education 
and programming, such as that supported by LD 1817, has on students.  This act, in 
particular, focuses on the equity of widening and ensuring that more Maine students 
have access to these opportunities, which is incredibly important. 
To note, 
(1) Children benefit from outdoor education and less than 25 percent of Maine 
students are able to access outdoor education and this inequity needs to be addressed 
because data shows that it supports the child’s educational journey, the child’s 
emotional and mental health, and the child’s connection to Maine’ incredible outdoor 
heritage. 
(2) Teachers and schools benefit from outdoor education. For example, teachers’ 
relationship with their students grows after an outdoor education program, because it 
allows each to experience the other in a new light; and 
(3) The community benefits from outdoor education programs. For example, it 
benefits in regard to workforce development. This would have a significant impact on
full-time employment jobs opportunities for people in Maine right now. Oregon, with 
about triple the number of students that Maine has, noted that outdoor school 
programming would support more than 600 jobs and more than 27 million dollars of 
income in Oregon on an annual basis. 
For these reasons, I would ask you to support LD 1818 and vote ought to pass on this 
bill. Thank you to the sponsor for bringing forward this bill and thank you to the 
committee members for your work on this Committee. 
