GAIL Scott
Portland
LD 1817
Statement of Support to LD 1817
An Act to Support Outdoor Education by Establishing the Outdoor School for All 
Maine Students Program
May 10, 2023 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the distinguished 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry. My name is Gail R. Scott. I 
live in the town/city of Portland.  I am submitting testimony in support of LD 1817. 
Having raised our son in rural Northern Maine, I know first hand how much he 
benefited from individual and educational experiences in the fields, woods, stream, 
mountains and farmlands of our environment in Aroostook County. In fact, his entire 
college, graduate school, and career track was shaped and fostered by his early life in 
the outdoors—through Boy Scout overnight summer camp for three years—all filled 
with outings, hiking, mountain climbing, camping, fishing, canoeing, rafting, and 
exploring. High school and college courses included winter camping, cross-country 
ski trips and much more. 
These experiences prepared him for achieving a Bachelor’s degree in Human Ecology
from College of Atlantic and then several years of leading youth on outdoor adventure
trips through Outward Bound, outdoor education sessions for middle school students 
(overnights) at Chewonki and 3-week paddling trips for teenagers on the Allagash 
Waterways. 
And finally, he completed a Master’s Degree in Environmental Education, followed 
by a career in programming and delivering outdoor education, camping, and 
year-round outdoor environmental education for young people of all ages.
All because he had opportunities (and the privilege) of exciting and meaningful 
outdoor education. Every Maine child deserves the same. That is why I support—and 
urge you to support LD 1817.
I know from watching how the outdoor education programs he developed just how 
much teachers and schools benefit from outdoor education. I’ve seen teachers’ 
relationship with their students grows after an outdoor education program, because it 
allows both student and teacher experience the other in a new light and grasp science 
and natural history concepts in a more hands-on and meaningful way. Parents and 
communities benefit as well as they witness new ways that young people learn and 
grow and contribute to society.
For these reasons, I would ask you to support LD 1818 and vote ought to pass on this 
bill. Thank you to the sponsors who are bringing forward this bill and thank you to the
committee members for your work on this Committee. 

