Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadw ay, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Box 310, Caribou, ME 0473 6 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 0 4106 
 
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org 
Testimony  
                             In Support of  
LD 1817 An Act to Support Outdoor Education by Esta blishing the 
Outdoor School for All Maine Students Program 
Grace Leavitt, President, Maine Education Associati on 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture,  Conservation and Forestry 
May 10, 2023 
  
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and Mem bers of the Committee on Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry, 
 
My name is Grace Leavitt. My pronouns are she, her,  hers. I am serving as President of the Maine 
Education Association while on leave from teaching Spanish in MSAD 51. I have over 43 years of 
classroom teaching experience with 20 years as a Na tional Board Certified teacher. The MEA represents 
nearly 24,000 educators in our Maine system of publ ic education in pre-K-12 schools as well as in our 
institutions of higher education, both the Universi ty of Maine System and the Maine Community 
College System, along with students in teacher prep  programs as well as many retired educators. 
 
I am submitting this testimony on behalf of MEA in support of LD 1817 An Act to Support Outdoor 
Education by Establishing the Outdoor School for Al l Maine Students Program. 
 
During the early months and especially the first ye ar of the COVID pandemic, many schools turned to 
outdoor spaces for holding classes as an alternativ e to the need for masking while indoors in order to  
reduce transmission of the virus. As a result, many  educators not only located classes outdoors, but 
incorporated the setting as part of the lesson. The  public at large became more aware of the importanc e 
of spending time in nature and the many benefits of  doing so for our mental and physical wellbeing. 
 
We are fortunate to live in an incredibly beautiful  state. Every time I get to travel to other parts o f Maine 
I am struck by the natural beauty of our surroundin gs, and I am reminded of the importance of doing 
what we can to mitigate the negative impacts of cli mate change in order to try to preserve Maine’s 
natural beauty. 
 
Some students in Maine are also fortunate to have t he opportunity to participate in outdoor education 
programs, and to learn about and appreciate our env ironment. My school district for many years 
provided such an opportunity to all seventh graders . My own daughters enjoyed the experience when 
they were students. 
 
Unfortunately, not all students in our state have t hat opportunity, for a variety of reasons. The prop osal 
before you in LD 1817 will expand the opportunity t o many more students and help to reduce the current  
inequitable situation. There is a considerable cost  to what is proposed, and that is a concern for us,  given 
the many other priorities MEA is hoping to see prog ress on during this session. But we are hopeful tha t 
these priorities can be met as well as the other im portant proposals before the legislature that will help to 
improve the education as well as the lives of our s tudents and that will help to address the issues of  the 
educator shortages. 
We hope you will consider voting “ought to pass” on  LD 1817. 
