TESTIMONY OF THE  
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE  
  
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY  
 
IN SUPPORT OF  L.D. 1817  
  
“An Act to Support Outdoor Education by Establishing the Outdoor School for All 
Maine Students Program ” 
 
DATE OF HEARING:  May 10, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator  Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker  and m embers of the Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forest ry Committee . I am Emily MacCabe, Director of Information and 
Education  at the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, providing this  on behalf of the 
Department, in support of  L.D. 1817.  
 
This bill establishes the Outdoor School for All Maine Students Program to provide immersive 
outdoor education to serve students enrolled in grade 4 to grade 8 in the State.  
 
Our agency supports  the intent and focus of the bill , particularly as it relates to educating our 
youth on the State’s outdoor heritage, environment and natural resources, protecting and 
managing fish, game and  other wildlife and their habitats including restoring endangered 
species and safely enjoying the outdoors.  
 
The Department  has a full -time  Outreach and Education Supervisor  who works with schools to 
train teachers on developing outdoor focused curriculum  through Project Wild and Nature of 
Teaching.    
 
The Department also offers several ongoing education programs for youth including camps 
offered in partnership with the University of Maine Cooperative Extension, and many “Next 
Step” Learn to Hunt workshops in partnership with local community organizations and fish and 
game clubs. The Department also supports a number of existing public -school programs that 
offer outdoor learning opportunities through outing clubs or extracurricular offerings . 
 
Addi tionally, our agency offers safety education courses both online and i n-person  related to 
hunting, trapping and operation of recreational vehicles in the outdoors . The  course content  
meets  national standards, and the in -person  courses are led by certified volunteer instructors 
across the state. Many are associated with an organized fish and game club, adult ed ucation  
program, or civic organization.  
 
While we feel that the elements of this bill provide meaningful learning opportunities for 
students in Maine, w e do have significant concerns with the fiscal impact of this bill, which is 
expected to be $12 million per biennium. Funding for this effort has not been included in the 
Governor’s proposed budget. Additionally, we are concerned about the  potentia l need for 
additional resources from our agency to train or assist the schools with ongoing efforts. It 
appear s, based on the bill language that Inland Fisheries and Wildlife may be asked to have a 
staff represent the agency on the advisory committee.  I wo uld be glad to answer any questions 
at this time or be available to answer questions during the work session.  
