Statement of Support to LD 1817 
An Act to Support Outdoor Education by Establishing the Outdoor School for All Maine Students Program 
May 10, 2023 
 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the distinguished Committee on Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry. My name is Jessie Francis I live in the town of Stockton Springs.  I am submitting 
testimony as a Mainer, a former camper, staff person and current board member of the University of Maine 4-
H Camps at Tanglewood and Blueberry Cove; I am submitting testimony in support of LD 1817. 
 
Teachers and schools would benefit from LD 1817; coming out of the pandemic there are significant needs of 
teachers and schools and the children they serve. This initiative would provide additional supports and hands-
on learning opportunities for teachers and schools. 
 
Children and students would benefit from LD 1817; who participate in outdoor education programs have 
improved academic performance, increased self-esteem and confidence, better problem-solving skills, and 
improved physical and mental health. And, unfortunately, despite Maine’s rich outdoor resources, many 
Maine students are not able to access outdoor education and its benefits.  This initiative would reduce the 
inequalities in Maine students’ access to outdoor recreation and learning experiences and drive improved 
student outcomes. 
 
The broader Maine community will benefit from LD1817; the program will stimulate economic growth throw 
adding full-time job opportunities and generating life-long supporters of Maine’s outdoor and tourism 
industries; Oregon authorized a similar program nearly a decade ago which supported numerous jobs, 
educators, and stimulated significant economic activity.  
 
I began attending Tanglewood 4-H Learning Center in 2000 as a child and continued working for the 
organization for years, seasonally and then full-time for more than 10 years.  I have served on the Board of 
Directors of the same organization since 2013.  My commitment to the organization is a testament to the 
impact that outdoor education has had on my life as a child and young adult.  I have had the joy of teaching 
hundreds of children in the Maine outdoors—nothing compares to standing beside a child as they eat a carrot 
fresh from the ground for the first time, watching a nine-year-old observe as a monarch butterfly emerges 
from a chrysalis in real time, or being with a student as they dip their feet in the ocean for the first time, 
despite living  their entire life in a state with 3,000+ miles of ocean coastline.  These experiences enhance 
traditional classroom learning and builds lifelong commitment to Maine’s natural resources.    
 
For these reasons, I would ask you to support LD 1817 and vote ought to pass on his bill. Thank you to the 
sponsor for bringing forward this bill and thank you to the committee members for your work on this 
Committee. 
 
