 
 
To: Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee From: Kim Silva, Friends of Outdoor School 
Date: May 8, 2023 
Re: LD1817  
Dear Senator Ingwersen, Representative Plu ecker, and members of the distinguished 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, 
 
Please join Friends of Outdoor School and outdoor education champions in 
Maine and across the country in support of LD1817: Outdoor School for All Maine Students Program. Your support is critical to thousands of Maine youth, 
teachers, school districts, families, and the people who work for these 
outstanding programs.  
At Outdoor School, students leave their school  classrooms, moving into the outdoors to 
learn, immersed in nature, and led by ski lled educators. Students learn about natural 
resources, ecosystems, and themselves. Outdoor education is an effective educational 
tool to teach curriculum, connect student to  their local lands, and help meet the physical 
and emotional needs of children. Many students report that their time learning outdoors is the most powerful experience in their K-12 schooling. 
 
Here in Oregon, voters overwhelmingly approved Measure 99 in 2016 allocating a portion 
of Lottery funds to send every 5 th   or 6th   grade student to a week of Outdoor School. 
This funding is distributed through a gran t program administered  by Oregon State 
University Extension Service. Since 2016, over 150,000 Oregon kids have attended 
Outdoor School and the numbers are increasing every year! Sadly, fewer than 25% of 
Maine students are afforded  such an opportunity.  
 
Sustained investment in Oregon has had a hugely positive impact. Something Maine 
students, their families, and communities can also enjoy: 
 
 Student access:  
o The numbers of students, schools, and districts who are participating in 
Outdoor School continue to increase. Stable funding is key to school districts feeling comfortable committing to the program for their students.  
o High school student leaders are gaining important leadership 
opportunities. 
o Outdoor School instructors and program leaders have had the 
opportunity to deeply examine their programs with an equity, access, and inclusion lens to improve programming and the physical environment to meet the changing needs of students and school 
districts. 
 
 
 Program improvement:  
o Oregon State University Extension Service Outdoor School has been able to conduct 
formal research into the benefits of Outdoor School to students. This information helps to 
highlight areas of program strengths and areas for improvement. 
o Students have begun to have the opportunity to provide feedback about their experience. 
This information allows program providers to discover ways to better meet students' 
needs and the needs of  their communities. 
o Outdoor School staff have been able to pa rticipate in professional development improving 
their knowledge and skills to support and educate students. 
 
 Workforce development: A large part of the Ou tdoor School workforce has moved from low-paid 
seasonal jobs without benefits to professional, liv ing-wage jobs with be nefits. These employees 
are now exploring how to become more committe d in their communities such as buying homes or 
planning long-term careers in Oregon. Most impor tantly, well-paid and well-educated instructors 
make the experience better for kids. 
 
Friends of Outdoor School is the key connection be tween Outdoor School and the larger community of 
individuals, businesses, community organizations, a nd agencies that support Oregon’s statewide Outdoor 
School system. Our purpose is to connect, support, a nd advocate for all of Oregon’s diverse students to 
learn at inclusive and accessible Outdoor School progra ms that contribute to educational development, 
inspire youth, promote personal growth, and embrace jus tice. Our vision is that Outdoor School is a place 
where every child can belong. We share in the dream that other states such as Maine provide these seminal 
opportunities to children and that outdoor education moves from a "nice to have" to every student's 
educational right.  
 
In Oregon, families across the state – rural, suburba n, and urban - rely on Outdoor School to educate 
and inspire their kids to create a deep and enduri ng connection to Oregon, their communities, and each 
other. This shared experience is also something that can connect the people of Maine. Please support 
LD1817 to ensure that every student in Maine has the opportunity to learn, grow, and discover through outdoor education experiences. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Kim Silva 
Executive Director kim@friendsofoutdoorschool.org   
971-303-8914 
 
 

