Mikayla Gullace
Schoodic Institute
LD 1817
Hello Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the distinguished 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry. My name is Mikayla Gullace 
and I live in the town of Winter Harbor and work as an environmental educator with 
Schoodic Institute and the National Park Service. I am submitting testimony in 
support of LD 1817. 
At the Schoodic Institute, we host an outdoor education program, called Schoodic 
Education Adventure (SEA), where middle school students spend 3 days and 2 nights 
in Acadia National Park. The typical day at SEA starts when those big yellow school 
buses pull up outside of Eliot Hall. Excited (and sometimes nervous!) kids pile out, 
suitcases in hand, and sprint toward the bunkhouse to pick out their beds. Once settled
into their home for the next few days, students are guided through some basic Leave 
No Trace principles to ensure everyone shows respect to the land, the organisms that 
inhabit it, and the people that rely on it. We then might split into groups, with some 
students getting to check out our large floor map of Maine and the surrounding waters
while others participate in a scavenger hunt activity involving the use of compasses, 
which is often a new skill for many students. When lunchtime finally arrives, the 
classes make their way over to our dining hall, where Schoodic Institute’s kitchen 
staff has prepared a delicious meal served with a side of some “bussin’ juice,” as one 
kid stated in their thank you note reflecting on the week. Lunchtime then segways into
our afternoon program, which, if the tides are right, may involve participation in a 
citizen science project assessing invasive crab populations. 
Students might use a dichotomous key (and hopefully learn that not all coniferous 
trees are pines!), face their fear of crab claws, gape in awe while imagining what 
Acadia looked like during the last ice age, compare their own senses to the unique 
adaptations of nocturnal animals, and, most importantly, form closer relationships 
with their classmates. There’s usually some rambunctious shouts during free time at 
the basketball courts, lots of singing and riddles over evening s’mores, and more than 
a few tired faces the following morning as students share their amusing stories from 
the bunkhouse.
A day at SEA is a chance for students to take their learning into different outdoor 
environments, push themselves out of their comfort zones and routines, and 
communicate with classmates and educators they normally might not interact with. 
SEA is also a place where students with varying learning styles can come forth and 
shine, allowing their teachers and peers to view them in a new light. And lastly, it’s a 
time for NPS and Schoodic Educators to share their love of the outdoors while 
embracing the true magic of the Schoodic Peninsula. Bringing this amazing 
experience to students and educators is incredibly important, and making these 
experiences more accessible through the passing of this bill is crucial.
For these reasons, I would ask you to support LD 1818 and vote to pass on this bill. 
Thank you to the sponsor for bringing forward this bill and thank you to the 
committee members for your work on this Committee. 

