 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 6 22-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF  
 
L.D. 1817  
 
AN ACT TO SUPPORT OUTDOOR EDUCATION BY ESTABLISHING  
THE OUTDOOR SCHOOL FOR ALL MAINE STUDENTS PROGRAM  
 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker  and members of the Agriculture, Conservation  and Forestry  
Committee.  I am Steven Bailey , executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on 
behalf of the legislative committees of the Maine School  Boards Association and Maine School 
Superintendents Association, in support of  L.D. 1817 . 
 
Our associatio ns appreciate the intent of this bill, which is to get students outside  to learn from their 
surroundings, offering the opportunity  for han ds-on learning about  ecolog y, natur e, weathe r and the 
environmen t. Assuring the same grade attends this  opportunity ea ch year from the same school will assure 
continuing groups of students from the district will have this same wonderful experienc e. The opportunity is 
an opt in experience and not mandatory, however, providing this experience  state wid e will allow many 
groups of students not currently eligible to participat e. 
 
We are lucky to live in  Maine where  we have access to forest, lakes, streams,  mountain s and undeveloped 
flatland.  We have more than  80 land conservation organizations that make up w hat’s known as the l and trust 
networ k, encompassing  more than  1,200 mile s of hikin g and walking trails and 275 miles of biking trail s. 
 
Student outdoor experience and safety, educator opportunity and professional development, and connections 
with many of t he excellent outdoor  learning agencies all will be of benefit to those  participatin g in this 
program . 
 
MSSA and MSBA both support this opportunity and encourage you to vote OTP for L .D. 1817 . 
