Testimony in Support of LD 1817 
An Act to Support Outdoor Education by Establishing the Outdoor School for All 
Maine Students Program 
May 10, 2023 
 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Susan Swanton, I’m a resident of Biddeford, 
the retired Executive Director of the Maine Marine Trades Association and proud to serve on 
the Board of Directors of The Ecology School in Saco, and as Chair of the Board of Trustees of 
The Landing School of Boatbuilding and Design in Arundel. 
 
I am  so delighted that via LD 1817 Maine has an opportunity to give students the chance to not 
only enjoy some fun outdoors, but to have their time spent at an environmental learning center 
be a living and learning experience that has the potential to be life changing. You may think that 
my post-employment ‘work’ – serving on these two boards seems a little disjointed. But 
actually, they are quite connected. In my 40 years in the boating industry I spent a lot of time 
working outdoors in boatyards and marinas and on the water. For the last 20 years of that 
career most of my work was focused on environmental compliance and education and training. 
These two things became my passions as I realized that we all have a job to do when it comes 
to protecting our environment and I could help make that happen by connecting my industry to 
resources at the state and federal levels that would help us do the right things. And on the 
educational front, as someone who was responsible for hiring people and then someone who 
worked for a large number of employers I knew that one of our biggest problems has always 
been a lack of a trained workforce. 
 
I have long believed that everyone should have work that they can be passionate about – not 
just a job that pays the bills. In all honesty, my career was a bit of an accident. No one told me 
there were opportunities like the ones I found – or perhaps more accurately, stumbled upon. 
But that accidental stumble into my local boatyard changed my life and provided me with 
experiences and relationships that I never would have had if I had taken a more traditional 
career path. This bill, when enacted, will give so many Maine kids an opportunity to learn and 
grow and perhaps see for themselves that if they have the passion they too can find what I 
found - work that makes their hearts sing. Careers that will pay well, that offer good benefit 
packages and that will give these young people something to be proud of right here at home 
and that don’t necessarily require the expense of four years at a university are there for the 
taking. In fact, the commitment beyond high school might be just a year or two at a community 
college – yes like The Landing School, or an apprenticeship program or simply by working for an 
employer who has a strong commitment to training. And there’s something else we should all 
be grateful for – working in the outdoor recreation industries in Maine can’t be ‘offshored’ or 
done remotely.  
 
As you consider this bill I hope that you will see what Sen. Brenner and the one hundred and 
thirteen co-sponsors who joined her saw – a real opportunity to improve the lives of every 
young student in Maine by giving them the chance to experience the wonders of the outdoors, 
to learn by doing, and to enjoy the company of others as they share farm fresh meals and living 
experiences that they just can’t get in a classroom. I thank you for your time and ask that you 
fully support LD 1817 with a vote of ought to pass. 
