 
 
 
 
1 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE , ESQ.  
 
Ought Not to Pass - LD 635 
 
An Act to Allow a Retired Law Enforcement Officer to Serve as 
a School Resource Officer Without Affecting That Officer's 
Retirement Benefits  
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON LABOR AND HOUSING  
 
March 2 , 2022 
 
Senator  Tipping , Representative Roeder , and members of the Committee on 
Labor and Housing,  good afternoon . My name is Michael Kebede , and I am policy 
counsel for the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing 
and preserving civil liberties in Maine .  On behalf of our members , I am here to 
testify against  LD 635, a bill that would strengthen an inherently harmful system.  
If enacted, this bill w ould make it easier for retired police officers to become 
School Resource Officers (“SROs”) by ensuring that becoming an SRO does not 
affect former officers’ retirement benefits. Not only is this bill unnecessary, but it 
would also take Maine further down a failed path.  
The ACLU has long advocated for the removal of police from schools. That is 
because police are generally ill equipped to address the mental and behavioral 
health challenges that often underpin student misbehavior. Kids will be kids, 
regardle ss of whether they are in the presence of a cop, counselor, or social worker. 
But the presence of an armed, uniformed police officer in a school could mean the 
difference between a kid’s fight being seen as criminal conduct, and reported to the 
local distr ict attorney, or their fight being treated with the appropriate behavioral 
  
 
2 
 health intervention. The very presence of police in schools has meant that student 
behavior is criminalized at higher rates.1  
As a result, the SRO system does not work. SROs simpl y do not make 
students safer. The only study ever conducted of Maine’s SRO system confirms this 
conclusion.2 Other studies have shown that SRO presence in schools doesn’t even 
make students feel safer.3 Students of color feel especially vulnerable in the  
presence of SROs.4 This is unsurprising, given that studies have shown that SROs 
disproportionately discipline students of color and students with disabilities.5 When 
in schools, police officers do what they are trained to do, which is detain, handcuff,  
and arrest. This leads to greater student alienation and a more threatening school 
climate.  
Moreover, SROs compete for scarce school funds with counselors and social 
workers. For example, the Portland School District – the largest in Maine – spent 
approxi mately $130,000 per year on its two SROs until July of 2020. This despite 
the shortage of counselors, psychologists, and social workers in the district’s public 
schools. In the summer of 2020, citing this fiscal burden, and the SRO program’s 
harmful impact  on students of color and students with disabilities, Portland’s school 
board ended its SRO program.  
Schools are not, and should not be, a place that funnels youth to prison. 
Schools should be places of enlightenment and growth, where students feel safe a nd 
 
1 See Matthew Theriot, School Resource Officers and the Criminalization of Student Behavior , 37 J. 
of Crim. Just. 280, 280 (2009); Kim Brooks et al., School House Hype: Two Years Later, Justice Policy 
Inst. & Children’s Law Center, Inc . (2000).  
2 School -Based Policing in Maine: A Study on School Resource Officers in Maine's Public Schools , 
Univ.  of S. Maine, Muskie School, Cutler Institute, October 3, 2019,  at 12  [hereinafter Cutler Institute 
Study ] available at  https://usm.maine.edu/publicaffairs/first -ever-report -maines -school -based -policing -
released -usms -cutler -institute .  
3 Theriot, M. & Cuellar, M. (2016). School resource officers and students’ rights . Contemporary 
Justice Review, 19 (3), 363 –379; Tillyer, M.S., Fisher, B.S. & Wilcox, P. (2011). The effects of school 
crime prevention on students’ viol ent victimization, risk perception, and fear of crime: A multilevel 
opportunity perspective . Justice Quarterly, 28 (2), 249 -277..  
4 Morris, M.W., Epstein, R., & Yusuf, A. (2018). Be Her Resource: A toolkit about school resource 
officers and girls of color . Center on Poverty and Inequality, Georgetown Law; Lacoe, J. (2015). 
Unequally safe: The race gap in school safety . Youth Violence and Juvenile Justice, 13, 143 -168. 
5 Cutler Institute Study at 12.  
  
 
3 
 supported. They should be a place where students are free from physical and 
psychological harm. LD 635 bill would strengthen this harmful system by making it 
easier for retired police officers to become an SROs. We urge you to vote ought not to 
pass.  
Thank you for your time and attention.  
 
