Public Testimony regarding:  LD 634 An Act to Allow Open Burning in the Snow Without a 
Permit
Lindy Moceus
Vienna, Maine
I oppose this bill for the following reasons:
Why is this bill being proposed when the on-line open burning permit process has been made so 
easy for folks.  You can get a permit 9am to midnight, 7 days a week and there is no longer a 
fee.  This is too much of a bother for people?   Burn permits provide information to the Forest 
Service of where burning is taking place and limits the time and duration of those fires.  This 
proposed bill will allow large, heat intensive fires that are very different from the recreational 
campfires presently permissible without a permit when there is snow cover.  Of course the risk 
of forest fires is greatly reduced when there is snow on the ground, but there are more than just 
forest fires to be concerned about with open burning:   
1. Everyone is not knowledgeable about fire safety and conscientious about surrounding 
property, yet we can all strike a match.   This can put nearby buildings at risk even when 
there is snow on the ground. People burn everywhere. 
2. Burning pollutes the air we breathe.  Aren’t we all entitled to being able to go outside for a 
breath of fresh air.   Even though Maine is rural, there are a lot of houses nowadays where 
open farmland used to be and we are all downwind.   
On an open burning permit application, the person is required to list the types of material they 
will be burning.  This is a good reminder that they can’t just burn anything.   A permit allows 
burning only after 5 pm and before 9:00 am and not when the daily fire danger is rated above 
moderate.  Also, the burning must take place (start to finish) within 24 hours of when the permit 
was issued.   These restrictions are important with the purpose of having some control over 
these fires.  They prevent burning when high winds come up, help to ensure combustion is 
limited to only wood based materials, and limit the overall duration of the fires.    With this bill, 
all those restrictions go away.  A fire could burn continuously for days, or even weeks.   
Curtailment of any problem fires will be only if someone complains. Nobody wants to complain 
about their neighbor and create bad feelings.  People shouldn’t be put in that position because 
they want to breathe clean air.   Do we really want such a lack of awareness and oversight for 
these kinds of fires?
Burning of waste is a poor way to dispose of it and in this day and age, other means of disposal 
should be encouraged.  Some attractions of open burning of wood waste is that it’s convenient 
and provides cost free disposal.   A big pile of wood waste seems to disappear except for the 
small pile of ashes that remain.   But, that is not the full picture.   Airborne soot particulates and 
gases are released into the air and the waste gas is mostly the greenhouse gas, CO2.  When 
word spreads that you can open burn in Maine without a permit in the winter, isn’t it likely that 
burning will increase.   And, along with that, pollution of the air that we all breathe.  
Open burning provides cost-free disposal of wood waste, but even ‘when the ground is covered with 
snow,’  it will pollute the air, add to the climate crisis, and can put property at a risk for fires under 
certain circumstances.  With all that, is it too much to ask for a burning permit for these large fires?  
Please do not support this bill.   Thank you for your consideration. 

