Carlene Sperry 
May 8, 2023 
Hearing Testimony LD 1665 
"An Act to Improve Breast Health Care for Genetic Ciounseling and 
Testing” (Prevention, Treatment, and Well Care). 
*Below are crucial statistics: 
*Every two minutes, a woman is diagnosed with breast cancer in the 
United States. 
*40% of women in the United States have dense breast tissue, making it 
harder to detect breast cancer through a mammogram image only. 
*3/4 of women have no reason for a diagnosis of breast cancer. 
*American Cancer Society Cancer Facts and Figures 2023 estimated new 
breast cancer cases in females 297,790 and in males 2,800. 
*|n the United States, 38 states must say women have dense breasts. 
*On|y 14 states must pay for an ultrasound (little is covered) for 
preventative and diagnostic screening. 
Side note: Some insurance companies may not cover the three-D 
mammography cost, which is a concern. 
l want to thank the committee here today for this opportunity to share 
some of my concerns about breast health care for women and men in 
our state of Maine.
I want to share a little history of my journey with breast cancer. 
On January 20, 2003, I was diagnosed with ductile invasive carcinoma, 
stage 3, with seven lymph nodes positive for cancer-and in-situ non- 
invasive breast cancer. I was 42. I had no choice but to have my left 
breast removed. I had reconstruction surgery and endured eight rounds 
of chemotherapy and 33 rounds of radiation, and ﬁve years of hormone 
therapy. January 20, 2023, marked 20 years of being cancer free. I live 
my life and cherish every moment day by day. 
I come before you all here today with a heart full of compassion, 
concern, and hope. I hope that we as a state can provide positive and 
reassuring health care to breast cancer patients. 
I had good health insurance at the time of my diagnosis, but I still had 
signiﬁcate medical bills after my insurance paid their portion. Twenty 
years ago, for me to receive my chemotherapy every two weeks,I 
needed a shot that was $3,000.00 per shot; I had seven of them. Today 
this shot is around $7,000.00 per shot. 
It is heart-wrenching for a breast cancer patient underinsured to face 
these brutal and massive bills. Unfortunately, in the United States, one 
of the causes of bankruptcy is medical bills. Insurance companies own 
us when it comes to our health and well-being. 
Over the years, I've listened to breast cancer patients with little 
insurance coverage, resources, and support. Some fall in between the 
cracks. Breast cancer should not be the driver, nor should Corporate 
AmerlCa.
We must address our healthcare dilemma now and in the future. But 
ﬁrst, we must educate ourselves about insurance companies; they make 
mistakes! But, unfortunately, their mistakes cost the insurer. 
l want to end by conveying the importance of breast cancer in 
prevention, treatment, and care. It's crucial to our future and the future 
of l\/lainer's. 
Thank you for your time and deliberation of my concerns with breast 
cancer health for women and men in Maine.
