MAINE ASSQCIATION 
11011 
Prams 
Testimony of Dan Demeritt 5/8/23 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
In Opposition to LD 1665 
An Act to Improve Breast Health Care by Providing 
Coverage for Genetic Counseling and Testing 
Senator Bailey, Representative Peny, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
My name is Dan Demeritt, the Executive Director of the Maine Association of Health Plans 
(MeAHP). Our plans include Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Cigna, CVS / Aetna, 
Community Health Options, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, and United Health Care. Our private 
and non-profit insurance carriers provide or administer health insurance coverage to about 
600,000 Maine people. Our mission as an association is to improve the health of Maine people 
by promoting affordable, safe, and coordinated healthcare. 
The Affordable Care Act requires that preventative care benefits be provided for free by health 
plans. Services outlined as preventative and available to insured women without cost share 
include genetic counseling and testing for BRCAI and BRCA2 genes.1 
l\/laine ’s private and non-profit insurance carriers provide this coverage. Moreover, health 
insurance carriers and industry leaders agree that the Affordable Care Act will continue to set the 
standards Mainers and all Americans can count on regarding free access to preventative care.3 
MeAHP opposes LD 1665 because it unnecessarily creates a Maine-based statute that does not 
keep pace with the requirements and guidance set by the AC A. 
Clinical genomics is still a new and evolving field. We believe it is a mistake in this context to 
specify in state statute that “all genetic laboratory testing” in accordance with guidelines froma 
national cancer society is Maine’s standard of care for genetic testing. 
My testimony includes a highlighted reference from the National Institute of Health’s National 
Human Genome Research Institute that speaks to how the “frameworks to evaluate the clinical 
utility of genetic tests are still being developed. ” 
We urge a vote of Ought Not To Pass on LD l665. 
1 httns:[/healthgov/mvhealthfinde r/health-conditions/cancer/talk-doctor~if-breast-or-ovarian-cancer —runs-your- 
family 
2 httos:L/www.ahlp.org/newslpress-rele ases/ahip-state me nt-on-the-braid wood-v-becerra-decision
' 
P.O. Box l93, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
National Human Genome 
Research Institute 
Source: https://w\-vwgenome.gov/about-genomics/nolicv-issues/Regulation-of-Genetic-Tests 
Federal Regulation 
Several federal agencies regulate genetic tests: the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). Genetic and Genomic tests, like other types of diagnostic tests, can be evaluated and regulated on the following three criteria, adapted from the National Library of Medicine's Genetics Home Reference. 
Analytical Validity: Refers to how well the test predicts the presence or absence of a particular" 
gene or genetic change. Can the test consistently and accurately detect whether a specific genetic variant is present or absent? 
Clinical Validity: Refers to how well the genetic variant(s) being analyzed is related to the 
presence, absence, or risk of a specific disease. Has having a specific genetic variant been conclusively shown to increase the risk or likelihood of having a disease or eventually 
developing a disease? 
Clinical Utility: Refers to whether the test can provide information about diagnosis, treatment, 
management, or prevention of a disease that will be helpful to patients and their providers. Will 
use of the test lead to improved health outcomes CMS implements regulations to control the 
analytical validity of clinical genetic tests, but there is no federal oversight of the clinical validity of most genetic tests. In light of this, FDA has proposed new policies to enhance analytical 
validity regulation and expand oversight of the clinical validity of genetic tests. 
Neither agency has issued fonnal plans to regulate the clinical utility of genetic tests, but 
typically, health care insurers like CMS draw on data from the research and medical 
communities to determine the clinical utility of medical treatments and procedures. Since clinical 
genomics is a relatively new field, frameworks to evaluate the clinical utility of genetic tests are still being developed. With time and experience, researchers, clinicians, health insurance 
companies, and regulators will have better information with which to establish the clinical utility 
of genetic tests. 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine 04473 207-852-2087
