STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL & FINANCIAL REGULATION 
BUREAU OF INSURANCE 
 
 
 
 
 
Office Location: 76 Northern Avenue, Gardiner, Maine 04345 
Mailing Address: 34 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 
www.maine.gov/insurance 
Phone: (207) 624-8475  TTY: Please Call Maine Relay 711 Consumer Assistance: 1-800-300-5000 Fax: (207) 624-8599 
 
Janet T. Mills
Governor
Anne L. Head
DPFR Commissioner
Timothy N. Schott
Acting Superintendent
 
May 8, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair 
Representative Anne Perry, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME  04333-0100 
Re: L.D. 1665, An Act to Improve Breast Health Care by Providing Coverage for Genetic 
Counseling and Testing 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee: 
The Bureau of Insurance takes no position on L.D. 1665.  The purpose of this letter is to provide 
you with background information.  This bill would require carriers offering health plans in the 
State to provide coverage for BRCA-related genetic testing and BRCA-related genetic 
counseling for individuals who are at an increased risk for developing BRCA-related cancers.  
The bill specifies that an insurer may not impose a deductible, copayment, coinsurance or other 
cost-sharing requirement for the costs of BRCA-related genetic testing or BRCA-related genetic 
counseling.  The requirements of this bill apply to health plans issued or renewed on or after 
January 1, 2024.   
Currently, coverage for these tests is already provided by insurers since it is on the USPSTF’s 
recommended list with a “B” rating.   According to their website, the USPSTF recommends that 
primary care clinicians assess women with a personal or family history of breast, ovarian, tubal, 
or peritoneal cancer or who have an ancestry associated with breast cancer susceptibility 1 and 2 
(BRCA1/2) gene mutations with an appropriate brief familial risk assessment tool.  Women with 
a positive result on the risk assessment tool should receive genetic counseling and, if indicated 
after counseling, genetic testing.    
The requirement to prohibit insurers from imposing any cost-sharing requirement conflicts with 
federal laws as it relates to high-deductible health plans.  The Committee may want to consider 
the unintended consequences associated with imposing a requirement that would conflict with or 
be preempted by federal law. 
Beginning in 2014, states were required to defray the costs of all mandates that are included in 
Qualified Health Plans, unless those mandates are required as part of the essential benefit 
package.  The Affordable Care Act (ACA) directs states to make payments either to the 
individual enrollee or to the insurer.  Generally, any mandate adopted by a state after December 
31, 2011 is subject to the requirement for the state to defray the additional premium cost of that 
mandate, unless it is an extension of an existing mandate, a provider mandate, or a cost-sharing 
requirement. 
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair 
Representative Anne Perry, Chair 
May 8, 2023 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
Title 24-A M.R.S. § 2752 requires a review and evaluation of a mandated benefit proposal by the 
Bureau of Insurance before the bill may be enacted.  These reviews include an evaluation of the 
financial impact, social impact and medical efficacy of the mandate. If a report is requested it 
could cost the Bureau up to $13,500 for outside contract consulting work plus staff time, 
estimated at a cost of $1,600 to collect information, review consultant work, and prepare the final 
report.  We anticipate that current resources will allow us to conduct up to two studies during the 
current session, and we will need eight weeks for each report to ensure a high-quality evaluation.  
I hope this information is useful to the Committee.  Please let me know if I can provide any 
further assistance. 
Sincerely, 
 
Timothy N. Schott 
Acting Superintendent 
