Testimony in support of LD 1665, "An Act to Improve Breast Health Care by 
Providing Coverage for Genetic Counseling and Testing" 
Michelle Lemieux 
May 8, 2023
My name is Michelle Lemieux. I'm 42 years old, a wife, daughter, sister, mother of two 
children, and battling metastatic breast cancer. I am honored to have been asked to be one of 
the guest speakers for this event, and I feel it is so important to share my story. Hopefully, by 
doing so, it can help others. My journey began on December 2nd, 2013, a day I will never 
forget. I discovered out of the blue a lump in my chest. Sitting in my office at work, I had an 
itch on the upper part of my chest. When I went to scratch it, I felt this hard lump I had never 
felt before.lt didn't hurt, and I couldn't move that. At ﬁrst, this didn't concern me, but I went 
home that evening and had my husband and mother feel it. They both encouraged me to call 
my provider. So the next day, I called for an appointment to see my midwife as I had my 
yearly physical with her in May. And she had completed a Breast exam at that appointment. 
She sent me right away for a mammogram just to be certain it wasn't anything. After a very 
aggressive mammogram, the radiologist recommended that I have an ultrasound completed, 
stating that he was very concerned that it had a lot of calcification in my right breast and that 
my breast tissue was very dense, partly due to my age. The ultrasound revealed that it hada 
very suspicious lump. It was not ﬂuid-ﬁlled; I also had an enlarged lymph node under my arm. 
And that I would need to have further testing and a biopsy of the lymph node. On the 
afternoon of December 6, they received my pathology report from my biopsy. I still remember 
it so vividly. When the breast health nurse walked into my office and stated that the doctor 
wanted to see me right away and her ofﬁce, I was all alone in the office as she stood there 
and told me the news that would rock my world. You have breast cancer. At the time, they still 
didn't have all the information they needed, but they knew I had invasive ductal carcinoma, 
but I would need to have further testing completed, which included an MRI. Just to be sure 
the cancer hasn't spread anywhere else. An MRI was completed, in which they discovered 
another lump in the upper quadrant of my right breast, which, let me share with you, never 
showed up on my mammogram. I then needed to have another biopsy completed on the 
second lump that they had just discovered. I soon learned that I had a very aggressive breast 
cancer stage two, and notjust one type of breast cancer, but two different types of breast 
cancer in the same breast ductal carcinoma in situ. An invasive ductal carcinoma. And I was 
HER2 positive, a protein that appears on the surface of breast cancergcells and promotes the 
growth of cancer cells. My breast cancer was not estrogen fed. Surgery, chemotherapy, and 
perhaps radiation would be in my very near future, a perfectly healthy 36-year-old with no 
family history. Genetic testing for Braca One and Two was negative. To be fair, exercising 
regularly, I breastfed both of my children for 13 months, and there has been proven evidence 
that breastfeeding is supposed to decrease your chances of having breast cancer. I found 
myself struggling to accept the news. I had so many questions. Here I was, happily married, 
full-time mother of two young children, ages seven and three. Working full time and dealing 
with cancer on top of all this. I knew I was strong, but this was out of my hands. I was scared 
and worried about my future, but I couldn't let my children see my fear. I began to question, 
God, why would you do this to me and my family? What had I done in life so badly to let this 
be placed upon me? But instead of lamenting my feet, I decided to look for the positive side of 
it. I also realized I was about to face a new beginning, a New Hope, and see more with a new 
perspective on Iife.l knew that I would develop and gain strength from all my experiences. By
the end of January 2014, I had my treatment plan and a wonderful team of providers lined up, 
ready to begin my journey of hope. My treatment plan was a little different than most 
individuals have. My journey would consist of an alternative timeline based on a strong 
recommendation from my amazing breast surgeon, Doctor Lauren Work.Who had just 
recently relocated to ME Medical Center. Coming from MD Anderson in Texas, one of the best 
cancer centers in the United States. Due to the aggressive type of breast cancer, the doctor's 
nurse suggested neoadjuvant chemotherapy, several doses given before surgery to shrink the 
tumors. Due to my age, this timeline consisted of five months of chemotherapy, a month off, 
and a double mastectomy. Depending on the outcome of the surgery, radiation was 
questionable, depending on my final pathology report, and then ﬁnal reconstruction surgery 
would be scheduled a few months after I recovered. Because of my HER2 positive, I would 
have to continue chemotherapy every three weeks, three weeks, ﬁrst six months after my 
surgery. On February 6, 2014, I started chemotherapy. As more rounds of chemo came, it 
took a toll on me physically and emotionally. Luckily I was able to manage the treatments 
fairly well. I never really got sick and worked the entire time, only having to call out once 
during my treatments, and I continue to be there for my husband and children with the help of 
my family and friends. My hair started falling out just after my third chemo treatment.Losing 
my hair was very difﬁcult for me and my children, but I decided to shave my head and have 
some control overthings. I spent my weekends not feeling well, but no one could have ever 
prepared me for the mental and physical war. Chemotherapy would rage on my mind, body, 
and spirit. After enduring chemotherapy, a bilateral mastectomy and removal of lymph nodes 
was scheduled for July 11th. Throughout the process, I noticed that there was not one aspect 
that cancer did not affect. Family, friends, work, love, etc. It would be easy to blame cancer for 
all it has taken from me, but then I would have learned nothing from this experience. So 
instead, I choose to be grateful for each day that I had, each true friend that stuck by me, and 
each family member who cried with me, and for my husband, children, and family who gave 
up so much through my battle with this terrible disease. Still, to this day, I feel trulyA 
bIessed.This experience taught me that life is unpredictable and cancer doesn't discriminate. 
It affects the young, old, rich, and poor. I often think about all the individuals that are no longer 
among us.I also realize that there will always be someone worse off than me. My motto 
throughout my journey was always to keep a positive attitude. To take one day at a time. Live 
in the moment and surround yourself with positive people. It truly does make a difference. 
Today I find thatl laugh a lot easier and enjoy my life more, and all those little things that' 
made me crazy before don't bother me anymore. I often wonder if this happened to me to 
make me realize I'm much stronger than I thought.After everything I had endured, I was toldI 
was cancer free and to live my life. Almost four years later, of being told I was cancer free. In 
October 2017, I developed a lingering cough, which wasn't getting worse but wasn't going 
away. I ended up calling and making an appointment with my primary care provider, and given 
my history, she immediately ordered a CT.A chest X-ray. There was some uncertainty about 
my results, so as a CT scan was ordered, I had to hear those words again.You have 
cancer.Biopsies once again to determine the type of breast cancer.The results were 
metastatic breast cancer that had now spread to my lungs. I couldn't have surgery as I had
several tumors throughout my Iungs.I once again began chemotherapy. Then in April 2018.I 
started to develop issues with my right arm. And hand typing, writing, using a fork, and 
brushing my teeth became a challenge for me.I discussed these concerns with my medical 
oncologist and was immediately sent for a brain MRI.And the results were devastating.The 
cancer had now spread to my brain.Twelve tumors total, one huge size affecting my right 
arm.It was too large to radiate but needed to be removed. How could this be, as l'm still doing 
king maintenance chemotherapy for my lungs? What we didn't know at the time was that the 
regimen I was on couldn't cross the blood blood-brain barrier. The blood-brain barrier provides 
a defense against disease-causing pathogens and toxins that may be present in your blood, 
which protects your brain. My medical oncologist referred me to a neurosurgeon 
Neurosurgeon down at ME Medical Center. I met with a neurosurgeon on a Monday and was 
immediately scheduled for brain surgery on Thursday. I received my metastatic breast cancer 
diagnosis at 40 years old. To say this time in my life was full is a monstrous understatement. 
This cancer diagnosis felt like a cruel joke. I was not oven/veight and was a non-smoker all of 
my life. Exercise, value my health and wellness, and elect any associated high-risk factors for 
developing this disease which typically impacts women in their 60s. I remember expecting to 
wake up from a terrible dream and have eveiything suddenly returned to normal. My cancer 
diagnosis has forever altered my life course. Today I live with metastatic breast cancer, with 
the disease in my lungs, brain, and bones. This also means I live with anxiety and 
tremendous grief. The grief of the countless setbacks I've experienced and the anticipation of 
how my terminal illness will play out and impact my loved ones. Cancer has a way of 
stretching and sinking its ugly claws into nearly every aspect of existence. It is larger thana 
life diagnosis, and it changes so much.I have developed over three years of living with 
metastatic breast cancer. I have discovered some tools that allow me to cope with all the 
heaviness associated with this diagnosis and lead a life shaped by meaning and purpose.lt's 
OK and sometimes necessary to take space from cancer. One of the trickiest aspects of this 
disease is how it sneaks into nearly all corners of your life without your permission. As a way 
of impacting virtually everything, for the first year of my diagnosis, I struggled with my identity 
in a significant way. My life was significantly and permanently altered. Suddenly I had taken 
on the role and my family and friendships as a sick person. A person who suddenly required 
more care and attention and even special handling. My life felt swallowed up by this new 
identity, and that identity I certainly did not sign up for. I think it is fairly easy for a person with 
an illness to fall into the role of a helpless victim. That certainly happened for me somewhat, 
somewhat subconsciously. I was terriﬁed and looking to be LED in a way. That I could.I was 
craving safety and security. It took some time for me to realize that living my life from a place 
of why me and victimhood were not good for anyone. Not my family, supporters, and certainly 
not myself. At that point, it was time to get empowered. What could I control? My life of 
mine.I'm gently, generally, a very articulate person regarding how l'm feeling. l'm pretty open 
with my experiences around cancer, but sometimes I want to tell people in my life that I need 
a couple of hours or days off from cancer. My loved ones and I are never fully off from it. But 
this is my attempt to send conversations and focus on things that have nothing to do with my 
health. By creating that space for myself and my supporters, I can reinforce that cancer
doesn't have to touch every corner of my life.|n the Note Now cancer zone, l don't want to talk 
about treatment, clinical trials, research, the latest scans, labs, or how I feel physically. Life 
with metastatic breast cancer is no cakewalk. It is a rollercoaster ride of highs, lows, twists, 
and turns. But it can still be profoundly beautifu|.The journey to contentment in this turbulent 
life starts with the gifts we give ourselves. No matter how good or bad you think, life is, wake 
up each day and be thankful for life.Someone else is ﬁghting to survive. l'm a warrior survivor 
and hope there'll be a cure someday.Thank you for listening and giving me this opportunity to 
share my journey.
