‘Y 
t I1 
r 
"Q: ‘ii 
\\ _, 
E79‘ 
Peggy Rotundo THE IVIAINE SENATE 3 State House Statign 
Senator, District 21 13 lst Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony introducing 
LD 1665, ”An Act to Improve Breast Health Care by Providing Coverage for Genetic Counseling 
and Testing” 
Senator Peggy Rotundo 
May 8, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and other distinguished members of the Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, my name is Peggy Rotundo and I represent Senate 
District 21, the City of Lewiston. I ain here today to introduce LD 1665, “An Act to Improve Breast 
Health Care by Providing Coverage for Genetic Counseling and Testing”. 
I submitted this bill months ago to ensure that the counseling required to determine if a woman may 
have a genetic predisposition to breast cancer and the resulting tests are covered by private 
insurance. 
Since submitting this bill, I have learned through the Maine Bureau of Insurance that insurance 
coverage for genetic counseling and evaluation for routine breast cancer (BRCA 1 and 2) is mandated 
by the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) as well as by the State of Maine. I 
I decided that I would bring the bill forward regardless since there still seems to be a problem with 
some insurance carriers not complying with the law that mandates coverage for BRCA 1 and 2.I 
have heard that testing for genetic predisposition has come up before in this legislative session and 
there seems to be some confusion about where the problem lies. Someone, for example, suggested 
that there might be a coding problem and better education for providers could help to eliminate the 
problem. I am presenting the bill with the hope that by calling attention to the issue, the problem that 
some women in Maine face as they struggle to gain access to this testing and counseling will be 
resolved. 
Last December I was contacted by a constituent, Carlene Sperry, who founded the Heart of Hope 
Charitable Fund, a non-profit organization in Maine, which has helped hundreds of women manage 
the enormous burden of a breast cancer diagnosis. Carlene is here today, and she will share her story 
with you about how critical this testing is as well as the hurdles that many in the state face as they 
seek help. 
Thank you for your attention and consideration of the need to help women learn about their cancer 
risks as early as possible. I ain happy to try to answer any questions you may have. 
Chair, Appropriations and Financial Aﬂairs Committee 
. StareH0use: (207) 287-1515 * Fax: (207)287-1585 * Toll Free: 1-800-423-6900 * TTX- 711 
Peggy.R0tund0@1egis1aIure. maine. gov * legislature. maine. gov/senate
