53 Baxter Boulevard, Suite 202 | Portland, ME 04101
Phone: 866-554-5380 | Fax: 207-775-5727 | TTY: 877-
434-7598
aarp.org/me | me@aarp.org | twitter: @aarpmaine 
facebook.com/aarpmaine | instagram.com/aarpme
March 16, 2023
L.D. 542:  An Act to Comprehensively and Equitably Reform Electricity Rates
BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES, AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE
TESTIMONY OF AARP MAINE: IN OPPOSITION
Chairs Lawrence and Zeigler, and the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and 
Technology:
Good morning, my name is Alf Anderson, and I am an Advocacy and Outreach 
Director with AARP Maine. AARP Maine is a non-partisan, non-profit organization 
with more than 200,000 members statewide. I’m here today to testify IN 
OPPOSITION TO L.D. 542 AS PROPOSED.  
As originally printed, the bill was labeled a “concept draft,” and stated that this bill 
would require the Public Utilities Commission to make dramatic changes to the residential 
rate design for essential electric service that will harm lower income, fixed income, and 
lower usage customers.  Specifically, the bill would eliminate rates based on usage of 
kilowatt hours and require distribution service to be based on fixed charges, require 
Standard Offer to be billed on time of use rates, and require a determination of net energy 
billing rates based on “systemic and social benefits.”  AARP opposes all three of these 
directives.
Rate design is a zero sum game because the rate structure must result in collecting the 
approved revenue requirement.  Any change in rate structures shift costs among ratepayers 
of the same class and some will pay more and some will pay less.  Furthermore, unlike our 
progressive income tax structures, electricity prices are regressive in that those with lower or 
fixed income pay a higher percentage of their household income for essential electricity 
compared to higher income customers.  Keeping these two key points in mind when 
considering mandates for rate design changes will help explain AARP’s concerns with this 
proposed legislation.
 The revised version of this bill printed on March 13, 2023, eliminates some of the 
most adverse proposals as stated in the original bill’s Summary.  However, the revised bill 
reflects a number of continuing concerns to AARP Maine.  
With regard to the directives concerning performance-based rates, the Legislature 
adopted directives on this policy in the last session in L.D. 1959, An Act Regarding Utility 
Accountability and Grid Planning for Maine’s Energy Future.  And those directives are being 
considered and implemented in ongoing PUC rulemakings to establish performance 
standards and penalties and in current base rate proceedings pending for both CMP and 
Versant Power.   
AARP questions the benefits of multi-year rate cases based on speculative forecast costs. 
We prefer the traditional cost of service model. Any performance metrics or metrics 
reward payments should be narrowly focused and conducted under limited-term pilots. 
They should also include consumer protections and tied to achieving positive outcomes 
for consumers such as increased reliability and affordability. We support the bill’s 
provision for an annual review by the PUC as well as the allowing the PUC to award 
metrics rewards of penalties. However, the authorized rate of return should be adjusted 
down to reflect the reduced business risk from this alternative regulation. 
AARP Maine is particularly concerned about the vague notion of promoting “carbon 
reduction,” “beneficial electrification,” and “electric vehicles” since these policies carry 
significant implications for affordable electric service for Maine’s fixed and lower income 
customers.  It is our view that the current Legislatively mandated policies that govern the 
Commission’s ratemaking authority are sufficient at this time.  
Second, the bill’s clear intent is to promote time of use rates for both distribution 
and generation supply service or the Standard Offer.  While AARP does not oppose an 
optional time of use rate for distribution service and notes that several time varying and 
seasonal varying rate options are already available for CMP’s customers, we oppose any 
suggestion that distribution service should consist primarily of time of use rates or that 
the Standard Offer should mandate time of use rates for residential customers.  
AARP supports a statistically valid analysis of the current and newly adopted rate 
options that were intended to respond to “electrification” policies.  No such analysis of the 
current or newly adopted time of use or seasonal rate options have been evaluated in 
Maine.  For example, both CMP and Versant Power have offered time of use rates for many 
years, but there has never been any analysis or evaluation of these rate options to 
determine customer satisfaction or the impact of the participating customer’s usage 
profile on peak load demand.  Both time of use rate options are poorly subscribed and 
reflect the general view of residential customers that time-based rate options are not 
preferred or desired.  We recommend that the bill require the Commission to conduct a 
rigorous analysis of current rate options prior to moving to any further expansion of more 
volatile rate options for residential customers.
Time of use rates charge very high prices for electricity usage at times when many 
residential customers must use electricity for home heating and cooling.  These rate 
structures threaten the affordability of essential electric service to customers whose 
income or housing type does not allow for investments to avoid higher bills.  This type of 
mandate would radically change the statutory purpose of Standard Offer which is 
intended to reflect the “lowest cost” and provide a stable rate for essential electric service 
for residential customers.  I attach AARP Maine’s Comments to the PUC on its recent 
Notice of Inquiry concerning potential implementation of time of use rates for Standard 
Service.
 Thank you.
Alf Anderson
Outreach and Advocacy
AARP Maine 
