i
l
x
§ 
s
1
s 
5 Senator Lawrence 
Representative Ziegler 
Members of the Energy, Utilities & Technology Committee 
Re: LD 542, An Act to Comprehensively and Equitably Reform Electricity 
Rates _ 
My name is Debra Hart and I am a resident of Manchester, Maine. I am 
providing testimony today in opposition to section 3 of LD 542, which would 
require consumer —owned transmission and distribution utilities to offer an 
optional time-of-use rate to the retail customers in its service territory. As 
you know, COUs represent some of the more rural areas of the State and they 
have few large industrial or commercial customers. A focus of the COUs is to 
keep their rates as low as possible for all of their customers and they have 
been quite successful in those endeavors with their standard offer service 
providers by locking those rates in for in excess of one year, oftentimes as 
many of upwards to five years and beyond. 
Some of the COUs do not have a billing or metering systems that will support 
time-of-use metering, which would likely only be used by a few customers ina 
COU territory. In addition, because COUs are able to choose one standard- 
offer service provider for their entire territory, the rates they get from that 
provider apply to all their customers and not a separate rate for a time-of-use 
customer ~~ and again, one that would require a separate metering or billing 
system. 
While we appreciate the endeavors to lower rates, in this instance we believe 
there would be little benefit to all of the consumers they serve in order to 
provide this option to a few customers who might choose this time-of-use 
rate.
Changing the language in Sec. 3 to read “A consumer-owned transmission and 
distribution utility may offer an optional time-of-use rate to the retail 
customers in its service territory" would make this permissive rather thana 
requirement. We would support this change or taking that sentence out 
entirely. 
I'd be happy to answer any questions or provide you with any additional 
information.
