site 
. as- 
lie STATE OF MAINE 
Pusuc ununes COMMlSSlON 
Philip L. Bartlett, ll Hany Lanphear 
CHAlRMAN ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR 
Randall D. Davis 
Patrick J. Scully 
COMMISSIONERS 
r 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
Neither for Nor Against 
LD 542, An Act To Comprehensively and Equitably Reform Electricity Rates 
March 16, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Deirdre Schneider, testifying neither for 
nor against the sponsor’s amendment to LD 542, An Act To Comprehensively and Equitably Reform 
Electricity Rates on behalf of the Commission.- 
First, we would like to thank the sponsor, Representative Runte, for giving the Commission the 
opportunity to review the amendment and provide input. The Commission finds the proposed 
amendment to be workable and compliments work we are currently undertaking. 
Section l of the amendment provides the Commission with explicit authority to establish a multi-year 
rate plan for transmission and distribution utilities with more than 500 ,000 customers that includes rate 
adjustment mechanisms with positive and negative financial incentives. This section speciﬁes the 
annual performance goals the Commission must establish if pursuing a multi-year rate plan and 
establishes requirement related to the evaluation of the utility’s performance. Currently, Central Maine 
Power has ﬁled a request for a multi-year rate plan that includes performance mechanisms. 
Section 4 of the bill requires the Commission to investigate the (1) feasibility of requiring a time-of-use 
(TOU) option for standard offer service; (2) the effect a standard offer TOU rate would have on the 
commercial and industrial net energy billing tariff rate; (3) the options for utilizing a standard offer 
TOU in establishing the annual tariff rate; and (4) the feasibility of requiring all investor-owned 
transmission and distribution utilities to offer a TOU for the delivery of electricity for all customer 
classes. 
The Commission initiated an inquiry in February seeking comments regarding rate structures for 
standard offer service and issues related to offering standard offer TOU rates.‘ initial comments 
provided through this inquiry are a helpful ﬁrst step in meeting the requirements of Section 4 of the 
amendment. The Commission will need to explore other issues associated with offering a TOU ratefor 
standard offer service and having a clear signal from the Legislature that this is a worthy undertaking 
provides focus and reﬁnement to the effort. 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the work session. 
l 
2023-00019 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, Hallowell, ME 04347 V MAIL: 18 State House Station, Augusta, l\/[E 04333-0018 
PHONE: (20'D 287-3831 (VOICE) Tl'Y users call Maine Relay 71 l FAX: (207) 287-1039
