<i\ 
" 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ii? ' 
5%. 5. 
{,5 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
A AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Walter Gerzifd Runte Jr. TTY3 MAINE RELAY 711 
House District 146 
Phone: (207) 361-7143 
Gerry.Runte@1egislature.maine.gov 
March 16, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Gerry Runte introducing 
LD 542, An Act To Comprehensively and Equitably Reform Electricity Rates 
Before the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, and esteemed members of the Joint Committee on 
Energy, Utilities, and Technology, I am pleased to present to you LD 542, a bill that addresses 
two necessary reforms to Maine's rate regulatory structure: ensuring that electricity pricing in 
all rate classifications and net energy billing tariffs incorporate the time value of energy, and 
accelerating the use of 21“-century performance-based rate-making. 
All utilities, including Maine's, have been regulated for over 100 years. The current regulation 
and rate designs were created to ensure monopoly providers, regardless of ownership, achieve 
established goals. Over the course of the 20*“ century, these rules successfully encouraged the 
buildout of economic electricity service using the economies of scale that the central 
generation model provides to: 
0 Encourage investment in large power plants 
0 Transmit energy to local distribution grids 
0 Deliver that energy to end users 
The rules assumed a one-way delivery model, and cost of service ratemaking encouraged utility 
investments in plants and infrastructure to ensure that every citizen who needed electricity 
would have it. 
Over the last 20 years, however, much has changed. Most utilities no longer generate their own 
power but only deliver it. New technologies emerged (and are emerging) that permit smaller 
scale generation to be sited much closer to the end user. Communications and metering 
technologies permit this legacy one-way system to operate as a multidirectional network. 
Additionally, this multi-directional interconnectivity allows for greater load management anda 
more efficient grid operation, further mitigating the need for the traditional large power plant 
and T&D assets.
The dilemma we face is that, for the most part, our current rate structure supports the old one- 
way grid system, a system that was never designed to accommodate the new technology and 
methods needed to modernize the grid, to build a system that can support electrification and 
the state's climate change goals. lf we want to achieve a 21st-century multidirectional grid, that 
rules system, our rate regulatory structure, needs reform. 
This bill addresses one of those reforms- the need to operate our distribution system based on 
the value and cost of the energy produced — by requiring the commission to investigate the 
feasibility of requiring time-of-use rates across all applicable rate classes, including the Standard 
Offer and the Net Energy Billing tariff. Maine does have a smattering of time-of-use rates, but 
they all deal with the delivery portion of cost and are limited. So why do this? 
Pricing in the wholesale electricity market varies by time and location. in mid-March ona 
typical day our electricity demand peaks at 8 am and 8 pm; it is lowest at 3 am. Electricity cost 
at those peaks is much higher than at hours of lowest demand. Charging a single rate for 
electricity results in those that consume less expensive off-peak electricity are subsidizing users 
who consume expensive on-peak power. Time-of-use pricing allocates costs equitably and gives 
consumers more control over their electric bills. A single rate was the only option before the 
smart metering technology was available. Maine has sufficient smart metering technology 
deployed to implement time-of-use rate designs in major portions of utility service territories 
with more deployments planned. 
Time-of-use rates allow for greater efficiency in system operations. By pricing the electricity 
closer to actual costs, consumers who opt for time-of-use rates have greater control over their 
bills by adjusting their use according to cost. And since peak power is generated by the most 
expensive sources with the highest GHG emissions, when consumers shift their usage off-peak, 
fewer of these units need to be operated. 
Time-of-use rates would allow owners of storage devices (including batteries and electric 
vehicles) to charge at low rates and act as a power source during expensive peak periods, 
reducing the peak demand on the grid, providing a reliable source of standby power, and 
incentivize the market for storage technologies. 
The bill also introduces time-of-use rate design to net energy billing tariffs to that ensure that 
the rate of compensation more accurately reflects the true value of the electricity. 
The second area of reform addressed in this bill, is performance-based ratemaking. Greater 
automation and data availability, combined with integrated distribution planning, permits 
development of performance-based goals and standards, incentivizes utilities to meet these 
goals, and allows for the measurement and verification of a utilities ’ progress to goals and 
performance objectives. 13 states have already implemented variations of this more rigorous 
and granular reward system that encourages the utilities to meet ratepayer expectations.
LD 1959 initiated a scorecard for utility performance. This bill builds on LD 1959 by requiring the 
commission to assess annual performance in its multiyear rate plans and issue incentives or 
penalties based on previously established goals and performance standards. The commission 
will establish metrics for: 
0 Service quality, including but not limited to the reliability of service and timeliness of 
restoring service after outages. 
0 Customer service, including but not limited to timeliness and accuracy of bills. 
0 Field services, including but not limited to communication with and responsiveness to 
municipalities, businesses, and individuals; encouragement of distributed energy 
resources, including interconnection. 
1 Grid resiliency. 
0 Peak load reduction. 
0 Encouragement of beneﬁcial electrification. 
Performance-based ratemaking is particularly important now, but even if our utilities were 
better performing, a rigorous system of incentives and penalties would still be warranted. 
As we move forward in our design ofthe state's electricity grid, rate regulatory reform is an 
essential enabling tool. It establishes the context and framework for how all of the various parts 
should work. LD 542 is a starting point for that process by addressing the time value of 
electricity and enhanced performance-based ratemaking. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
Gerry Runte
