VE RSANT P 0 w ER 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against LD 542 (as proposed to be amended) 
An Act to Comprehensively and Equitably Reform Electricity Rates 
March 15, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and members of the committee, my name is James Cote andI 
am here today on behalf of Versant Power neither for nor against LD 542. 
Generally speaking, this bill and the sponsor’s amendment raise a number of signiﬁcant and important 
topics in utility ratemaking and regulation. Versant Power is supportive of many of these concepts 
overall, but also recognizes that, should the legislature decide to move forward with these policies, the 
details of their implementation will ultimately determine their success or failure to help Maine 
accomplish it’s stated goals. We believe, should the committee want to continue exploring these topics, 
an appropriate next step should include considerable additional discussion among a broad range of 
relevant stakeholders, including the utilities, PUC, OPA, GEO, developers and advocates. 
With regard to the speciﬁc policies present in the bill and amendment, Versant Power believes that true 
performance-based ratemaking and multi-year rate plans can be parts of a constructive utility regulatory 
framework, especially as the role of utilities and the needs and capabilities of the elected grid are rapidly 
changing to facilitate the energy transitions already underway. 
We note that, as the sponsor’s amendment recognizes, true performance based ratemaking both rewards 
utilities with positive ﬁnancial incentives for meeting and exceeding agreed—upon objectives, and 
penalizing them with negative ﬁnancial consequences for falling short. This model and has been tested 
successfully in jurisdictions around the United States. However, this is not the current framework in 
Maine and would represent a major shift in the way the Commission has historically regulated the state’s 
utilities. 
Successful implementation of performance-based ratemaking requires signiﬁcant time and effort to 
understand current utility capabilities, a commitment to long term planning, robust rulemaking, and the 
identiﬁcation of performance targets that are measurable, clearly understood, enjoy broad stakeholder 
support, and are carefully crafted to accomplish stated policy goals in the most efficient possible 
manner. 
In terms of Section 4 of the proposed amendment, T ime-of-use rates; report, we agree that having the 
Public Utilities Commission investigate the feasibility of this model makes sense and will help inform 
the Legislature and the public about prudent ways to move forward. Versant Power would be glad to 
support the Commission in its discovery. 
We would be happy to answer any questions and provide more information for the Work session at your 
request. Thank you for your consideration. 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District -— PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209
