 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony on LD 542, An Act to Comprehen sively and Equitably Reform Electricity 
Rates 
 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
By Pete LaFond, Acadia Center  
March 16, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative  Zeigler, and members of  the Energy, Utilities an d Technology Committee: 
My name is Pete LaFond, and I am the Senior Policy  Advocate for Acadia Center, a Rockport, Maine-based 
nonprofit research and advocacy organ ization committed to advancing the clea n energy future of Maine. Please 
accept this testimony in strong support of the Amendmen t to L.D. 542, “An Act to Comprehensively and Equitably 
Reform Electricity Rates.” Acadia Center recognizes that Mainers are struggling to pay their electricity bills. We know 
this every time we open our own utility bills. The Amendment sets forth a plan to begin to address increasing utility 
bills by establishing performance-based ratemaking for ma jor transmission and distribu tion utilities in Maine. 
The Amendment specifically empowers the Maine Public Utilities Commission to establish both positive and 
negative financial incentives to ac hieve necessary performance goals, all as set forth in the Amendment. The 
categories of performance include impr oving grid flexibility and resiliency and encouraging peak load shaping and 
peak load reduction, all while using pr oven methods of electrification and energy efficiency. Under the Amendment, 
the PUC will receive data from each utility and develop an annual public report card. The public desperately needs greater transparency around utility de cision-making and performa nce, especially given ri sing rates. Financial 
incentives and penalties can help to a ddress the misalignment between existing  utility incentives and State policy 
goals and ensure that utilities are providin g the best possible outcomes for ratepayers.  
While Acadia Center supports the Amendment, we recomm end that several additional items be added to the 
list of performance categories under Section 1 “Performance goals”, including affordability and cost control, as well as 
environmental justice and equity. By addi ng these categories of pe rformance, this bill can help ensure that those who 
are suffering most from rising electricity costs are prioritized. 
The amendment also mandates that “a  consumer-owned transmission and di stribution utility shall offer an 
optimal time-of-use rate to ret ail customers in its service territory.” Acadia  Center strongly supports the use of time-
of-use rates and other advanced rate designs that respond to changing conditions and prices on the grid.  
 
Thank you, 
Peter LaFond 
2 
 
Senior Advocate and Maine Program Director 
8 Summer St. PO Box 583 
Rockport, ME 04856-0583 
plafond@acadiacenter.org   
207-236-6470 x305 
207-329-4606 cell 
