 
  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 542 ,  
 An Act to Comprehensively and Equitably Reform Electricity Rates  
 
By Rebecca Schultz, Senior Advocate for Climate and Clean Energy 
March 16, 2023  
 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology , my name is Rebecca Schultz. I am a S enior Advocate for Climate and Clean Energy at the 
Natural Resources Council of Maine  (NRCM). NRCM  has been  working  for more  than  60 years  to protect,  
restore,  and conserve  Maine’s  environment,  on behalf  of our 25,000 members  and supporters .  
 
On behalf of our  members and supporters,  I’m grateful for the opportunity to present testimony  in 
support  of LD 542 , which would  enable the adoption of performance -based regulation (PBR) and time -
of-use (TOU ) rates by the Public Utilities Commission  (PUC).  
 
Our transmission and dist ribution  (T&D)  utilities  occupy a central position  in our resp onse to climate 
change , being integral to both  the electrification  of the  transportatio n and buildings sectors  and the 
integration of clean  renewable electricity  at all scales  across  the grid . The clean ene rgy transition 
represents a once- in-a-century growth opportunity for our T&D utilities, and how  we regulate these 
monopoly  compan ies will ultimately determine how quickly we can decarbonize  and how much it will 
cost Maine ratepayers .  
 Performance -based regulation  seeks to resolve  the conflicts of interest inherent  to traditional utility 
regulation , namely : the incentive to over -build  infrastructure created by a guaranteed cost recovery for 
capital expend iture ; and the disincentive to conserve electricity  due to the  resulting reduction in 
electricity  sales.  PBR aims to realign  utility profit motivations  by offering financial carrots  and s ticks  for 
specific quantifiable outcomes related to utility performance and public po licy goals  over time.  This 
approach  to utility regulation is not new, it has  a long track record  in jurisdictions around the wor ld and 
is widely considered an e ssential tool for  harnessing the powe rful profit -seeking behavior of a publicly  
traded compan y in service of the public good.   
 
We support the sponsor ’s amendment  in that it explicit ly authoriz es the PUC to adopt performance -
based  ratemaking  and identifies  areas of performance crucial to grid modernization and the clean 
energy transition , such as  grid resiliency , grid securi ty, distributed  energy resource in terconnection, 
peak load reduction,  beneficial electrification , etc. How ever, we  would caution against being overly  
prescript ive in legislation in favor of affording discretion  to the PUC to devi se the most relevant 
performance metrics  and goals  after data gathering through a rule making  process , as well as  to provide  
adequate  long -term sign als for utilities  to shift investment s trategies. By additionally requiring 
performance categories  pertaining to equity , cost control  and afford ability, and environmental pol icies , 
LD 542 could help seize the opportuni ty recently missed  in related proceedings at the PUC.  
 
 
  
LD 542 also proposes  a feasibility study for standard offer TOU  rates . Well-designed  TOU rates , ideally 
coordinated for supply and delivery compo nents of the bills , and accompan ying public education  
campaigns, can shift demand away from peak times, offering cost savings to  the customer and to 
utilities through improved system efficiency . TOU rate reforms have  the potential to advance d state  
decarbonization goals  cost effectively and the proposed s tudy would be complementa ry to ongoing 
proceedings at the PUC.  
 
In conclusion, we urge you to vote Ought To Pass on LD 542 and t hank you for your consideration of this 
testimony .  
 
 
  
