Testimony of the Industrial Energy Consumer Group 
2 
In Opposition of . 
L.D. 542, An Act To Comprehensively' and Equitably Reform Electricity Rates 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technologyu 
March 16, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler and Members of the Joint Standing‘
_ 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology. I am Steven Hudson, an attorney with the ﬁrm of Preti 
Flaherty, here today on behalf of the Industrial Energy Consumer Group (IECG). IECG has been< 
representing medium and large sized consumers of energy in Maine for more than twenty-ﬁve years at 
the state, regional and federal level. We advocate for policies that reduce the cost of energyfor our 
members, helping to maintain their operations in our state and the thousands of jobs provided directly 
and indirectly by those operations. We also advocate for climate change mitigation through cost- 
effective beneﬁcial electriﬁcation.R
_ 
Industrial Energy Consumer Group testiﬁes todayin opposition. to L.D. 542, An Act ToI
t 
Comprehensively and Equitably Reform Electricity Rates, not because we are opposed to reform of 
electricity rates, but that we oppose setting up automatic upward rachets in rates as a reward to investor- 
owned transmission & distribution utilities for doing the kinds of things IECG thinks they should either 
be doing to protect the interests of the ratepayers or that we already expect them to do _and for which 
they are already gwell compensated by existing ratemaking, . 
IECG believes that this well-intentioned bill is an apparently unintentional, but potentially-lucrative gift 
to Maine’s largest T&D utilities. Section 1 of the bill encourages what is billed as performance-based 
multi-year ratemaking (MRP) for these utilities. These concepts have been tried in Maine previously 
under slightly different names and arrangements. Unfortunately, as a report for the National Association 
of Regulatory Utility Commissioners (NARUC) has noted: “The issues surrounding MRPs are more 
complex than What ﬁrst meets the eye. Whether MRPs are in the public interest ‘ is theultimate question 
for regulators to answer, but one that has no clear answer?"V
_ 
The NARUC report goes on to say: 
‘ National Regulatory Research Institute, Multiyear Rate Plans and the Public Interest, Report No. 16-08, Executive 
Summary page iv, October 2016, accessed at https://pubs.naruc.org/pub/FA86999D-D03F-2858-7228 —A6353560E5B9
1
The major supporter of MRPs in the U.S., electric utilities, have advanced different arguments. 
Their main one is that MRPs would improve the regulatory process and their ﬁnancial condition 
(e.g., from less regulatory lag). From a regulatory perspective, their arguments seem to fall short 
of makinga compelling case for how their customers would beneﬁt. For example, utilities have 
emphasized the need for MRPs to facilitate recovery of capital costs between‘ 
general rate cases. 
While this may beneﬁt customers, MRPs have other effects on utility customers, either positive
i 
or negative. The mixed results from MRPs preclude a prima facie case for their approval by ‘V 
regulators? 
IECG further notes that this section of the bill appears to be unnecessary, given the existing provisions 
of law in the Electric Rate Reform Act, codiﬁed at 35-A MRSA Ch. 31, subch. 3, §§3l51-3155 which 
among other things provides that the commission to: relate transmission and distribution rates more 
closelyto the costs of providing transmission and distribution service; consider the ability of low- 
income residential customers to pay in full for electric services as transmission and distribution rates are 
redesigned consistent with these policies; and to set rates to the extent practicable to achieve economic 
efﬁciency. These provisions also direct the commission to: encourage energy conservation, minimize the 
need for new transmission and distribution capacity, minimize costs of transmission and distribution 
service to consumers, minimize transmission and distribution ratesover the long term or short term and 
take into account the needs of low-income customers. Finally the PUC already has authority to consider 
incentive ratemaking through the provisions found in of 35-A MRSA §3 195.3 
2 Id.'
. 
3 
§3l95. Commission authority to promote transmission and distribution utility efﬁciency 
1. Rate-adjustment mechanisms. This Title may not be construed to prohibit the commission from or to restrict the 
commission in establishing or authorizing any reasonable rate-adjustment mechanisms to promote efficiency in transmission 
and distribution utility operations and least-cost planning. Rate-adjustment mechanisms may include, but are not limitedto: 
A. Decoupling of utility proﬁts from utility sales through revenue reconciliation; .‘ 
B. Reconciliation of actual revenues or costs with projected revenues or costs, either on a total or per customer basis; 
C. Adjustment of revenues based on reconciled, indexed or forecasted costs; and\ 
D. Positive or negative ﬁnancial incentives for efﬁcient operations. .' 
2. Just and reasonable rates. In detennining the reasonableness of any rate-adjustment mechanism established under this 
subchapter, the commission shall apply the standards of section 301 to ensure that the rates resulting from the implementation 
of the mechanism are just and reasonable. Prior to the adoption of a new or replacement alternative rate plan or renewal of 
any existing alternative rate plan, the commission shall, in order to ensure that rates at the starting point of the plan are just 
and reasonable, conduct a revenue requirement and earnings review pursuant to the standards of section 301. In conducting 
such a review under this subsection, the commission, at its discretion, may conduct the review in a mamier designed to 
minimize the cost of the review to ratepayers. 
3. Value of utility property. Notwithstanding section 303, rate-adjustment mechanisms established under this section may 
be used to establish the value of the transmission and distribution utility's property._
2
IECG is skeptical of attempts to adopt anymechanisms that include revenue decoupling for utilities. 
IECG believes decoupling disrupts and distorts the utility core business functions and is not a-A 
particularly effective way of promoting energy efﬁciency or anything of beneﬁt to the utility’s_ 
customers. Time and time again decoupling has been tried in several states, only to be suspended 
because it unduly interferes with the overall regulatory process. A 2019 study found:“ .. .U.S. utility 
data in 2000-2012 reveals that RD [Revenue Decoupling] is associated Withmore than 10% higher 
electricity prices and revenues in two years aﬂer_RD is implemented relative to similar non-decoupled 
utilities. Between these comparable utilities, there are no signiﬁcant differences in the electricity sales, 
indicating that RD tends to allow larger increases in utility revenues. ”4 
IECG respectfully suggests LD 542 be voted Ought Not to Pass or at a minimum the bill be amended to 
delete sections 1 and 2. IECG encourages the Committee to just allow the PUC to do its job for Maine 
and Maine ratepayers. . 
4. Ratepayer protection. In determining the reasonableness of any rate-adjustment mechanisms, the commission shall 
consider the transfer of risks associated with the effect of the economy and the weather on the utility's sales. To the extent 
these risks are transferred from the utility to its customers, the commission shall consider in a rate proceeding the effect of the 
transfer of risk in determining a utility's allowed rate of retum..» 
5. Report. The commission shall include in its annual report pursuant to section 120, subsection 6 any signiﬁcant 
developments with respect to any actions taken or proposed to be taken by the commission under this section. . 
6. Rate ﬂexibility. Notwithstanding sections 307 and 703, thecommission, in an adjudicatory proceeding, may authorize aV 
transmission and distribution utility to implement a program under which:'
'
. 
A.'The utility may change its schedule of rates with limited notice to the commission; and' 
B. The utility may enter into contracts for the sale of transmission and distribution services and related management services 
with limited or no prior express approval by the commission. _ »’ 
The commission shall render its decision in any adjudicatory proceeding held for the purposes of authorizing a utility to 
implement a program consistent with this subsection within 9 months of the initiation of the proceeding. In the adjudicatory 
proceeding, the commission shall establish the terms and conditions under which a program is authorized under this 
subsection. The authority granted to the commission under this subsection is in addition to the authority of the commission 
granted under other provisions of this Title and nothing in this subsection may be construed to limit the authority of the 
commission under any other provision of this Title. 
4 Brucal A and Tami N) Revenue decoupling for electric utilities: impacts on prices and welfare. Centre for Climate Change 
Economics and Policy Working Paper 343/Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment Working 
Paper 309. London: London School 0f*Economics and Political Science, 2019
