‘x 1 5 University Drive 
Augusta, Maine 04330 
Maine Water Utilities Association 207623-951 1 
Organized 1925 
March 27, 2023 
Honorable Anne Beebe-Center, Senate Chair 
Honorable Suzanne Salisbury, House Chair 
Joint Legislative Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony in opposition to LD 647, An Act To Amend the Life Safety Code Regarding 
When Sprinkler Systems May Be Shut Off 
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Members of the Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety: 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) appreciates the opportunity to provide 
testimony regarding LD 647. MWUA respectfully opposes LD 647 because it would limit the 
ability of water utilities to shut off private sprinkler systems for important reasons such as 
nonpayment or infrastructure integrity issues 
About MWUA. The Maine Water Utilities Association is a nonproﬁt association based in 
Augusta that provides support for water works professionals throughout the State of Maine in 
advocating for safe drinking water through educational and technical programming as well as 
advocacy on the local, state, and national level. The Association was formed in 1925 and counts 
approximately 109 water utilities in Maine as members. 
Discussion. LD 647 would prohibit shutting off water to an automatic sprinkler system ina 
building that is within 25 feet of another building except for short term maintenance or repair. If 
this bill is passed as written, it could impede the ability of water utilities to collect revenue from 
accounts with private water service. 
A water utility is allowed to shut off water service when customers fail to make payment as 
governed by Maine statutes, rules of the Public Utilities Commission, and the utility’s approved 
Terms and Conditions of Service. The use of this mechanism to collect delinquent bills is very 
effective, and it reduces the utility’s delinquent receivables, to the beneﬁt of all ratepayers. If 
delinquent bills are not properly collected, ratepayers who do pay their bills are left to pay the 
expenses of running the water system — including the cost of serving customers who are not 
paying. Other methods of collecting delinquent bills, including civil collection actions and the 
ﬁling of water liens, do not yield the same results, take much longer to complete, and are less 
cost effective. 
Water utilities are generally very hesitant to shut off water to a private ﬁre service and work with 
building owners and the local fire department to ﬁnd solutions without shutting off water. 
However, this LD completely removes a utility’s ability to shut off ﬁre service regardless of how
March 27, 2023 
Page2 
delinquent the account becomes or if there are other issues associated with the fre service which 
could jeopardize the integrity of the water utility. 
If the Cormnittee determines this legislation is needed, we ask the Committee to amend LD 647 
to exempt water utilities from this prohibition for purposes of delinquent bill collection or to 
address a repair, maintenance, or public health and safety issue provided the utility gives notice 
to the ﬁre department which serves the building. Water utilities generally provide such notice 
now, allowing the ﬁre department to work with the property owner to address the reason for the 
shut off and make arrangement for ﬁre protection. 
Conclusion. As written, this bill removes the ability for a utility to shut off ﬁre service for non- 
payment or infrastructure integrity issues. Without this authority, other ratepayers will absorb 
the costs that should be borne by the private ﬁre account. Additionally, this bill may result ina 
utility being unable to effectively address a water leak or other issues jeopardizing the integrity 
of the Water system. Therefore, we ask the Conmiittee to oppose this legislation and vote ought 
not to pass. 
Yours for safe drinking water, 
9”%f“*~1";/ Jeffrey McNelly, Liaison 
Maine Water Utilities Association 
cc: Bruce Berger, Executive Director, MWUA 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counsel
