 
 LD 647, When Sprinkler Systems May Be Shut Off 
Proposed Amendment of Maine Water Utilities Association 
April 5, 2023 
 
Sec. 1.  25 MRSA §2452, first ¶, as repealed and replaced by PL 2011, c. 691, Pt. A, §25, is 
amended to read: 
The Commissioner of Public Safety shall adopt and may amend rules governing the safety to life 
from fire in or around all buildings or other structures and mass outdoor gatherings, as defined in 
Title 22, section 1601, subsection 2, within the commissioner's jurisdiction. Automatic sprinkler 
systems may not be required in existing noncommercial places of assembly. Noncommercial places 
of assembly include those facilities used for such purposes as deliberation, worship, entertainment, 
amusement or awaiting transportation that have a capacity of 100 to 300 persons.  Automatic 
sprinkler systems may not be required in existing commercial places of assembly that are open for no 
more than 50 days per calendar year.  "Commercial places of assembly" includes bars with live 
entertainment, dance halls, nightclubs, assembly halls with large open areas in which patrons stand or 
sit, commonly referred to as "festival seating," and restaurants. Once installed, an automatic sprinkler 
system in a building that is within 25 feet of another building may not be shut off by the building 
owner or operator for a reason other than short-term maintenance or a repair requiring the system to 
be shut off.  Nothing in this section is intended to apply to a disconnection of public water service to 
a sprinkler system in accordance with title 35-A and any rules adopted by the Maine Public 
Utilities Commission. adopted pursuant to this section are routine technical rules, except that rules 
pertaining to fire sprinklers are major substantive rules, both of which are defined in Title 5, chapter 
375, subchapter 2‑A. 
SUMMARY 
This amendment clarifies that a disconnection of water service to a sprinkler system by a water 
utility, in accordance with the requirements established by the Maine Public Utilites Commission, is 
not covered by the original bill. 
