TESTIMONY OF RICHARD MCCARTHY 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
OFFICE OF STATE FIRE MARSHAL 
(Support for) L.D. 647 
"An Act to Amend the Life Safety Code Regarding When Sprinkler 
Systems May Be Shut Off" 
Presented by: Representative Geiger 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
AND PUBLIC SAFETY 
Hearing Date: Monday, March 27th, 2023, at 10:00 AM in Room 436, State House 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative 
Salisbury, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety. 
My name is Richard McCarthy, and I am the State Fire 
Marshal, I am here today representing the Department of 
Public Safety and the Office of State Fire Marshal to testify in 
support of this bill. 
Currently the code allows for sprinkler systems to be 
removed from buildings, that have provided information that 
the building would not be required to have a sprinkler installed 
if the building was being built new. This has been in code fora 
number of years, and our office has a policy that requires the 
building owner to provide documentation from their insurance
carrier acknowledging that the sprinkler was removed as well 
as notification from the local Fire Chief that they are okay with 
the removal of the sprinkler system. This is in addition to 
providing a code analysis providing information to support the 
building owner in their quest to removing a sprinkler system. 
When a sprinkler system is shut down any visible pieces of the 
system are required to be removed so that no one mistakenly 
thinks that there is a functioning sprinkler. 
The code does not take into account the proximity of other 
buildings and leaves that decision entirely up to the local Fire 
Chief or Code Official. This bill would give us all a definitive 
distance that we could enforce to prohibit a sprinkler system to 
be shut off and become a hazard to other buildings located in 
close proximity. The changes to the codes will be handled 
within standard rulemaking process, so that code matches 
Statute 
Thank you for your time today and I would be happy to 
answer any questions you may have at this time or during the 
work session.
