District 42: Rockland, Owls Head, North Haven and part of Matinicus Isle
Valli Geiger 
1 Green Way
Rockland, ME 04841
Phone: (207) 956-1565
Valli.Geiger@legislature.maine.gov HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002
(207) 287-1400
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711
March 27, 2023
Testimony of Rep. Valli Geiger presenting
LD 647, An Act to Amend the Maine Life Safety Code
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety
Good Morning Senator Beebe-Center and Representative Salisbury and esteemed members of 
the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee. My name is Valli Geiger and I represent 
District 42 which includes Rockland, most of Owls Head and the islands of North Haven, 
Matinicus and the Muscle Ridge. I am here today to present LD 647, An Act to Amend the 
Maine Life Safety Code, adopted NFPA 25, 2014 edition, section 4.1.1 Sprinkler Shutdown 
Practices.
This bill would make a small, but significant change to the Maine Life Safety Code. I sponsored 
this bill because last summer, I was contacted by a constituent in Rockland. She owned an Inn 
just off of Main Street, and about eight feet from a building bordering Main Street. The building 
was a very large, former church in poor condition. She had discovered that the new owner of the 
building had requested and received permission to shut off the sprinkler system because the 
building was empty. The Inn owner was rightly concerned that if a fire started in the empty 
building next door, it could quickly spread to her hotel and other adjoining buildings.
I was very surprised by her story. I know the Rockland Fire Chief, Chris Whytock, very well and 
could not imagine him ever giving such a permission. I called him and he confirmed that he did 
not give permission but that the ultimate decision maker was the State Fire Marshal’s office. I 
spent some time looking at the relevant statutes before calling the office liaison to discuss the 
matter. I spoke with the then Acting - now Active - State Fire Marshal and discovered a loop 
hole in the current law.
The Maine Life Safety Code requires a sprinkler system in all new commercial buildings over 
5,000 square feet and requires any remodels that add square footage to an existing commercial 
building, so that the total is 12,000 square feet or more, must also comply with installing a 
sprinkler system. It is illegal to shut off a fire sprinkler system in a required commercial building. 
The statute reads that “Temporary or seasonal shutdowns may be allowed by the State Fire 
Marshal’s Office.” But this is not quite accurate. The building owner does not require the 
permission of the State Fire Marshal to shut off a sprinkler system. The statute requires that the 
owner obtain written acknowledgment from the local fire department (again acknowledgment 
but not permission), obtain written acknowledgment from their building’s insurance carrier and 
submit these to the Fire Marshal’s office. 
If the two requirements are met, the building’s sprinkler system can be shutdown. It does not 
require permission from either the local fire department or the State Fire Marshal’s office. This 
loophole poses a threat to buildings in close proximity to their neighbors in urban, downtown or 
suburban settings. There have been several recent fires in large commercial buildings with 
disabled sprinkler systems. In February of 2022, the Bar Harbor Bluenose hotel, whose sprinkler 
system had been disabled, had a fire but was not in close proximity to adjoining buildings. 
Gardiner’s fire of July 2020 resulted in the loss of four adjacent downtown buildings. The 
buildings were old enough not to require sprinkler systems but when a fire started in one, it 
quickly spread to three other adjoining buildings. The Red Jacket Hotel in North Conway, New 
Hampshire, had a recent fire in a part of their building with a non-functioning sprinkler system. 
The fire spread quickly, the hotel was actively used at the time with guests needing to escape, 
some needing to jump from 3rd floor balconies, leaving the hotel badly damaged and several 
guests and fire fighters injured. Twenty Fire Departments were required to respond to that fire.
A building with a disabled fire sprinkler system in an urban, downtown or suburban setting with 
adjoining neighbors in close proximity poses a severe threat to those adjoining buildings, the 
people in them and the firefighters who must fight that fire. The Fire Marshal’s Office supports 
this change.
This bill would make a small change with life-saving impacts to the existing statute. The 
proposal would add a provision to the statute that would prohibit an automatic sprinkler system 
from being shutoff for any reason other than short-term maintenance if the building is within 25 
feet of another building. 
Thank you for your time and I am happy to answer any questions.
