295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1094 
"An Act Regarding the Allocation of Funds Awarded to Maine  
Due to the Opioid Settlement." 
Sponsored by Representative Brennan 
April 3, 2023 
 
Good morning Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the 
Health and Human Services Committees.  My name is Malory Shaughnessy and I 
am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health 
Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of 
Maine’s community based mental health and substance use treatment providers, 
providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance 
advocates for the implementation of sound policies and evidence-based practices 
that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care 
system. 
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in opposition to LD 1094, "An 
Act Regarding the Allocation of Funds Awarded to Maine Due to the Opioid 
Settlement." In 2022, as part of an amendment to the Maine State-Subdivision 
Memorandum of understanding and Agreement Regarding Use of Settlement 
Funds created the Maine Recovery Council “to direct the disbursement of 
recovery funds for recovery purposes on a statewide basis for the uses allowed” 
by the MOU. LD 1094 transfers funds from the Maine Recovery Fund to the 
Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of Corrections and 
the Department of Education for substance use and mental health intervention 
and treatment programs for specific individuals served by those departments.  
 
Last session, I stood before this committee in support of the Maine Recovery 
Council because “much like the Fund for a Healthy Maine was established to do 
good in Maine, and was built on the settlement funds for misdeeds and 
misleading advertisements and statements by some tobacco companies, we now 
have the opportunity to do good in Maine built on the settlement funds for 
misdeeds and misleading advertising and statements by some pharmaceutical 
companies. And I am sure that similarly to the Fund for a Healthy Maine, there 
will need to be advocates to protect the fund and make sure it remains true to 
the intent of its creation -- to assure that it is not siphoned off to a myriad of 
other purposes in the general fund.”  
 
And here we are. The decisions about the disbursement of the opioid settlement 
funds should be made by the Recovery Council – with an eye toward the entire 
state. Additionally, decisions about spending of the opioid settlement funds 
should be guided by principles expressed at the outset. 
 
 
 
 ~ Officers ~
Dave McCluskey, President
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1st Vice-President
Day One
Bob Descoteaux, 2nd Vice-
President
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health
Kara Hay, Secretary
Penquis CAP Inc.
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer
Aroostook Mental Health Center
Eric Meyer, Past President
Spurwink
 
~ Board Members ~
Adcare Educational Institute
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare
Assistance Plus
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center
Common Ties
Community Caring Collaborative
Community Health & Counseling
COR Health
Crisis & Counseling Centers
Crossroads Maine
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry
Kennebec Behavioral Health
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization
Maine Behavioral Healthcare
Milestone Recovery
NFI North, Inc.
Northern Light/Acadia
Portland Recovery Community 
Center
Pathways of Maine
Rumford Group Homes
Brighter Heights Maine
Sunrise Opportunities
Sweetser
TriCounty Mental Health Services
Wellspring, Inc.
Wings for Children & Families
Woodfords Family Services

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
 
To guide jurisdictions in the use of these funds, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health1 
encourages the adoption of five guiding principles: 
 
1. Spend money to save lives. 
2. Use evidence to guide spending. 
3. Invest in youth prevention. 
4. Focus on racial equity. 
5.  Develop a transparent, inclusive decision-making process. 
 
The proposal before you today contains a transfer of millions of dollars to the Department of 
Corrections. That transfer flies in the face of the guiding principles for Opioid Settlement Funds. For 
these reasons, and many more, the Alliance stands in strong opposition to this proposal. I thank you 
for your time today and am happy to answer any questions you have for me.  
 
 
 
 
1 , Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. Accessed 04.01.2023. https://opioidprinciples.jhsph.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2022/02/Opioid-Principles-Doc.pdf   
