 
University of Southern Maine | Muskie School of Public Service | Wishcamper Center | 34 Bedford St. | Portland, ME 04104-9300 
(207) 780-4820 | FAX: (207) 228-8460 | www.cascobayestuary.org 
  
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
c/o Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Testimony of the Casco Bay Estuary Partnership 
Commenting Neither For nor Against  
LD 1570, An Act to Create the Storm Water Infrastructure Repair and 
Replacement Fund 
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Committee on Environment 
and Natural Resources.  
Stormwater, management is important for water quality.  Stormwater, especially urban runoff, 
is a source of pollutants including excess nutrients, toxic contaminants, and bacteria to Maine’s 
streams, rivers, lakes and coastal waters. Stormwater also exacerbates flooding and stream 
bank erosion and degrades habitat quality. Effective stormwater management can lessen the 
impacts of runoff on water quality while also reducing risk of flooding in our communities.  
Funding stormwater management at the local level can be a challenge. Towns face many 
competing priorities.  All too often, stormwater programs end up underfunded. Largely invisible 
underground infrastructure may not compete well in budget discussions in comparison with 
schools, roads or police. Casco Bay Estuary Partnership encourages the Committee to evaluate 
the proposed legislation in the context of the work Maine towns are already doing to address 
stormwater, and especially the challenges they face funding important local efforts that protect 
Maine’s streams, rivers, lakes and bays. 
The Casco Bay Estuary Partnership is a National Estuary Program. The twenty-eight National 
Estuary Programs across the country each work to protect and restore the ecological integrity 
of an Estuary of National Significance, in our case, Casco Bay.  Like all National Estuary 
Programs, we are a collaboration. The Partnership includes municipalities, citizen organizations, 
federal and state agencies, academics, businesses and individuals. Because we are a 
Partnership, we do not (with rare exceptions) take positions either for or against legislation.  
We do, however, sometimes submit comments (as here) on proposed legislation when the 
legislation is closely related to our mission. Stormwater management has been part of our work 
for more than 25 years. 
Stormwater management is costly. It can be difficult to get a full picture of stormwater costs 
because towns sometimes divide stormwater-related costs among budget lines. Two special 

 
University of Southern Maine | Muskie School of Public Service | Wishcamper Center | 34 Bedford St. | Portland, ME 04104-9300 
(207) 780-4820 | FAX: (207) 228-8460 | www.cascobayestuary.org 
 cases offer perspective on local costs.  The Long Creek Watershed Management District 
(LCWMD) is a quasi-municipal corporation that manages stormwater on behalf of about 130 
public and private landowners near the Maine Mall.  The suburban Long Creek watershed is a 
bit under 3.5 square miles, yet the organization has an annual budget of about $1.5 million.  
The City of Portland’s Stormwater Service Charge was instituted in 2016 to more fairly allocate 
stormwater costs by scaling fees to the area of “impervious surfaces” like rooftops and parking 
areas that contribute to stormwater.  The fee (a portion of which supports remediating 
combined sewer overflows, a related problem) raises over $6.7 million annually. 
Stormwater programs involve more than infrastructure.  The Long Creek Watershed 
Management District engages in street sweeping, catch basin cleanouts, inspections, 
monitoring, mowing, vegetation control, and other ongoing maintenance.  The District also 
funds a program to reduce use of winter salt, which can be harmful to freshwater organisms.  
Municipalities face similar operational costs.  Many larger Maine towns also need to address 
education, policy, and reporting obligations under the Municipal Separated Storm Sewer 
System (or MS4) permit program.  All this requires staff, engineering support, specialized 
contractors and other expenses. 
While repair and replacement of aging or damaged infrastructure is important, other 
stormwater capital costs are also worthy of funding.  Many Maine towns were laid out before 
the advent of modern stormwater engineering, so some have an invisible backlog of 
stormwater infrastructure that should exist but does not.  It can be especially difficult to find 
local funds to construct what are known as “stormwater retrofits” to help improve water 
quality (which is especially important in the watersheds of “urban impaired streams,” a formal 
DEP designation). 
Stormwater infrastructure is a capital asset, and it fails to function as designed in just a few 
years if maintenance is deferred. Maintenance of stormwater structures should be a regular 
part of municipal budget planning, just like maintenance of schools or roads.  Grants offered for 
repair and replacement (but not maintenance) of stormwater structures may indirectly 
disincentivize maintenance that could reduce the need for repair and replacement in the first 
place. The committee should consider ways the proposed grant program could also provide 
incentives for good maintenance practices. 
More towns will face stormwater finance challenges in years to come due to increases in 
precipitation and growing populations. We encourage the Committee to consider how this 
legislation could be expanded to help address not only a backlog of repair and replacement of 
stormwater infrastructure, but also pressing systemic challenges funding stormwater at the 
local scale. 
