 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1570 - An Act to Create the Storm Water Infrastructure Repair and Replacement Fund 
May 2, 2023 
Sen. Brenner, Rep. Gramlich and distinguished members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham and I submitting testimony neither for nor against 
LD 1570, An Act to Create the Storm Water Infrastructure Repair and Replacement Fund, on behalf of 
the Maine Municipal Association, which represents the interests of municipal government before the 
Legislature. The positions of the Association are established by our 70-member Legislative Policy 
Committee (LPC), who are elected by the councils and selectboards of municipalities in each of Maine’s 
35 Senate districts. 
While municipal officials support increased investment in stormwater and infrastructure 
replacement that is state funded, to meet the growing challenges Municipal Separate Stormwater Sewer 
Systems (MS4) communities are challenged to address, they expressed concerns about the lack of clarity 
around the funding mechanism identified to support this effort and the inclusion of “public sources” in the 
bill.  
One MS4 community, Portland, has created essentially a stormwater utility which adds ongoing 
fees by calculating impervious surfaces created by development to offset the enormous costs the 
community must shoulder to mitigate the effects of runoff to urban impaired streams and bodies of water 
in the municipality. These are federal compliance requirements that force expensive obligations on 
identified communities that meet a census defined population density, particularly near impaired waters, 
that come with no outside funding from state or federal partners and become increasingly more onerous 
over time.  
There are more than 40 communities that have MS4 permits with a host of new communities 
swept into the mix following the last census. They pay significant permit fees to the state, provide all of 
the statewide public education on the topic to increase behavior change in residents and visitors that 
further impair these waters like picking up after your animal, and not dumping chemicals into storm 
drains or over fertilizing your lawn. These communities are also required to use stricter ordinances on 
development to limit growth in those impaired water shed areas with no state support. Additionally, the 
work of these municipal employees directly provides the impairment data that the department then uses to 
add additional requirements during the next permitting round.  
For these reasons, municipal officials support the concept of a stormwater infrastructure repair 
and replacement fund to address what one of our favorite stormwater professionals refers to as “an Andre 
The Giant” sized burden. Officials ask that you consider identifying a funding mechanism specifically, 
avoid using permitting fees for this purpose and design an infrastructure fund that provides sustainable, 
fair and equitable distribution of the funds on a statewide basis.  

