E. :7‘ , fl.' 
, .,
V 
‘' 
. scngoi 49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
ﬁglgiggls 
mlw Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
PUBUC EDUCAHON ADVOCATES Webslta 1v‘V‘V'mSma‘veb'c0m it 
Mﬂllll‘SCI}!-\ll|S\.I])Ct ’lItiCI\liEI1l51\(V)d ﬂti()It 
TESTIMONY REGARDING 
L.D. 335 
AN ACT TO IMPROVE EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION RESPONSE TIMES 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Eileen King, deputy executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of 
the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, regarding L.D. 335 — MSBA is neither for nor against and MSSA is opposed. 
Over recent years the wait time for educator certiﬁcation has been up to and sometimes longer than 12 weeks. 
While we appreciate the intent of the bill, there has been a marked improvement in recent wait times for 
educator certiﬁcation and the Maine Department of Education website now shows that they are currently 
processing applications received within the last 3-4 weeks. We understand that there is a “bottle neck” 
towards the end of the year to gain re-certi ﬁcation status, but due to some recent changes, educators can 
submit for re-certi ﬁcation anytime during the year their certiﬁcate expires which should improve that end of 
year rush. District re-certi ﬁcation steering committees can help with this by encouraging educators needing to 
recertify to not wait until the end of the year. 
Our organizations feel that due to the improvement of the wait times and the number of staff and the costs 
associated with this bill, this level of need is no longer justified. Under the new leadership of the Director of 
Higher Education and Support Services we hope that the response times continue to remain at or better than 
current levels and that gaining certiﬁcation status in Maine is easily obtainable. 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Executive Director
