., 
kwk 
Maine Education Association 
EM Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove \/ice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Racheiie Bristol Executive Director 
Testimony 
In Support of 
LD 335 An Act to Improve Educator Certification Response Times 
Grace Leavitt, President, Maine Education Association 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs 
March 14, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, 
My name is Grace Leavitt. My pronouns are she, her, hers. I am serving as President of the Maine 
Education Association while on leave from teaching Spanish in MSAD 51. I have over 43 years of 
classroom teaching experience with 20 years as a National Board Certiﬁed teacher. The MEA 
represents nearly 24,000 educators in our Maine system of public education in pre-K-12 schools as well 
as in our institutions of higher education, both the University of Maine System and the Maine 
Community College System, along with students in teacher prep programs as well as many retired 
educators. 
I am here to testify on behalf of MEA in support of LD 335, An Act to Improve Educator Certiﬁcation 
Response Times. 
MEA has heard from some educators that they have waited for several weeks, or longer, to hear that 
their application for certiﬁcation has been processed and that they are deemed ofﬁcially certiﬁed. Some 
examples: an ed tech hired for a teaching position for which they were qualiﬁed, doing the work ofa 
teacher, but who was classiﬁed as a long-term sub while waiting to receive their teaching certiﬁcate. 
Another ed tech with a similar situation —there was such a lag time in receiving their teaching certiﬁcate 
that it has ended up that they have been going without the beneﬁts they should have been receiving for 
several months now. This is not just about certiﬁcation for teachers. For someone waiting to receive the 
approval from the DOE for certiﬁcation as an ed tech, being classiﬁed as a substitute means not having 
the same pay and beneﬁts as others doing the same work. 
These are just a few of the instances we’ve been hearing about. 
To be fair, the Maine Department of Education did work hard to address what was a huge backlog 
previously, and the timeframe is reported now to be three to four weeks for most applications. Yet even 
three to four weeks can mean that a district has someone hired, and paid, as a substitute teacher or ed 
tech while awaiting notiﬁcation of being certiﬁed. That is not only a ﬁnancial hardship for some, but 
also an unsettling situation to ﬁnd oneself in. 
We recognize that the DOE has worked to reduce the timeframe and also that there has been a change 
made to the process that allows an educator to submit their renewal materials before they are due yet 
maintain the same renewal date, thus attempting to reduce the inevitable ‘logjam’ of submissions at the 
end of the academic year. This is potentially a help, and MEA has helped to alert our members to this 
change, yet knowing what the demands on our educators are during the school year, we can only hope 
that some will take advantage of this change and submit their materials early on to reduce the inﬂux in 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I134‘? Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Box 310, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207~622-5866 I 207-888~2070 tax I Wv~/w.rnaineea.org
June and make things more manageable for the certiﬁcation department. (In full confession, I have my 
documentation ready to go and have had it since September of this year, but still have not found the time 
to submit it—~though I promise I will do so very soon!) 
Of even more concern is the number of conditional and emergency certiﬁcations that we are now seeing. 
These are needed, of course, for districts to do what they can to ﬁll the many vacancies our schools are 
experiencing due to the ongoing educator shortage. With the increased number of conditional and 
emergency certiﬁcations, we need to ensure that educators holding these certiﬁcates are being monitored 
appropriately and reminded, if needed, to be sure that they are making the necessary progress toward 
becoming fully certiﬁed so that no one falls through the cracks and runs up against the time constraints 
that are necessarily in place for these certiﬁcations. 
Additionally, We have heard of instances where reciprocity was denied to educators coming from other 
states and have to wonder if this happened, at least some times, due to the need for additional employees 
in the certiﬁcation department to review transcripts in more depth. 
Lastly, but not at all least, there have been a number of changes to certiﬁcation rules just this past year. 
Many people have questions about if and how these changes affect their initial certiﬁcation and there 
will be many questions that educators who are seeking to renew their certiﬁcates will have as they tend 
to this. There needs to be sufﬁcient staff in the certiﬁcation department to handle this so that educators 
are getting the information they need in a timely fashion and are not experiencing delays that will likely 
be frustrating at best, or a deterrent at worst. 
MEA believes that passage of LD 335 is yet another way to help address the educator shortage we are 
seeing and urges your support. 
Thank you. 
Respectfully, 
I/Qgvwz Q.Z;c?/»77?4
