Dv. 101 Western Ave. 
~ P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coalition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
T10 Eﬁd Domestic vlOl6F“iC8 2O7_43O.8334 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso, on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
Neither For Nor Against LD 506: “An Act to Improve the Child and Family Court Process by 
Increasing the Number and Duties of Family Law Magistrates ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Thursday, March 2, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, l am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV)‘ neither for nor against LD 506, “An Act to Improve the Child and Family 
Court Process by Increasing the Number and Duties of Family Law Magistrates ” to provide 
you with perspective on how our under-resourced family courts are impacting safety and 
security for survivors and their children. 
In Maine, eight magistrates are responsible each year for handling the pre-trial needs 
of more than 8,000 families navigating our family courts. This extraordinarily high case-load 
results in long wait times between court dates. From the filing of the proof of service ina 
parental rights and responsibilities case, the parties are not likely to meet with a magistrate 
for a full month or more. This will be the first opportunity to raise a need for a child support 
order; the need for a court ordered parent-child contact schedule; or any safety needs or 
concerns. However, even when the parties ultimately get before a judge or magistrate, 
there are then time constraints that limit the number of issues that can be thoughtfully 
addressed - or even whether any contested issues can be addressed without a further delay. 
Litigants at a case management conference typically see the magistrate for about fifteen 
minutes before the next case is expected. Only a fraction of litigants who file written 
motions for an expedited interim hearing are able to have their requests for a hearing 
granted. 
For survivors of domestic abuse and violence, the courts’ inability to provide timely 
and effective resolution to urgent financial and parental rights concerns significantly 
hampers their ability to achieve timely and sustained safety and stability. Current litigation 
timeframes are exhausting to those who are concurrently attempting to recover (and often 
1 
MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than 12,000 victims of domestic 
violence and their children in Maine last year, including court advocacy services in the civil and criminal courts 
to more than 5,000. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change.
‘ 
mcedv.org
l\/ICEDV Page 2 of2 
helping their children recover) from trauma. Too often, the desire to just get the process 
finally over with drives case resolution agreements that do not fully address existing or 
easily foreseeable conflicts and risks. 
Whether or not this particular proposal is the right mechanism for addressing these 
issues, we hope that something will be done to address the fact that the family courts, and 
Maine's civil justice system in general, are not sufficiently resourced to provide timely and 
effective responses to families in crisis. For survivors contemplating separation from the 
person who has been abusing them, a paramount concern is always what will ultimately 
happen with the children. When one parent uses abuse and violence against the other, 
“leaving” is often little more than a change in residence, as the children will remain a life- 
long tie. Survivors should be able to see our family courts as a resource to help them achieve 
safety and stability. For too many survivors in Maine, that is not the reality of their 
experience. 
As always, thank you for the opportunity to share our perspective. MCEDV and our 
member programs look forward to continuing to engage with legislators and other 
interested parties on these important issues. 
Contact Information: 
Andrea Mancuso, Esq. 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph: (207) 650-4356, Email: and,rea@__i;nge_d._v,org
