" 
Administrative Office of the Courts 
P.O. Box 4820, Portland, Maine 04112-4820 
Tel: (207) 822-0792 FAX: (207) 822-0781 TTY: (207) 822-0701 
Julia Finn, Esq. Tel! (207) 822-0767 
Legislative Analyst iulia.ﬁnn@courts.maine.gov 
Judicial Branch testimony neither for nor against LD 506, An Act to Improve 
the Child and Family Court Process by Increasing the Number and Duties of 
Family Law Magistrates: 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Julie Finn and I represent the Judicial Branch. I would like to provide 
testimony neither for nor against this bill. 
I want to provide some background and context for the work of magistrates. The 
Legislature authorized the use of family law magistrates (magistrates) to process family matters 
in 1997. Section 1830 of Title 4 authorizes the Chief Judge of the District Court, with the 
approval of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, to employ magistrates. Magistrates 
are required to be “members of the Bar of this State and must have experience in the area of 
family law.” 4 M.R.S. § l83(l)(A). Furthermore, magistrates must have “training or experience 
in mediation and other alternate dispute resolution techniques, domestic violence, child 
development, family dynamics and case management. ” Id. Under current law, magistrates handle 
a variety of proceedings in family matters with children, including interim orders regarding child 
support; interim orders in divorce, separation, and parental rights matters; final orders when the 
proceeding is uncontested; final orders in a contested proceeding when child support is the only 
contested issue; and other related matters. Id. Accordingly, except for post-judgment motions for 
contempt, which are referred directly to a judge as required under M.R. Civ. P. 11OA(b)(6)(C), 
all family matters involving children are first assigned to a magistrate for case management. The 
addition of these positions was a recognition that timely resolution of family law cases is 
essential to minimize the particularly heightened negative effects of such disputes on children. 
The efﬁcacy of the addition of these positions is now widely accepted. 
This bill calls for the addition of 24 magistrates and associated staff to continue this 
important work for families in Maine. Currently, there are eight full-time magistrates to serve the 
entire state of Maine——a number that has not increased since 1997. The magistrates carry a heavy 
caseload and work tirelessly to bring enormous benefit to the children and families in Maine. 
3/2/23
Given the limited jurisdiction of magistrates in family matters with children, we think 
there is only a need for two more magistrates to cover these case types effectively. 
In addition to expanding the number of magistrates, this bill would also signiﬁcantly 
expand the authority of magistrates to hear, except for ﬁnal prehearing conferences, all pretrial 
and interim elements of a child protection proceeding, including child protection proceedings 
consolidated in an action under Title 19-A. The Judicial Branch is concerned about expanding 
the jurisdiction of magistrates to include child protection cases for several reasons. 
First, the Judicial Branch strives to assign a single judge to each child protection case to 
allow one judicial ofﬁcer to become familiar with the complexities and evolving facts of each 
child protection case. This improves the experience of families navigating an unpredictable and 
overwhelming process because it introduces an element of stability. If a magistrate were to 
handle the pretrial elements of a child protection matter, but a judge was to handle the jeopardy 
hearings and termination of parental rights hearings, the back and forth could be disruptive for 
families and undercut the beneﬁts of the “one family/ one judge” model. 
Second, many events in child protective cases are not clearly “pretrial ” or “interim, ” and 
the docket on any given day usually contains a mix of proceedings. Thus, it is unclear the extent 
to which this expansion of jurisdiction would actually assist in the resolution of cases. 
Finally, we are concerned about the use of federal funds. Federal funds under Title IV-D 
of the Social Security Act cover approximately 66% of the costs of our current roster of 
magistrates. Expansion of magistrate jurisdiction to include child protective matters may 
jeopardize the availability of these federal funds. Although these federal funds can now be used 
to cover part of the costs of magistrates, the applicable federal regulations prohibit their use to 
cover the costs of compensation of judges. 45 CFR 304.2l(b)(3). The expansion of magistrate 
jurisdiction to align more with that of judges runs the risk of blurring the important distinction 
between magistrates and judges for federal funding purposes. 
We do not expect to receive additional federal funds if additional positions were created. 
The federal funds are provided for certain case types, the number of which would not increase 
even if the number of magistrates were to increase. Thus, the ftmding for the new positions 
would have to come from the General Fund. 
The Judicial Branch will provide more information as to the cost for additional 
magistrates, considering capacity of current court facilities to accommodate these positions and 
support staff, as part of its ﬁscal note on the bill. 
Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions. 
3/2/23
