LD 1098, An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical
Exemptions Regarding Immunization Requirements   
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs,
My name is Abigail Beal of Cherryfield.  In regard to LD 1098, I urge you to support the restoring of 
religious and philosophical exemptions regarding immunization requirements.
When do we see in our founding documents the governmental authority to dictate what citizens will or 
will not inject into our bodies?
We don't.  In fact, the Fourteenth Amendment, Section 1 of the U.S. Constitution says, “No State shall 
make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United 
States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; 
nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.”
And from the Declaration of Independence: "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are 
created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among 
these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness. --That to secure these rights, Governments are 
instituted among Men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed. " 
The government has no authority to violate our God-given rights. We live in a Constitutional Republic. 
Therefore, the government does not grant us our rights. Rather, we grant government certain, specific 
powers.
In closing, I would quote the words of Jesus, Who said, “Render to Caesar the things that are 
Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's."  Mark 12:17  
My body is not "Caesar's".  My body is not the government's.  My body is God's, and so it is to Him 
that I submit myself, my blood, and my immunization decisions.
It is for that reason that I urge you to support vaccine exemptions, as well as the freedom we ought to 
have to make our own immunization decisions without even having ask for it.
Thank you for your time.
