DIANNA LEIGHTON
FORT FAIRFIELD
LD 1098
Dianna Leighton
Regarding LD 51 - An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to 
Immunization Requirements and LD 1098 - An Act to Restore Religious and 
Philosophical Exemptions Regarding Immunization Requirements
3/31/2023
To Senator Rafferty and esteemed members of the Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs:
My name is Dianna Leighton, a concerned citizen and parent from Fort Fairfield. I am
writing against LD 51 and LD 1098 being discussed today. 
In 2019 and into 2020, I worked as a volunteer advocate for the No on 1 campaign to 
uphold LD 798 and remove religious and philosophical exemptions from public 
school attendance requirements. 
At that time, the statewide average coverage immunization rate for Kindergarten 
students for the school year 2019-20 was below the standard herd immunity target of 
95% for polio, measles, mumps, rubella, diphtheria, and pertussis. A statewide 
average across a state as large as ours is only one piece of the puzzle though. When 
zooming in to individual counties or even individual schools, the state of things 
became more dire: 
Franklin County had a coverage immunization rate for Kindergarten students in 
2019-20 as low as 89% for measles, mumps, rubella. Maine Coast Waldorf School in 
Freeport had an exemption rate of 46.2% of students, meaning that coverage 
immunization would be well below the 95% standard at a staggeringly low 53.8% 
Even in my home of Aroostook County, which historically boasts robust vaccination 
rates, there have been pockets of concern, such as Woodland School at 83% coverage 
and Greater Houlton Christian Academy at 87.5% coverage across all required school 
immunizations. 
These numbers had been slowly dropping in the years prior, driven by the ease of 
access to religious and philosophical exemptions. Most religions do not prohibit 
vaccinations. One’s philosophical beliefs regarding vaccinations were not questioned. 
Rather, a parental statement was all that was required to allow a student to attend 
school without the required vaccines. 
If it was only a matter of personal risk, I probably wouldn’t be writing to you today. 
But I do ask you to imagine a scenario where I am stopped by a Maine State Police 
officer for driving 30 mph over the posted speed limit on I-95. In response, I provide 
a statement that I have written that explains my philosophical belief that speeding 
does not increase the risk of traffic fatalities to myself and others. That’s it. I’m 
exempt. The officer tips their hat and I continue to drive 105 mph. Maybe I even 
remove my seatbelt and my child’s booster seat as well since I don’t philosophically 
believe in those either. 
Suddenly, the range of risk moves beyond me and to others. In the case of schools, 
these are often the hub of our greater communities, serving as large employers and 
providing education to several family members at one time. If an outbreak occurs in a 
school, it can easily spread beyond a school to vulnerable members of our 
communities, including infants, the elderly, and the immunocompromised. The choice
not to immunize [outside of medical reasons] is never solely personal. 
In Fort Fairfield, it doesn’t take long to meet someone who grew up with polio. Many 
can share tragic stories of the loss of friends, neighbors, and even siblings. Like many 
of his generation, my father recalled a painful childhood case of mumps, a disease 
that can lead to inflammation of the brain and ovaries/testicles in some cases. I still 
bear the scars of chicken pox that took me out of school for weeks, a disease I would 
never wish upon my son today.
Each of these diseases is now preventable through vaccination, but especially in 
maintaining a coverage vaccination rate of 95% or higher. Since LD798  was upheld 
in 2020, Maine has seen a rise…from 94% to 96.3%...in the statewide average 
coverage immunization rate. By placing the religious and philosophical exemptions 
back in place, we place the future of public health for all Mainers at a severe 
disadvantage and remove a necessary layer of safety for Maine students. 
Respectfully submitted,
Dianna Leighton 
Fort Fairfield, ME 

