My name is Francine Michaels and I am a registered voter in Kennebunk Maine.  
It has been said that the covid 19 MRNA vaccine is not like other vaccine, because it works differently 
than other vaccines. It therefore cannot be compared to others that saved thousands from polio and 
such.  The comparison is therefore completely inappropriate. 
Using guilt mongering and worse,  to induce individuals to take a shot that has been proven to have 
more negative side effects than the disease itself wrong!  This is particularly true when treatments 
proven effective to treat which would not profit the vaccine manufacturing companies-were not allowed 
to treat the disease. In fact doctors that had the threat of the removal of their medical licenses even in 
this state of Maine.  They were in fact put in a position to violate conscience to give treatments that 
resulted in death rather than issuing treatments that could cure the illness. 
No one needs a vaccine against an easily treatable disease. Doctors were by in large unable to prove 
that treatments other than those that would make considerable profit from the administration of their 
drugs (regardless of whether people that got them got better or died), because they were forbidden 
from using them. There is therefore in fact no proof that people would be better off by receiving the 
vaccine or receiving non-big pharma treatments. 
The alternative to promoting big pharma in all these matters has been ostensibly forbidden. 
Even if I had not read the testimonies of countless individuals that had side effects from these Covid 19 
shots, and I say that not believing that they are truly vaccines because I know only a few people that 
have received the vaccine that did not afterwards get covid 19. Instead, I observed with great sadness a 
number of people that were around others that were around people that got these injections get sick 
and in one case died.  Again, I must specify these individuals were not around people that had covid, but 
rather around people that had these injections, specifically. 
Those that I know, including myself who caught covid-19 “naturally” (pre-vaccine if that matters) did not 
have any serious effects and from the reports. I have several of these alleged co-morbidities, including 
obesity, pre-diabetes and I was older, 58 years at the time I got sick. 
When I allegedly caught covid again and had almost no symptoms, my physician could not provide any 
reason for the lack of serious symptoms accept to say, “somewhat other his breath” perhaps it was 
because I already had it.  
Even if I did not recognize these truths from my own personal “witness study”, there is yet another point 
on the line here which is even more important than whether or not these injections or safe and if they 
have contributed to the deaths around those that have taken these shots. 
That is our constitutional right to determine what form of medical treatment we should receive by 
conscience.  It is one thing to say women have the right to choose whether or not they should be able to 
receive an abortion.  It is another entirely to say that a person should have a medical procedure 
(injection of a substance) mandated upon them in a violation of their personal conscience. 
This is essentially mandating a state of enforced atheism-and worse a denial of the right even for those 
that consider themselves to be atheist to have a conscience. 
A state that determines that the state has the right to override a person’s conscience is clearly a 
dictatorship in which the state decides it has become the conscience of the individuals over whom it 
rules.  That state has ostensibly determined that it has become God to the people overriding all the 
spiritual beliefs of those in that state.   
This is clearly unconstitutional and against the foundational principles of those that penned the 
constitution to preserve for perpetuity personal freedoms and rights for those in this United States and 
in Maine. 
I am therefore in favor of 
 LD 1098 - An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions Regarding Immunization 
Requirements 
And in favor of 
LD 51 - An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements 
And in favor of 
LD 1209 - An Act to Reinstate the Religious and Philosophical Vaccine Exemptions for Private Schools 
and Virtual Public Charter Schools 
Also, since “mandate” by definition implies the inability to make a choice that removal of choice of 
students and/or parents is taking away the right of an individual to make personal health care choices, 
particularly given the preponderance of evidence that their decision to take these alleged vaccines in 
certain age ranges where these are mandated could result in permanent injury and or death as opposed 
to the lack of evidence for anything happening should they not take it.  I am therefore in favor of the 
following: 
LD 869 - An Act to Protect Education Access by Prohibiting a Mandate for Schoolchildren for a COVID-19 
Vaccine or a Vaccine Under an Emergency Use Authorization 
LD 1148 - An Act to Prohibit COVID-19 Vaccine Mandates for Students Enrolled in Public Institutions of 
Learning 
An Act to Prohibit Certain Higher Education Institutions from Requiring Vaccines Approved Under 
Emergency Use Authorization for Admission or Attendance. 
I pray a conscience guided by truth and goodness will compel you to agree with the aforementioned. 
