Gayle Travers
Arundel
LD 1098
Thank you Respected Committee Chairs and Members ,
I am asking that you vote Ought To Pass LD 51, 1098, 1209 to remove exemptions 
from vaccination in the state of Maine.  
I have workedin the medical field since I was a Nurses Aide in High School, an RN 
with a Bachelors Degree who worked in the hospital and the community during my 
20's, I have a Masters Degree in Family and Community Health and am a  Board 
Certified Family Practice Nurse Practitioner who has worked full time in Primary 
Care for over 30 years, and I have a Doctoral Degree in Healthcare Leadership.
I have worked in Family Medicine, Pediatrics, and I Have devoted the past 20 years to
the Care of Our Veterans.  As a single woman I could not afford to lose my job over 
these mandates and lack of exemptions the way so. many in healthcare have, so 
although I live here, I work in the state of New Hampshire. 
I could tell you about all of the negative impacts of the vaccine that I have seen in my 
family and my practice but you have heard enough of that from licensed and 
Practicing medical providers, physicians who are actually working on the front lines, 
not simply using the title 'doctor' while sitting at a desk and simply making policy.
Instead, I would like to impress upon you the Discrimination I have seen and been a 
victim of related to vaccination status.  I have been on the floor in a Maine ICU where
some staff were proudly wearing stickers (made by one of the Anesthesiologists 
there) saying "No Vaccine No Ventilator".  This is the doctor who's license should be 
revoked, not the doctor who dares to write a medical exemption only to lose their 
right to practice, and you have heard repeatedly that is happening.  
Although I did have Covid and I recovered as most do without drug treatment, my 
primary care provider here in Maine refused to check my antibody levels post 
infection. I went to NH to have serial labs done monthly and sent the results to my 
PCP to show that my Natural Immunity was Increasing steadily for over a year, 
something that the vaccines were failing to do, but my PCP refused to include the 
results in my chart. 
At work every employee was held to a weekly Covid test.  Home tests were provided 
free of charge. Vaccinated employees were allowed to test at home and simply share 
their result, but as someone who did not take the vaccine I was required to drive to the
lab  call Occupational Health on a video conference call, and be 'watched' while I 
stuck a PCR swab up both sides of my nose weekly for 2 years.  
When I witnessed, as a PCP, what I felt was a 'blip' or a sudden increase in 
unwitnessed, unexpected deaths of my patients at home I tried to talk to the Pharmacy
and the Director about whether we should investigate similarities such as the fact that 
they all seemed to have taken the bivalent vaccine a short while prior, I was reported 
by someone at my agency as posing a 'threat to safety' for suggesting the vaccine 
could be related (something that as a medical prescriber would be expected of me for 
any other treatment or medication). 
I and my family members tried to get medical exemptions for any reason, including 
medical at various times and I will tell you that it is like a treasure hunt to find any 
provider who will provider a physician since the language of LD 798 made it virtually
impossible to write one safely.  
Allowing Personal Choice, Exemptions for Medical, Religious, or Philosophical 
reasons does Not make the vaccine unavailable to those who chose to take it, it simply
allows Choice and where there is Risk, there must be Informed Consent and Choice.   
For these reasons LD 1098 and 51 Ought To Pass.
