Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President | Jesse Hargrove Vice President | Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director | Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Box 310, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106
207-622-5866 | 207-888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org
Testimony 
        In Opposition to  
LD 51 An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to 
Immunization Requirements, and 
LD 1098 An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions Regarding Immunization 
Requirements, and 
LD 1209 An Act to Reinstate the Religious and Philosophical Vaccine Exemptions for Private 
Schools and Virtual Public Schools 
 
Grace Leavitt, President, Maine Education Association 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs 
April 3, 2023 
  
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee,  
 
My name is Grace Leavitt. My pronouns are she, her, hers. I am serving as President of the Maine 
Education Association while on leave from teaching Spanish in MSAD 51. I have over 43 years of 
classroom teaching experience with 20 years as a National Board Certified teacher.  The MEA 
represents nearly 24,000 educators in our Maine system of public education in pre-K-12 schools as well 
as in our institutions of higher education, both the University of Maine System and the Maine 
Community College System, along with students in teacher prep programs as well as many retired 
educators. 
 
I am here to testify on behalf of MEA in opposition to LD 51 An Act to Restore Religious and 
Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements, and LD 1098 An Act to Restore Religious 
and Philosophical Exemptions Regarding Immunization Requirements, and LD 1209 An Act to 
Reinstate the Religious and Philosophical Vaccine Exemptions for Private Schools and Virtual Public 
Schools. 
 
In the spring of 2019 during my first year serving as President of the MEA, I gave testimony in support 
of LD 798, An Act to Protect Maine Children and Students from Preventable Diseases by Repealing 
Certain Exemptions from the Laws Governing Immunization Requirements. At that time we were facing 
many instances of outbreaks of measles in our schools across the country as well as some here in Maine.  
My testimony included the following headlines:  
“Kids Pay the Highest Price in Measles Outbreak; The youngest children are at the greatest risk of 
getting—and dying from—measles.”  (U.S. News & World Report, March 11, 2019) 
“At least 107 measles cases confirmed across 21 states” (CNN, January 29, 2019) 
“One New York City student with measles sickened 21 people amid outbreak” (NBC News, March 8, 
2019) 
“Cost of measles outbreak:  800 students kept out of school” (NBC News, March 7, 2019). 
 “Measles Is Making a Comeback” (The New York Times, March 11, 2019) 
LD 798 passed and the law went into effect in September of 2021. Perhaps the global COVID-19 
pandemic has caused people to forget that measles and the other preventable childhood diseases for 
which there are safe, effective vaccines pose a serious threat. But the fact is that they still do. And it is 
also fact that there are some who, for valid medical reasons, may not be able to be vaccinated, but the 
rest of us who have no need of a medical exemption can keep them safe by being vaccinated. It is a 
matter of all of us acting on behalf of the common good, for the benefit of the greater society. The 
Centers for Disease Control1 has extensive information on how important, safe, and effective 
vaccinations are. 
The majority of voters in Maine showed clearly that they support what is now the current law by voting 
against the referendum question that tried to undo it. The result of that vote on that question in March 
2020 was 73% to 27% in favor of upholding the current law. The voters had the opportunity to 
overturn the new law but the vote was not even close. We should respect the voices of the voters who 
have weighed in on this issue and very clearly support allowing only medical exemptions. 
Our schools do all they can to provide a safe learning environment for all students. It is a top priority and 
a responsibility that must continue to be taken seriously. Maintaining the current law is an extremely 
important part of that. In addition, given the mobility of some of our students, the current law needs to 
continue to apply not only to the students in our public schools, which includes charter schools, but also 
to students in any of the virtual charter schools as well as in private schools, as we have seen students 
who find their decision to attend a virtual or private school turned out not to be what they expected and 
they are then students in their public school. 
We urge you to oppose these proposals. We should not go backwards, especially when it comes to 
keeping our children safe. 
 
 
 
1https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/parents/why-vaccinate/vaccine-
decision.html#:~:text=Vaccines%20can%20prevent%20common%20diseases,as%20measles%20and%2
0whooping%20cough .  
 
2https://wgme.com/news/local/maine-election-officials-surprised-by-high-turnout-after-polling-places-
run-out-of-ballots  
 
 
 
 
 
