 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
Testimony of the  Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
 
In Opposition to LD 1098  An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions Regarding 
Immunization Requirements  
 
Sponsored by: Representative Bagshaw  
Hearing Date: April 3, 2023  
 
Senator  Rafferty , Representative  Brennan , and Members  of Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs , my name is Jessica Shiminski  and I am the senior  health  
program  manager  of the Maine  Immunization  Program . I am here today to provide testimony on 
behalf of the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  and will be speaking  against LD 
1098, An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions Regarding Immunization 
Requirements . 
 
Public Law 2019, chapter 154 removed the non-medical exemption from immunization 
requirements that are based on religious or philosophical beliefs for students in elementary, 
secondary and postsecondary schools and for employees of nursery schools and certain health 
care facilitie s. This bill reinstates the se religious and philosophical exemptions  for immunization 
requirements . Additionally, c urrent law provides that a student enrolled in a distance education 
program is exempt from the school immunization requirements , and t his bil l expands that 
exemption to private schools and virtual public charter schools.  The following comments are 
offered for your consideration.  
 
Public Law  2019 , chapter  154 was enacted for three reasons: keeping our children safe and 
healthy from unnecessary disease, ensuring safe schools and childcare centers, and protecting 
vulnerable people against serious disease. The removal of religious and philosophical 
exemptions  was decided through legislative process and upheld by a referendum vote in 2020 
with 72% of Mainers in favor of this decision. The Maine State Legislature has designated rule  
change s to specif ic diseases for which immunization is required as major substan tive, requiring 
public comment and legislative approval . (20-A MRS §6358(1) .) 
 
Pursuant to statu te, non-medical exemptions were removed effective September 1, 2021. Data 
obtained through the Maine Immunization Program’s annual School Immunization Assessmen t 
Survey shows a significant increase of immunization rates from the 2020 -21 school year to the 
2021 -22 school year. MMR rates increase from 94.3% to 96.7%. DTaP increased from 94% to 
96.3%. Polio increased from 94.2% to 96.5%. Additionally, non -medical ex emptions decreased 
from 4.1% to 0.3% and medical exemptions increased from 0.5% to 1.5%, disproving the 
argument that medical exemptions are difficult to obtain in the State of Maine.   
 
  
Prior to September 1, 2021, most of Maine’s school age exemptions wer e non -medical, with the 
highest rates of non -medical exemptions being reported in Hancock and Waldo counties. These 
two counties also represented two of the four counties with the highest reported rates of pertussis 
cases in 2018. Not only did high exempti on rates likely contribute to higher rates of pertussis 
disease in these two counties, but also in the entire State, as Maine reported the highest rate of 
pertussis disease in the country for 2018. More recently states across the country are facing 
outbrea ks of both polio and measles. These vaccines are all required for kindergarten entry in 
Maine’s public and private schools. Reinstating these exemptions would threaten the public 
health of Mainers.  
 
20-A MRS §6359 is specific to post -secondary institutions  in Maine. Students attending private 
colleges and universities should not be exempt from this requirement. Diseases do not  
differentiate from private and public institutions and there is no less risk for individuals on a 
private campus.  
 
When someone cho oses not to vaccinate, that decision can jeopardize the health and safety of 
entire communities, especially the weakest and most vulnerable among us. Evidence shows that 
states that have more stringent  exemption laws have higher immunization rate, and less  disease.  
 
In summary, the Maine CDC opposes the proposed legislation. Good public health policy is data -
driven and evidence -based. Maine’s immunization requirements are established to  ensure full 
protection of all Maine children and adults from vaccine -preventable d isease. Reinstating 
exemptions will increase rates of cases of vaccine -preventable diseases, statewide. The evidence 
is overwhelming, sound, and supported by the professional medical community and majority of 
Maine voters; vaccinations are proven to be saf e and effective for preventing the spread of 
disease.   
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter  and for the opportunity to provide testimony 
today. I can address questions from Committee  and I will be available to participate in the work 
session.  
 
 
