Kaylee Knudsen
Topsham
LD 1098
I wanted to write on behalf of myself, as well as other nurses in our state, and 
community members in regards to the recently presented vaccine-related bills.
I want to first and foremost say that I am not for, nor against, vaccination. However, I 
recognize the sensitivity of the subject and know a number of people who are 
personally affected by vaccine injury. Where risk is associated, there must be choice. 
The "choice" to not have access to education due to whatever reason a person 
personally chooses not to vaccinate is not a choice, it is coercion. Maine has one of 
the highest vaccination rates in the country for COVID-19, yet, we also have one of 
the highest infection rates. I bring up the COVID vaccine because, as mentioned in 
Dr. Northrup’s and Dr. Hamilton’s live testimony, I have major concerns surrounding 
the fact that childhood vaccines are to be manufactured with MRNA gene technology 
in the future. Many countries have halted recommending the vaccine made with this 
type of technology due to the increase in cardiac events amongst many other adverse 
reactions. The argument many people make about MRNA vaccines is that they have 
been studied and developed for some time now. While this may be true, they have not
been utilized in this nature and have failed each animal study. It takes nearly two 
decades for a new product to go through proper approval channels, therefore, we are 
still being used within a clinical trial framework. Whether or not vaccination works is 
not the point, the point is that there are a number of risks associated with vaccination, 
and not vaccinating, which means we must allow for choice. Our job as nurses is to 
enforce informed consent. This means that we educate our patients to the best of our 
ability, and then allow them to make a choice based on what they feel is right for 
themselves. We educate our patients about the risks associated with smoking, poor 
food choices, etc. yet, I would never discriminate against caring for a patient who got 
emphysema or diabetes from their lifestyle choices. We must also place a focus on the
several other ways community members can stay healthy outside of vaccination; 
handwashing, exercise, proper diet, sleep hygiene, etc. as there is just as much science
available suggesting that vaccination can be just as harmful as it is helpful. 
Information is constantly evolving surrounding the efficacy of certain evidence-based 
practices, and then practice changes based on this evolving information. Florence 
Nightingale claimed nursing was "both a science and an art." What she meant is that, 
yes, we practice utilizing evidence-based practice but it is also an art in that nurses 
heavily rely on their intuition and "sense of knowing" to help guide their practice. Our
sense of knowing is based on the close relationships we form with our patients and the
rapport we build based on what is best for that individual. What is best for one 
individual isn't what is always best for the other individual. We treat the individual 
holistically and respect their experiences that help us formulate this kind of judgement
together with the patient. 
Since LD 798 has been put into practice, I have felt that this trusting relationship is 
lacking. Parents feel scared to disclose their reasonings, feelings, and true concerns 
surrounding vaccination. Maine has lost a number of students enrolling in schools, 
with many parents having to reconfigure their lifestyles in order to accommodate their
child's schooling needs; something we should be helping families with in our 
communities. It is an undue hardship that has been placed on numerous Maine 
families who were already struggling to begin with. Prior to LD 798, Maine had 
nearly 95% of students entering school already vaccinated. We broke relationships 
with families, made them feel more hesitant and guarded, and put up more of a wall to
even welcome a discussion about being able to provide education surrounding 
vaccination. Families that have chosen not to vaccinate their child, for whatever 
reason, feel that they cannot even seek regular healthcare for their children in fear of 
being pressured into a conversation about vaccines. As a master of science in nursing 
specializing in nursing education, one of the biggest lessons we learned was in 
educating others and how to recognize whether someone is "ready" or not to learn. If 
a patient or family member is not "ready" or open to learning, a different approach 
must be used or attempted at a different time. We must also assess what the learner 
already knows in order to determine what is actually teachable to the learner. And, 
sometimes, the learner teaches us. I do not claim to know everything there is about 
vaccines, but I have heard my patients and their experiences, which has ultimately 
allowed me to understand more of where they are coming from, and their concerns are
completely valid. We can always learn more from our patients, we must be humble in 
that we do not know what is personally best for them and validate their experiences 
and concerns. I am not comfortable "educating" someone to the point of persuasion 
and coercion in order for their student to attend school and reap the social, emotional, 
and holistic benefits that are now only privy to those vaccinated. Allowing for 
religious and philosophical exemptions to be reinstated allows for families to regain 
access to our schools and social circles. Just because these students are not in our 
schools, does not mean they no longer exist in our communities. We are not 
eradicating a problem or disease, we are creating one and highlighting a segregated 
population. We are sending the message and making the statement that vaccines are 
not up for discussion, nor are we willing to listen to or support our community 
members with concerns. Those who are immunocompromised should receive ample 
education on their risks, take proper precautions, and be free to vaccinate to protect 
themselves just as they would prior to LD 798 being enforced. There has been no 
evidence to support such a draconian measure, resulting in extreme lifestyle changes 
and hardships. 
As you consider whether to accept or reject these bills, I realize you may see certain 
associations such as MASN or the MPA make a statement in opposition. While I 
understand the weight of an endorsement one way or another from such 
school-related associations, I ask that you please be mindful that these statements do 
not reflect all educators or practitioners viewpoints. I do not feel it is appropriate for 
associations to speak on behalf of members without 1) transparency of said statement 
to members, and 2) speaking on behalf of all members, many of whom are not in 
agreement with the position taken. In an effort to maintain a nonbias and trusting 
relationship with colleagues, association members, and our communities, I suggest 
such associations make this consideration carefully. I ask that you restore freedom 
and equity to education for all children and constituents and pass all of the presented 
vaccine-related bills. Everyone deserves the right to choose. 
In health & happiness, 
Kaylee Knudsen, MSN, RN
