Testimony in Support of LD 51, LD 869, LD 1098, LD 1148, LD 1209, and LD 1228 
By Krystal Jean of Topsham  
  
Dear Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and esteemed members of the Committee of 
Education and Cultural Affairs, 
 
I am a lifelong resident of Maine, mother to three children, and homeschool teacher to my 
children as the result of LD 798.  I am providing written testimony in support of LD 51, LD 869, 
LD 1098, LD 1148, LD 1209, and LD 1228 today. 
 
My family is one of many, many families who have been impacted by the state of Maine 
removing religious exemptions and requiring all vaccinations in order to attend school in Maine. 
By reinstating the religious exemption, my children would have to option to attend school again. 
They would have the option to participate in school sports, band, theater, and any other activity 
that their school offers.  
 
In a world where it is preached to be inclusive every day, not allowing ALL children to attend 
school is as far from being inclusive as it gets. These children are being discriminated against for 
their own personal beliefs, while at the same time hearing adults preaching inclusivity and 
tolerance for all. It is a slap in the face to these children and their families; the hypocrisy is 
glaring obvious.  I find it infuriating that my children are able to go to schools around the state to 
watch their cousins play basketball or act in a play, but when it comes to my children sitting in 
the same schools to learn, they are then considered a threat. You have the chance today to 
include these children back with their peers. You have the chance today to allow ALL children 
the right to a public or private education, participate in sports, and be a leader amongst their 
peers; knowing they haven’t been excluded based on vaccination status. I hope you make the 
right decision today, a decision that includes all of Maine’s children. 
 
Thank you for taking the time to read my testimony. 
 
Krystal Jean 
 
