northernlighthealth.org
This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
 
 
Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 51 An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to  
Immunization Requirements 
LD 1098 An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions Regarding 
Immunization Requirements 
 
Testimony in Opposition  
April 3, 2023  
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs, my name is Lisa Harvey-McPherson RN.  I am here today providing 
testimony on behalf of Northern Light Health and our member organizations in 
opposition to both of these bills.  Northern Light Health member organizations include 
10 hospitals located in southern, central, eastern and northern Maine, 8 nursing 
facilities, air and ground ambulance, behavioral health, addiction treatment, pharmacy, 
primary and specialty care practices and a state-wide home care and hospice program.  
Ninety three percent of Maine’s population lives in the Northern Light Health service 
area.  Northern Light Health is also proud to be one of Maine’s largest employers with 
over 12,000 employees statewide. 
 
In 2019 Northern Light Health was a strong supporter of LD 798 which became Public 
Law 154 upon passage.  Prior to passing this law Maine was one of only 17 states in 
which families of school-aged children could state non-medical reasons to opt out of 
school-required immunizations. Maine had the 4th highest rate of non-medical opt-
outs, which put our community immunity below safe thresholds for disease outbreak.  
Since the law went into effect in 2020, data from the annual Annie E. Casey Foundation 
Kids Count survey shows that exemptions have decreased from 6.2% in 2018 to 1.8% in 
2021. This means that more children are protected from deadly diseases including 
measles, mumps, rubella, polio, chicken pox, tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis 
(whooping cough.). 
 
It is critically important to understand that the legislature also changed the medical 
exemption language in the law to ensure that a medical exemption is available to a 
health care employee or parent who provides a written statement from a licensed 
physician, nurse practitioner or physician assistant that, in the physician's, nurse 
practitioner's or physician assistant's professional judgment, immunization against one 
or more diseases may be medically inadvisable.  The legislature clearly intended to 
structure a medical exemption decision based on the professional judgement of the 
practitioner.  This change was strongly supported by Northern Light Health and the 
provider community to ensure that the provider would consider the unique medical 
needs of the individual when making the exemption determination.  
 
Public Law 154 also eliminated non-medical exemptions to vaccines for health care 
personnel working in a licensed nursing facility, residential care facility, intermediate 
care facility for persons with intellectual disabilities, multi-level health care facility, 
 hospital or home health agency.  This applies to immunizations required by the Maine 
Centers for Disease Control.  The rule specifically states:   
 
Except as otherwise provided by law, each Designated Healthcare Facility in the State of  
Maine must require for all employees who do not exclusively work remotely a 
Certificate of Immunization, or Proof of Immunity, subject to Section 4(B) of this rule, 
against: 
1. Rubeola (measles); 
2. Mumps; 
3. Rubella (German measles); 
4. Varicella (chicken pox); 
5. Hepatitis B; 
6. Influenza; 
7. COVID-19. 
 
Restoring religious and philosophical exemptions to rules requiring vaccination would 
undermine work done to promote illness prevention practices and protect the most 
vulnerable within our population including the very young, the very old, women who are 
pregnant, and anyone with an underlying chronic health condition.  Over the last few 
years in the United States, we have seen increased cases of measles, mumps, and 
whooping cough within communities with lower vaccination rates.  We have also seen 
cases of polio and polio like illnesses where it was believed polio had been eradicated 
from the United States.  Northern Light Health supported the removal of religious and 
philosophical exemptions within rules requiring vaccination against preventable 
infectious diseases while preserving legitimate medical exemptions.  As a source of both 
primary and acute medical care for much of the State of Maine we stand by that support 
in order to maintain the health and well-being of the communities and Mainers we 
serve. 
 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to express our opposition to both of the bills before you 
today.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
