70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 
 
 
 
Christian Civic League of Maine 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Maine Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs, I am Mike McClellan, Policy Director for the Christian Civic League of Maine. The 
Christian Civic League of Maine envisions a state and nation where God is honored, religious freedom 
flourishes, families thrive, and life is cherished. We believe a Biblical approach works in life and including 
in governance. 
I am here to testify in favor of LD 1098  - An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions 
Regarding Immunization Requirements - Rep. Barbara Bagshaw of Windham 
Public Law 2019, chapter 154 removed the exemption from immunization requirements based on 
religious or philosophical beliefs for students in elementary, secondary, and postsecondary schools, and 
employees of nursery schools and certain health care facilities. This bill reinstates the religious and 
philosophical exemptions. 
 
Current law provides that a student enrolled in a distance education program is exempt from the school 
immunization requirements. This bill expands that exemption to private schools and virtual public 
charter schools. CCL Maine believes that if a person has a religious or philosophical conviction regarding 
the use of a certain vaccine, or all vaccines, that they should have the right to exercise that conviction 
and refuse a vaccine, without being deprived of other rights and liberties enjoyed by Mainers. 
 
CCL Maine believes mistakes were made during the recent pandemic. This should highlight to us how 
the removal of the Religious and Philosophical exemptions was a disaster to the people of Maine. It is 
clear that our founding Father’s acknowledged these God given rights as the started our country. These 
rights did not come from government and so they are rights government should not take away. To do so 
would create chaos and now in retrospect, we see the results of that chaos. We need to clearly return to 
the thing that worked throughout our country’s history, religious freedom and the ability for 
philosophical choice. Please vote Ought To Pass on LD 1098! 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration today. Know that many are hopeful of your actions and are 
praying for you and your families. God bless, 
Mike    
 
Mike McClellan 
70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330         Phone: (207) 329-6148  
policy@cclmaine.org         www.cclmaine.org 
 
 Policy Director 
Christian Civic League Maine 
 
 
 
 
 
