Ray Vensel 
Oakland 
LD 1098 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Educational & Cultural Affairs 
Committee, I am testifying AGAINST LD 1098.  
Religious freedom is an essential right, but it is not a license to inflict harm on others. As the 
Supreme Court explained more than 75 years ago in Prince v. Massachusetts: “The right to 
practice religion freely does not include liberty to expose the community or the child to 
communicable disease or the latter to ill health or death.” Even a sincere request for a religious 
exemption should be denied if it puts the lives of others at risk. 
LD 1098 directly endangers the public health and makes more deaths from disease inevitable in a 
couple of obvious ways. First, it tramples the rights of the most vulnerable, who should be able 
to participate in society without putting their health at grave risk. Second, it increases the risks 
not only to students, but to residents, clients, or coworkers of certain other institutions whose 
employees would have the right to claim a religious exemption.  
For jobs that involve exposure to vulnerable populations, minimizing that risk via immunization 
is clearly an appropriate job requirement. Religious freedom for a teacher who opposes vaccines 
does not mean having the right to jeopardize children by being unvaccinated. Religious freedom 
means that if she doesn’t wish to fulfill her employer’s job requirement, she is free to find another 
job. 
In addition to these risks, government has no realistic way to measure the sincerity of a claimed 
religious belief justifying an exemption from a rule which preserves public health. We don’t 
have to try to gauge sincerity if we simply recognize the obvious fact that religious freedom has 
limits. “Sincerity” does not justify putting others at risk. 
There is no blanket constitutional right to religious exemptions from public-health measures that 
apply to everyone. That includes religious exemptions from vaccination requirements, given the 
danger unvaccinated people pose to public health. 
LD 1098 attacks public health measures by allowing vaccines to be avoided due to religious 
exemptions. Vaccines help to prevent the deaths of vulnerable populations, but only so long as 
people get vaccinated. By allowing religious exemptions to vaccines, diseases are able to evolve 
to become deadlier, or to avoid existing vaccines.  
 
Please protect public health, and don’t let this bill pass. Thank you. 
 
 
