Roland Roy
Lewiston
LD 1098
Please accept the following comments so as to promote a better understanding that 
would support reinstating both religious and philosophical reasons to become exempt 
from anyone being forced or required to be jabbed so as to be allowed to go to school 
or to keep their job or be allowed into a building or on public transportation.
Please do not rely on the CDC, the WHO and any government health policy officials 
as their information regarding mRna jabs are not reliable and not to be trusted.
If someone were to take any of these experimental jabs  they would eventually realize 
that the so called science behind them is unreliable, unverifiable, untested and  not 
properly checked for safety or efficacy. 
These novel mRna covid jabs are not like the old vaccines most of us have received in
the past.  From a moral standpoint, no one can force anyone against their will to take 
into their body any substance that has the ability to make that person sick, disabled or 
prematurely die.  
If one does the research they would find plenty of evidence to show that the US Govt 
has partnered with Big Pharma to create "medical countermeasures" which is code for
biological weapons against it's own people.    Both Katherine Watts and Sasha 
Latypova on their substack accounts provide voluminous data about the many ways 
these medical countermeasures were developed as a demonstration project that was 
set up to introduce novel nanotechnology that includes nanolipids and graphene oxide
that would create clots in people that would cause many negative health outcomes.  
We are witnessing before our very eyes a massive depopulation program disguised as 
a vaccine to a virus that does not even exist.
Please educate yourself if you haven't already and vote to make it illegal to mandate 
these and any future mRna clot shots as most people call them.   Philosophical and 
religious exemptions should and must be restored to enable people to go to work, go 
to school, travel on public conveyances, and live to a ripe old age.
It should be noted that the science behind the mRna jabs were never designed nor 
proven to produce immunity or to limit it's transmission of a  novel virus, that  to date,
has never been isolated following the GOLD Standard used to detect tiny pathogens.  
Over 100 years ago Robert Koch invented a way to detect if a pathogen existed. 
 He called them his 4 postulates.   These were later revised and  updated to be called 
the River Postulates.  j
It should also be noted that the so called "HIV" virus that supposedly caused AIDS 
and the virus that caused the 1918 Spanish Flu  both were never discovered despite 
the fact that French Virologist Luc Montagnier and American Virologist Robert Gallo
were jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for finding the HIV virus, but many years
later  both later claimed it was a false discovery.  
Without finding any virus using either the Rivers or Koch Postulates, the means to 
test for and then create a safe and effective vaccine  is scientifically impossible.
Thank You for helping humanity by choosing life over a fake vaccine which in reality
is a bioweapon, that was designed to make anyone sick, permanently disabled or even
dead.
May God be your judge as He can see which way your vote will count in either siding
with the culture of life and with the culture of death.
