 
University of Maine ∙ University of Maine at Augusta ∙ University of Maine at Farmington ∙ University of Maine at Fort Kent ∙ University of 
Main e at Machias ∙ University of Maine at Presque Isle ∙ University of Southern Maine ∙ University of Maine School of Law  
 
 
 
DATE:   April 3, 2023  
TO:   Committee  on Education & Cultural Affairs  
FROM:  Samantha Warren, UMS Director of Government & Community Relations   
                       samantha.warren@maine.edu  / (207) 632 -0389  
 
RE:   LD 51,  An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to  
  Immunization Requirements  
LD 1098,  An Act to Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions 
 Regarding Immunization Requirements  
  LD 1148,  An Act to Prohibit COVID -19 Vaccine Mandates for Students  
  Enrolled in Public Institutions of Learning  
 
  LD 1228, An Act to Prohibit Certain Higher Education Institutions from  
  Requiring Vaccines Approved Under Emergency Use Authorization for  
  Admission or Attendance  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs:  My name is Samantha Warren and I am the Director of 
Government Relations for the University of Maine System (UMS). I write today  to inform your 
consideration of the postsecondary immunization bills  before you.  
Maine’s public universities support immunization s that rigorous research has proven safe 
and protect ive of  public health, especially given the high risk for transmission of 
communicable diseases on residential campuses . We also  acknowledge that immunization 
requirements without  both exemption processes  and resources for education and  expan ded vaccine 
access  can create barriers  for some students  to postsecondary education and opportunity for 
economic and social mobility  that we must work together to mitigate.   
UMS is helping our students comply with P.L. 2019, Ch. 154 and its accompanying State rules, 
including by  offering  immunization  at campus health centers  (sliding fee scale for those  who are  un- 
or under -insured)  and connecting our own student electronic health record system with the Maine 
Immunization Information System.  
In March 2020, just one week prior to the Legislature’s adjournment due to COVID, UMS encouraged 
this Committee to support LD 2046, which would have expanded the State’s universal free child 
vaccination program to the  postsecondary students who are held to the same school 
immunization requirements . Today, our  universities  continue to have students who are not up-to-
date with  current  measles, mumps, rubella, diphtheria and tetanus vaccination r equirements. For 
example, the University of Maine at Augusta, which enrolls mostly  Pell-eligible  adult learners and 
does not have a  campus health clinic , reports that their students have difficulty  getting copies of their 
immunization records and/or do not  have primary care doctors and thus struggle to get scheduled for  
immunization s, titers or boosters. To support all students, we again ask you  to consider granting 
 
Page 2 of 2 
 in-state postsecondary students access to the same free vaccine  program  already afforded to 
those Mainers who are 18 and under . 
Regarding our ability to require additional immunizations beyond what is  already  required by law, the 
legislatively confirmed UMS Board of Trustees and the university leaders they designate must 
maintain  their authority to  develop and implement policies that are appropriately responsive 
to emerging and evolving needs in our System and state . 
Informed by an advisory group of world -class university researchers in relevant fields like virology 
and epidemiology, in 2021 UMS announced that it would require students to receive an FDA-
approved COVID -19 vaccination to participate  in on-campu s academic and activities . To support this 
pandemic policy , UMS provided medical and religious exemption s, education , access to free 
immunization including through on -campus clinics , and incentives for compliance including release  
from regular COVID testin g. We also implemented other proven risk mitigation practices like 
wastewater testing.  
UMS  policies and the inclusive science -based process that informed them were lauded 
nationally as a model and embraced by the local communities where our campuses are 
located . Most importantly,  students and families responded positively to the requirement  and 
the promise it provided of safer in -person learning , and the prevalence of COVID on our 
campuses remained well below the state ’s low rates . UMS  bucked national trends with 
enrollment from the pre -pandemic fall 2019 to the fall 2021 declining by just 1.1%, compared to a 
6.6% drop nationally , and we actually experienced a 3.4% enrollment increase among students from 
out-of-state from fall 2019 to fall 2021 . 
“I came back to Farmington this year because the university is so committed to the safety and 
success of its students ,” noted one University of Maine at Farmington student from Connecticut  at 
the time . “If there is anywhere in the country where students can count on a traditional campus 
experience next fall, it is going to be at our univ ersities in Maine .” 
Prior to UMS evolving its COVID immunization requirement to a recommendation  in March 2023 , 
the rate of compliance was  98%. Over the course of the pandemic, more than 900 students 
request ed and were  grant ed medical or religious exemptions , though we recognize some 
prospective students may not have enrolled or  enrolled entirely in online courses due to the prior 
mandate.  
Our System must always err on the side of protection of our campus and community 
members . To the ext ent allowable by law, we will continue to adhere to State and federal law and 
rules, and adapt university health policy based on guidance from civil authorities and public health 
experts, peer -reviewed science, localized data, and the best interest of our students, employees 
and Maine citizens.  
Thank you for your support of Maine’s public universities and our students. Please let me know if I 
can provide additional information in advance of your work session.    
 
