Dear Honorable Members of the Joint Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: 
I am Wendy Alpaugh of Stonington. I am asking you to oppose L.D. 51, An Act to 
Restore Religious and Philosophical Exemptions to Immunization Requirements, and 
the other bills under consideration.  
We are so fortunate to live in this day and age when modern medicine has allowed 
us to live extended lives not dreamed of 100 years ago. This is in part from the 
health benefits we have seen from vaccinations. 
Measles, small pox, tetanus, hepatitis, meningitis, influenza, COVID, mumps, rubella, 
pneumonia, diphtheria, polio, whooping cough, and chicken pox are some of the 
diseases that are well managed thanks to vaccines. Some of these diseases are 
deadly, others can cause life alternating harm that robs an individual of their quality 
of life. As we have learned from COVID19, it takes a community cooperating and 
working together to save lives and reduce the destruction that disease can cause. 
Those that choose not to vaccinate, because of their personal feelings, put others - 
who for medical reasons cannot be vaccinated - at risk of contracting a disease. Our 
communities and public schools are for all our children to attend safely. Maintaining 
the vaccination requirement helps make this possible.  
As a dentist, I strongly encourage patients to have the Human Papillomavirus 
vaccine as the virus is closely associated with cervical and oral cancer. The use of 
this vaccine can prevent the horrendous disfigurement often caused by treatment of 
oral cancer or the need for surgery and oncological services or worse, loss of life. 
This vaccine not only benefits the individual, but society as well. The cost of a 
vaccine is minimal compared with the cost of medical services needed to treat the 
disease that could have been prevented. 
Vaccines are part of our tool box for overall health and well-being. To be a member 
of a healthy community, we all need to heed public health guidance. Our lives 
depend upon it. 
Thank you for your time and for caring for the health of our Maine residents.  
Sincerely, 
Wendy L. Alpaugh, D.M.D. 
wlawjm@myfairpoint.net  
  
