e 
\'_i 5; 
in- 
1| Matthgw G_ PQu1j()[ THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 15 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
TESTIMONY OF SENATOR MATTHEW POULIOT 
Testimony LD 1066 
“An Act to Allow a Restaurant to Serve a Bottle of Wine to the Person Who Brought the 
Bottle” 
Public Hearing: March 20, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supcia and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs. I am Senator Matt Pouliot and I represent Senate District l5, which 
includes the towns of Augusta, Belgrade, China, Mount Vernon, Sidney and Vassalboro. I am 
here to present LD 1066 “An Act to Allow a Restaurant to Serve a Bottle of Wine to the Person 
W'ho Brought the Bottle.” 
This bill allows a restaurant, Class A restaurant or Class A restaurant/lounge licensed by the 
State to sell wine on the premises to allow a person who has purchased a full meal to provide a 
bottle of wine to consume on the premises. A restaurant, Class A restaurant or ClassA 
restaurant/lounge may charge a fee, not to exceed $100. The person may remove and transport 
the partially consumed bottle of wine in a manner consistent with the provisions of law regarding 
the removal and transport of a partially consumed bottle of wine purchased from a restaurant, 
Class A restaurant or Class A restaurant/lounge. 
This practice is referred to as a corkage fee. Currently 25 States allow for a corkage fee to be 
placed on a bottle of wine that they serve. This allows for a person to bring a bottle of wine they 
may like into a restaurant and allow the restaurant to serve it to them for a fee. I see it as win/Win 
for the restaurant and the consumer as the consumer is getting what they like to drink with their 
meal and the restaurant is getting paid for serving the product the consumer wants. 
This committee this session has voted to allow for alcoholic beverage sales “to go” for cocktails, 
beer and wine and I think it is now time to update our laws to allow individuals to bring their 
choice of wine to a restaurant. 
I would encourage this committee to support this legislation. Thank you and I am happy to 
answer any questions you may have. t 
State House: (207)287-1505 * Fax: (207) 287-1527 * T0llFree: 1-800-423 —6900 * TTY: 711 
Maft.P0uli0f@legislafz/re.maine. gov * Web Sire.‘ legislature.mai11e.g0v/senatei 
2+ 
gt
l 
il
l
w
l
t 
/r 
ll 
ll it
V 
gt
k 
ti
5 
it
»
i
