Arleigh Kraus
Warren
LD 355
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, my name is Arleigh Kraus. I am 
a registered cannabis caregiver with a B.S. in biochemistry, an organic farmer, and 
business owner in Warren.  I am a founding member of the Maine Craft Cannabis 
Association, a member of Seed2Health Learning Health Alliance, a board member of 
Medical Marijuana Caregivers of Maine, the Chair of the Adult and Medical Cannabis
Committee for the Town of Warren, I am on the State of Maine Cannabis Advisory 
Commission as a caregiver representative, and I am a founding member of the 
Cannabis Council of Maine.  I have been a caregiver in Maine for over 10 years.
I am here today in support of LD 355. As an appointed member of the cannabis 
advisory committee I was happy to have been chosen to be a representative of the 
medical cannabis community as a registered caregiver of the program. The advisory 
committee at the time of my appointment was composed mainly of individuals who 
were members of large cannabis companies, addiction specialists, public health 
professionals and law enforcement. My appointment put me in the minority of 
representatives. I was one of only a few people who had any involvement with 
cultivation and medical cannabis patient care.  The advisory committee has not met 
once since I was appointed last year.  Because the committee can only meet when the 
legislature is not in session any productive conversations which may arise from this 
committee is limited. 
I am supportive of the eradication of the advisory committee due to the lack of Maine 
cannabis industry and patient representatives and any significant value arising from 
previous committee meetings. That being said, a reshaping of the advisory committee 
would also be welcomed. If the committee were to be able to meet while in session 
and be composed of representatives from the medical cannabis community working 
here in Maine as well as cannabis patients this would make more sense as a resource 
to the VLA committee and add real value. Ideally the advisory committee should 
contain medical caregivers, patients, medical providers, medical cannabis cultivators, 
cannabis laboratory scientists, and agricultural experts. The people of this agricultural 
community should be able to represent their industry without the need to defend their 
very existence. 
Thank you for your consideration. 

