 
To The Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
February 13th, 2023  
Mark Barnett  
125 Granite St  
Auburn, ME 04210  
LD 355 OUGHT TO PASS  
Good morning. My name is Mark Barnett. I'm a resident of Auburn, the owner of a medical retail 
store and coffee shop in Portland called Higher Grounds of Main e, and the Executive Chair 
and Policy Director for the Maine Craft Cannabis Association. I am testifying today in support of 
reconsidering  the work of Maine’s Cannabis Advisory Commission (CAC).  
The CAC is not functio ning as intended to provide review of the totality of Maine’s cannabis 
policies. We think the changes made with LD 1589 were a step in the right direction, but more 
needs to be done for the CAC to be a meaningful body. We believe the CAC needs to be 
recons idered for two main reasons: first, it is too large, unwieldy, and heavy on bureaucrats with 
little to no relevant experience on the issue to achieve meaningful discussion and analysis; 
second, its ‘duties’ miss the mark of what a state Commission on an in dustry as profoundly 
important to this state should do, which is support and promote the success of that industry and 
its participants, from the cultivator all the way to the end user. Furthermore, the duties that it 
does have in statute contribute to the stigma around cannabis use that powered the disastrous 
War on Drugs. They are, in our opinion, focused on the imagined ‘dangers’ of cannabis and on 
‘operationalizing’ the commerce of cannabis rather than on studying what cannabis could mean 
to us as a popu lation as plant medicine, alternative therapy, enjoyment, and as a rich source of 
medical research.  
For example, the CAC is explicitly meant to push medical and ‘recreational’ use of cannabis 
together for regulatory purposes, an outcome that this state’s m edical cannabis businesses, 
patients, and certifying practitioners have fought against tooth and nail. Why? Because the 
concept of ‘alignment’ has been cover for a program explicitly aimed at shutting down Maine’s 
small -scale medical operators.  From statut e: 
§903. Duties  
3.C. Standardize, coordinate or integrate the adult use cannabis and medical cannabis laws, rules and programs in the State, 
including, but not limited to, recommended changes regarding the standardization, coordination or integration of t he laws and rules 
relating to the testing, labeling and packaging of adult use cannabis and adult use cannabis products and cannabis and cannabis 
products for medical use.    
This sounds nice, but cannabis has enormous medical potential that is completely overlooked in 
Maine’s Adult Use policies which focus on unfounded ‘dangers’ of cannabis in order  to, in our 
view, effectively reduce small business participation and success in the program. Further, 
Maine’s Adult Use testing and packaging laws represent, q uite frankly, policy failure. Packaging  
 
 
 
has already created huge piles of unnecessary plastic waste due to an obsession with ‘safety’ 
that has no grounding in public health data. All of these layers of complicated plastic still 
couldn’t stop a 5 -year old  with a screwdriver –but they may be too difficult for a more elderly or 
infirm individual to open on their own. Testing is so overbearing, complicated, and ultimately 
meaningless in its results for the customer that every session numerous bills have had to  be 
filed just to make the statute somewhat more workable for operators. ‘Mandatory testing’ in 
Adult Use is explicitly designed to undercut small craft production and favor large -scale 
industrial farming.  
Why would we want to push medical into that same m ess? We saw what ‘standardizing’ Medical 
and Adult Use rules would look like in the failed effort at Rulemaking from the OCP in 2020, that 
we and nearly every other speaker at the numerous public hearings saw for what it was: an 
attempt to destroy Maine’s dynamic, highly successful, and popular medical cannabis program 
and remake it in the image of the Adult Use program, which was designed for well -capitalized 
investors rather than for everyday Mainers. It’s time that we took that bias out of our statute 
everywhere we can, and reforming the CAC provides an opportunity to do that.  
Sincerely,   
Mark Barnett  
 
