122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  in Opposition to : 
LD 355: An Act To Eliminate the Cannabis Advisory Commission  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
State House, Room 437 Monday, February 13, 2023  Good morning, Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and executive director of Maine Public Health Association.  MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of M PHA is to improve 
and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied 
to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to  the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that 
responsibility seriously.  MPHA is opposed to LD 355: “ An Act To Eliminate the Cannabis Advisory Commission.” T his bill repeals the 
Cannabis Advisory Commission.  
 The Can nabis Advisory Commission is essential fo r a thoughtful  and planful  appr oach to cannabis  policy in 
Maine. The purpose s of the Commis sion
 are to “ review laws and rules pertaining to the adult use cannabis and 
medical cannabis industries in this State and any other provision of law or rule pertaining to cannabis, including, but not limited to, laws and rules regarding public health, public safety, juvenile and adult criminal and civil offenses, workplace drug testing, workplace safety, motor vehicle safety, landlords and tenants, the personal use of cannabis and taxes and fees paid to the State by applicants and registered caregivers and registered dispensaries under the Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Act and applicants and licensees under this Act.” The Cannabis Advisory Commission has a 
diverse membership , all of whom have different  perspectives 
on cannabis polic ies in Maine. The  Commission is a legislatively  required connection to public health and 
safety, with commissioner appointments by the Maine Department of Health and Human Services and Public Safety, and a public health policy expert.  The Commission includes members hip from the t ribal community, 
civil liberties, and agriculture  among other appointments. 
 We respectfully reques t the Committee to please consider learning more about the  challenges with regular 
convenings  of the Commission and its work to date, and identifying str ategies for resolving those, instead of 
repealing it al together. It is not often these diverse  perspectives are b rought  together  to discuss regulations; 
repealing this Commission would be a significant  loss for education a nd well -informed policymaking. 
 
Thank you for considering our testimony. 
