 
 
Written Testimony from the Maine Credit Union League  
Neither for Nor Against  LD 355, An Act to Refocus the Purpose and Duties of the Cannabis 
Advisory Commission  
February 13, 2023  
 
Senator Hickman , Representative Supica , and Distinguished Members of the Joint Committee 
on Veterans and Legal Affairs , 
My name is Robert Caverly and I serve as the Vice President of Advocacy & Outreach at the 
Maine Credit Union League . The League proudly  represen ts Maine’s 50 credit unions and more 
than 720,000 members  statewide. Please accept our testimony neither for nor against LD355 ; 
An Act to Refocus the Purpose and Duties of the Cannabis Advisory Commission .  
As this committee is aware, Maine was an early stat e to legalize any form of cannabis, starting 
with the legalization of medical cannabis  by citizen’s referendum back in 1999. From the very 
beginning of legalization, it has been a challenge to provide financial services to cannabis -
related businesses ( CRB). Dating back to 2014, a small number of credit unions have offered 
CRB accounts to their members. Having access to traditional banking services is critically 
important, not only for the CRBs , but also for public safety. Exclusively cash run businesses 
present a public safety concern and a problem for tax compliance.  
As the Committee is considering amending the purpose and duties of the Cannabis Advisory 
Commission from its initial creation, the League would strongly support the inclusion of a 
representativ e from the financial services industry  on the Commission. Any regulatory changes 
the Commission might consider that would further the gap between Maine law and the stricter 
expectations of financial regulators would increase the difficulty of credit unions  to offer 
financial services to CRBs . This will  have a chilling effect on getting CRBs  into a financial 
institution, a goal that is shared by many stakeholders, interested parties, and elected officials.  
The League will continue to research and advocate on  this important matter. Bringing financial 
services to legal Maine MRBs is a standing priority of the League. Ultimately the final solution to 
bring financial services to MRBs will need to come from the federal government. In the interim, 
decreasing the ga p between the more strictly regimented requirements of the financial 
regulators and the current Maine laws surrounding the growth and sale of marijuana would 
help ameliorate distrust and increase understanding.  
Thank you for your consideration.  
