Testimony in support of LD 344: An Act to Establish Maine Alewife Day
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the State and Local Government 
Committee, my name is Jeff Romano. I appreciate this opportunity to provide testimony on 
behalf of Maine Coast Heritage Trust in support of LD 344.
Maine Coast Heritage Trust conserves and stewards Maine's coastal lands and islands for their 
renowned scenic beauty, ecological value, outdoor recreational opportunities, and contribution 
to community well-being. We provide statewide conservation leadership through our work with 
land trusts, coastal communities, and other partners. Over the past four decades, we have 
conserved more than 150,000 acres in Maine.
Creating an Alewife Day would be an impactful way to focus attention on a natural resource 
that is critically important to Maine’s ecology, heritage, and economy. It would also build on 
work underway in Maine that is making our state a national leader.
The alewife is central to ecosystem health of Maine’s natural landscapes and ocean. It is food 
for iconic species like bald eagles, cod, and river otters. Harvested for centuries for sustenance, 
this fish has been enjoyed canned, smoked, and pickled. It is also a key source of spring lobster 
bait. Maine is home to one of the few alewife runs on the east coast that is still strong and 
increasing, due to the hard work of Maine people who hand carry fish over obstacles, build 
fishways, restore streams and bring them back.  Maine can be proud of being a national leader 
in alewife restoration, and many organizations including Maine Coast Heritage Trust are actively 
working to restore fish runs across the state.  
A day to celebrate alewives is an opportunity to recognize this fish and its importance to our 
people, to have pride in our state and our way of life, and to educate the next generation about 
this resource and its place in our heritage. It is also an opportunity to learn about and build 
momentum for the restoration work still needed. Thank you for your consideration on this bill, 
a fitting tribute to the “fish that feeds all.”
