TESTIMONY OF 
Patrick Keliher 
Department of Marine Resources 
The Department of Marine Resources (DMR) is testifying 
In Support of 
LD 344 An Act To Establish Maine Alewife Day 
Before the Committee on State and Local Government 
Sponsored by Representative Davis 
Date of Hearing: February 14, 2023 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and 
Local Government, my name is Patrick Keliher, Commissioner of the Department of Marine Resources, 
and l am testifying on behalf of the Department in support of LD 344. 
The Department of Marine Resources (DMR) shares Representative Davis's enthusiasm for alewives. 
Alewives are an anadromous species that play an important role in Maine's ecology, economy, and 
cultural heritage. Through their migration, alewives tie our ocean, rivers and lakes together, 
providing vital nutrients and forage needed for healthy watersheds. They are an important food 
source for a wide variety of fish, birds and mammals in these ecosystems, and provide a prey buffer for 
other important species like Atlantic salmon, undertaking the same migration. 
There is a long history of Maine people harvesting alewives, beginning with the Wabanaki Tribes and 
continuing to this day. At times, alewives have been an important source of food, but more recently 
have been used mainly as an important seasonal source of lobster bait. Maine traditions of dipping 
and smoking alewives are kept alive by people like Representative Davis, who has been engaged for 
years in teaching young people in Downeast Maine these local traditions. 
Within DMR, the Bureau of Sea Run Fisheries and Habitat works to protect, conserve, restore, manage 
and enhance diadromous fish populations and their habitat in all waters of the State; to securea 
sustainable recreational fishery for diadromous species; and to conduct and coordinate projects 
involving research, planning, management, restoration or propagation of diadromous fishes. Recently, 
the Maine Jobs and Recovery Plan was instrumental in providing funding for projects both large and 
small across the state that benefit alewives. Some examples of this work include the completion of 
the removal ofa dam on Meddybemps Lake anticipated to restore 2 million alewives and an upcoming 
project on the Penobscot River anticipated to restore 4 million alewives. We are excited about these 
efforts, because we have seen how successful they can be. Within the Kennebec drainage, some key 
dam removals as well as improvement of fish passage at non-hydro dams and culverts, have enabled 
the alewife population to rebound dramatically, from only 78,000 fish in 1999, to 8-10 million fish 
today. 
In closing, DMR agrees that alewives are a species and a story worthy of celebration, and supports an 
annual recognition of their importance to the state of Maine. Thank you for your consideration, andI 
would be happy to answer any questions you might have.
