Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary,  
My name is Abigail Beal of Cherryfield, Maine. I appreciate the opportunity to testify on this important issue.  
 
As a citizen and as a Christian, I stand in opposition of LD 1412, RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine Establishin g That All Maine Residents Have Equal Rights Under the Law  which was submitted by 
Representative Reckitt.  
I believe we must consider the fact that our U.S. Constitution already grants sufficient protection and promise of 
equality to all people through sec tion 1 of the 14th Amendment, and the U.S. Supreme Court has already previously 
applied the 14th Amendment to women's issues.  
The Declaration of Independence also plainly recognizes that all are created equal and have been given certain 
unalienable rights  by our Creator. Furthermore, there are countless other laws already in place covering practically all 
the bases, from employment and equal pay to education and many other areas of life.  
The truth is that the ERA will not give women any more rights than t hey already have, and, if passed, it will harm and 
endanger women and their children in incredibly significant ways.  
While appearing to promote justice and equality, in truth this proposition seeks to erase differences between men and 
women. The Bible pla inly states in Genesis 1:27, "So God created man in His own image, in the image of God created He 
him; male and female created He them." I urge you to stand against the tide of immorality that seeks to destroy God's 
order in family and gender distinctions.   
If passed, the ERA will be used to overturn all restrictions on abortion. This absolutely breaks the 7th Commandment 
which tells us, "Thou shalt not kill." (See Exodus 20 and Deut. 5) It also violates the before -stated founding documents 
recognizing that  all people have the God -given right to life and liberty.  
Today we have more than sufficient evidence to prove that life begins at conception and that unborn children are 
indeed living, growing human beings. Therefore, by allowing abortion, we are causing  children to die en masse across 
our nation, to the tune of millions of children missing from our society today. I believe that we have a responsibility to 
stand up against this evil.  
There are many other ways in which LD 1412 harms and infringes upon wom en's purpose, dignity, and safety. This 
Amendment could remove gender designations in locker rooms, restrooms, jails, and hospital rooms. It could eradicate 
workplace laws that provide special accommodations for pregnant women. It could remove support for women in 
situations of abandonment by their husbands -- alimony, child support, payment of husband's debts, and requirement of 
husbands to pay for their wives' medical bills. And it could also require all women to be drafted into military service and 
front -line combat.  
These are all areas of great concern to me and to many other women across our state and nation. I would like to take 
this opportunity to remind you that as lawmakers you are responsible before God for the decisions you make. Not only 
will th ese decisions impact us as citizens here and now, but they will also affect the futures of our families for 
generations to come.  
Where is the future of America, if not in the family structure we are destroying? Where is the future of our nation if not 
in the Holy Scriptures we are shunning? And where is the future of our country if not in the Constitution we are 
trampling?  
I urge you in the name of Righteousness, Justice, and Truth to boldly stand up in opposition to LD 1412. Thank you for 
your time.  
