Sen. Carney, Representative Moonen, and Distinguished  Members of the Judiciary 
Committee . 
 
My name is Anne Gass  and I’m here in support of  LD 14 12. I’m an independ ent 
historian who has written two books on women’s fight for voting rights. I a lso 
serve as an appointed member of Maine’s Perma nent Commission on the S tatus 
of Women , and as Maine Coordinator for the N ational Votes for Women Trail , 
although I ’m not speaking  on their behalf  today . I come to this d iscussion of LD 
1412 with an understanding of history and its connections to the present.  
 
This year , 2023,  marks the centennial of the original ERA bill being introduced  in 
Congress. We are also coming up on  250 years of America ’s independence. Let’s 
ponder that for a moment . In all this time , women have struggled to achieve 
equality with men. And although we have made great strides  we’re still not there 
yet.  
 
As with the federal ERA, the previous versions of Maine’s ERA bills have  sought to 
explicit ly prohibit  discrimination on the basis of sex. I’ve supp orted that language 
in the past.  
 
However , we know  that prohibiting discrimination based on sex doesn’t go far  
enough.  Because there are a lot of ways to discriminate ;  base d on skin color , 
ethnicity, religion , disability, gender orientation , all kinds of reasons.  
 
We’ve seen that in Maine throughout our history . Land was stolen from Native 
peop les and their culture suppressed; French -Canadian s wer e punished for  
speaking their native language; neighborhoods were redlined so that Irish 
Cath olics and Blacks  and Jews were segregated in the ir own communities. All 
endured  employment discrimination.  And on and on.  
 
In recent years we ’ve be gun to come to terms with the long -term negative effects 
of legal discrimination.  It’s not just that such discrimination inflicts emotional and 
psychological trauma , although that should be enough to make us stop and think . 
But there are long term economic conseq uences from  not being able to buy a 
house in  a certain town (or at all), of being denied access to public programs that 
could have helped you and your  family thrive , of being barred from colleges and 
universities . The social, political , and financial assets ancestors  amass  give the 
future  generations  a head start compared to those who were prevented from 
doing so  by our Constitution and o ur laws. This is bad for fami lies and bad for our 
economy.  
 
Alice P aul, the suffrage leader who co -authored t he original ERA in 1923 and 
spent the res t of her life  trying to  get it through Congress and ratified , once said “I 
never doubted that equal rights was the right direct ion. Most reforms, most 
problems are complicated. But to me there is nothing complicated about ordinary 
equality.” 
 
The q uestion for the Judiciary Committee  and the Maine legislature  isn’t “Why 
should we pass 1412 ?” but “Why  wouldn’t we?” 
 
There’s nothing complicated  about ordinary  equality. It’s good for families. It ’s 
good for Maine. Please approve LD 1412.  
 
 
