x W» 
I am Barbara Cray from Westport Island. I am an attorney here in Maine, and like 
to think of myself as a student of Constitutional law. 
In January of last year I testified before this committee in favor of an Equal Rights 
Amendment in Maine prohibiting denial of equal rights on account of sex, giving 
women a constitutional right to equality. I am back today to urge this Committee 
to vote “ought to pass” for this new Equal Rights Amendment which goes beyond 
discrimination on account of sex, and adds the statuses already recognized by the 
Maine Human Rights Act. 
So why should this Equal Rights Amendment be part of the Maine Constitution, 
and why now‘? Simply because it can be done and it is the right thing to do. 
State constitutions combined with the federal Constitution make up the indivisible 
whole of the American constitutional tradition. State constitutions are not just 
technical governing documents, but provide protections and positive rights to its 
citizens, both in the absence of, or consistent with, federal constitutional 
protections. Although Maine has a robust Human Rights Act and Civil Rights Act, 
neither are as broad in prohibiting denial of equal rights as the proposed 
constitutional amendment. And statutes can be changed or negated by legislatures 
and executive action. Whereas a constitutional amendment embeds these 
fundamental rights into Maine’s governing document. And it sends a message to 
the people it protects that Maine has your back. 
And so why now? 
In my prior testimony, one of the reasons I urged passage of the ERA, which to my 
surprise appeared in the Press Herald the following morning, was the rise of far 
right, neo-facist and militant male organizations who are self-proclaimed “Western 
chauvanists ” who want to deny rights to women. Well, since those remarks, 
wholesale denial of rights for women has expanded beyond the creed of smaller 
militant groups to members of the United States Supreme Court, and far right 
republican governors, federal legislators and state legislatures. The rights of 
women are under attack. LGBTQ rights are under attack, especially by unfairly 
targeting trans people. And racial and religious inequities are legislated. 
I was shocked to my core when I attended the United States Senate Judiciary 
Committee hearing on the original Equal Rights Amendment in February and 
heard Lindsay Graham, Ted Cruz and others assert that the times in which we live 
have changed, and that the ERA would not get a 2/3 vote now. So as a result they

And 
Heroes don’t look like they used to, they look like you do 
I urge you to be a hero to all those who will beneﬁt from a constitutional right to 
equality in Maine.
