Bonnie Hackett
S Berwick
LD 1412
There already exists equal rights - Both women and men already have a full claim to 
equal rights under the 5th and 14th Amendments.
There already exists laws that prohibit sex discrimination - There are numerous laws 
in virtually all areas of American life (e.g. employment, education, credit eligibility, 
housing, public accommodations, etc.) that prohibit sex discrimination.
This bill has everything to do with abortion! - The ERA could be interpreted as 
enshrining in our Constitution a right to taxpayer-funded abortions because under the 
ERA there would be no difference between abortions and medically necessary 
procedures sought by men, so the state must pay for abortions. There are multiple 
states that have passed this bill and then been court ordered to fund abortions.
This bill would empower courts to define “sex” - The courts would be empowered to 
define “sex” and “equality of rights,” which could grant special legal rights to people 
on the basis of “sexual orientation” and “gender identity,” which would threaten 
religious liberty and conscience protections.
The bill would jeopardize privacy and safety - Traditional male and female 
bathrooms, locker rooms, hospital rooms, nursing homes, etc. would be nullified 
because under the ERA women and men must be treated as indistinguishable. This 
would place our young children at risk and seriously jeopardize privacy.
It would supersede Title IX – The ERA would permit males and females to compete 
for inclusion on the same sports teams, as evidenced by Pennsylvania’s Supreme 
Court which invalidated sex segregated sports policies, including contact sports, 
citing the state’s ERA. Integrated prison system - Male and female prisons will 
become integrated according to Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsberg, and 
result in harsher discipline for females since they would be required to be treated in 
the same way as men. Auto and life insurance for women would increase - Regardless
of the statistical evidence showing that women live longer than men or women have 
better driving records, women would likely have to pay the same rates as men.
