I 
1 1 E‘ < it 
;“ 
- Z3»h i’ E3 1‘ 2 .-. KQ 
April 24, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, 
l join you today in support of LD 1412, "RESOLUTlON, Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine Establishing That All Maine Residents Have Equal Rights Under 
the Law" , on behalf of the Maine Women’s Lobby, which adovcates for gender justice for all 
Mainers. We thank Rep. Reckitt for sponsoring this important legislation. 
Maine has deeply held beliefs and values regarding equality and protection from discrimination 
- in fact, our. Human Rights Act is a. national model. Still, data - as well as our own eyes and 
experiences - make it clear that we have not yet achieved the equality we dream of. Women in 
Maine: 
o Are more likely to live in poverty (1), 
0 Still make between .66 and .88 cents for every $1.00 a white man makes (2), 
v Are more likely to experience sexual harassment and violence (3);_ 
Q Are more likely to be discriminated against in the workplace (4); and 
0 Are less likely to be represented in Government (Women make up only 28 percent of the 
US Congress, and 32 percent of State Legislatures. Maine is at the forefront, but still 
with less than parity at 44 percent in our state legislature (5)). 
All of this, and the effects are even more profound and harmful for women who also 
experience racism, homophobia, transphobia, xenophobia, and discrimination based on 
differing abilities. 
An amendment to our Constitution won't solve all of these problems - these are structural 
inequities that no single law or amendment can change. Still, there are a few very specific 
circumstances that this Amendment could address: 
0 Offering protections where the Maine Human Rights Act is silent, especially around 
redress for experience of gender-based or racially-motivated violence. 
~ Pay equity, which has actually been exacerbated by COVID-19 - in fact, we are losing 
ground substantially in that realm, with the gender-based and race-based pay 
disparities actually growing (6). While several state laws have chipped away at this,a 
Constitutional right offers protections that a state law does not afford. 
v Clarifying that all Mainers who are harmed by discrimination based on gender, race, 
religion, ability, and nation or origin are equally protected and valued under the law. 
o Creating avenues for redress and accountability that currently fall short. I know 
from over a decade in sexual assault response work that one size does not fit all whenit
comes to the experiences for survivors or the pathways to justice. We know that real 
justice and equity is achieved through many means, and this amendment could be one 
tool to that end. 
Systemic challenges need and deserve systemic solutions, embedded in state 
government. We don’t even have a statewide infrastrcuture to address these kinds of inequities 
built into our state, in fact, a bill for the first funding for our state's Permanent Commission on 
the Status of Women is before the Legislature right now. lt is currently run almost entirely by 
volunteer labor. That is not equity. It's time to write equity into our state’s foundational 
documents, and then keep going, until our government reflects the people it is built to 
serve. 
Finally, a Constitutinal amendment is also an opportunity to bring the voice of Mainers into 
shaping what justice looks like in our state. We know that we share a dream of statewide equity, 
and we should extend the opportunity to weigh in to all Maine voters. We hope you will vote 
‘Ought to Pass’ on LD 1412. 
Sincerely, 
Destie Hohman Sprague, Maine Women’s Lobby 
(1) United States Census Bureau, 2014-2018 Poverty Rate in the United States By County. (2019). Retrieved from 
https://www.census.govI|ibrary/visualizations ﬁnteractive/2014-2018-poverty-rate-by-county.html 
(2)Lifetime Wage Gap Losses for Women Overall State Rankings: 2018. (2020, March). Retrieved August 3, 2020, 
from https://nwlc-ciw49tixgw5lbab.staokpathdns.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/03NVomen-Overall-Lifetime-Losses- 
2020-v3-1.pdf 
(3) Dumont, Robyn MPPM and Shaler, George MPH (2015). 2015 Maine Crime Victimization Survey: Informing Public 
Policy for Safer Communities. Maine Statistical Analysis Center. Retrieved from 
https:l/digitalcommons.usm.maine.edu/maine_statistical_analysis_center/5 
(4) PanAtlantic Research (2019). Reportto Maine Can Do on Sexual Harassment in Maine Workplaces. 
(5) Rutgers University (2021). Center for American Women in Politics. Retrieved from 
https://cawp.rutgers.edu/factsllevels-office/state-Iegislature/women-state-legislatures-2023 
(6) Cutler Institute of Health Policy. (2022). Economic Security of Older Women in Maine: A Databook. Retrieved from 
https:/iwwwm ainewomen.orq!slEconom icSecurityOlderWomeninMaineReoort-FlNAL2.odf
