 
PO 257  Auburn, ME  04212-0257     (207) 782-0101  fax (207) 782-0221 
www.MaineRightToLife.com   MRLC@MaineRightToLife.com  
 
Testimony in opposition 
LD 1412: RESOLUTION, Proposing Amendment to the Constitution of Maine Establishing That All Maine Residents Have 
Equal Rights Under The Law 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Judiciary Committee.  My name is Karen 
Vachon and I am the Executive Director of Maine Right To Life, located in Auburn.  I come before you today in 
opposition to  LD 1412 RESOLUTION, Proposing Amendment to the Constitution of Maine Establishing That All Maine 
Residents Have Equal Rights Under The Law 
 
 
Maine Right to Life is a state affiliate of the National Right To Life Committee.  We are a non-profit organization 
founded to protect and uphold the dignity and worth of every human life from conception to natural death by making 
abortion, infanticide, and euthanasia socially, ethically, and legally unacceptable and to actively promote positive 
alternatives.   
 
Maine Right to Life supports equal political rights, where both male and female citizens shall enjoy equally all civil, 
political, and religious privileges.  We are Pro-Life, Pro-Active, and Pro-Women .  Our members share a belief that 
women were created uniquely different than men to fulfill a very important role in mankind.  Women have a womb.  
They bring new life into the world.  They are to be honored, respected, and protected.  
 
ERA Ratification goes too far and isn’t necessary.  T he Equal Pay Act of 1963 ,The Civil Rights Act of 1964  prohibits 
discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin, the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 
1972,  The 14th Amendment to the US Constitution , Title IX of the Education Amendments Act of 1972 , are laws 
already in place to protect women.   ERA ratification hurts women – it jeopardizes their unique needs and physical 
biological differences resulting in the stripping of gender roles.  This will impact alimony, child custody, sexual assault 
protection, and lead to single sex bathrooms, increased taxpayer funded abortions, and the forced military draft of 
women. 
 
Equal rights sounds so fair and equitable.   Members of this committee – don’t be fooled.  This will hurt biological 
women – it is discriminatory against biological women.  Not only does it displace the traditional role of women, it 
degrades motherhood, and it gives biological women an uneven and disadvantaged playing field – most recently 
displayed when men identifying as women have hijacked women’s sports.  It also puts biological women at risk when 
biological men identify as women are admitted into locker rooms, shelters, and the like. 
 
For the protection of all women – living and unborn, I humbly ask this committee to vote no on this proposed 
resolution. 
 
 
Karen Vachon 
Executive Director 
www.mainerighttolife.com  
karen@mainerighttolife.com  
 
Karen Vachon
Auburn
LD 1412
Testimony in opposition
LD 1412: RESOLUTION, Proposing Amendment to the Constitution of Maine 
Establishing That All Maine Residents Have Equal Rights Under The Law
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Judiciary 
Committee.  My name is Karen Vachon and I am the Executive Director of Maine 
Right To Life, located in Auburn.  I come before you today in opposition to  LD 1412
RESOLUTION, Proposing Amendment to the Constitution of Maine Establishing 
That All Maine Residents Have Equal Rights Under The Law
Maine Right to Life is a state affiliate of the National Right To Life Committee.  We 
are a non-profit organization founded to protect and uphold the dignity and worth of 
every human life from conception to natural death by making abortion, infanticide, 
and euthanasia socially, ethically, and legally unacceptable and to actively promote 
positive alternatives.  
Maine Right to Life supports equal political rights, where both male and female 
citizens shall enjoy equally all civil, political, and religious privileges.  We are 
Pro-Life, Pro-Active, and Pro-Women .  Our members share a belief that women were
created uniquely different than men to fulfill a very important role in mankind.  
Women have a womb.  They bring new life into the world.  They are to be honored, 
respected, and protected. 
ERA Ratification goes too far and isn’t necessary.  The Equal Pay Act of 1963,The 
Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, 
sex, or national origin, the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972, The 14th 
Amendment to the US Constitution, Title IX of the Education Amendments Act of 
1972 , are laws already in place to protect women.   ERA ratification hurts women – it
jeopardizes their unique needs and physical biological differences resulting in the 
stripping of gender roles.  This will impact alimony, child custody, sexual assault 
protection, and lead to single sex bathrooms, increased taxpayer funded abortions, and
the forced military draft of women.
Equal rights sounds so fair and equitable.   Members of this committee – don’t be 
fooled.  This will hurt biological women – it is discriminatory against biological 
women.  Not only does it displace the traditional role of women, it degrades 
motherhood, and it gives biological women an uneven and disadvantaged playing 
field – most recently displayed when men identifying as women have hijacked 
women’s sports.  It also puts biological women at risk when biological men identify 
as women are admitted into locker rooms, shelters, and the like.
For the protection of all women – living and unborn, I humbly ask this committee to 
vote no on this proposed resolution.
Karen Vachon
Executive Director
www.mainerighttolife.com
karen@mainerighttolife.com

