April	21,	2023		Dear	Judiciary	Chair	Representative	Matt	Moonen	and	members	of	the	Judiciary	Committee,			I	am	writing	in	strong	support	of	LD	1412,	the	Maine	Equal	Rights	Amendment.		It	is	just	amazing	to	me	we	don’t	have	a	federal	one	already!		I	thought	that	democracy	would	win	out	and	the	original	federal	ERA	would	certainly	be	part	of	our	Constitution	by	now.		A	majority	of	Americans	want	it	and	so	do	a	majority	of	Mainers,	reportedly.	So	why	is	our	democracy	dragging	its	feet	when	it	comes	to	women’s	rights?			At	the	moment	the	Maine	ERA	seems	to	be	held	hostage	by	those	who	want	to	block	women’s	rights	to	an	abortion—but	this	is	about	so	much	more	than	abortion.	It	is	about	being	paid	equally,	about	similar	numbers	of	women	being	promoted	as	men,	about	getting	equal	consideration,	and	about	protection.	And	basic	respect.		In	my	career	during	the	1980s	and	1990s	I	worked	for	a	federal	agency	as	a	scientist	and	it	wasn’t	until	many	years	later	that	I	realized	that	I	was	not	mentored	like	my	male	counterparts,	either	in	college	or	during	my	career.		I	missed	out	on	all	sorts	of	opportunities	without	even	knowing	about	it.		If	there	had	been	an	equal	rights	amendment,	I	think	that	statistics	would	have	required	actions	to	be	taken	to	make	sure	women	would	advance	and	take	leadership	roles	in	similar	numbers	to	men.	Several	women	I	knew	suffered	sexual	harassment	from	their	bosses.	I	never	thought	that	we’d	still	be	fighting	these	same	battles	in	2023,	but	just	a	few	years	ago	I	read	about	some	of	the	same	sorts	of	stories	of	harassment,	especially	during	field	work,	going	on	in	another	federal	science	agency—I	was	stunned	and	disappointed	that	the	same	issues	were	still	going	on!		What	women	have	now	is	a	patchwork	of	laws	protecting	them	in	some	ways,	and	these	laws	can	be	changed	at	any	time—that	is	just	not	acceptable!	Everyone	deserves	equal	protection	under	the	law—what	kind	of	a	society	is	this	that	can’t	see	their	way	to	making	everyone	equal	under	the	constitution?		The	Bangor	Daily	News	has	thrown	a	light	on	sexual	harassment	and	discrimination	against	women	in	Maine	over	the	past	few	years	at	the	Maine	General	Medical	Center	and	in	the	Maine	National	Guard,	showing	that	harassment	and	discrimination	are	ongoing	problems	here	in	Maine,	not	something	that	our	society	has	gotten	past	as	some	assume,	and	I	suspect	there	is	much	more	of	it	going	on	than	has	been	reported.		Women	suffering	harassment	and	discrimination	deserve	better.		They	deserve	not	to	have	their	careers	undermined,	and	they	deserve	to	be	rewarded	in	their	jobs	based	on	their	merits	and	hard	work.		I	believe	that	an	ERA	would	also	help	protect	women	who	suffer	domestic	abuse.		Even	now,	some	local	jurisdictions	seem	to	believe	that	domestic	abuse	is	people’s	private	business	instead	of	a	criminal	act,	with	local	jurisdictions	sometimes	failing	to	enforce	state	or	local	protection	orders.	How	can	we	allow	these	antiquated	and	dangerous	views	to	continue?		I	urge	you	to	vote	for	LD	1412,	an	amendment	to	the	Maine	constitution,	in	order	to	give	the	people	of	Maine	the	chance	to	vote	on	it	themselves,	the	truly	democratic	way	to	handle	this	issue.		I	hope	we	can	bring	Maine	out	of	the	dark	ages	into	a	future	with	equal	rights	for	all.	Think	about	your	own	friends	and	relatives	who	could	be	discriminated	against,	and	how	you	would	like	them	to	thrive!		Leda	Beth	Gray,	Blue	Hill,	Maine.	
Leda Beth Gray
Blue Hill, Maine
LD 1412
April 21, 2023
Dear Judiciary Chair Representative Matt Moonen and members of the Judiciary 
Committee, 
I am writing in strong support of LD 1412, the Maine Equal Rights Amendment.  It is 
just amazing to me we don’t have a federal one already!  I thought that democracy 
would win out and the original federal ERA would certainly be part of our 
Constitution by now.  A majority of Americans want it and so do a majority of 
Mainers, reportedly. So why is our democracy dragging its feet when it comes to 
women’s rights? 
At the moment the Maine ERA seems to be held hostage by those who want to block 
women’s rights to an abortion—but this is about so much more than abortion. It is 
about being paid equally, about similar numbers of women being promoted as men, 
about getting equal consideration, and about protection. And basic respect.
In my career during the 1980s and 1990s I worked for a federal agency as a scientist 
and it wasn’t until many years later that I realized that I was not mentored like my 
male counterparts, either in college or during my career.  I missed out on all sorts of 
opportunities without even knowing about it.  If there had been an equal rights 
amendment, I think that statistics would have required actions to be taken to make 
sure women would advance and take leadership roles in similar numbers to men. 
Several women I knew suffered sexual harassment from their bosses. I never thought 
that we’d still be fighting these same battles in 2023, but just a few years ago I read 
about some of the same sorts of stories of harassment, especially during field work, 
going on in another federal science agency—I was stunned and disappointed that the 
same issues were still going on!
What women have now is a patchwork of laws protecting them in some ways, and 
these laws can be changed at any time—that is just not acceptable! Everyone deserves
equal protection under the law—what kind of a society is this that can’t see their way 
to making everyone equal under the constitution?
The Bangor Daily News has thrown a light on sexual harassment and discrimination 
against women in Maine over the past few years at the Maine General Medical Center
and in the Maine National Guard, showing that harassment and discrimination are 
ongoing problems here in Maine, not something that our society has gotten past as 
some assume, and I suspect there is much more of it going on than has been reported. 
Women suffering harassment and discrimination deserve better.  They deserve not to 
have their careers undermined, and they deserve to be rewarded in their jobs based on 
their merits and hard work.
I believe that an ERA would also help protect women who suffer domestic abuse.  
Even now, some local jurisdictions seem to believe that domestic abuse is people’s 
private business instead of a criminal act, with local jurisdictions sometimes failing to
enforce state or local protection orders. How can we allow these antiquated and 
dangerous views to continue?
I urge you to vote for LD 1412, an amendment to the Maine constitution, in order to 
give the people of Maine the chance to vote on it themselves, the truly democratic 
way to handle this issue.  I hope we can bring Maine out of the dark ages into a future 
with equal rights for all. Think about your own friends and relatives who could be 
discriminated against, and how you would like them to thrive!
Leda Beth Gray, Blue Hill, Maine.

