Lee Umphrey, President & CEO, Eastern Maine Development Corporation  
Supporting LD 1412 
Before the Maine Committee on Judiciary, Augusta  
April 24, 2023  
  
Thank you, Madam Chair Senator Anne Carney, House Chair Matt Noonen, and 
Members of the Committee on Judiciary,   
 
My name is Lee Umphrey, President & CEO of Eastern Maine Development 
Corporation (EMDC) and here in strong support of LD 1412 – A Resolution 
Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine Establishing That All 
Maine Residents Have Equal Rights Under the Law. 
 
EMDC is a community-based, nonprofit organization that fosters public-private 
relationships and provides programmatic services while leveraging resources that 
help businesses, communities, and individuals reach long-term goals and 
prosperity. We are the only economic development organization in the state that 
provides small business lending, economic and municipal comprehensive 
planning, and workforce development services in our region and statewide.   
 
Our integrated community-based programs and individualized services accelerate 
economic and workforce development and success. We also seek to 
ensure smooth navigation around social barriers including 
access to affordable childcare, healthcare, housing, and discrimination and equity 
issues that might impede their success. To that end, ERA is both an economic and 
equality issue.   
 
Increasingly,  EMDC programs have more women in our business and workforce 
programs. Challenges include balancing family, childcare, and financial 
planning.  Because working women in our state and nationwide are 
driving economic progress we need to do better in creating policies 
and workplaces for women to feel equal and valued.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
One hundred and three years ago, Maine voted to ratified the Nineteenth 
Amendment ensuring that the right to vote could not be denied in our nation. 
Contrary to speculation, Representative Lois Reckitt and Governor Janet Mills was 
not present during that historic moment but have worked tirelessly for equality 
since then.  The Governor and Lois’s work over all these years in Maine will always 
grow because the next generation, with Labor Commissioner Laura Fortman, and 
DECD Commissioner Heather Johnson fight every day to protect and promote 
women in the workplace. In many ways, Commissioner Fortman is following the 
focus of Newcastle’s Frances Perkins, the first woman in a presidential cabinet as 
Secretary of Labor in protecting economic, workplace safety and equal pay for 
equal work.   
    
For those who say this endeavor is not needed, I offer another first woman 
of Maine, Senator Margaret Smith. A Republican, Senator Smith was the first 
woman elected to both the US House and US Senate. While her declaration of 
conscience is well known for supporting fundamental rights for all, her advocacy 
for women in the military was equally profound. In 1948, she saw injustice and 
inequality and fought for and achieved permanent protection, status, and equality 
for the Women’s Army Corps. Senator Smith did this because it was good public 
policy and she saw her role as a public servant as being an efficient and honest 
broker to do what is right.   
 
To that end, I support Lois and her longtime policy partners in proudly, plainly and 
persistently endorsing the ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment. At the 
same time, let’s recognize the remarkable women leaders of Maine and renew 
the commitment we must sustain for fair and lasting prosperity.  The  Maine 
Constitution , was created when women had limited rights, so it falls short of 
protecting its citizens from sex discrimination. To fix that, a constitutional 
amendment is needed. This is good business for Maine.     
 
 
   
  
  
 
