Senator Carney, Representative Harnett,         4-19-23 
and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary:  
 
I am writing to testify against LD 1412, RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine Establishing 
That All Maine Residents Have Equal Rights Under the Law, which was submitted by Representative Reckitt.  
 
While the proposed amendment pu rports to be for the purpose of keeping one's rights from being denied or abridged 
based on sex, there is already a guarantee in Article I, Section 6 -A of our state's constitution stating that no one is to be 
denied equal protection of the law or be denied  enjoyment of their civil rights or be discriminated against.  That would 
seem to say that, whether man or woman, our rights are already afforded equal protection.  (And of course, the 
Declaration of Independence and our national Constitution also view men  and women as equal and afford to all the 
rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.)  
Unfortunately, the proposal to amend the state constitution mirrors the recent attempt nation -wide to add an ERA 
(Equal Rights Amendment) to our national Con stitution.  Having failed at that, it has become the current strategy for 
those who did not succeed at the latter to now try the former – hoping to gain on a state -by-state basis what could not 
be procured federally.  
It is widely recognized that the natio nal amendment that failed was not so much about equality as about expanding the 
"right" to abortion.  It is not a stretch then to divine that the proposed amendment to our own state -level constitution is 
also more about setting up a framework that would al low for an expansion of abortion "rights" than about ensuring an 
equality that women already possess.  
Abortion is, quite simply, the taking of an innocent human life.  The opening of our state constitution declares in Section 
I, Natural Rights that all peo ple have the unalienable right to enjoy life.  And this unalienable right —the right to life —is 
also delineated in the Declaration of Independence and the 14th amendment of our national Constitution.  It is 
unalienable because it comes from the Creator.  It  is not a right that is conferred upon us by a governmental body; 
rather it is a God -given right that should be protected.  But government cannot claim to protect life while also making 
allowance for the killing of the unborn under the guise of "choice."  Every life is precious.  Unborn children and partially -
born children have as much right to life as you or I, but they have no voice.  Even in this enlightened, scientific era where  
we can see both 3D ultrasound pictures and video images captured from the w omb, we live in such moral darkness that 
these infants still need others to speak out in their defense.  
It says in the preamble to our state constitution that we, the people of Maine, "implore God's aid and direction."  Do we 
truly mean that anymore?  Ecc lesiastes says, "Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin . . . Wherefore should God 
be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands?"  If we the people of Maine desire God's aid and direction on 
this or any other matter, we have only to l ook in His Word to find it.  He shows us repeatedly through Scripture that 
children are precious in His sight.  Take, as one example, the text of Psalm 127:3 –  
Lo, children are an heritage of the LORD:  
and the fruit of the womb is his reward.  
If only we the people of Maine (and we the people of America at large) could align ourselves with God's heart on this!  
To secure the blessings of life and liberty for our posterity, I respectfully ask that you vote against LD 1412.  And I thank 
you in advance for yo ur time and for your sincere deliberation in this matter.  
Sincerely,  
Lisa E. Beal  
Cherryfield, ME, USA  
