_, , HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
-5. 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
g t 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
* 
(207) 287-1400 
Lois Gﬂégy Reckitt TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
38 Myrtle Avenue 
South Portland, ME 04106 
Cell Phone: (207) 712-2474 
Lois Reckitt@legislature.maine. gov 
April 24, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Lois Galgay Reckitt introducing 
LD 1412, Resolution, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution 
of Maine Establishing That All Maine Residents Have Equal Rights 
Under the Law 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Good morning, Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and esteemed colleagues on the 
Judiciary Committee. My name is Lois Galgay Reckitt, and I am the Representative for House 
District 122, which is the ocean end of South Portland. I stand before you today as the proud and 
persistent sponsor of LD 1412, Resolution, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine Establishing That All Maine Residents Have Equal Rights Under the Law. 
I am asking you to take a journey with me this morning. It is the story, much abbreviated, of how 
I ended up before you today — in this state, in this room — asking you to open your hearts — to 
help me take the remaining steps with joy in my heart. 
It was a miracle, unfortunately seldom seen these days. I grew up poor, but my father worked 
three jobs and my mom took in sewing. I spent my childhood summers in a $40/week tiny 
cottage beside a tidal river in Goose Rocks Beach. When I was 7 years old, I told my motherI 
wanted to move to Maine. She suggested I wait until I grew up. I taught swimming standing in 
the ocean as soon as I was old enough. I learned to love the ocean. I learned to love Maine. 
At age 23, with a degree in marine ecology, I married a Coastguardsman stationed in South 
Portland and moved to Maine. That same year, 1968, I began my ﬁrst “real” job teaching Marine 
Biology, Marine Botany and Food Science at what was then called Southern Maine Vocational 
Technical Institute. It was one of my favorite jobs — even though that year there were only 11 
women students on campus and three women faculty, two of us part-time. 
The next year I did a stereotypical “whither thou goest” and moved to Chicago. Thankfully, we 
retumed six months later, and in 1971, we bought the house I have lived in to this day. 
Unfortunately, by that time, job prospects for women were even more scarce — and I needed to 
work. So, having taught swimming throughout my teen years, I took a job as swimming director 
at the YWCA in Portland. I stayed there nine years.
1
One night in 1971, a woman named Wilma Scott Heide, newly elected president of the National 
Organization for Women (N OW), came to speak at what was then the University of Maine at 
Portland-Gorharn. That night changed the entire course of my life. During Wilma’s speech, she 
totally transposed gender roles — and it was shocking to the ears. During discussion, she 
explained that as far as she could tell, the only sex-speci ﬁc jobs were as follows: only women 
could be Wet nurses — and only men could be“ sperm donors. Aside from those roles, all else was 
interchangeable. Wilma had just come from the U.S. Congress, where she participated in protests 
that ﬁnally released the Equal Rights Amendment to the states for ratiﬁcation after nearly 50 
years of efforts. It had been introduced in Congress every year since the year of my mother’s 
birth, 1923. 
The next night, a small group of us met at the YWCA and founded the ﬁrst chapter of NOW in 
Maine, Southem Maine NOW. At the founding meeting I agreed to be the treasurer of the 
chapter — little did I know the path on which that would propel my life. After my stint as 
treasurer, in 1971 I became president, in 1973 state coordinator. In the latter role, I helped lead 
the efforts for ratiﬁcation in Maine — unsuccessfully in 1973, successfully in 1974. In 1976,I 
was elected to the national board, where I served as a volunteer for more than a decade. I lobbied 
in South. Carolina, picketed the Miss America pageant in Atlantic City, marched in Springﬁeld, 
Illinois, in a borrowed 1890s bathing suit, and picketed the Freedom Train in Portland, Maine. 
Although NOW’s primary focus was equality for women, nearly all of us believed in' 
intersectionality before it was characterized by that term. Our vision was equality for all — but as 
the largest group “left out” by the US Constitution, despite Abigail Adams’ lobbying of her 
husband John to “Remember the Ladies” in the writing of our federal Constitution, we aimed to 
ﬁx that grievous error by passing the Equal Rights Amendment. 
When the arbitrary deadline for federal ratiﬁcation passed, many did — and still do — continue to 
ﬁght for federal ratiﬁcation. 
When federal ratiﬁcation stalled, states began to introduce initiatives to strengthen and protect 
the position of and possibilities for women. These initiatives vary in their words and occasionally 
in their scope. 
As most of you are aware, I was chosen by the voters of part of South Portland to represent them 
here in Augusta in the election of 2016. 
For three terms in the 128“ , 129“ and 130“ Legislatures, I have introduced and fought for 
constitutional equality for Maine women — but because we need a two-thirds vote in both the 
House and Senate, I have never reached the next step ~— a vote by the citizens of Maine. To my 
recollection, only one Republican, Senator Kim Rosen of Bucksport, has ever answered the call 
to “Let the People Vote.” 
I pride myself on being a very determined person. Deserting my core beliefs, like equality, is not 
in my playbook. Last November I watched as the state of Nevada took a novel approach and sent 
a broader articulation of constitutional equality to Nevada voters. Voters there subsequently 
ratiﬁed that state’s proposed equality amendment by a signiﬁcant margin.
2
I am a patient and persistent legislator, and I am not averse to new ways of advocating important 
ideas. I thank the Nevada Legislature for showing me a new way. 
So — this year’s proposal for constitutional equality in Maine is broader, more inclusive and more 
appropriate for the diverse citizenry that now comprises Maine. This proposal before you seeks 
to make constitutional what this Legislature has already made, over the years, statutory reality 
through the work of the Maine Human Rights Commission. 
LD 1412 represents a straightforward yet strong concept that can ensure that the winds of change 
cannot easily be dismissed. Equal rights in Maine will encompass all our citizens. We will 
prohibit the denial or abridgment by the State or any political subdivision of the State of equal 
rights based on the actual or perceived race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender 
identity, gender expression, age, physical or mental disability, ancestry or national origin of an 
individual.i 
This is my ﬁnal tenn in the Maine House. Let it end with a vote for justice and equality — and 
make more permanent what has been accepted by the populace and the Legislature as 
appropriate. I ask this committee to send LD 1412 to a vote — and I urge you and all the members 
of the House and Senate to “Let the People Speak.”
3
