, so 
(207) 771:-~:s41w 
wwm/.acH.2maine Um Portk-incl, ii./2? W H_ 
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTSES UNHIN 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
VLD 1412 - Ought to Pass 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine 
Establishing That All Maine'Residents Have Equal Rights Under the Law 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON J UDICIARY 
April 24, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Committee on 
Judiciary, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, and I am Policy Director for the 
American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization committed to 
advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions. I am here today to testify in support of LD 1412. 
For more than 100 years, the ACLU has been at the forefront of _the struggle to win 
full legal equality for all. For example, since its founding, the ACLU has argued 
more women’s rights cases before the United States Supreme Court than any other 
organization. In 1970, we endorsed the Equal Rights Amendment, and established 
our Women’s Rights Project soon after, directed by then~Professor Ruth Bader 
Ginsburg. In the context of that legacy, we are proud to support an amendment top 
the Maine constitution that will guarantee equal rights to people in Maine 
regardless of their actual or perceived race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, 
gender identity, gender expression, age, physical or mental disability, ancestry or 
national origin.’ 
The central concept of civil liberties is that all individuals have the fundamental 
right to be judged on the basis of their individual characteristics and capabilities, 
not the characteristics and capabilities that are supposedly shared by any group or 
class to which they might belong. This fundamental right is the premise of the 
Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which guarantees the 
equal protection of the laws to all individuals. 
The Fourteenth Amendment has not been an effective tool to combat many forms of 
discrimination, including sex and race discrimination. Though the Fourteenth 
Amendment covers all “persons, ” it is worth noting that when it was adopted in 
1868 women were not “persons” in the legal sense. Despite the guarantees of equal 
protection in the federal and Maine constitutions, inequities in our legalsystem 
remain.V
LD 1412 would enshrine full legalequality in the Maine Constitution for protected 
classes. It is wrong to suggest that we should not act because the amendment would 
cause some uncertainty and require legislation and, possibly, litigation to clarify its 
specific meanings. The same could be said of every section of the state and federal 
constitutions. It is Wrong also to assume that passage of the Equal Rights 
Amendment Will invalidate any of the necessary protections and benefits that have 
been extended to protected classes by statute. This amendment would not supplant 
or invalidate any existing statutory protections, but would complement and 
strengthen them. 
It is time for Maine to recognize the full legal equality of Maine’s people. We urge 
you to vote ought to pass._
\
