Christian Civic League of Maine 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Maine Committee on Judiciary, I am Mike 
McClellan, Policy Director for the Christian Civic League of Maine. The Christian Civic League of Maine 
envisions a state and nation where God is honored, religious freedom flourishes, families thrive, and life 
is cherished. We believe a Biblical approach works in life and including in governance. 
I am here to testify in opposition to LD 1412 - RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the 
Constitution of Maine Establishing That All Maine Residents Have Equal Rights Under the Law. This bill is 
again sponsored by Representative Reckitt. 
I waited to testify last week and as I listened to another public hearing, I heard a sponsor say he had put 
the proposed bill in 3 times and not to worry, he was terming out and this would be the last try. I found 
that as strange and not as funny as he suggested. The Maine Legislature has important work and should 
be able to focus on that work and not agendas. Yes, we have seen LD 1412 before. In the 130"‘ Maine 
Legislature LD 344 when voted on, the House was 77-59 and the State Senate 22-12. In the 129th 
Legislature LD 433 we saw a House vote of 87-54 and the State Senate 26-9. Senator Bennett of Oxford 
stood in the discussion of LD 344 in the 130"‘ State Senate and pointed out that the Maine 
Constitution Article 1 says rights go to ALL people of Maine. He rightly pointed out that this bill is not 
needed. If there are issues with rights in Maine, it is thus an enforcement issue, not the need of a law or 
a drastic Constitutional Amendment. 
From past discussions of this bill we know: There already exists equal rights in Maine, there already 
exists laws that prohibit discrimination, this bill is about abortion rights as it would allow Maine courts to 
define ”sex," and LD 1412 would supersede Title IX -hurting women, not making them equal. 
We have seen in other states where this bill has been used to create "special rights" for specific groups, I 
would ask that you do your work under the idea of creating laws that serve and protect ALL people. LD 
1412 is not needed for various reasons. Maine does have other areas that need your attention, I suggest 
you eliminate this proposed legislation and focus on areas that need your attention. 
Thank you for your time and consideration today. 
Know that many Maine citizens are hopeful of your actions and are praying for you and your family. 
God bless, 
Mike 
70 Sewall Street, Augusta, Maine 04330 Phone: (207) 329-6148 
policy@ccln1ainc.0rg WWW.cc1maine.o1rg
