My name is Posie Cowan and I live in Brooksville. I co-founded Equal 
Right Maine seven years ago when a group of us realized that most 
Americans mistakenly believed that the Equal Rights Amendment had 
been ratiﬁed and Was part of the US Constitution. The fact that it had not 
means Women are not protected ﬁom sex discrimination in our 
Constitution or in our Maine Constitution. 
I have testified before this committee several times during previous 
sessions in support of a Maine Equal Rights Amendment 
I urged your members to vote for it so it can go out to a referendum 
allowing Maine voters to decide. I urge you today to let the voters 
decide. 
Our group’s mission is to educate and advocate for women to have the 
same constitutional legal protections and rights that men do. Since it will 
be years, maybe decades and possibly a century before an ERA will 
become part of the US Constitution, it is critical that Maine pass one 
now to protect Maine women from discrimination based on sex. 
26 other states have passed one and other states like NY and Mimiesota 
are currently working on passing one. 
Today I am addressing the need for a Maine Equal Rights Amendment 
to include discrimination based on sex. That is my area of expertise. 
Other speakers Will explain why it is necessary to have an expanded list 
included in the state amendment. All Mainers should be legally 
protected from any form of discrimination and that right should be 
embedded in the Maine Constitution because laws have been inadequate. 
I have a personal interest in this effort. Exactly one hundred years ago in 
1923 my great grandmother started working with Alice Paul to get 
an Equal Rights Amendment passed. The two of them along with many 
other women had just spent years campaigning for women’s right to 
vote. The suffrage campaign started in l848 and it took over 70 years 
and many generations of Women to make it happen.
Alice Paul and my great grandmother both knew and Wrote often that 
women would not be treated equally until there was a constitutional 
amendment guaranteeing equality. Getting the right to vote was not 
enough. They were correct. 
My heart felt wish is that my daughter, granddaughters and great 
granddaughters will not have to testify at another hearing on this subject. 
I hope that they will be living in a country where equality for all is 
enshrined in the Maine and hopefully the US Constitution. 
One of our most sacred democratic principles is Justice for all. 
One Way to assure that Will happen is to enshrine legal protections 
against discrimination in our Maine Constitution for all Mainers, not just 
for men. 
Thank you 
These are some of the arguments against the need to have a state ERA. 
“There are already laws addressing sex discrimination ”. 
Our answer: 
It is clear that passing laws to prevent sex discrimination in wages, 
violence against Women and sexual harassment have not been effective. 
Just look at the gender pay gap, the high number of sexual harassment 
and assault cases on and off campuses, pregnancy discrimination cases, 
domestic violence cases. Women need to have an explicit legal 
constitutional guarantee of equal protection because Congress can repeal 
existing laws by a simple majority and Judicial attitudes can shift.
**************>l<>l=>l<*****>l<* 
“The l4‘h amendment is sufficient for sex discrimination cases. We 
don’t need an ERA.” 
Our answer: 
There is irony in this argument. Using the protection clause of the 14*“ 
amendment for sex discrimination cases only started in 1971. At that 
time the Supreme Court justices created a separate standard for women 
to prove sex discrimination which was different from those asserting 
race discrimination. It was called intermediate scrutiny which meant 
that Women had to prove the business was intentionally. 
discriminating based on sex as opposed to defendants (the businesses) in 
race discrimination cases had to prove they did not intend to 
discriminate. That standard was called strict scrutiny. 
Obviou,sly sex discrimination cases are much harder to prove. 
Submitted April 24, 2023
