V HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES . . 
5, 
E‘ 
Q. 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
_p " 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 Suzanne Salisbury 
134 Park Road 
Westbrook, MB 04092 
Residence: (207) 899-6863 
Suzanne.Salisburig@legislature.maine.gov 
April 24, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Suzanne Salisbury in support of 
LD 1412, RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine 
Establishing That All Maine Residents Have Equal Rights Under the Law 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Sue Salisbury. I represent House District 128, which is 
part of the town of Westbrook. I am here today to speak in strong support of LD 1412, 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine Establishing 
That All Maine Residents Have Equal Rights Under the Law. 
As a mother, sister, aunt, daughter and elected official, I feel it is my duty to testify in favor of 
this bill. The fact that this has to even be discussed, let alone multiple times over the course of 
many years tells me that While we have come a long way in this country, we have a long way 
still to go. 
I may not have to have my husband’s approval to get a credit card or a loan anymore, but I still 
do not have the protection under the constitution that my male counterparts do. 
About three years ago I had a representative from Bathﬁtter come to my house to give mea 
quote on a new bathtub. After the man completed the measurements and gathered the 
information, he needed he asked if I wanted to wait for my husband to get home before he Went 
over the quote. I said no and asked him to leave that I wasn’t interested in the quote. WhenI 
Worked in EMS, and I showed up with a female partner we would often get asked who was going 
to drive the ambulance for us. 
I have heard it said that this change to the Constitution of Maine is not necessary, but I have to 
disagree. If we can’t even have this conversation in our everyday lives, how can we know that 
this protection is even there when it truly matters? 
It is time to make this change, I urge the committee to vote yes on this important bill! 
District l28: Part of Westbrook
