Susan D. Mackey Andrews  
3 Shore Road North  
Dover -Foxcroft, M aine  04426 -3920  
207-564-7835  
sdmandrews@gmail.com   
 
Testimon y in SUP PORT of LD 1412  
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine Establishing That Al l Maine 
Residents Have Equal Rights Under the Law  
 
April 23, 2023  
Dear Senator Carney, R epresentative Moonen , and Distinguished Members of the Joint 
Legislative , Committee on Judiciary,  
I am submitting this testimony  in support of LD 1412 , which will approve that this question be 
sent to the voters for final ratification .  I am an appointed Commissioner on the Maine 
Permane nt Commission on the Status of Women  currently in my second term. I bring the voice 
of women in rural Maine to th e Com mission .  
Currently, m en make up 48.9% and women make up 51.1% of the population in Maine  yet 
women continue to  earn less wage than men in our State, and nationally. The Commission 
fulfilled  out bi ennial obligation to the L egislature last year , fulfilling our role per statu te “ as a 
government appointed group dedicated to improving opportunities for women and girls. ” As 
such, we advise the Governor and members of the Legislature about policy and social issues 
affecting women and girls in the sta te Title 5, Chapter 371 -A: Permanent Commission on the 
Status of Women.  
Women play a larger role in caring for young children, family members with disabilities, and 
aging parents, and comprise the bulk of the paid workforce  in the care economy, which means 
the COVID -19 pandemic has taken a heavy toll on Maine women. Th is 2022 report explores the 
challenges our state faces in going beyond the broad grouping of "women" to better understand 
the race, ethnicity, age, disability, or other characteristics of women most affected by the COVID -
19 Pandemic . (https://www.maine.gov/sos/womens -comm/index.html ) 
The Covid -19 Pandemic  has ha d a disproportionate , negative impact up on Maine women, 
especially those in rural Maine. Domestic violence remains an intractable problem in Maine.  
Membe rs of the Joint Committee on the Judiciary  
April 23, 2023  
Page Two  
RE: LD 1412  
 
The wage gap is closing so slowly, white men s till earn 2.2 times what Black women earn in 
Maine  and more than many White  women in Maine.   In our rural region, nearly 4 5% of women 
previously  in the workfor ce have been unable to return to their jobs. Why? There is a variety of 
reasons b ut the most significant one is that their male partners make more money  than they do , 
and this fact alone drives the decision about who will stay home with the children in light of 
losing more than 50% of our child  care resources.  
Current laws simply do not require the State to do enough to address the most se vere patterns 
of inequality in Maine. The late Justice Antonin Scalia famously stated “Certainly the Constitution 
does not require discrimination on the basis of sex. The only issue is whether it prohibits it. It 
doesn’t.” Because we don’t have these prote ctions in the US Constitution it makes it doubly 
important that we have them in the Maine Constitution.  
I strongly urge you to vo te YES on  LD 1412 to let the people of our g reat Sta te vote to support 
the equal rights  of wome n.  
Thank you sincerely for your service to us in the L egislature.  I recogni ze that it isn ’t always easy, 
but want you to know we are grateful for your contributions and service.  
 
Sincerel y, 
 
Susa n D. Mackey Andrews  
3 Shore Road North  
Dover -Foxcroft, ME  04426  
 
 
 
 

