an/t/J 
Race. 
Color. 
Religion. 
Sex. 
Sexual orientation. 
Gender identity. 
Gender expression. 
Age. 
Physical or mental disability. 
Ancestry or national origin of an individual. 
These are all basic human rights that Mainers expect to be protected under our 
state constitution. 
But they are not. 
LD 1412, an equal rights amendment, seeks to remedy this glaring omission in 
Maine’s fundamental governing document. 
Over 75 percent of Maine voters have said they Want to see an equal rights 
amendment added to our state constitution. 
Since 2017, Rep. Lois Reckitt has introduced an equal rights amendment in 
three sessions of the Maine state legislature. 
Yet some members in both the state House and Senate have continuously 
stonewalled attempts in these sessions to pass an equal rights amendment on to 
the voters of Maine for their rightful consideration to vote either in favor of or 
against an ERA. 
These legislators know fully Well that by voting against an equal rights 
amendment, they are censoring the voice of their constituents and, by extension, 
all Mainers.
Because constitutional amendments may only be introduced by state 
legislators--and not through the citizen initiative process--the voters of Maine 
have been continuously denied their constitutional right by a minority of 
legislators to decide if Mainers want basic human rights legally protected in our 
state. 
I have been told by some that I am too strident in my advocacy for a Maine state 
ERA, that my rhetorical rigor weighs too harshly on opposing legislative views. 
For me, this kind of criticism is all too reminiscent of the type of censoring of 
Women’s voices that has prevailed throughout history. A censoring that has also 
muzzled--virtually disenfranchised--the voters of Maine during the four recent 
legislative sessions where an equal rights amendment has been introduced by 
Rep. Reckitt. 
So I say to this committee--and the Maine state legislature at large: It is now 
time that the voters of Maine be allowed to decide if we want, codiﬁed in our 
state constitution, undeniable protections for the following rights as enumerated 
in this amendment: race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, 
gender expression, age, physical or mental disability, and ancestry or national 
origin of an individual. 
How can any Maine legislator deny their constituents any of these rights? 
I ask: Should our state legislators be the fmal arbiters to decide on an 
amendment guaranteeing equality of rights for all Maine citizens under the law? 
I think not. This is not democracy in action. 
Let the people of Maine ﬁnally speak. 
Let us vote on LD 1412, on equal rights for all in Maine. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Susan A. Snider, 262 Back Road, Brooklin ME 04616
