 Roman Catholic Diocese of Portland  
 
510 Ocean Avenue     Telephone: (207) 773 -6471 
Portland Maine 0410 3-4936     Facsimile: (207) 773 -0182 
Suzanne C. Lafreniere, JD  
Office of Public Policy  
 
Testimony of Suzanne Lafreniere, on behalf of the Roman Catholic Diocese  
in opposition to LD 1412  
RESOLUTI ON, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution o f 
Maine Establishing That All Maine Residents Have Equal Right s 
Under the La w 
Senator  Carney , Representative Moonen , and members of the Joint Standing Committee  on 
Judiciary , my name is Suzanne Lafreniere and  I represent the Roman Catholic Diocese of Portland in 
opposition to LD 1412 .  The Diocese has a population of over 279,000 Catholics* or one -fifth of the total 
population of the state of Maine.  In addition to its  141 churches organized into  48 parishes, it has 
nine elementary schools,  one private elementary school,  one diocesan hig h school and one private high 
school. It also includes one Catholic college, Saint Joseph's College of Maine in Standish.  Within the 
diocese, there are also  seven subsidized housing units, four rehabilitation and residence facilities,  and 
two child -care centers. There are three Catholic hospitals operating independently of the diocese as well 
as Catholic Charities Maine, the state's largest social service agency, which operates as a separate 
corporation.  
The Roman Catholic Diocese of Portland advocates for enacting and enforcing laws that create 
safe communities and promote the common good.  This issue is important to Catholics because as people 
of faith a primary concern is the moral and ethical considerations that should be at the root of our decision 
making. We all are created in God’s image. We all —each of us --possess a basic human dignity.  The 
Catholic Church teaches that human life is sacred and that the dignity of the human person is the 
underpinning of a moral vision for society. This belief is the found ational principle of Catholic social 
teaching.     
The text of the ERA is simple: “Equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged by 
the United States or any State on account of sex.” The language was developed by lawyer and suffrage 
fighter Alice Paul in 1943, although the equality amendment was first introduced in 1923.  
When, under the amendment process, it was approved in 1972 by two -thirds of the members of the 
U.S. House of Representatives and Senate, a deadline for ratification by th e states was inserted —at first 
seven years, then extended to 10 years. The ratification fell three states short of the 38 needed, and in 
1982, the ERA was declared dead.  
There are now two paths that the ERA coalition is trying: One approach is to gain the final three 
ratifications and amend the original congressional time limit; the other is to “start over” with a vote in 
Congress and gather 38 new state ratifications.  
The Diocese of Maine STRONGLY supports equal rights for women.  Women are made equal in 
dignity to men.  Women should have equal rights in employment laws, insurance, finance laws, family 
law and disability laws, etc.    
 
Page 2 of 2 However, a woman  is not exactly the same  as a man. The most obvious difference is that only 
women can bring new life into the world.   Children and all people must be protected at every stage and 
every condition. As previously stated, we all possess a basic human dignity.  
 
The ERA website’s fre quently asked questions section admits that the ERA has been used in other 
states to force tax payer funding for abortions. “State equal rights amendments have been cited in a few 
state court decisions (e.g., in Connecticut and New Mexico) regarding a very  specific issue – whether a 
state that provides funding to low -income Medicaid -eligible women for childbirth expenses should also 
be required to fund medically necessary abortions for women in that government program. Those courts 
ruled that the state must  fund both of those pregnancy -related procedures if it funds either one, in order to 
prevent the government from using fiscal pressure to exert a chilling influence on a woman’s exercise of 
her constitutional right to make medical decisions about her pregn ancy.”1 
 
If this bill were amended to protect  unborn children, perhaps the Diocese of Portland could 
consider support ing it.  However as written, t here is nothing equal about a law that could require funding 
that strips away the right to life for unborn children permanently.  
 
Thank you for your time and consideration today.    
 
*www.pewforum.org/religious -landscape -study/state/maine/  
 
1 https://www.equalrightsamendment.org/faq  
 
