Date: February 13th, 2023
To: Agriculture, Forestry and Conservation Committee
From: Cole Cochrane, Maine Youth Action
Re: Supporting LD 289, An Act to Require the State to Purchase
Farms Contaminated with Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl
Substances
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker , and the esteemed members of the Agriculture,
Conservation, and Forestry Committee. My name is Cole Cochrane and I write on behalf of
Maine Youth Action, a statewide youth-led advocacy group that represents hundreds of our
youth across the state. We write to express our support of LD 289, An Act to Require the State to
Purchase Farms Contaminated with Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances.
Without a shred of doubt, farmers have been severely impacted by PF AS contaminated lands and
have borne the brunt of this disaster . Seeping through their waters and soil, they have seen their
animals and crops threatened by PF AS substances. Moreover , farmers simply do not have the
resources to combat this problem, and therefore jeopardizes the stability of their livelihoods. The
ones af fected are not corporations looking for a handout. The af fected are hard working families
trying to make an honest living. For example, from a personal perspective, my great Uncle in the
small town of Parkman owns a farm. Uncle Hank not only owns his own farm, but works with
others in the area baling hay . When PF AS became a headline issue, I asked him about it. He said
that an overwhelming number of Parkman’ s farmers, his friends and colleagues, faced PF AS
contamination in their soils, in their waters, and in their animals. He believed that they all got the
short end of the stick and faced consequences that they never knew were there. Although this
may be a personal observation, I may confidently say that this is not the only town deeply
affected by this issue. Therefore, we believe that LD 289 will be able to ef fectively address this
situation and mitigate the aftermath of PF AS. The merits of this bill are without question. This is
a way for the government to hold itself accountable by rectifying a mistake of permitting PF AS
substances to be used as fertilizer . It is not reasonable to assume that farmers would have known

the negative impacts associated with using these residuals and it was the responsibility of DEP  to
make sure that what farmers used as fertilizer was healthy for the soil, for the waters, and for the
public. Let this be an opportunity to prove to not only those af fected that the government will
hold itself accountable and assist them, but to our youth that the government plays a role in
righting wrongs and can be trusted that they will fulfill this responsibility . I ur ge the committee
to vote “ought to pass” on LD 289, in order to directly assist PF AS impacted farmers and restore
trust in government.
