HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ‘ l _ ,, If 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION
“ T AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
Wayne R. Parry MAINE RELAY 711 
$51 Alfred Road 
.=\1‘undel. ME (Ht)-I6 
\\‘;1yne.l’arl§'<Zj legislalure.maine.go\" 
Residence: (307) 286-9 I 46 
Testimony on 
L.D. 289, “An Act to Require the State to Purchase Farms Contaminated with 
Perﬂuoroalkyl and Polyﬂuoroalkyl Substances ” 
Presented by 
Representative Wayne R. Parry 
District 140 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry 
Monday, February 13, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry: 
I am State Representative Wayne R. Parry, and I proudly represent District 140, Arundel, 
Dayton, and a portion of Lyman. It is an honor to appear before you today for the purpose of 
introducing L.D. 289, “An Act to Require the State to Purchase Farms Contaminated with 
Perﬂuoroalkyl and Polyﬂuoroalkyl Substances. ” 
I have brought this bill forward as a lifeline to those farms that have been destroyed because 
of contamination from PFA chemicals. This is not a mandate on the farms to sell -- that choice is 
up to them. 
Let me be very clear. These farms were contaminated from PFAS, but only after the 
STATE of MAINE enviromnental agencies said it was okay to spread these substances on their 
ﬁelds. The State said it was SAFE. 
What I have done here is use current law and allocations we made in 2021 to give that 
lifeline to these fanns sooner rather than force these farms to have to wait ﬁve to 10 years for 
actual help. 
Current law already allows the buying and selling of agriculture land contaminated by PFAS 
(Sec.1 7 MRSA §320-K, sub-4D ) with these allocations made. 
My Worry Was, when we started down this road, the farms that were destroyed would become 
pawns and would be left behind. That is exactly what has happened. We appropriated 
District 140 Arundel, Dayton and Lyman (Part) Over’ Please 
Printed on recycled paper
$60,000,000, and the farms that were destroyed have received little. We have talked, but not 
directly helped these farms. 
This bill does that; however, as I said, this is a lifeline to those farms if they wish to take it. 
I believe the money We have already allocated should go to the farmers ﬁrst, not for more 
government bureaucracy ﬁrst. 
IT IS TIME TO HELP THESE FARMS AND FARMERS NOW — not ﬁve to 10 years 
from now, which is usually how government works. Most farmers are older and do not have 
time to wait years for help. 
I have given one Way to help these farmers here. If the committee thinks there is a better Way 
or method, I am ﬁne with that. My big thing is HELPING THESE FARMERS NOW! That is 
Why I propose the nine-month time Window. 
Some of the numbers look big, but let us remember that these farms have lost millions of 
dollars. Some have not been able to sell anything from their fanns in over the last ﬁve years. 
THEY HAVE BEEN DESTROYED. 
LET US HELP THESE FARNIERS NOW! 
Thank you for your consideration. I am happy to answer any questions you may have at this 
time.
