 
1 
 LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC. 
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333 
(207) 621-0087    Fax (207) 621-0742    
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle 
   
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY) 
www.mainelse.org 
April 4, 2023 
 
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in 
support of L.D. 323 An Act to Improve Compliance with Maine's Implied 
Warranty Law before the Joint Standing Committee on Committee On 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business 
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Joint Standing 
Committees on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business 
 
On behalf of Legal Services for the Elderly I would like to offer some brief 
comments in support of LD 323.  Legal Services for the Elderly (LSE) is a 
nonprofit legal services organization, and our mission is to provide free legal 
assistance to Maine’s older adults when their basic human needs are 
threatened. 
 
The two main components of LSE’s services are a statewide Helpline and 
litigation services provided by Staff Attorneys. 
 
LSE’s statewide Helpline provides all older people in Maine, regardless of 
where they live in the state, with direct and free access to an attorney via 
telephone. Consumer calls about defective products are generally handled by 
the Helpline attorneys. They are able to give general advice about how 
express or implied warranties work and how to properly make a claim for 
repair or replacement of the item. We are aware that the Attorney General 
has excellent materials in their Consumer Law Guide on the subject and 
have a link to that resource on the Elder Rights Handbook page on our 
website. We agree that educating the public on this topic is important. For 
older adults, remaining independent is a highly valued goal and having the 
tools to solve their own problems simply encourages independence. We are 
happy to support this concept.  
 
2 
   
Thank you for letting us share our thoughts with you today.     
