1 
 Testimony on 
L.D. 1299, “An Act to Amend the Maine Bail Code” 
Presented by 
Deputy Chief Christopher M. Martin 
Brewer Police Department 
Judiciary Committee 
April 12, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Carney, Representative Moon en, and distinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciar y: 
The intent of this bill is to reverse the changes t o the Maine Bail Code enacted in 
2021.  My testimony is in support of the passage of  LD 1299. 
Across the country, bail reform – using mechanisms such as cashless bail and 
requiring judges to use the least restrictive bail possible, has been a disaster.  The 
reforms to the Maine Bail Code followed a national narrative and utilized the 
talking points of “social justice reform”.  These r eforms treat repeat offenders as 
not a big deal and effectively removes a lot of jud icial discretion. 
Bail reforms efforts have been targeted since 2019 and are a part of a larger 
strategy working on social justice reform and the d ecriminalization of drug 
possession.  Attached to this testimony you will fi nd the recommendations of the 
Maine Coalition for Sensible Drug Policy from 2019.   Nearly all of the 
recommendations have been introduced as bills since  that time, again with an 
overarching theme that seeks to eliminate criminal interdiction, reduce 
proactive policing, decriminalize drug possession, and removing accountability 
for those committing crimes all at the expense of s afety and the right to 
peaceful enjoyment by our citizenry.  All of these initiatives, including bail reform, 
follow a national reform movement and use the same talking points. 
The enacted bail reform mirrors that of New York, a nd its impact has been similar 
but to a different scale.  Repeat offenders are emb oldened while 
consequences are marginalized.  It has an impact on  public safety.  Below are 
some resource documents that illustrate the issues with such reform.  Attached is 
testimony submitted by one of our officers citing s ome personal examples of 
impact, these stories are not anecdotal. 
 
2 
  https://media4.manhattan-institute.org/sites/defaul t/files/Measuring-the-Public-Safety-Impact-
of-New-Yorks-2019-Bail-Law.pdf#page=25  
 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RukkghLhcfw  
 https://nypost.com/2023/01/05/327-crooks-made-up-30 -of-shoplifting-arrests-in-2022-
nypd/?fbclid=IwAR0Y933i91FPBmoRpdn7fYot9SRlVx0Yzg0s 0b0XBGfmaGZd4MM8qKslmTU  
 https://nypost.com/2023/01/09/lawmakers-express-out rage-over-nycs-revolving-door-shoplift-
crisis-thats-killing-local-
businesses/?fbclid=IwAR3bpUGx6IPPx3tjSlTz39DT8LQtVV ShE29C7t_Xw3MGdM062TK68jQnc7U  
 http://bronxink.org/2022/10/20/29349-bail-reform-tw o-years-on-how-is-the-law-affecting-
communities-in-the-bronx/?fbclid=IwAR0JuGtXzSltQLU1 aqxG4l57-
fPAdmt8NN3DJYxa_VvbEGryVgSvhtfxBNo  
 https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-economic-and-human -costs-of-protecting-criminals-police-
shoplifting-arrest-violent-defendant-offenders-
11673387450?mod=e2fb&fbclid=IwAR2OkF1enbASBtf2gRYIN y691TBN3Svu4TlW9mLdePl_rA8xJ 
hcSvHbEQXM  
 https://wgme.com/news/local/man-out-on-bail-for-doz ens-of-crimes-accused-of-assaulting-
clerk-in-brewer-maine-joel-williams-circle-k-assaul t-violation-of-release-conditions-active-
arrest-warrant-penobscot-county-jail  
Law enforcement generally is very judicious about d ecisions to arrest.  There are 
times where people need to be arrested for misdemea nor offenses because a 
summons would not stop the illegal activity.  In th ese instances, offenders would 
often times be released from jail before the arrest ing officer could complete the 
booking paperwork.   Officers are encountering repe at offenders with significant 
criminal history who are out on numerous sets of ba il (in upwards of a dozen 
plus) and continue to commit crimes victimizing oth ers. There is an emboldened 
criminal element that contributes to increased assa ults on officers and an overall 
attitude that an arrest is a minor inconvenience an d not a deterrent for 
continued criminal behavior.  These stories are not  anecdotal, they are 
occurring here in Maine and across the country.  Th e impact of similar bail 
reform in New York City has brought this issue to l ight. 
Cashless bail, especially when considering repeat o ffenders who continually 
violate the law, only emboldens the offenders at th e expense of the rest of 
society.  Given the current constraints in our judi cial system, persons with multiple 
offenses will often time be offered plea deals redu cing multiple offenses to only 
a few.  This erodes the confidence of our system an d contributes to a sense of 
apathy where people will be less likely to report c rimes because they feel that it 
won’t change anything. 
Bail is a constitutional right but it is not absolu te.  There needs to be mechanisms 
where bail can be denied where there is just cause for the safety of the public 
3 
 and to maintain public confidence in the administra tion of justice, even for 
misdemeanor offenses by repeat offenders. 
An effective bail code allows judges to use appropr iate discretion to set bail, 
revoke bail, release on recognizance, and/or set co nditions of release.  It 
wouldn’t eliminate the presumption of bail for defe ndants who are likely to 
appear in court or lack criminal records.  Judges s hould be able to factor into 
bail decisions if there is a high probability of re -offending and if there is a danger 
to the public.  Judges should be able to change the  conditions of release based 
on violations and failures to comply with court ord ers for any crime.  Our former 
bail code wasn’t broken, any arrested individual ha d an appearance in front of 
a judge within 72 hours of an arrest for considerat ion of bail, and there was 
judicial discretion. 
It is critical that we course correct our bail syst em and this bill will do just that. 
Thank you for your time. 
Testimony on L.D. 1299 “An Act to Amend the Maine B ail code” 
Zachary Caron 
 
Distinguished Members of the Judiciary Committee,  
 My name is Zachary Caron, I am a Patrol Sergeant w ith the Brewer Police Department, I have been a pol ice 
officer for over 9 years. The bail system in Maine is a disaster, I see it first hand every day. Crimi nals in Maine know they 
can break the law, make bail, and be back out on th e streets before the police even finish the report.  The purpose of jail 
is the prevent new crimes, promote rehabilitation o f the offender, and deter further crimes to be comm itted.  A bail 
system in place that does not prevent or deter the offender from committing further crimes after relea se is a failed 
system.  A failed system produces more victims, mor e crime, and more cost to the public. I have specif ic examples where 
I believe the bail reform has failed citizens from protecting them from further criminal activity: 
 In December of 2022 a suspect was arrested for ass aulting a person in Brewer, Maine. This offender ha d 24 
active sets of bail conditions. The current bail co de had determined incorrectly 24 times that he was not a further risk to 
commit a crime or flight risk. The offender was arr ested, and made bail again. The next day a warrant was entered as the 
offender had failed to appear for a court date, and  he was arrested again, and again made bail. The of fender currently 
has a warrant for his arrest regarding the assault in December, as he did not show up to his court dat e. The bail system 
failed to protect the victim of the assault, and fa iled to determine the flight risk associated with t he suspect.  
 In March of 2023 I was investigating a domestic in cident, where an assault had occurred. During the c ourse of 
the investigation I was assaulted by two subjects t hat were on scene, I did receive a minor injury dur ing this altercation. 
One of the offenders was charged with Domestic Viol ence Assault, Refusing to Submit to arrest, and Ass ault on a Police 
Officer (A class C felony). This offenders bail was  set at $750 dollars.  This individual decided to a ssault a police officer, as 
well as another person, and it was determined that if he had $750.00 he would not be a threat to the p ublic.  Offenders 
now see that price tag to try to fight the police i s worth the risk of trying to get away. Offenders w ill think that if they try 
to incapacitate the police, and fail, they still ha ve a good chance at making bail.  
 My third example is not as personal.  In 2019 New York state eliminated the use of cash bail, this re sulted in a 
huge increase in violent crime (5%).  Crime statist ics have shown that in 2019 10% of offenders were r e-arrested for 
violent felonies. After cashless bail was enacted, January 2020 to June 2021 23% of offenders released  were re-arrested 
for violent felonies, 41% of offenders were arreste d on criminal charges of any kind.  
 I choose to live in Maine for the great people tha t live in this state, the beautiful scenery, and th e safety of my 
family. I choose my career because I believe everyb ody has the right to feel safe in their home. Maine  does not need to 
base its bail code off a system that is failing to protect the citizens its designed to protect.  For this reason, I strongly 
support the passage of LD 1299.  
  
 
 
Sincerely,  
Zachary Caron 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Prepared by   The Maine Coalition for Sensible Drug Policy  
 Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
January 2019  

Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 2 
Table of Contents  
 
 
1. Preamble, Recommendations, and Supporting Organizations  ................................ ............  3 
Preamble  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 3 
Recommendations:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  4 
Supporting Organiza tions:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  5 
2. Executive Summary  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............................  6 
3. Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  7 
4. Understanding the issues  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  8 
4.1. Understanding Drug Use  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  8 
4.2. Understanding Drug -Related  Harm  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 11 
4.3. Understanding the Systems Surrounding Drug Use  ................................ ................................ .... 14 
5. Recommen dations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  20 
5.1. Primary Prevention ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 20 
5.2. Harm Reduction Recommendations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 21 
5.3  Treatment Recommendations  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  23 
5.4. Recovery R ecommendations  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  26 
5.5. Criminal Justice Reform Recommendations  ................................ ................................ ..................  29 
5.6. Recommendations to combat stigma and dehumanization  ................................ .....................  33 
6. Conclusion  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  35 
6.1 Summary and Concluding Statements  ................................ ................................ ...............................  35 
6.2 How we pay for  this agenda  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  35 
6.3  Acknowledgements:  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................  37 
7. References  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 3 
1. Preamble, Recommendations, and Supporting Organizations  
Preamble  
Whereas, the opioid crisis cont inues to escalate, claiming more and more lives and shattering more 
and more families, including over 418 accidental drug poisoning deaths in 2017 alone;  
 
Whereas, the state of Maine suffers from a disproportionate share of adverse health outcomes related 
to opioid use, including a rate of acute hepatitis C that is four times the national average;  
 
Whereas, the undersigned desire to advance the health and wellbeing of pregnant people and infants, 
and Maine continues to have a high rate of substance exposed infants, with roughly eight percent of 
children born in 2017 exhibiting some degree of neonatal abstinence syndrome;  
 
Whereas, preventing substance use requires us to challenge and change the system s and structures 
that are complicit in traumatizing our yo uth and perpetuating the escapism inherent in problematic 
drug use;  
 
Whereas, the continuum of care for people who use drugs is broken, characterized by a lack of 
access to critical services and an over-reliance on punitive approaches to addressing substan ce use 
that are of incredibly limited use;  
 
Whereas, existing punitive drug policy was founded in racialized public policy and a 
misunderstanding of substance use, contributing to an epidemic of mass incarceration that 
perpetuates the effects of segregatio n; 
 
Whereas, people of color continue to be penalized at a rate far exceeding whites in spite of 
statistically similar use patterns, leading to ongoing community -level trauma;  
 
Wherea s, addressing this complex crisis requires a complex array of tools inclu ding primary 
prevention, harm reduction, treatment and care, recovery supports, criminal justice reform and 
efforts to combat discrimination against people who use drugs;  
 
Whereas, ex isting policy and strategies to address the adverse consequences of drug use and the 
prevailing culture around drug use have proven limited and at times more harmful than helpful;  
 
We, the undersigned, also known as the Coalition for Sensible Drug Policy, do hereby recognize and 
promote these Recommendations for Sensible Drug P olicy as a broad road map for addressing the 
opioid crisis and the failings of our existing drug policy.  These Recommendations represent 
evidence -based approaches, promising practice s and innovative new models. They build upon prior 
policy recommendations , including the report of the legislatively formed Opioid Task Force (2018) 
and the work of the Opioid Collaborative (2016). In particular, the Coalition advances previously 
unconside red strategies, supported by a significant body of evidence, and radicall y reframes our 
approach to substance use, recognizing that the continuing crisis requires swift and serious action to 
reduce the loss of life, health and wellbeing.  
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 4 Recommendations:  
1. Improve and expand social safety net programs to reduce poverty, depriva tion and social 
marginalization that drive rates of adverse childhood experiences.  
 
2. Increase resiliency among youth and mitigate the effects of childhood trauma by fostering and 
funding evidence -based, age appropriate programs.  
 
3. Support and fund harm red uction programming to establish well -resourced, fully -staffed syringe 
exchange and naloxone distribution centers in every county and foster outreach programs that 
conduct community an d street -level outreach to people who use drugs, with a focus on those 
populations disproportionately impacted by substance use.   
 
4. Fund and sanction the establishment of safer drug consumption facilities in major metropolitan 
areas throughout Maine.  
  
5. Expand access to case management services for people who consume drugs, peo ple engaged in 
treatment and people in short -term recovery including support with employment, housing and 
other needs.  
6. Reduce reluctance to seek care by supporting and funding educ ational programs for healthcare 
providers about stigma surrounding people w ho consume drugs, harm reduction in health care, 
substance use treatment and compassionate care for people who consume drugs.   
 
7. Reduce barriers to accessing treatment to ensure tha t all people who need su bstance use 
treatment can access  it, including low -barrier and flexible treatment programs and additional 
supports for parents of young children.  
 
8. Establish methadone and buprenorphine maintenance therapy, including comprehensive t rauma -
informed counseling services, in every county in Maine.  
 
9. Cultivate l ow-barrier access to medical detox services by supporting and funding the 
establishment of medical detox services in every county in Maine .  
10. Foster, support and fund programming offered through local recovery community centers 
established and maintained b y people in long -term recovery including employment supports and 
job readiness programs, housing supports, recovery coaching services and other peer recovery 
support s ervices.  
 
11. Increase access to housing for people in all stages of recovery, including peo ple who are actively 
using drugs, people in short -term recovery and people who are pregnant or parenting.  
 
12. Decriminalize possession of all drugs. Possession of illicit drugs and/or materials used to 
administer drugs becomes an administrative offense on al l counts, regardless of the quantity of 
the substance within the possession of the accused . Eliminate the permissible inference of 
trafficking or furnishing base d solely on the weight or amount of a substance possessed by the 
accused and add intent as an e lement of the crimes of trafficking and furnishing.  
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 5 13. Mandate the provision of a full range of treatment, including medication assisted treatment, and 
assertive p ost-release supports to cultivate seamless access to treatment upon release for people 
with sub stance use disorders in correctional facilities, for all correctional settings throughout 
Maine.   
 
14. Divert people out of the criminal justice system for crimes d riven by substance use by supporting 
and funding the development of pre -booking diversion progr ams, modeled on and adapting the 
Law Enforcement Assisted Diversion program in every county throughout Maine.  
 
15. Require the collection of data related to race, e thnicity and socioeconomic status for all stops, 
arrests, charges, convictions, sentences and o ther events at all levels of the criminal justice 
system. Establish a community panel to review data annually with the authority to require further 
review and ac tion to address disparities. Require racial impact statements for all new policies 
considered b y the Maine State Legislature.  
 
16. Support employment for people with a history of drug use and reduce employment 
discrimination by funding programs to engage empl oyers around the importance of purpose for 
people in recovery and offering protections and ince ntives to hire people with substance use 
disorders as well as passing broad ‘Fair Chance’ policies that restrict the consideration of 
criminal history for all em ployment, housing, licensing and other relevant application processes. 
These should be suppleme nted by policies that address racial bias in hiring practices.  
 
17. Establish and/or amend non -discrimination policies to encompass people with substance use 
disord ers, affording them protections against discrimination in housing.  
 
18. Support and fund a coordi nated public education campaign and other efforts to reduce stigma 
around substance use and shift the cultural perception of people who consume drugs.  
 
Supporting Organizations:  
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) of Maine  
Amistad  
Church of Safe Inject ion 
Coastal Recovery Community Center    
Frannie Peabody Center  
Health Equity Alliance  
James’ Place  
Journey House Recovery  
Maine Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers  
Maine Equal Justice Partners  
Maine Family Planning  
Maine HIV Advisory Committee  
 Maine P eople’s Alliance  
Maine Prisoners Advocacy Coalition  
Maine Prisoners Reentry Network  
Midcoast Recovery Coalition  
National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People 
(NAACP), Maine Prison Branch  
National Association of Pregnant Women  
Penobscot Communi ty Health Center  
Portland Overdose Prevention Site  
Wabanaki Health and Wellness  
Young People in Recovery, Maine  
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 6 2. Executive Summary  
This report represents a collaborative effort on behalf of the Maine Coalition for Sensible Drug 
Policy. It endeavors to explore the ongoi ng opioid crisis in all of its depth and breadth, painting a 
comprehensive picture of this public health crisis, its sociocultural moorings, and the impact of 
public policy on the crisis, by:  
• highlighting the  extent to which drug use exist s along a continu um from benign through 
chaotic use patterns;  
• exploring the strong connection between experiences of trauma and severe mental illness and 
the development of problematic relationships with drugs;  
• adopting a broad definition of recovery, that  encompasses any positive step towards 
improving ones health and wellbeing;  
• documenting escalating rates of accidental drug poisonings, hepatitis C and other related 
conditions;  
• exploring the failings and inappropriateness of the criminal justice system in  addressing drug 
use; 
• recognizing and calling out the racially motivated foundations and racialized consequences 
of punitive approaches to addressing drug use;  
• elaborating on barriers to treatment and care and the contributions of the previous 
administrati on in exacerbatin g these issues;  
• and highlighting the discrimination and stigma faced by people with a history of drug use in 
housing, employment, health care and other sectors.  
 
The Coalition asserts specific recommendations to address the opioid crisis a nd advance sensible 
drug policy with the goals of reducing the prevalence of problematic drug use, reducing drug -
related harms and facilitating recovery for people with problematic relationships with drugs. 
Recommendations fall into several domains includi ng: 
• Primary  prevention – reducing the prevalence of problematic drug use;  
• Harm reduction – reducing drug -related harms associated with problematic drug use;  
• Treatment and Care – increasing access to treatment for people with problematic drug use;  
• Recovery Supports – advancing and sustaining health and wellbeing for people with a history 
of drug use;  
• Criminal Justice – advancing criminal justice reform to align with public health evidence and 
a compassionate approach to drug use  and reduce the impact of structural racism in public 
policy ; and  
• Anti-Discrimination – reducing stigma and discrimination experienced by people who use 
drugs  
These recommendations are grounded in public health science and advocates for a 
compassionate approach to drug use and the suspension of punitive programs that amount to 
efforts to ‘punish people into recovery.’ The evidence and/or arguments surrounding these 
recommendations is explored in -depth.  
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 7 
3. Introduction  
After three years of struggle, multiple planning processes and ongo ing efforts to address the 
opioid crisis Maine continues to be swallowed by the crisis, drowning in the tide of death and 
disease that define it. Maine has the unfortunate distinction of having the sixth highest increase 
in overdose deaths between 2017  and 2018.1 Further, recent research suggests that the opioid 
crisis is but the latest, incrementally more fatal, crisis in a series of progressively more dangerous 
overdose crises that the US has seen since the last 1970s.2 After years of attempting to apply the 
same stale solutions to an escalating problem, it is clear that the prevailing drug policy has not 
been effective in addressing the harms associated with drug use. It is becoming increasingly clear 
that efforts to ad dress the latest opioid crisis must focus not just on surface -level reforms, but on 
upsetting and meaningfully altering the foundations of our nation’s and state’s understanding and 
approach to addressing substance use.  
 
Drug policy in Maine and the US fin ds its origins in racially -motivated  public policy dating back 
to the early 1900’s, emerging initially as endeavors to control the ‘racialized other’ in the wake 
of abolition and growing immigration. Policy tends to lean heavily on an understanding of 
substance use as a personal choice and m oral failing, deserving of and responsive to punitive 
consequences. These punitive efforts to deter and reduce drug use were ramped up significantly 
over the 1970’s  and 1980’s  in reaction to desegregation and the specter  of the ‘counterculture’ . 
The intens ifying policing of drug use, with especial emphasis on drug use among African 
Americans,  created  an epidemic of mass incarceration  that effectively maintained racial 
segregation and deepened the disadvantage of already m arginalized communities.  
 
Drug polic y in Maine leans  heavily on an understanding of substance use as a personal choice 
and moral failing, deserving of and responsive to punitive consequences. This fails to take into 
consideration the substantial advances i n understanding and addressing subst ance use drawing 
from more recent research from the medical, sociological, psychological and public health 
sectors. Reforms have thus far failed to meaningfully alter these foundations. This has lead to a 
significant dis connect in the public policy domain,  where substance use is treated simultaneously 
as a public health and a criminal justice issue. As a nation, we seek both to support people with 
substance issues and to punish them.  
 
The Maine Coalition for Sensible Drug Policy (the Coalition) was establis hed in 201 8 in 
response to the recommendations of the Opioid Task Force convened by the State of Maine. 
While the Coalition feels that the Task Force’s report was a valiant effort to impact the opioid 
crisis , it believes that the Task Force was fundamental ly limited by process, preventing members 
from more significantly engaging and altering Maine’s drug policy. Task Force 
recommendations tended toward the least objectionable suggestions, neglecting more 
controversial ideas. In response, the Coalition forme d explicitly to produce and advance 
evidence -based practices, emerging promising approaches and innovative new solutions that will 
meaningfully address the opioid crisis and the failings of Maine’s drug poli cy. 
 
The Coalition was guided by a small Leadersh ip Committee that included people with a history 
of drug use. The core of the Coalition was comprised of roughly 10 -15 members, including 
people with a history of drug use, professionals from health, public health, and social justice 
organizations, and leg islators from both major political parties.  
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 8 
Over the course of the last six months of 2018 the Coalition collected input and developed this 
report and recommendations. During the course of this process the C oalition consulted over 30 
people, programs, and organizations directly involved in or affected by the opioid crisis and 
Maine drug policy, and over 100 people with a history of drug use.  
 
The report is founded on the following principles:  Human beings hav e consumed psychoactive 
substances for as long as  we have existed. Recognizing that it is unrealistic that we will ever 
fully eradicate drug use, we seek instead to reduce and mitigate the risks and harms sometimes 
associated with drug use. As such, we pro pose a drug policy that advances:  
• The prevention of problematic drug use.  
• The reduction of drug -related harms, including drug overdose deaths, infectious diseases 
and other potential issues.  
• The facilitation of recovery, defined herein as a process by whic h people realize “any 
positive change, as a perso n defines it for [themselves]” as intoned by Dan Bigg and John 
Szyler, founders of the Chicago Recovery Alliance.3 
4. Understanding the issues  
4.1. Understanding Drug Use  
Prevalence  
Estimates of the prevalence of drug use and problematic drug use vary wid ely from source to 
source. According to the National Survey of Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), in 2016 roughly 
29,000 Mainers reported using illicit drugs other than cannabis during the past year, of whi ch 
roughly 5,000 people reported using heroin. Beyond he roin, problematic use of prescription 
opioids continue to present as an issue that is not captured in the NSDUH’s account of illicit 
drugs. According to the same source, roughly 43,000 Mainers reporte d misusing prescription 
pain relievers in 2016.4 A 2018 report that utilized data from the health insurance sector found 
that roughly 12.56 per 1,000 insured persons (16,705 people if extended to the entire population) 
had been diagnosed with an opioid use  disorder, placing Maine substantially higher than the U .S. 
rate of 4.6 per 1,000 people.5 Assuming that not everybody experiencing problematic use has 
been diagnosed with an opioid use disorder and that problematic use is at least as high among 
people wit hout health insurance as it is among people covered by p rivate insurance and 
MaineCare, we conclude that the actual rate of problematic drug use is likely substantially higher 
than these sources reflect.  
 
Continuum of Drug Use  
Contrary to popular misconcep tions of drug use, not all drug use is problematic. Peop le use 
drugs (both legal and illegal) along a continuum, ranging from relatively benign social and 
recreational use to the more frequent or “chaotic” use. At the chaotic end of the spectrum, 
people’s lives are heavily focused on drugs and have been signifi cantly negatively impacted by 
their drug use. According to researchers, only 15% of people who report extramedical use of 
drugs other than tobacco and alcohol develop a physiological dependence for th at drug, one of 
the diagnostic characteristics of a seve re substance use disorder or addiction.6 Others will fall 
elsewhere within the spectrum, including a significant cohort of functional people who use drugs 
but otherwise have relatively successful, hea lthy lives, careers and families. While the 15% who 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 9 deve lop a dependence on drugs may require long -term substance use treatment, most people will 
cease using drugs without treatment or with minimal help.7 
 
While all drug use carries inherent risk (includin g drug adulteration, accidental poisoning, and 
legal san ctions), these risks and consequences are most acute on the chaotic end of the spectrum. 
Further, the Coalition recognizes that punitive approaches to drug use lead to significant, lifelong 
social con sequences such as incarceration, family rejection, and j ob loss, which only compound 
the risks and heighten the stakes, often leading to a downward spiral of increasingly negative 
financial, health and safety outcomes.  
 
Trauma and Adverse Childhood Experie nces  
Increasingly, researchers are recognizing the impac t of comorbid mental health conditions and 
childhood trauma on a person’s potential to develop a problematic relationship with drugs and 
other adverse health outcomes.  
 
Researchers have long established a high frequency of comorbid substance use and psychi atric 
disorders. One study found that 47% of methadone seeking study participants had comorbid 
psychiatric disorders, with anti -social personality disorder and major depressive among the most  
common.8 A similar study conducted through a community -based syr inge exchange program 
found that 50% of participants had at least one comorbid psychiatric disorder.9 
 
Similarly, the Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs) study found a strong relationship be tween 
adverse childhood experiences such as physical, emotional, and sexual abuse and drug use. The 
more ACEs a person had, the more likely they were to have used illicit drugs. According to the 
study, a male child who had experienced 6 of the catalogued a dverse childhood experiences was 
46 times more likely to use intr avenous drugs.10 Additionally, studies of comorbidity between 
substance use disorders and complex trauma suggest that between 50% and 90% of people with a 
reported substance use disorder also had complex trauma histories.11 A 2017 study among people 
seeking treatment for opioid use found that people with more ACEs started using opioids earlier 
and were more likely to experience an accidental opioid poisoning.12 
 
In explaining the connections betw een psychiatric disorder, ACEs, trauma and adverse health 
outcome s (including drug use), researchers have pointed to the neurological effects of chronic 
stress. The above findings validate the theory that problem drug use predominantly arises from 
the desi re to escape psychic discomfort.13 14 While this does not discount the role of physical 
dependence and withdrawal avoidance in inhibiting recovery, physical dependence is secondary 
to psychic pain. Absent psychic pain, persons that have developed physical de pendence may 
much more readily decrease and/or cease use.  
 
The a bove casts some doubt on the assumption that over -prescribing is primarily responsible for 
escalating rates of problem opioid use and fatal opioid poisonings. According to the NSDUH, 
over 75%  of people who misuse prescription medications obtain them from a  non-medical 
source.15 This is further supported by a 2010 review of opioid pain management that concluded 
that less than 1% of participants in the collective studies became addicted.16 That sa id, over -
prescribing is undoubtedly a contributing factor insofar  as overprescribing contributes to 
increased exposure to opioids.  
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 10 In essence, by reducing incidence of ACEs and childhood trauma we can largely prevent the 
development of chaotic substance us e and the negative consequences that often accompany it.  
  
Societ al Conditions and Intergenerational Trauma  
While the ACEs studies are fantastic tools for understanding the development of problematic 
substance use, they are also fundamentally individualizi ng and lack sufficient context to 
understand the social origins o f substance use. Where physical and emotional abuse and neglect 
have a demonstrated causative association with problem substance use, it is important to 
recognize that these behaviors do not happen in a vacuum. The emerging academic literature 
suggests tha t ACEs are both caused by and cause adverse social contexts including poverty, 
discrimination, and other forms of inequality and social rejection.17 18 Further, deprivation, food 
insecurity, ho using insecurity and other conditions intimately related to pover ty can easily be 
considered traumatic in their own right, leading to elevated chronic stress levels among 
adolescents and adults. Akin to this, a growing body of research on historical trauma  suggests 
that trauma can have intergenerational consequences, pa rticularly among marginalized 
communities. Researchers have suggested that trauma can be reproduced intergenerationally 
through parental behaviors as well as directly through a person’s DNA.19 20 This suggests that far 
from ‘being in the past’ historical tra uma and oppression have ramifications that extend to today 
and into the future.  
 
These findings validate the ‘dislocation theory of addiction’ popularized by theorist Bruce 
Alexander, who arg ued that “addiction of all forms (substances or otherwise) is a w ay of 
adapting to the social fragmentation and individual dislocation inherent in modern society.”21 
Alexander’s work considers drugs and alcohol to be but one of many addictive tendencies tha t 
characterize modern life, expanding our perspective from proble matic use of drugs to excessive 
and chaotic use of any behavior to escape. This perspective is supported by recent research that 
suggests that opioid overdose deaths are but the most recent m anifestation of an ongoing process. 
When taken in consideration w ith other drugs, overdose deaths have not spiked dramatically as 
might be imagined, but appear as an exponential growth curve.22 As some drugs become more 
difficult to access, people turn to o ther drugs to facilitate their escape from psychic pain.  
Followin g this, the Coalition believes that social inequality is directly and indirectly responsible 
for problematic substance use and associated morbidity and mortality. In directing our efforts 
towards addressing social inequality, we address not only opioids, b ut other substances and other 
excessive behaviors as well.  
 
Recovery from Substance Use  
The Coalition recognizes that while there is no single definition of recovery, the most commonly 
agreed upon definition was released in 2012 by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration (SAMHSA). SAMHSA’s working definition of recovery is “a process of change 
through which individuals improve their health and wellness, liv e a self -directed life and strive to 
reach their full potential.”23 Notably, this  definition does not include abstinence from substances 
as a feature or requirement of recovery. Recovery is defined as a process, rather than a status, 
and a person who is act ively using illicit drugs can be ‘in recovery.’  
 
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 11 SAMHSA delineated four major dimensions that support a life in recovery. These dimensions 
allow any person to lead a happy, healthy and productive life. They are:  
1. Health : overcoming or managing one’s disease(s) or symptom, and making informed, 
healthy choices that supp ort physical an d emotional well being.  
2. Home : having a stable and safe place to live.  
3. Purpose:  conducting meaningful daily activities, such as employment or e ducation and 
having the independence, income and resources to participate in society . 
4. Community: having relationshi ps and social networks that provide support, friendship, 
love  
 
Where we adopt a broad understanding of recovery, to facilitate recovery it s tands to reason that 
people in all stages of recovery require support in these areas. People who have an active 
substance use disorder have disconnected from themselves, their feelings, their families, and the 
community in which they live. Recovery is abou t connections and relationships. Helping to 
support individuals by creating and maintaining connections must be the  focus of policy.  
 
The process of recovery is highly personal, happens on a continuum, and occurs via many 
pathways. It can include - but is not limited to - clinical treatment, medication assisted recovery, 
12-step programs, faith -based approaches, peer support, family supp ort, harm reduction 
techniques, self -care, safe housing, peer -run recovery centers, employment and job -readiness 
trainings. Recovery should be customized to fit the individual.  
 
4.2. Understanding Drug -Related  Harm  
Accidental Drug Pois oning Deaths  
During 2017, accidental drug poisoning deaths continued their steady climb upwards. With 418 
deaths in that year, 2017 was the fifth consecutive year of increases in overdose mortality in 
Maine. With each year more deadly than the last, betwee n 2012 and 2015 over dose mortality 
grew over 178%. Digging deeper, the drug poisoning death crisis is driven by a combination of 
factors, including the extent to which fentanyl, a synthetic opioid, has come to permeate the 
supply of illicit opioids, and th e combination of opi oids with other substances. The average cause 
of death involved the combination of three drugs. Meanwhile, accidental drug poisoning deaths 
involving stimulants, such as cocaine, are also on the rise. This is captured in Table A below.  
 
The average age of people dying from accidental drug poisoning was 40, with a range of 18 to 75 
years. Meanwhile, the geographic distribution of overdose deaths suggests that this crisis is felt 
intensely in rural areas throughout Maine, although metropol itan areas experienc ed substantially 
more drug poisoning deaths in absolute numbers.  
 
 
  
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 12 Table A  
2017 Maine Overdose Mortality, by substance(s) involved and geography  
Substance(s) involved  Number of Deaths  Percentage of Deaths  
All Drug Overdose Deaths  418 100%  
All opioids, licit and illicit  354 85% 
Fentanyl  247 58% 
Heroin  88 21% 
Pharmaceutical opioids  124 30% 
Cocaine  91 22% 
Any benzodiazepine  98 23% 
Methamphetamine  16 4% 
Geographic Area  Number of Deaths  Rate per 100,000 people  
Androscoggin  25 23.22 
Lewiston  17  
Cumberland  109 37.26  
Portland  57  
Kennebec  47 38.58  
Augusta  14  
Knox  11 27.65  
Penobscot  65 42.78  
Bangor  30  
Somerset  18 35.56  
Washington  13 41.15  
York  82 40.16  
Biddeford  23  
Sanford  12  
Source: Sorg, M. (2018). Expanded Maine Drug Death Report for 2017. Margaret Chase Smith 
Policy Center, University of Maine.  Retrieved December , 18(2018).  
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 13 Hepatitis C  
Although it has received significantly less attention, in addition to accidental drug poisoning 
deaths, Maine is in the midst of a hepatitis C crisis. Between 2013 and 2016 cases of acute 
hepatitis C rose 366%, with a rate of roughly 2.8 per 100,000 people in 2017. This rate is 180% 
higher than rate for the US as a whole. In 2017 62.5% of p eople diagnosed with acute hepatitis C 
in M aine reported a history of intravenous drug use. Reflecting overdose mortality, the hepatitis 
C crisis is felt both in rural and metropolitan areas, with some of the highest rates of acute 
hepatitis C in Washingto n and Waldo Counties.24 
 
Lack of access to h epatitis C testing services and the delayed onset of symptoms, contribute to 
later diagnoses and higher rates of transmission. It is almost certain that the rate of actual 
seropositivity is considerably higher tha n what has been documented here.  
 
Hepatiti s C is an infectious disease spread through exposure to blood, including through 
contaminated materials such as syringes and other injection supplies. Researchers have found 
that roughly 80% of people who contract  hepatitis C develop a chronic infection. L eft untreated, 
the hepatitis C virus can lead to serious scarring, cirrhosis of the liver, and liver cancer.  While 
hepatitis C is considered curable, effective treatment for the conditions is perceived to be 
immen sely expensive. Since 2015, the State of Ma ine had spent $18m -$24m per year treating 
hepatitis C.25 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)  
HIV is a chronic, incurable virus that is spread through exposure to contaminated blood, seminal 
fluid, vaginal fluid or b reast milk. Most directly relevant to the C oalition’s report, HIV has been 
found to live for up to 6 weeks in the barrel of a syringe, allowing it to be transmitted between 
people who use drugs  who share injection equipment.26 
 
While the number of new cases of HIV attributed to injection drug use is  relatively insignificant 
compared to other modes of transmission, a study from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control 
identified four of Maine’s sixteen counties as being at -risk for an HIV outbreak similar to  those 
recently in Indiana and Massachusetts.27 Prior to 2015, Scott County, Indiana saw an average of 
roughly five new cases of HIV per year. Over the course of 6 months starting in March of 2015 
this skyrocketed to 215 new cases of HIV, driven predominant ly by injection drug use.28 
Likewise, Massachuset ts has recently called attention to a significant surge in new cases of HIV 
related to injection drug use, with 129 new cases of HIV identified since 2015.29 
 
Unlike hepatitis C, HIV is an incurable disease. U sing anti -retroviral medications, people living 
with HIV can contain and reduce the presence of the virus in their systems to undetectable levels, 
making the virus untransmissible. However, like hepatitis C, HIV medications are expensive. 
The most recent s tudy of costs found that the lifetime treatment cost for HIV was roughly 
$379,668 per person.30 
Substance Use During Pregnancy & Infant Exposure  
Maine is experiencing a rise in substance use during pregnancy, resulting in a dramatic increase 
in the number o f infants born exposed to substances. Currently,  one in 12 infants in Maine is 
born exposed to a substance, including illicit drugs like heroin and fentanyl, as well as legal 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 14 substances like tobacco and alcohol.31  Rates of unintended pregnancy among women using 
opioids are 86%, nearly 40% higher than th e general population.32 
  
Many women who use substances during pregnancy are also survivors of complex trauma, 
including experiences of sexual and domestic violence, sex trafficking, poverty, homelessness, 
incarceration, and reproductive coercion —all of whi ch contribute to psychic pain that drives 
chaotic substance use, and too often results in inadequate access to healthcare, treatment options, 
and other forms of support. Additionally, the stigma of drug use i s compounded for pregnant 
people, who legitimate ly fear judgment by providers and the potential loss of custody 
immediately postpartum, which can lead to avoidance of prenatal care. Maine’s mandatory 
reporting statute is open to interpretation and operatio nalization by individual hospital systems 
and pr oviders, which leaves far too much room for bias in reporting. Despite the reality that 
many people are highly motivated during pregnancy to enter treatment and recovery, wraparound 
services that promote the best health outcomes for adult and infant are sc arce and largely 
inaccessible.  
  
Effective policy -making in this area is further hindered by misinformation about effects of 
substance use during pregnancy. As the organization National Advocates for Pregnant  Women 
explains, “Carefully constructed, unbiase d, scientific research has not found that prenatal 
exposure to any of the illegal drugs causes unique or inevitable harm (to a fetus of infant).”33 The 
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists relea sed a statement in 2011 decrying the 
use of crim inal justice measures to address the issue of substance exposed infants, stating plainly 
that “incarceration and the threat of incarceration have proved to be ineffective in reducing the 
incidence of alcohol or drug abuse” and “the use of the legal system to address perinatal alcohol 
and substance abuse is inappropriate.”34 
4.3. Understanding the Systems Surrounding Drug Use  
The Criminal Justice System  
According to the US Surgeon General, the misuse of drugs is a public health, not criminal 
justice, issue.35 However, since at least the early 1970s, when President Richard Nixon 
announced an “all -out, global war on the drug menace,”36 we as a country have centered our 
public narrative —and our solutions —almos t exclusively around the criminal legal system.  
 
The rel iance on courts to address drug use has, in part, led to a swollen penal system: the US is 
home to 5% of the world’s population, but 25% of its incarcerated population.37 We also have 
poured an ever -increasing amount of money into our criminal legal system:  from 1993 to 2012, 
the amount of criminal justice spending in the United States increased by 74%, going from $158 
billion to $274 billion.38  
 
The consequences of the ‘drug war’ have affected people o f low income , women, and people of 
color the most. The n umber of incarcerated women has risen 834% during the nation’s 40 -plus 
year war on drugs,39 and the problem has been particularly problematic in small, rural counties. 
Nearly 80% of women in jails are parents, often primary caretakers for their minor childr en. One 
nationwide study found that among women incarcerated in jails, 82% had experienced drug 
dependence or problematic use in their lifetimes.40 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 15  
When we explore the history of the war on drugs, it is difficult not to recognize its foundation in 
racial ly-motivated  public policy. Prior to the Harrison Narcotics Act of 1914, what are referred 
to today as ‘drugs ’ were often used as ingredients in tonics, remedies and other medications 
utilized by the ge neral populace to address their everyday maladies. In the wake of abolition drug 
policy was seized as a useful mechanism through which the establishment could maintain the 
subjugation of people of color. T he progressive prohibition of these substances was pushed 
forward through the use of fear tactics that expl icitly linked drug use with the racialized ‘other' 
made wild and uncontrollable through drugs , conflating drug use with racial and ethnic 
minorities . In a post -slavery society this message found a wil ling audience. Most notably, 
African Americans,  recently  freed from slavery, were converted from slaves into free but 
unequal people, and quickly into criminals  and deviants . Branded as morally deficient, it was 
easy work to strip away the rights and privileges afforded to the ‘ordinary citizen’ thereby 
maintai ning systems of racial inequality and second -class citizenship.  
41 42 
 
Indeed, any analysis of our nation and our state’s drug policy cannot be adequately addressed 
without confronting the racial d isparities in who we criminalize: d espite the fact that peopl e of 
all races engage in drug use at the same rates,43 people of color are disproportionately punished 
by the criminal justice system. For example, while only 3.4% of the Maine’s population identi fy 
as non -white,44 non-white people represent 19.46% of the st ate’s male prison population.45 
Throughout the US one in three black men are expected to have spent time in incarceration, 
compared to one in 17 white men.46 
 
The criminal legal system is an imperf ect and ill -equipped tool to address substance use disorder. 
Police, who are not social workers or doctors but who have instead been trained to use force to 
resolve conflicts, are usually a person’s first contact with the legal system. Once in jail, people  
are not offered treatment. Instead, Maine jails and prisons force one way of resolving drug use: 
mandatory detoxification without medical oversight . Because of the lack of access to supports, 
associated instability, and the decrease in tolerance to drugs after a period of abstinence, drug 
overdoses upon release fro m prison are exceptionally high. One study showed that the likelihood 
of fatal overdose is between three and eight times more likely during the first two weeks after 
release from incarceration as  compared to three to 12 weeks after release.47 
 
Further, form al incarceration is merely the beginning of what often amounts to a lifetime of 
social exclusion and discrimination. According to the Prison Policy Initiative , there are seven 
million people living in the US who are currently under correctional control. Af ter people serve 
time in jail or prison, they are released back into society with little to no support and significantly 
increased barriers to accessing healthcare, jobs, or ho using. People convicted of felonies related 
to the possession and sale of drugs may not be eligible for federal financial aid, may be denied 
public housing, and can be declined employment on the basis of a criminal conviction.  
 
The criminal justice system, built around the dehumanization of incarcerated people, likely has 
the effect o f retraumatizing a population already plagued by trauma. Where drugs have often 
become the primary coping mechanism for people in chaotic use, a ret reat from a world full of 
stressors and trauma, the harsh conditions facing them during incarceration and af ter they are 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 16 released adds both stress and trauma and blocks access to the supports discussed in section 3.1 
above, in essence pushing them back tow ards drugs. According to one study, 76.9% of drug 
offenders are likely to be rearrested within a year of rel ease.48 
 
Despite the increase in spending and capacity in the criminal justice system, drug use has not 
been curbed in the past half century as revea led by data from the National Institute of Drug 
Abuse dating back to 1978. Meanwhile studies in criminology have found serious fault with 
deterrence theory, the theory that harsh criminal consequences will deter criminal activities, 
particularly with regar ds to drug use.49 50 51 
 
Opponents of substantive criminal justice reform suggest that incarceration enables ac cess to 
treatment, however effectiveness of compulsory treatment is weak, and some studies suggest 
may actually be harmful.52 Further studies suggest  that there is no reduction in the likelihood of 
rearrest when somebody is incarcerated as compared to recei ving probation,53 and the length of 
time in a corrections setting or on probation made no difference in the likelihood of rearrest.54 
 
The Coalition f eels strongly that, as the system stands presently, the harm caused by the criminal 
justice system, both to the individual and the broader community, substantially outweighs any 
potential benefit of the system in terms of deterrence. We will only see a cha nge when we 
address drug use as a public health emergency as opposed to a criminal justice emergency.  
Treatm ent and Access to Care  
According to the National Survey of Drug Use and Health in 2016, roughly 25,000 people living 
in Maine needed but did not rec eive treatment for illicit drug use.55 While this figure presents 
some challenges (including what constitutes  “needing” treatment, and inclusion of cannabis as an 
illicit drug) it is the only available dataset on the topic. Reasons for not accessing treatme nt are 
complex and include constituents’ individual readiness level (i.e., some people simply didn’t 
want tr eatment). However, they also include a number of structural barriers that significantly 
constrain access to care.  
 
Foremost among these barriers is cost and lack of insurance. Over the past eight years the State 
of Maine has progressively curbed Medicaid e nrollment, effectively reducing the number of 
people with public insurance. Additionally, as of October 2018, the State of Maine has thus far 
failed  to expand Medicaid up to 138% of the federal poverty level. This leaves a substantial gap 
in coverage betwe en current Medicaid eligible populations and people above 138% of the federal 
poverty level who are eligible for tax incentives and cost reductions related for health insurance 
under the Affordable Care Act. According to some analysts, this leaves approxim ately 77,000 
people without health insurance. Based on results from a 2016 survey of syringe exchange 
consumers, roughly 48% of people who inject dr ugs lack any insurance whatsoever. This makes 
both treatment and basic health care cost prohibitive.56 
 
Furth er constraining access, 40% of people who use drugs live in households with annual 
household incomes below $11,000 per year. Most methadone clinics throughout Maine charge 
roughly $80/wk. per patient self -pay. With annual treatment costs for methadone main tenance 
therapy running around $4,160 per year, this amounts to more than 37% of their annual income.  
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 17 In addition to cost, treatment access is sev erely limited by geographic availability. Medical detox 
services are particularly constrained. Currently, th ere are a handful of medical detox centers in 
Maine, leaving vast areas of the state uncovered.  
 
There are currently seven opioid treatment programs  (formerly called methadone clinics) 
throughout the entire state of Maine. These are largely oriented around  the I-95 corridor, with 
two in more distant settings (Rockland and Calais). As a result, many people living in Maine’s 
rural areas face an hour or longer drive to access methadone maintenance treatment services, and 
people from Northern and Western Maine may encounter travel times of two to three hours. 
Where methadone usually requires daily dosing, this quickly becomes unsustainable.  
 
Existing feder al law presents a major barrier to establishing more opioid treatment programs. 
The Controlled Substances Ac t of 1970 maintains a strict set of expectations for methadone 
services that make it challenging to operate sustainably. This adds costs, making it unsustainable 
for and discouraging many would -be providers. Meanwhile, the State of Maine lowered the 
Medica id reimbursement rate for methadone maintenance treatment in 2010, capped the number 
of years that Medicaid will pay for treatment, and shrunk overa ll Medicaid rolls, leaving many 
would -be patients without insurance.  
 
Buprenorphine treatment is more widel y accessible through primary care providers. Currently, 
Maine has 742 X -waivered buprenorphine prescribers, or one per 1,800 people.57 This is direct ly 
related to the fact that there are fewer federal regulations surrounding buprenorphine when 
compared to m ethadone. Additionally, recent federal policy further increased access to 
buprenorphine by increasing the number of patients a provider can prescrib e to, and allowing 
Nurse Practitioners and Physicians’ Assistants to prescribe as well. Currently, considera bly 
fewer providers are actively prescribing buprenorphine than are certified to do so. Interviews 
with and accounts of providers suggest that reluc tance to prescribe is related to concerns over a 
‘difficult patient panel’ and the complexities of working w ith people who use drugs.58 
 
Ultimately, healthcare providers are people too, and are impacted by broader social attitudes 
surrounding drug use and p eople who use drugs (PWUD). Beyond treatment, provider stigma is 
felt to substantially impact receipt of pre ventive and basic health services for people who use 
drugs. Stigma among doctors treating patients with substance use disorder is ubiquitous. A meta -
analysis of healthcare professionals in 2013 demonstrated largely negative attitudes toward 
PWUD, contribut ing to suboptimal care and reduced patient empowerment.59 Over time, stigma 
becomes internalized, reducing the likelihood that a person using drugs will seek help as a result 
of low self -worth. In one study, 25% of participants interviewed indicated that th ey had been 
prevented from obtaining medical care becaus e of their drug use.60 This leads to increased 
reluctance to engage with healthcare professionals that prevent PWUD from receiving routine 
healthcare and may lead to increased acute care visits and rel iance on emergency rooms. Based 
on results from a 2016 s urvey of Maine syringe exchange participants, 33% of constituents 
reported they were reluctant to seek medical help for injection or drug related issues.61 
 
Where health is considered one of the four p illars of recovery, constricted access to treatment 
and basic healthcare services, whether due to lack of insurance, inability to pay, distance or 
provider stigma, emerges as a major impediment to recovery.  
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 18 Housing and Employment  
As stated above, housing ( home) and employment (purpose) are two of the four pilla rs of 
recovery.  Prevalence of housing insecurity and homelessness among people with a history of 
drug use is challenging to isolate, with few relevant recent studies to build from. One 
longitudinal st udy of people with a history of injection drug use found  that 38% of subjects 
reported experiencing homelessness in during the study period.62 A 2016 survey of Maine 
syringe exchange participants demonstrated that roughly 24% of respondents had experienced 
homelessness within the past year and 66% indicated expe riencing homelessness at least once in 
their lifetime.63 
 
Homelessness among PWUD is associated with dramatically increased risk of adverse health 
outcomes, including contracting HIV and hepatitis C an d increased risk of fatal accidental drug 
poisoning. Studies have found that homeless persons that use drugs are more likely to rush 
injection, share injection equipment, engage in sex work for drugs, and other risk behaviors 
related to a combination of po licy interventions (e.g., confiscation of materials or fear of 
persecution) and lack of sufficient income. A 2015 study found that housing insecurity was 
independently associated with all -cause mortality among people who inject drugs, substantially 
increas ing the likelihood of death from any numbe r of causes.64 Studies have suggested that 
homelessness can contribute to initiation of injection,65 as well as re -initiation of injection after a 
period of cessation.66 Accordingly, the Coalition finds that homelessn ess and housing insecurity 
severely compro mise recovery, and contribute to relapse among people who have been abstinent 
from drugs.  
 
Likewise, unemployment among people with a history of drug use poses significant challenges 
for PWUD and the recovery proce ss. Indeed, one recent literature review c oncluded that 
economic recessions drove substance use because unemployment contributed to psychological 
distress that in turn increased drug use.67 A 2011 literature review explored the complex 
relationship between unemployment, substance use and relapse. A ccording to the author, 
problematic drug use contributed to unemployment as might be expected. However, the author 
also found that unemployment was a significant risk factor for substance use and the 
development of  substance use disorders, as well as incre asing the risk of relapse after alcohol 
and/or drug treatment.68 
Stigma and Discrimination  
Meanwhile the pillar of ‘community’ identified in section 3.1 above is severely challenged by 
stigma and discrimination agai nst PWUD and others affected by drug polic y. 
 
Stigmatizing attitudes that shame, discredit and dehumanize people with a history of drug use 
run deep within our culture, the product of more than 100 years of public policy and messaging 
that frames drug use as a character defect and people who use d rugs as immoral. Studies of social 
perceptions found that stigmatization of problem drug users was commonplace.69 According to 
one review, people frequently perceived people with a history of drug use as more danger ous and 
more responsible for their conditi on than other populations with psychiatric issues.70 Similarly, 
family members were likely to report shame surrounding their loved one’s drug history.71 
Furthermore, this stain extended long into the recovery process , and touched the reputations and 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 19 experien ces of one’s friends and family. It is no surprise then that people with a history of drug 
use, both actively using and having ceased use, report high levels of stigma and discrimination 
and related avoidance and s hame.72  
 
This stigma surfaces in the langu age we use surrounding PWUD. Language plays a significant 
role in stigma; junkies, dope fiends, crack -heads, crack babies, drug users, drug use, drug abuse, 
drug misuse, “dirty” (as opposed to “clean”) are common n egative monikers. Our language 
surrounding  drug use frequently collapses a person into a behavior - parents, children, spouses, 
employees, all become ‘drug users.’ Further, the language we use surrounding drugs sends a 
clear message that drug use is bad an d the people who use drugs are immoral. Th is is subtly 
internalized, leading to lower self -worth and self -efficacy. Input from people adversely affected 
by stigmatization, in regards to drug use, resulted in the people first nomenclature: “people who 
use d rugs.”  
 
Common examples of prejudice and discrimination found in Ahern, Stuber and Galea’s (2006) 
study of stigma and discrimination of people who use drugs included rejection by friends (65.8% 
of study participants), rejection by family (75.2%), being pr evented from obtaining medical care 
(24%),  and being denied housing (34%).73 Personal experiences lead people with a history of 
drug use to fear exposure to further stigma and discrimination, contributing to reluctance to seek 
treatment and basic healthcare , apply for jobs, pursue an education and seek out other activities 
important to their recovery.  
 
Beyond interpersonal discrimination, people with a history of drug use and others directly 
impacted by US drug policy often suffer from systemic discriminati on as well, further 
undermining their abil ity to avail themselves of health, home, community and purpose. 
Unemployment and housing discrimination are unintended but devastating by -products of 
criminal stigma. Criminal convictions may exclude applicants fro m being hired, accessing 
affordable housin g, and obtaining student loans and business loans among other things.  
 
Employment is not only important as a means of financial support, but also of self -worth. 
Because a great number of people with a history of d rug use have arrest records relating to dr ug 
possession, sales, or illegal activities to gain money for drugs, and the almost universal use of 
criminal background checks as part of the employment process, this population faces great 
difficulty securing emp loyment and housing. Many employers and la ndlords are reluctant to 
consider a person with a history of drug use. Add the stigma of criminal history, and reluctance 
turns to refusal. Criminal history reduces the likelihood of an employer considering an appl icant 
by 50%.74 Further, there is no legal protection from discrimination or exclusion for people with a 
history of drug use or people with criminal convictions.  
 
This emerges as a whole system of ‘otherness,’ breaking a certain segment of society out from 
the general population, considering them u ndeserving of and thusly exempted from its support 
and benefits. This takes on a whole other dimension when we consider the extent to which 
communities of color continue to be disproportionately arrested, charged a nd sentenced with 
drug crimes in compariso n with their white counterparts in spite of similar rates of substance use. 
Roughly one -in-four black men have found their lives colliding with the criminal justice system 
and subjected to incarceration, which mean s this same proportion of black men have h ad their 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 20 
rights stripped away. Viewed through this lens, US drug policy emerges as a system of legal 
discrimination. It replaces the Jim Crow laws of a bygone era, created to govern and control 
black bodies, with d rug policy and the penal system, created t o govern and control criminals, 
defined as such by the very system that exists to control them.75 
 
Furthermore, mandated reporter requirements frequently equate drug use in the family setting as 
concrete evidence of  neglect. As such, a person with children who openly admits to using drugs 
risks losing their children. This increases reluctance to engage with healthcare providers, 
effectively keeping people out of health care relationships and away from treatment.  
 
As vital as health, home community and purpos e are to recovery, our current system, with its 
over reliance on a punitive approach to drug use, is actively eroding these pillars, contributing to 
high rates of relapse and recidivism. But beyond this, US and Mai ne drug policy is complicit in 
perpetuatin g systemic inequality against people of color and people with a history of drug use, 
effectively consigning members of these populations to second -class citizenship, wherein they 
are not afforded the same rights an d privileges as the general population.  
 
5. Recommendations  
5.1. Primary Prevention  
1. Improve and expand social safety net programs to reduce poverty, deprivation and social 
marginalization that drive rates of adverse childhood experiences.  
Specific sugge stions to accomplish this include:  
a. Ensure universal access to early childhood educatio n. 
b. Align minimum wage with the ‘living wage’.  
c. Promote housing security as a universal right - expand access to low -income and 
income -sensitive housing throughout Maine.  
d. Promote health care as a universal right , including for people who use drugs and 
people  with the capacity for pregnancy  - moving towards universal health care 
systems beginning with Medicaid expansion.  
e. Expand access to reproductive health care and family p lanning services, including 
abortion care.  
f. Expand access to mental health care services.  
 
The Coalition recognizes the extreme complexity surrounding the initiation of substance use and 
the development of problematic relationships with substances. As indic ated in section 3.1 above, 
a growing body of evidence has affirmed that there i s a causative connection between adverse 
childhood experiences, cumulative stress and trauma on the one hand, and problematic 
relationships with substances on the other. Example s of traumatic experiences that lead to 
cumulative stress include extreme depri vation, homelessness, loss of a parent, abuse and neglect, 
and imprisonment of a parent.  
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 21 The Coalition recommends the improvement and expansion of a broad set of social safety net 
programs that are expected to broadly reduce incidence of trauma and advers e childhood 
experiences, thus contributing to the prevention of the development of substance use disorders.  
 
2. Increase resiliency among youth and mitigate the effects of childho od trauma by fostering 
and funding evidence -based, age appropriate programs that:  
a. Identify and intervene with youth that have experienced trauma and/or with high 
ACE scores or at risk of having high ACE scores.  
b. Increase resiliency among all youth through s chool -wide and community -level 
programming.  
Where the Coalition recognizes that it is impossible to completely eliminate childhood trauma 
and adverse childhood experiences, we recommend programs to increase resiliency among youth 
and mitigate the effects o f trauma, thus contributing to the prevention of the d evelopment of 
substance use disorders.   
Following the ‘asset -building model,’ resilience leads to positive youth development.  Resilience 
emerges as an internal asset, frequently accompanied by optimism , conflict resolution and 
problem -solving. However, po sitive youth development also relies on external protective factors 
that provide opportunities and challenges for realizing resilience.76 
Numerous studies demonstrate a negative association between resil ience measures and 
problematic substance use.77 Likewis e, the public health literature base is rife with studies 
demonstrating the impacts of specific evidence -based practices (EBPs) on resilience among at -
risk youth (specific prevention) and youth at large  (universal prevention) leading to reduced 
problematic  substance use. The Coalition has elected to refrain from identifying specific EBPs 
for implementation. However, the Coalition strongly recommends committing resources 
sufficient to fund implementation of locally selected EBPs throughout the state.  
5.2. H arm Reduction Recommendations  
 
3. Support and fund harm reduction programming to establish well -resourced, fully -staffed 
syringe exchange and naloxone distribution centers in every county embedded and/or closely 
allied with treatment services. Foster outreach programs that conduct community and street -
level outreach to people who use drugs, with a focus on those populations disproportionately 
impacted by substance use, including but not limited to the LGBT Q+ community, tribal 
communities, and people at  high risk of unintended pregnancies. Distribute safer injection 
supplies, naloxone, HIV/HCV testing, safer sex supplies, and connect people who use drugs 
to resources including treatment, basic health service s, customized sex education and 
contraceptive s ervices . 
Harm reduction programming, including syringe exchange and naloxone distribution programs, 
is supported by a substantial body of evidence suggesting that these programs decrease morbidity 
and mortalit y related to drug use and lead to improved heal th outcomes among PWUD.  
Syringe exchange programs have been closely studied for well over three decades and have been 
shown to dramatically reduce incidence of HIV among people who inject drugs. These finding s 
have been validated in a multitude of studies  and meta analyses.78 While less clear cut than HIV, 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 22 the evidence indicates that syringe exchange programs can reduce the transmission of hepatitis C 
when they are implemented at a ‘structural level’ (able to r each roughly 50% of the injecting 
population).79 This suggests the need for widely accessible syringe exchange services in order to 
have a lasting impact on rates of hepatitis C. Along these lines, in order to adapt syringe 
exchange models that originated i n urban areas for rural districts, analysts hav e suggested 
reducing geographic barriers by increasing the number of exchanges in rural areas to decrease 
travel distances, as well as modifying outreach models to reflect the needs of people in rural 
communit ies. 
Similarly, naloxone distribution programs that equip and train PWUD to administer naloxone, a 
temporary opioid overdose reversal medication, have been shown to decrease fatal drug 
poisonings. One systematic review that evaluated 22 studies found that take-home naloxone 
programs reduced overdose mo rtality among program participants and the broader community.80 
Additionally, some researchers found a dose -response relationship between quantity of naloxone 
distributed and effect size, suggesting that distri buting more naloxone programs could have a 
greater impact on accidental drug poisoning deaths.81 
Beyond the impacts of harm reduction programming on morbidity and mortality, these resources 
have been shown to increase uptake of substance use treatment. Ana lyses of syringe service 
programs suggest that they are highly effect sources of treatment referrals.82 One analysis 
showed that treatment referrals originating from syringe exchange programs were more effective 
than general referrals.83 Additionally, one st udy showed that individuals partic ipating in 
naloxone distribution programs were more likely to access treatment over the long term.84 
4. Fund and sanction the establishment of overdose prevention sites in major metropolitan 
areas throughout Maine . 
A growing b ody of evidence supports the establishment of overdose prevention sites (OPS), also 
known as safer drug use facilities (SDUF) or supervised injection sites (SIS), in metropolitan 
areas with high rates of injection drug use. SISs provide medically supervise d spaces for people 
to consum e pre -obtained illicit substances in a sterile environment. In most cases, medical staff 
are on hand to provide medical advice, dispense safer drug use supplies, and administer naloxone 
in the event of an accidental drug poison ing. 
Originating in Europe, S ISs have been in existence for nearly as long as syringe access 
programs. The first and only legal SIS in North America is InSite, located in Vancouver. Studies 
of OPSs suggest that they are effective ways to reduce the transmi ssion of HIV and viral 
hepati tis as well as reducing fatal drug poisonings. One 2004 systematic literature review of 75 
articles found that OPSs have the potential to reduce unintentional fatal opioid poisonings and 
HIV and hepatitis C transmission, and in crease access to primary care  and drug treatment for 
participants.85 Further, OPSs were not found to increase crime or drug use, and actually 
decreased public drug consumption and syringe litter.  
5. Expand access to case management services for people who con sume drugs, people engaged 
in treatment and people in short -term recovery, including support with employment, housing 
and other needs by amending section 13.03 -4 of the MaineCare Benefits Manual to include 
people with a severe substance use disorder who ar e not currently engaged in tr eatment, and 
removing the requirement that the individual be pregnant, living with his or her minor 
children, and/or an “intravenous drug user” (a person who consumes drugs intravenously).  
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 23 Case management is a client -centered s trategy to improve coordination and continuity of care. A 
significant body of evidence suggests that case management services significantly improve 
outcomes for people engaged in or seeking substance use treatment services compared to 
treatment alone. Stud ies identify improv ements over treatment alone in outcomes ranging from 
retention in care, reduced substance use, global functioning and reduced re -occurrence of 
symptoms (relapse).86 
 
While few studies exist examining outcomes related to the provision of c ase management 
services for persons not engaged in or seeking treatment, the Coalition strongly believes that the 
coordination of care provided by case management services would reduce morbidity and 
mortality related to substance use and increase initiatio n of substance use treatment.  
 
By expanding targeted case management to people with severe substance use disorders who are 
not engaged in treatment and do not have a history of injection drug use, providers will be better 
able to coordinate services and c are among people wh o use drugs, empowering them to develop 
the aforementioned pillars of recovery. This is expected to lead to increased functioning and 
stability among participants, as well as increasing the initiation of treatment and retention in care.  
 
6. Reduce relucta nce to seek care by supporting and funding educational programs for health 
care providers and students in all relevant specialties, including but not limited to primary care, 
infectious disease care, gastroenterology, hepatology, women’s  health and pre -natal care, 
concerning stigma surrounding people who consume drugs, harm reduction in health care, 
substance use treatment and compassionate care for people who consume drugs.  
 
Studies suggest that education on substance use and strategies to support people w ho consume 
drugs can improve attitudes of caregivers, including health care providers, towards people who 
consume drugs.87 88Accordingly, continuing medical education programs should include 
education surrounding the nature of addiction an d addiction as a di sease -state, education 
regarding effective treatment for addiction, education regarding disease conditions that people 
who consume drugs may be susceptible to, guidance around providing harm reduction 
information to people who consume dr ugs, and education around motivational interviewing.  
 
5.3  Treatment Recommendations  
 
7. Reduce barriers to treatment to ensure that all people who n eed substance use treatment can 
access it, including low -barrier and flexible treatment programs and addi tional supports for 
parents of young children.  
Specific suggestions to accomplish this include:  
a. Expand Mainecare and explore and implementing gap coverage for people without 
insurance to ensure that all people who need substance use treatment can afford it . 
b. Reduce requirements beholden upon people seeking treatment.  
One of the most significant barriers to accessing effective substance use treatment in Maine is 
lack of insurance. As stated above, most people experiencing substance use issues have no 
insuranc e whatsoever. Lacking insurance, the costs of medication assisted treatment regimens 
tend to be prohibitive, posing an insurmountable obstacle for people with low incomes. The 
Coalition highly recommends the express expansion of MaineCare. Experts througho ut the state 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 24 agree that expanding MaineCare up to 138% of the federal poverty level would decrease the 
proportion of PWUD that are currently lacking insurance. This would dramatically increase 
access to medication assisted treatment services, behavioral he alth services, case management 
services and basic healthcare services, helping to improve the overall health of people who use 
drugs in alignment with the pillars of recovery as identified by SAMHSA.  
 
In addition to expanding MaineCare up to 138% of the fe deral poverty level, the Coalition 
recommends exploring options and implementing gap coverage for people who are uninsured or 
underinsured to ensure that all people who need substance use treatment can afford it. Gap 
coverage should support the overall hea lth of recipients but may emphasize access to recovery -
oriented services, including medication assisted treatment services, behavioral health services 
and case management services.  
Beyond people’s ability to reasonably afford treatment services, recent res earch in the domain of 
addiction science lends itself strongly to decreasing non -financial barriers to accessing treatment, 
contradicting common practice in many clinics.89 Specifically this growing body of research 
recommends:  
• Continued buprenorphine treat ment in the wake of relapse over discontinuance of 
treatment on the basis that the patient is unfit;  
• Behavioral treatment as desired by the patient over mandated counseling;  
• Drug testing as a tool to support recovery over punitive consequences resulting fr om 
drug testing;  
• Buprenorphine treatment provided regardless of other drug use, over use of other 
substances as grounds for discharge;  
• Buprenorphine prescribed for as long as necessary.  
8. Establish methadone and buprenorphine maintenance therapy, including comprehensive 
trauma -informed counseling services, in every county in Maine.  
Specific suggestions to accomplish this include:  
a. Expanding MaineCare to increase access to treatment.  
b. Increasing the reimbursement rate for affiliated services to support business  viability.  
c. Decreasing barriers and burdens on methadone services to increase access through 
primary care and/or other avenues.  
d. Increase the availability of and access to treatment during the perinatal period.  
Methadone maintenance therapy and bupr enorphin e maintenance therapy make up the vast 
majority of medication assisted treatment regimens (MAT). First introduced in the 1960s, 
methadone maintenance therapy has been intensively studied during the course of the last 50 
years. Buprenorphine later j oined th is class of treatment in the 1980s and has likewise proven 
effective in treating opioid use disorders.  
 
Both medications function by staving off withdrawal symptoms and reducing drug -seeking 
behavior accordingly. The maximal efficacy of buprenorphi ne is lo wer than the proscribed 
optimal daily methadone dose, suggesting that buprenorphine may not be the best fit for persons 
using high -dose opioids. Additionally, some studies have found that the structure that frequently 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 25 accompanies methadone treatmen t throug h federally certified programs works better for some 
types of patients. However, buprenorphine tends to be more widely available due to fewer 
restrictions on prescribers and carries a lower risk of overdose due to a natural ceiling on its 
agonist e ffects a nd its frequent combination with naloxone, an opioid antagonist. As such, the 
Coalition strongly recommends increasing access to both medications.  By expanding MaineCare 
up to 138% of the federal poverty level, policy -makers would dramatically lowe r rates of 
un/underinsurance among people who use drugs. As indicated following recommendation 7 
above, this would dramatically increase access to substance use treatment and recovery services, 
including medication assisted treatment.  
 
During the last 8 y ears, ma ny clinics and addiction practices have been severely challenged by 
progressive reductions to MaineCare. With increasing reductions to addiction coverage, practices 
have hemorrhaged patients who could no longer afford their services, compromising t heir 
business viability and leading many to close down altogether. MaineCare expansion would boost 
the business viability for addiction practices throughout Maine, facilitating growth and expansion 
of these vital services and helping to establish practices  in area s outside of the metropolitan core.  
This effort would be further supported by increasing reimbursement rates for behavioral health 
and addiction services, including medication assisted treatment. By increasing the reimbursement 
rate for these vital  service s, policy -makers would help boost the business viability of addiction 
practices, thereby increasing the availability of substance use treatment throughout the state.  
 
Lastly, opioid treatment programs are more tightly regulated by the federal gover nment th an 
other addiction practices including buprenorphine prescribing. The burdens and barriers 
confronted by opioid treatment programs as a result of the Controlled Substances Act and other 
legislation contributes to lower access to methadone compared to bupre norphine and/or other 
treatment modalities, leaving methadone in the hands of a few organizations and largely confined 
to more metropolitan areas.  
As such, the Coalition strongly recommends that policy -makers examine and address federal 
regulatio ns regar ding opioid treatment programs that reduce barriers and burdens on providers 
and/or balances these barriers and burdens with incentives that will increase business viability in 
an effort to extend methadone maintenance therapy into every county in Maine.  
9. Cultivate low -barrier access to medical detox services by supporting and funding the 
establishment of medical detox services in every county in Maine.   
Research suggests that detox from opioids without successive linkage to medication assisted 
treatment in the form of buprenorphine or methadone is significantly less effective and 
associated with higher rates of opioid poisoning fatalities.90 The Coalition strongly recommends 
that people seeking opioid treatment be encouraged to utilize a nd be linked firmly to  medication 
assisted treatment as possible.  
 
However, the Coalition is dedicated to individual self -direction and recognizes that there is no 
wrong way to pursue recovery. As such, the Coalition advocates for a pragmatic approach to 
recovery, encouraging people to pursue recovery in whatever form the y feel will work best for 
them.  
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 26 Additionally, in spite of the above referenced findings, rapid cessation from opioids followed by 
abstinence remains the primary modality of recovery in the U.S. today.91 To thi s end, the 
Coalition recommends the allocation  of State funds towards the development and funding of 
medical detox services in every county in Maine.  
 
For many people seeking to cease drug use, withdrawal symptoms are an initial challenge faced 
in attaini ng abstinence. Medical detox facilities are me dically supervised practices that assist 
people who are physically dependent on substances to cease use and weather the short -term 
effects of withdrawal and connect them with other services to facilitate long -term recovery. 
While the evidence suggests that  rapid cessation of opioid use may be less effective and more 
dangerous than medication -assisted treatment, detox is one of the few options available for many 
other drugs.  
5.4. Recovery Recommendations  
 
10. Foster , support and fund programming offered through local recovery community centers 
established and maintained by people in long -term recovery including employment supports 
and job readiness programs, housing supports, recovery coaching services and other peer  
recovery support services.   
 
According  to SAMHSA, a robust network of friends, loved ones and associates (community), 
productive employment, educational avenues and volunteer opportunities (purpose) and stable 
housing (home) are key recovery supports. Tak en together, these supports amount to i ntegration 
in the community, a task made acutely difficult by stigma and in many cases criminal history.  
 
According to the Recovery Research Institute, “Recovery Community Centers are peer -operated 
centers that serve as locatable resources of community -based recovery support.”92 They provide 
resources, including advocacy training, resource mobilization, mutual support, networking, 
social activities and other services to individuals in recovery to help build and sustain their 
recovery over time. These centers  serve as a unique opportunity to engage people in recovery in 
programming and services.  
 
Recovery coaches are individuals, often in recovery themselves, who support people in their 
recovery process. Most recovery coa ches are peers that have completed an i ntensive recovery 
coach training. Recovery coaches provide support, connect people to resources and encourage 
them along the way, with a focus on non -clinical issues, such as housing, employment, and legal 
issues.  
 
Where many communities have Career Center s and other programs that are intended to connect 
people to meaningful employment, these centers are specifically intended to work with people 
who are “work ready,” i.e. they adhere to traditional codes of professiona lism. Training 
programs to increase wor k readiness for the recovery community are of vital importance to 
connecting people to meaningful employment opportunities.  A wealth of evidence supports the 
effectiveness of ‘supported employment’ in helping people b uild recovery.93 94  
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 27 One meta -analysis f ound that among four types of employment supports programs, supported 
employment and augmented supported employment were most effective in helping people obtain 
and maintain employment. Another study found that engage ment in supported employment 
programmin g significantly increased overall empowerment of the individual and decreased 
internalized stigma. Accordingly, where self -worth and self -efficacy are crucial components of 
recovery, supported employment increases bot h. According to researchers, the most e ffective 
supported employment programs: 1) encourage employment, 2) understand substance abuse as 
part of the vocational profile, 3) find a job that supports recovery, 4) help with money 
management, and 5) use a team approach to integrate mental health, su bstance abuse, and 
vocational services.  
 
11. Increase access to housing for people in all stages of recovery, including people who are 
actively using drugs, people in short -term recovery and people who are pregnant or 
parenting. Support Maine’s recovery housing movement.  
Specific suggestions to accomplish this include:  
a. Funding ‘Housing First’ programs for people who use drugs living in extreme  
      poverty in major metropolitan areas throughout Maine, including case man agement  
      supports, housing and rapid treatment access.  
b. Creating a funding mechanism to support certified recovery residences using a   
      voucher system.  
c. Establishing/endorsin g a statewide network of recovery houses, including voluntary  
      certificatio n to ensure safety and quality.  
d. Incentivizing state funded  recovery houses from discriminating against people in  
      medication assisted recovery by providing increased fin ancial support for houses that  
      accept people in medication assist ed recovery . 
e.  Clarifying that recovery houses are exempt fro m federal regulations regarding  
     maximum occupancy of unrelated people for re covery housing and ensuring thee  
     alignment of state and municipal fire codes with federal policy.  
The Coali tion believes that recovery is unique to each person and given the critical importance of 
housing in the recovery process, a range of housing options for all types of people - whether they 
are currently using substances, practicing abstinence, par ticipatin g in medication assisted 
treatment  or all of the above - should be available.  
 
Housing First is a “supportive housing model for persons with histories of chronic homelessness 
which emphasizes client -centered services, immediate housing and does no t require  treatment for 
mental illness or substance use as a condition.”95 Previous studies of Housing First have found 
reduced governmental costs and improved personal well -being among participants By funding 
‘Housing First’ programs for people who use dru gs living  in extreme poverty in major 
metropolitan areas throughout Maine, including case management supports, housing and rapid 
treatment access, we could have a significant impact for people living with substance use 
disorders.  
 
Recovery housing in Main e is extr emely limited at present. The vast majority of recovery homes 
are abstinence based with only 21 houses known to accept residents currently using medication 
assisted treatment.  
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 28  
“The Federal Housing Act, 42 U.S.C 3601 et seq., prohibits discriminat ion by di rect providers of 
housing, such as landlords and real estate companies as well as other entities, such as 
municipalities, banks or other lending institutions and homeowners insurance companies whose 
discriminatory practices make housing unavailabl e to pers ons because of race, religion, sex, 
national origin, familial status or disability.” Substance use disorder and recovery from it is 
protected as a disability, provided that illicit substances are not being used. The Fair Housing Act 
makes it unlaw ful “to r efuse to make reasonable accommodations in land use and zoning policies 
and procedures where such accommodations may be necessary to afford persons or groups of 
persons with disabilities an equal opportunity to use and enjoy housing.”96  
 
At presen t, Maine municipalities are operating in silos, without direction from the State 
government on rules and guidelines. Often houses outside Cumberland County find it difficult to 
work within the fire codes regarding maximum occupancy of unrelated people. As such, the  
Coalition strongly recommends that the State of Maine amend State fire codes regarding 
maximum occupancy of unrelated people to exempt recovery residences (RR). Further, the 
Coalition recommends that the State provide guidance to municipalities a round com pliance with 
State policy and the Fair Housing Act and takes administrative action to mandate compliance 
with these laws in order to increase access to RRs.  
 
In a 2018 article published in the Bangor Daily News, Troy Bennett “reached out to more t han 
90 ho mes believed to be recovery residences in [Maine].” Bennet’s survey found that currently 
there are 76 homes operating within state lines, with more than 77% of those in the Portland 
area, suggesting that only 17 houses exist outside the confines o f Cumberl and County.97 As a 
result, people with a history of substance use are most often forced to choose between living in 
Cumberland County or struggling with housing.  
 
Beyond availability, across the country, RR operators have been charged for allegedl y offerin g 
drugs to residences, sexually assaulting guests, and keeping them in an the deadly cycle of 
addiction to keep money flowing into the business. Though Maine has been spared of any of 
these heinous accusations, the Coalition believes that we must take a pr oactive approach to 
ensure the safety and quality of RRs.  
 
In response to the above, the Coalition recommends the establishment of a voluntary certification 
system that recognizes and extols RRs that meet certain quality and safety standards and do not 
discriminate against people on medication assisted treatment. Through oversight, houses would 
receive guidance and support in offering this critical service. “State recognition could also offer 
guidance to cities and towns, which can be leery of [RR s] and ha ve rules that make it hard for 
them to open despite federal law protecting … residents.”98  Certified RRs would be listed in a 
statewide inventory to facilitate referrals to housing. Further, stipends should be made available 
to certified recovery residence s (RR) via a foster care type system that would provide a stipend 
to community members for hosting people in recovery in their residential home. Owner -
operators would be required to pass certification standards prior to applying for a stipend.  
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 29 5.5. Crimin al Justice Reform Recommendations  
 
12. Decriminalize possession of all drugs. Possession of illicit drugs and/or materials used to 
administer drugs becomes an administrative offense on all counts, regardless of the quantity 
of the substance within the possess ion of the accused . Eliminate the permissible inference of 
trafficking or furnishing based solely on the weight or amount of a substance possessed by 
the accused and add intent as an element of the crimes of trafficking and furnishing.  
 
The Coalition belie ves that drug misuse is best addressed through public health rather than 
criminal legal means. As such, it recommends the decriminalization of the possession of all 
drugs. Doing this will allow us to effectively treat substance use disord er, remove the dev astating 
collateral consequences of criminal convictions for many who suffer from substance use 
disorder, and will free up money we spend on criminalization to put towards treatment and 
healthcare.  
In 2016, the Maine legislature took an important step in a ddressing the criminalization of people 
with substance use disorder when it de -felonized the possession of less than 200 milligrams 
heroin and fentanyl, among other drugs.99 Now, under Maine law, possession of less tha n 200 
milligrams of heroin or fentanyl is a Class D crime, a misdemeanor.100  This is an important step, 
because felony records are, generally speaking, much tougher barriers for employment, housing, 
and other forms of public assistance. However, even misdem eanor convictions can derail a 
person f rom fully engaging in civil life: it may prevent a person from accessing federal student 
aid,101 receiving federally subsidized housing,102 being employed in certain fields ,103 and 
obtaining certain professional licenses,104 among other things.  
 
In order to decrim inalize possession, we recommend the repeal of 17 -A Maine Revised Statutes. 
§1107 -A in its entirety, and the replacement of that section with a provision making possessio n 
of drugs in any amount an administrative penalty.105 
 
This proposal is not without pre cedent: in 2001, while in the midst of its own opioid crisis, 
Portugal decriminalized all drugs, including heroin, making possession of drugs an 
administrative violation that is dealt with outside of the country’s criminal legal system. ( Drug 
trafficking i s still criminalized under Portuguese law.)  When police encounter someone using or 
possessing drugs, they are required to issue a citation but may not arrest the person.106 A person 
with a citation must appear before a local board that is staffed by a doctor , lawyer and social 
worker that determine the appropriate response.107 This generally includes referrals to local 
resources, including harm reduction programs, and rarely i ncludes any fines or fees for the first 
instance. As part of this new public health mo del, Portugal dramatically ramped up outreach 
services, including syringe exchange, to people who use drugs, and treatment access.108 
 
In the years that followed, competing  public health narratives have emerged, endeavoring to 
shape and influence the percept ion and reception of this dramatic new approach to substance use. 
In a 2012 review and comparison of these competing narratives, CE Hughes and A Stevens 
dissect the claim s of the proponents and opponents and compare their accounts against the 
available evi dence. Hughes and Stevens observe a notable decrease in recent and current drug 
use among people aged 15 -24 between 2001 and 2007, and a dramatic decrease in drug -induced  
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 30 deaths between 2000 and 2008. Additionally, they note that in comparison to peer coun tries in 
Europe, following its reforms, Portugal was the only nation to exhibit declines in problematic 
drug use, and declines in drug -related deaths were more pronounced  in Portugal than its peer 
countries.109 
 
Meanwhile, according to the European Monitorin g Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction 
(EMCDDA) new HIV diagnoses attributable to drug injecting continues to decline, from 1,408 
in 2000110 to 30 in 2016, where it has rema ined relatively flat among people who do not use 
drugs.111 
 
The 2008 EMCDDA report for P ortugal indicates a dramatic increase in clients in medication 
assisted treatment programs (methadone or buprenorphine) between 2000 and 2007. While this 
peaked in 2010 a nd later declined somewhat before plateauing in 2013, this may be interpreted 
as marke t saturation. Participation in medication assisted treatment programs remained at nearly 
double the 2000 level in 2016.  
 
Put simply, when Portugal started treating drug u se as a public health issue and diverted its 
limited money away from criminalizing dru gs and into public health, it saw positive results.  
 
Escalating the punishment for drug sales has done nothing to stem the tide of overdose deaths in 
the US and Maine, an d we are skeptical that targeting drug dealers through criminalization does 
much more than continue to ensnare those with substance use disorder in the criminal justice 
system.112 However, to the extent that public officials insist on criminalizing drug sell ing or 
“trafficking,” they must establish safeguards to protect those with serious sub stance use disorder 
from being criminalized for their disorder.  
 
Current Maine law allows juries and judges to convict people for trafficking of drugs based 
solely on the  amount of drugs in a person’s possession.113 The threshold amount of drugs 
possessed fo r trafficking is lower than some people use in one week.114 This means that long -
term drug users with higher tolerance are vulnerable to being incarcerated simply because t hey 
are heavy users, not because they are drug kingpins.  
 
Instead of establishing traf ficking solely by the amount of a drug in a person’s possession, the 
Coalition recommends that the law should require as an element of the crime that a person has 
inten t to traffic. This way, the legislature can ensure that prosecutors are not prosecuting those 
with very heavy habits, or those who are dealing solely to pay for their own drug dependence, 
but are going after those with more power who are higher up on the dis tribution chain.  
 
13. Mandate the provision of a full range of treatment, including medic ation assisted treatment, 
and assertive post -release supports to cultivate seamless access to treatment upon release for 
people with substance use disorders in correction al facilities, for all correctional settings 
throughout Maine.  
 
As an initial matter, we wish to stress that (1) people should never have to go to jail in order to 
receive treatment for substance use disorders, and (2) jails and prisons should never be our 
state’s default drug treatment facilities. Funding for treatmen t for drug addiction m ust be 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 31 centered in communities, where people can live with their families, earn a living, and recover in 
a normal setting. However, to the extent that it will take time to shift our state’s culture from one 
of criminalizing drug use t o treating substance u se disorder, Maine must provide treatment for 
those who are suffering in jails and prisons now. We believe that to deny people health care, 
including medication assisted treatment, violates the principles of the Eighth Amendment’s 
prohibition on cruel and unusual punishment.  
 
Most jails in Maine, and the Maine Department of Corrections, do not allow the use of 
medication -assisted treatment for opioid use disorder. Instead, those who enter jail or prison 
already using medication assiste d treatment must stop that treatment, and those who were 
actively using drugs up until the time of incarceration are forced into detoxification without 
medical supervision. Detoxing can be dangerous and is, for most opioid users, almost unbearably 
painful.  Upon release from inc arceration, people who have been abstinent without medical care 
are released back into our communities without ready access to healthcare, jobs, or housing. 
Because of the lack of stability and the decrease in tolerance to drugs after  a period of 
abstinenc e, drug overdoses upon release from prison are exceptionally high.  
 
Maine’s jails and prisons must immediately end any prohibition on medication assisted treatment 
for substance use disorders. They must provide medication assisted treatment to any incarce rated 
person with a substance use disorder who wishes to receive it. Jails and prisons must also 
provide transitional support to those who leave incarceration, so that the factors that often lead to 
relapse – especially lac k of stable housing and employmen t - are less likely to occur.  
 
14. Divert people out of the criminal justice system for crimes driven by substance use by 
supporting and funding the development of pre -booking diversion programs, modeled on and 
adapting the La w Enforcement Assisted Diversion program in every county throughout 
Maine.  
 
Law Enforcement Assisted Diversion (LEAD) is a pre -booking diversion program originating in 
King County, Washington to address low -level drug and prostitution crimes in select area s of 
Seattle. “In a LEAD program,  officers exercise discretionary authority at point of contact to 
divert individuals to a community -based, harm reduction intervention for law violations driven 
by unmet behavioral health needs,”115 effectively diverting them  out of the criminal justice 
system cycle. Since 2016, two such programs have emerged in Maine, LEAAP (Law 
Enforcement Addiction Advocacy Program) in Portland and the Greater Bangor Area LEAD 
program in Bangor.  
 
Since it’s launch in Seattle in 2011, LEAD h as been rigorously evaluated. A 2 017 peer -reviewed 
evaluation found that LEAD participants were 58% less likely to be arrested. Additional studies 
of client outcomes found that LEAD participants were significantly more likely to have housing, 
employment an d legitimate income after receivi ng services than prior to the referral. Further, 
evaluations of system utilization and associated costs found that between jail bookings, jail days, 
prison incarceration, and other costs associated with criminal justice and  legal system utilization, 
LEAD p articipants showed considerable cost reductions ( -$2,100), where their counterparts 
showed cost increases (+$5,961).  
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 32 The Coalition recommends LEAD (and variants thereof) specifically due to some concerns the 
Coalition has over Project Hope variants and Ad ult Treatment Court (i.e. “Drug Court”). LEAD 
is founded in harm reduction that recognizes and celebrates incremental change towards an end 
goal of recovery, with a focus on improved stability and functioning. Project Hope,  started by the 
Scarborough Polic e Department, has generally tended towards a treatment centered approach 
(frequently abstinence -based treatment) with an end goal of abstinence -based recovery. Further, 
most Project Hope variants in other parts of the state  offer little support outside of the initial 
linkage to treatment and often don’t follow -up with constituents. This contributes to concerns 
over the potential for unintentional adverse outcomes, including increased accidental drug 
poisoning fatalities. Tha t said, there is an opportunity t o integrate and adapt both models (LEAD 
and Project Hope) to address the aforementioned concerns and better adapt LEAD to Maine’s 
rural environs.  
 
Major concerns also emerge over Adult Treatment Court (also known as “Drug C ourt”), which 
has often been adva nced as an effort to soften the criminal justice system and better treat 
substance use as a public health issue. Drug Courts, while well -intentioned, contain serious flaws 
that make them unsuitable for comprehensively addre ssing Maine’s drug use problems. First, by 
their very nature, drug courts still view substance use as a problem that the criminal justice 
system can solve. Drug courts offer help with substance use disorder that a person might not 
otherwise be able to acce ss, but at a price: the defendant  must come to court weekly, must waive 
their rights to due process and plead guilty to participate,  
 
15. Require the collection of data related to race, ethnicity and socioeconomic status for all 
stops, arrests, charges, conv ictions, sentences and other even ts at all levels of the criminal 
justice system. Establish a community panel to review data annually with the authority to 
require further review and action to address disparities. Require racial impact statements for 
all new policies considered by the Mai ne State Legislature.  
a. Collect and report Information on race and socioeconomic status in the criminal 
justice system.  
b. Require racial impact statements for all legislation.  
 
The war on drugs has disproportionately affected poor people and people of color, e specially 
Black people. In Maine, Black people are 46% of drug defendants,116 even though they are only 
1.6% of the population,117 and do not engage in illegal substance use more than any other race .118 
Defendants in drug cases who are Black are 20% more likely to be sentenced to prison than 
defendants in drug cases who are white.119 
 
Despite the general information on disparities mentioned above, more specific information 
regarding racial disparities in  the criminal legal system in its component parts is hard to c ome by 
in Maine, as criminal justice agencies do not use uniform systems of data collection or storage, 
nor do they collect the same categories of information. In order to know how to address th e racial 
and money inequities, we must first know exactly wher e the problem is.  
 
The recommendation that Maine require a centralized reporting structure for data on race and 
socioeconomic status is not novel: at a hearing before the Maine Advisory Committe e to the U.S. 
Commission on Civil Rights in 2014, experts test ified that Maine should inquire of law 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 33 enforcement officials what data is kept on racial disparities in the criminal legal system.120 That 
Commission itself officially recommended that Maine “requ ire the reporting, at minimum of a 
quarterly basis, of relevan t information”121 regarding race in sentencing and incarceration.  
Though the recommendation is not novel, we join the chorus of experts in the criminal justice 
field calling for the collection of information on race and socioeconomic status by criminal 
justice actors.  
Acknowledging that our criminal justice system disproportionately targets and punishes people 
of color, including a recognition that the war on drugs and our response to  people with substance 
use disorder have historically disproportionately ha rmed people of color, other states have begun 
requiring racial justice analyses before passing legislation. For example, earlier this year New 
Jersey Republican Governor Chris Chris tie signed into law legislation that will provide 
legislators with statisti cal analyses and projections of how criminal justice policies are likely to 
affect people of color, before any final votes are taken. Several other states —Connecticut, Iowa, 
Minneso ta and Oregon —have also enacted similar legislation, some with solely crimi nal justice 
focuses and some with focuses on other areas like child welfare. In Maine, where opioid use is 
addressed in so many legislative committees, we must have racial impact st atements for all 
legislation. Since 1966, the Maine legislature has require d fiscal notes for legislation, describing 
the impact of the bill on the finances of State government. Currently, the Office of Fiscal and 
Program Review (OFPR), a non -partisan staf f office of the legislature, already creates 
preliminary fiscal impact stat ements for original printed bills. The legislature should require this 
office to not only forecast the economic impact of legislation, but also the projected impact on 
people of col or in Maine. Much in the way that a given bill may not seem to require expe nditures 
until OFPR adds a fiscal note, many bills may appear —and be intended to be —race neutral, until 
a deeper analysis is done. We cannot fully address the harm our drug policy h as had until we are 
confident that we are no longer creating legislation th at disproportionately harms one group of 
people.  
5.6. Recommendations to combat stigma and dehumanization  
16. Support employment for people with a history of drug use and reduce employment 
discrimination by funding programs to engage employers around the impo rtance of purpose 
for people in recovery and offering protections and incentives to hire people with substance 
use disorders as well as passing broad ‘Fair Chance’ policies th at restrict the consideration 
of criminal history for all employment, housing, li censing and other relevant application 
processes. These should be supplemented by policies that address racial bias in hiring 
practices.  
 
According to researchers, one in thre e American adults have a criminal record.122 As indicated 
above studies clearly ind icate that having a criminal record is a barrier to employment. The 
treatment of people who use drugs in the criminal justice system makes it difficult for them to 
find work a fter they have been sentenced, and employment has been shown to play an important  
part in reducing recidivism.123 The evidence demonstrates the best chance of success for people 
in recovery is to keep them employed. The Path Forward initiative in Ohio is gea red to do just 
that. This is part of the Ohio Bureau of Worker’s Compensation pil ot project; The Opioid 
Workplace Safety Program will provide $5 million to employers over two years to hire and 
manage people in recovery. Implementation will be based on succ essful programs partnering 
with treatment providers and employers.124 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 34 Ban the Box ( otherwise known as Fair Chance) policies seek to eliminate questions regarding 
criminal background on employment and other applications. These policies have been 
demonstrated to almost eliminate the barrier of having a criminal record on receiving a 
callba ck.125 In addition, hiring rates increased for people with criminal records where this policy 
was in practice.126 127 Once backgrounds are checked, individualized assessments that c onsider 
the time lapse from the last offense and its relevance to the job result in improved outcomes. 
Allowing the candidate an opportunity to review background -check results is also important due 
to a plethora of inaccurate and misleading information con tained in many reports. Ban the Box 
policies may reduce some of the stigma attach ed to having a criminal record, as well as have 
positive social and psychological outcomes. A potential downside to Ban the Box is a noted 
increase in employment discriminatio n against people of color. Recent studies indicate a reduced 
callback rate and re duced employment rate for people of color due to inherent bias with an 
assumption of criminal history.128 129 In a report produced by the Urban Institute, authors 
recommended pote ntial remedies to this including increased regulation against equal 
employment vi olators, training for employers and stakeholders around ‘ban -the-box policies, 
expungement, expanded job training for justice involved individuals, and a requirement that job 
applications be name and address blind130 
 
17. Establish and/or amend non -discriminati on policies to encompass people with substance use 
disorders, affording them protections against discrimination around housing, employment 
and other rights.  
 
While there is no  strong evidence to support the social, economic or health benefits of anti -
discr imination policies, this recommendation emerges from a desire to send a strong message 
that it is unacceptable to discriminate against people with substance use disorders. Whe re the 
evidence strongly shows that the majority of people with substance use dis orders are survivors of 
complex trauma and/or severe mental illness, it is easy to understand why it is important to 
protect this class. The war on drugs and the associated so cial exclusion of people who use drugs, 
when viewed through this lens, becomes a war on some of our most vulnerable citizens – 
survivors of childhood abuse, sexual assault, people with severe mental illnesses, and others. 
While existing federal law posits some protections for ‘people in recovery’ (i.e. people with a 
history of drug use  who are currently abstinent from drugs) by encompassing them within the 
federal definition of ‘disabled’ persons, this definition is inconsistently applied and poorly 
enforce d. Further, the authors can think of no other example in which differently abled people 
who are engaged in treatment are considered to have different rights than people who are not 
engaged in treatment. As such, this facet of law merely reinforces drug use r stigma.  
 
18. Beyond sending a strong message of social inclusion, establishing/exp anding non -
discrimination policies to include people with substance use disorders provides a legal 
mechanism through which rampant institutional, cultural and statutory discrimination might 
be challenged.  Support and fund a coordinated public education cam paign and other efforts 
to reduce stigma around substance use and shift the cultural perception of people who 
consume drugs. This should emphasize the impact o f trauma and adverse childhood 
experiences on substance use and break stereotypes related to peop le who consume drugs by 
exploring the extent to which they are our neighbors, loved ones, family and friends.  
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 35 
Stigma research indicates the importance of educa tional initiatives including interaction between 
the public, the police, and medical students (me dical professionals) with people who use 
substances. In addition, leaflets with positive depictions of people with substance use disorders 
reduced stigmatized perceptions of heroin and alcohol dependency.131 
The “Time to Change” campaign in England has had s uccess in improving public opinion and 
reaction to people with mental health issues.132 This has important implications for people who 
use substances as well. A similar campaign organized to reduce stigma around drug use is 
underway in the UK called; “Nice p eople take drugs”. The nonprofit, Release, has conducted an 
educational initiative and billboards on buses with their slogan to get the message out.133 
 
6. Conclusion  
6.1 Summary and Concluding Statements  
This report represents a collaborative effort on beh alf of the Maine Coalition for Sensible Drug 
Policy. It explores the ongoing opioid crisis in all of its depth and breadth, painting a 
comprehensive pictur e of this public health crisis, it’s sociocultural moorings and the impact of 
public policy on the cr isis. In so doing, the Coalition asserts specific recommendations to address 
the opioid crisis and advance sensible drug policy with the goals of reducing the prevalence of 
problematic drug use, reducing drug -related harms , reducing the disparate racial im pacts of 
existing drug policy  and facilitating recovery for people with problematic relationships to drugs. 
The above recommendations are grounded in public health science and advocate for a 
compassionate approach to drug use and the suspension of punitive  programs that amount to 
efforts to ‘punish people into recovery.’ The evidence and/or arguments surrounding these 
recommendations is explored in -depth.  
6.2 How we pay for this agenda  
No doubt, many features of this agenda require additional expenditures. To put those 
expenditures in context, however, we ought to remember the findings of Maine’s Substance Use 
and Mental Health Office’s 2013 Report, “ The Cost of Alcohol and Drug Abu se in Maine, 
2010 ,” documenting the enormous costs of the status quo.134 
When the Maine Center for Economic Policy updated  the analysis in 2015, they found that 
Maine’s substance abuse crisis costs the state at least $750 million a year, with $449 million born 
by the private sector, and $300 million born directly by the public through government 
expenditures. Furthermore, wh ile Maine spent about $67 mil lion in treatment, our state spent 
over $230 million in enforcement —with over 78% of all drug arrests simply for possession .135 
Clearly, our p riorities are inverted. We ou ght to invest far more in the prevention, harm 
reduction, treatment, recovery, and public education strategies outlined in these 
recommendations, and far less in criminalizing  people suffering from a public health crisis. Not 
only are these evidence -based strategies more effective, they are far more fiscally responsible.  
The Office of Substance Use and Mental Health Services put it in their 2013 report, in “2010, 
only 14,996 individuals were reported to have received treatment,  which is 20.9% of the total 
number of individuals who needed treatment”(14). Remember, the cuts to MaineCare that 
resulted in over 50,000 Mainers losing access to Medicaid (and therefore treatment for substance 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 36 use disorder), occurred after  2010, meaning today, it is likely that fewer than one in five people 
who need treatment can access it.  
We estimate the cost of our prevention, harm reduction, treatment, recovery, and public 
education strategies to be about $130 million for the next bienn ial budget ($61  million/year), 
about half of which is Medicaid expansion. In other words, our agenda constitutes only about 
a quarter of the resources already dedicated to drug enforcement strategies, well within 
range of the resources made available by de criminalizing d rug possession.  
Thus, the decriminalization of drug possession, while important from a public health policy 
perspective, also has the potential to fund all (or nearly all) the costs of the strategies necessary 
to tackle the epidemic. By re -centering our re sponse from the criminal justice system to the 
health care system, we can save lives and money.  
Furthermore, thanks to a healthy economy, Maine also has plenty of surplus revenue to direct to 
fight this epidemic, including:  
• Over $270 million  in the “rainy day” fund.  
• Over $140 million in a projected revenue surplus for the next biennium.  
• Over $30 million in an accumulating fund that would otherwise automatically lower 
Maine’s income tax rate.  
Many investments, particularly those involving Medi caid and Head S tart, come with generous 
federal matching funds. These additional resources, in combination with a healthier, more 
productive workforce, will strengthen Maine’s economy and the State’s fiscal position through 
stronger revenues over time. Fur thermore, lawma kers should provide greater oversight to the 
federal funds made available through the recently enacted “ SUPPORT for Patients and 
Communities Act ” and the reauthorization of the “21st Century Cures Act.” We should leave no 
stone unturned, and  do our best to  draw down any federal or other resources that can help move 
us forward.  
Finally, Maine lawmakers should restore oversight and public accountability to the assets and 
forfeitures seized during drug enforcement operations, using them to fuel public health —not 
further criminalization. Increasing the marijuana excise tax,136 increasing and equalizing tobacco 
taxes, the Opioid Manufacturer Windfall Profits Tax,137 and the portions of “tax conformity” that 
benefit only high net -worth individuals and c orporations,138 are all worthy of consideration as the 
legislature debates how to identify resources for these strategies. Previous legislative efforts, like 
using already -available TANF resources (Temporary Assistance to Needy Families) to create a 
housing voucher program ,139 could easily be adopted, with a tremendous impact on the crisis.  
In other words, money isn’t the issue. Just within the criminal justice system —excluding revenue 
surpluses and popular, appropriate revenue increases —we can we easily find m ore than enough  
to address this crisis. Even without the savings from decriminalization, the total non -
Medicaid expansion cost of these reforms is less than the projected revenue surplus for the 
next biennium.  In fact, the far greater fiscal danger are the  compounding co sts of inaction, 
driving up the costs to families, the public, and private businesses, with each passing day that 
this crisis continues.  
 
 
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 37 6.3  Acknowledgements:  
The Coalition would like to acknowledge the following persons who contributed significantly to 
the writing, editing and preparing this report:  
 
Arthur Adoff, volunteer/intern  
Courtney Allen, James’ Place  
Ben Chin, Maine People’s Alliance  
Andrea Littlefield, Health Equity Alliance  
Alysia Melnick, Berman Shu rr 
 Kenney Miller, Health Equity Allianc e 
Louisa Munk, Muskie School of Public 
Service  
Meagan Sway, ACLU of Maine  
Rachel Talbot -Ross, NAACP Prison Branch
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 38 
7. References  
                                                           
1  Miller K. Maine is 6th worst state in the nation for rise in overdose deaths. Portland Press Herald . 
August 16, 2018. https://www.pressherald.com/2018/08/16 /maine -continues -to-outpace -most -of-nation -
in-drug-overdose -deaths/  Accessed December 30, 2018.  
 
2 Jalal H, Buchanich JM, Roberts MS, Balmert LC, Zhang K, Burke, DS. Changing dynamics of the drug 
overdos e epidemic in the United States from 1979 through 2016. Scienc e. 2018; 361(6408). 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/361/6408/eaau1184 . Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
3 Dan Biggs revol utionized opioid treatment. Chicago Politics and City Life.  August 23, 2018. 
https://www.chicagomag.com/city -life/September -2018/Dan -Bigg -Revolution ized-Opioid -Treatment  
Accessed December 30, 2018.  
 
4 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services. National Survey on Drug Use and Health. Annual 
National Reports. https://w ww.samhsa.gov/data/nsduh/reports -detailed -tables -2015-NSDUH  and 
https://www.samhsa.gov/data/nsduh/reports -detailed -tables -2016 -NSDUH  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
5 Davenp ort S. Matthews K. Opioid use disorder in the United States: Diagnosed prevalence by payer, 
age, sex, and state. Milliman White Paper. March 9, 2018. 
http://www.mi lliman.com/insight/2018/Opioid -use-disorder -in-the-United -States -Diagnosed -prevalence -
by-payer --age--sex--and-state/  Accessed December 30, 2018.  
 
6 Anthony JC, Warner LA, Kessler RC. Comparative epidemio logy of dependence on tobacco, alcohol, 
controlled su bstances, and inhalants: Basic findings from the National Comorbidity Survey. Exp Clin 
Psychopharmacol . 1994; 2:244–268. 
 
7 Price RK, Risk NK, Spitznagel EL, Remission from drug use over a 25 year period:  Patterns and 
treatment use. Am J Public Health.  Am J Public Health 2001 July; 91(7): 1107 –1113. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1446707/pdf/11441739.pdf  Accessed December 31, 
2108.   
 
8 Brooner RK, King VL, Kidorf M, Schmidt CW, Bigelow GE. Psychiatric and substance use comorbidity 
among treatment -seeking opioid abusers. Arch Gen Psychiatry.  1997;54(1):71 –80. 
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1997.01830130077015  
9 Kidorf M , Disney ER, King VL, Neufeld K, Bellenson PL, Brooner, RK. Prevalence of psychiatric and 
substance use disorders in opioid abusers in a community syringe exchange program. Drug Alcohol 
Depend . 2004 May 10:74(2):115 -22. 
 
10 Felitti, V. The Origins of addict ion: Evidence from the adverse childhood experiences study. 
Department of Medicine, Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program. February 16, 2004. 
https://www.nijc.org/pdfs/Subject%20Matter%20Articles/Drugs%20and%20Alc/ACE%20Study%20 -
%20OriginsofAddiction.pdf  Accessed December 30, 2018.  
 
11 Reynolds M, Mezey G, Chapman M, Wheeler M, Drummond C, Baldacchino A. Co -morbid post -
traumatic s tress disorder in a substance misusing clinical population. Drug Alcohol Depend . 2005; 77(3), 
251-258. 
 
12 Stein MD, Conti MT, Kenney S, Anderson BJ, Flori JN, Risi MM, Bailey GL. (2017). Adverse  
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 39                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
childhood experience effects on opioid use initiati on, injec tion drug use, and overdose among persons 
with opioid use disorder. Drug Alcohol Depend . 2017; 179325-329. 
 
13 Maté, G. In the realm of hungry ghosts: Close encounters with addiction . North Atlantic Books, 2010.  
 
14 Alexander BK. The disease and adaptive mode ls of addiction: A framework evaluation. J Drug Issues. 
2987 ;17(1):47 -66. 
 
15 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services. National Survey on Drug Use and Health. Annual 
National Reports.  
 
16 Noble M, Treadwell JR, Tregear SJ, et al. Long ‐term opioid management for chronic noncancer pain. 
Cochrane Database Sys Reviews. 2010; 1. 
 
17 Bruner C. ACE, place, race, and poverty: building hope for children. Academic pediatrics . 
2017; 17(7):S123 -S129.  
 
18 Biglan VA, Van Ryzin MJ,  Hawkins, JD. Evolving a more nurturing society to prevent adverse 
childhood experiences. Academic Pediatrics. 2017;17(7): S150 -S157.  
 
19 Kellermann NP. Epigenetic transmission of holocaust trauma: can nightmares be inherited. Israel J 
Psychiatry Relat Sci. 2013;50 (1):33 -39. 
 
20 Bombay A, Matheson K, Anisman. Intergenerational trauma. Journal de la santé autochtone. 2009;5: 6-
47. 
 
21 Alexander BK. Dislocation theory of addiction: Rise and fall of the official view of addiction. July 3, 
2014. http://www.brucekalexander.com/articles -speeches/dislocation -theory -addiction/241 -rise-and-fall-
of-the-official -view -of-addictio n-5 Accessed December 3 1, 2018.  
 
22 Jalal H, Buchanich JM, Roberts MS, et al.  
 
23 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services. Recovery and recovery support. 
https://www.samhsa.gov/recovery  Updated October 12, 2018. Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
24 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Hepatitis C: Questions and answers for health 
professionals. https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/hcv/hcvfaq.htm#section2  Updated A pril 30, 2018. Accessed 
December 31, 2018.  
 
25 Wight P. Data: Maine spends tens of millions a year on hepatitis C treatment. Maine Public Radio. 
November 27, 2017. http://www.mainepublic.org/post/data -maine -spends -tens-millions -year-hepatitis -c-
treatment  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
26 Abdala NS, Stephens, PC, Griffith BP, Heimer  R. Survival of HIV -1 in syringes. J Acquir Immune Def 
Syndro.  1999;20(1):73 -80. 
 
27 Van MH, Rose CE, Hallisey EJ, et al. County -level vulnerability assessment for rapid dissemination of 
HIV or HCV infections among persons who inject drugs, United States. J Acquir Immune Def Syndro.  
2016; 73(3):323 -331. 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 40                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
28 Rapaport L. Indiana HIV ou tbreak among drug users may have been avoidable. Reuters Health News . 
October 4, 2018. https://www.reuters.com/ article/us -health -hiv-indiana/indiana -hiv-outbreak -among -
drug-users -may-have -been -avoida ble-idUSKCN1ME2N7  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
29 Freyer F. HIV outbreak in Lawrence, Lowell is bigger than officials thought. Boston Globe. July 25, 
2018. https://www.bostonglobe.com/metro/2018/07/25/hiv -outbreak -lawrence -lowell -bigger -than-
officials -thought/szlLL75UDcN TPeB022NptI/story.html  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
30 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. HIV cost -effectiveness. 
https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/programresource s/guidance/costeffectiveness/index.html  Updated March  8, 
2017. Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
31 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services. National Survey on Drug Use and Health. Annual 
National Reports.  
 
32 Heil SH, Jones HE, Arria A, et al. (2011). Uninte nded pregnancy in opioid -abusing women. J Subst 
Abuse Treat. 2011;40 (2):199 -202. 
 
33 Don’t judge drug -using pregnant women based on junk science.  National Advocates for Pregnant 
Women. April 5, 2012.  
http://advocatesforpregnantwomen.org/Don%E2%80%99t%20Judge%20Pregnant%20Drug11 -2-
2011.pdf  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
34 The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Substance abuse reporting a nd pregnancy: 
The role of the obstetrician gynecologis t. Committee Opinion no. 473, January 2011. Reaffirmed 2014.  
https://www.acog.org/Clinical -Guidance -and-
Publications/Committee_Opinions/Committee_on_Health_Care_for_Underserved_Women/Substance_A
buse_Reporting_and_Pregnancy_The_Role_of -the-Obstetrician -Gynecologist  Accessed December 31, 
2018.  
 
35 US Department of Health and Human Services. Executive Summary. Facing Addiction in America: 
Surgeon General’s Report on Alcohol, Drugs, and Health.  2016. 
https://addiction.surgeong eneral.gov/executive -summary  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
36 Message From the President of the United States Transmitting Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1973, 
Establishing a Drug Enforcement Administration , H.R. Doc. No. 69, 93rd Cong., 1st Sess. 3 (1973).  
 
37 The Drug War, Mass Incarceration and Race. Drug Policy Alliance. January 25, 2018. 
http://www.drugp olicy.org/resource/drug -war-mass -incarceration -and-race-englishspanish  Accessed 
December 31, 2018.  
 
38 Executive Office of the President of the United States. Economic Perspectives on Incarceration and the 
Criminal Justice System. April 2016). 
https://www.prisonpolicy.org/scans/20160423_cea_incarceration_criminal_justice.pdf  Accessed 
December 31, 2018.  
 
39 Sawyer W. The gender divide: Tracking women’s state pri son growth. Prison Policy Initiative.  January 
9, 2018. https://www.prisonpolicy.org/reports/women_overtime.html  Accessed Decemb er 31, 2018.  
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 41                                                                                                                                                                                            
40 Swavola E, Riley K, Subramanian R. Overl ooked : Women in Jails in an Era of Reform. Vera Institute 
of Justice. August 15, 2016.  https://storage.googleapis.com/vera -web-
assets/downloads/Publications/overlooked -women -and-jails-report/legacy_downloads/overlooked -
women -and-jails-report -updated.pdf  Accessed December  31, 2018.  
 
41 Hari J. Chasing the scream: The first and last days of the war on drugs . Bloomsbury Publishing USA, 
2015.  
 
42 Alexander M. The new Jim Crow: Mass incarceration in the age of colorblindness . The New Press, 
2012.  
 
43 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services. National Survey on Drug Use and Health. A nnual 
National Reports.  
 
44 United States Census Bureau. Quick Facts: Maine. https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/me  Upda ted July 
1, 2018. Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
45  Nellis A. The Color of Justice: Raci al and Ethnic Disparity in State Prisons. The Sentencing Project. 
June 14, 2016.  https://www.sentencingproject.org/publications/co lor-of-justice -racial -and-ethnic -
disparity -in-state-prisons/  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
46 Bonczar T. Prevalence of imprisonment in the US population, 1974 -2001. US Department of Justice. 
Bureau of Justice Statistics Special Report. August 2003. 
https://www.bjs.gov/content/ pub/pdf/piusp01.pdf  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
47 Merrall ELC, Karaminia A, Binswanger I, et al. Meta -Analysis of Drug -Related Deaths Soon after 
Release from Prison. Addic tion 2010;105.(9):1545 –1554, doi: 10.1111/j.1360 -0443.2010.02990.x  
 
48 Durose MR, Cooper AD, Snyder HN. Recidivism of Prisoners Released in 30 States in 2005: Patterns 
from 2 005 to 2010. US Department of Justic e. Bureau of Justice Statistics Special Report, April 2014.  
 
49 Tomlinson KD. An examination of deterrence theory: Where do we stand. Fed. Probation . 2016;80:33.  
 
50 Leipold AD. The war on drugs and the puzzle of deterrenc e. J. Gender Race & Just. , 2002; 6:111.  
 
51 Fentiman LC. Rethinking Addiction: Drugs, Deterrence, and the Neuroscience Revolution. U. Pa. JL & 
Soc. Change. 2011;14: 233. 
 
52 Werb D, Kamarulzaman A, Meacham MC, et al. The effectiveness of compulsory drug treatm ent: A 
systematic review. Int J Drug Policy. 2016;28: 1-9. 
 
53 Green DP, Winik D. Using random judge assignments to estimate the effects of incarceration and 
probation on recidivism among drug offenders. Criminology . 2010;48(2):357 -387. 
 
54 Spohn C, Holleran D. The effect of imprisonme nt on recidivism rates of felony offenders: A focus on 
drug offenders. Criminology . 2001;40(2):329 -358. 
 
55 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services. National Survey on Drug Use and Health. Annual 
National Reports.  
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 42                                                                                                                                                                                            
56 Syringe ex change participants were surveyed over the course of 3 months through syringe service 
programs in Ellsworth and Bangor. For a copy of survey results email info@mainehealthequity.org  
 
57 Contact wi th staff at  the US Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.  
 
58 Volkow N. How can we better support physicians in addressing the opioid crisis? Scientific American 
blog. August 31, 2018. https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/observations/how -can-we-better -support -
physicians -in-addressing -the-opioid -crisis/  Accessed December 31, 2108.  
 
59 Van Boekel LC, Brouwers EP, Van Weeghel J, Garretsen HF. Stigma among health professionals 
towards patients with substance use disorders and its consequences for healthcare delivery: systematic 
review. Drug Alcohol Depend . 2013 ;131(1 -2):23 -35. 
 
60 Ahern J, Stuber J, Galea S. Stigma, discr imination and the health of illicit drug users. Drug and alcohol 
dependence. 2007;88(2 -3;188-196. 
 
61 Syringe exchange participant survey, Ellsworth and Bangor.  
 
62 Linton SL, Celentano DD, Kirk GD , Mehta SH. The longitudinal association between homelessness , 
injection drug use, and injection -related risk behavior among persons with a history of injection drug use 
in Baltimore, MD. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2013;132(3): 457-465. 
 
63 Syringe exchange partic ipant survey, Ellsworth and Bangor.  
 
64 Zivanovic R. Milloy MJ , Hayashi K, et al. (2015). Impact of unstable housing on all -cause mortality 
among persons who inject drugs. BMC public health. 2015;15(1): 106. 
 
65 Roy É,  Boivin JF, Leclerc P. (2011). Initiation to drug injection among street youth: a gender -based 
analys is. Drug Alcohol Depend . 2011;114(1):49 -54. 
 
66 Linton SL, Celentano DD, Kirk GD, Mehta SH. The longitudinal association between homelessness, 
inject ion drug use, and injection -related risk behavior among persons with a history of injection drug use 
in Balt imore, MD. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2013;132(3): 457-465. 
 
67 Nagelhout GE, Hummel K, de Goeij MC, et al. (2017). How economic recessions and unemployment  
affect illegal drug use: a systematic realist literature review. Int J Drug Policy. 2017;44: 69-83. 
 
68 Henke l, D. (2011). Unemployment and substance use: a review of the literature (1990 -2010). Curr 
Drug Abuse Rev . 2011;4(1):4 -27. 
 
69 Lloyd C. The stigmatiz ation of problem drug users: A narrative literature review. Drugs: education, 
prevention and policy. 2013;20 (2):85-95. 
 
70 Corrigan PW, Kuwabara SA, O'Shaughnessy J. The public stigma of mental illness and drug addiction: 
Findings from a stratified random sample. J Soc Work. 2009;9(2): 139-147. 
 
71 Corrigan PW, Watson AC, Miller FE. (2006). Blame, shame, and contam ination: The i mpact of mental 
illness and drug dependence stigma on family members. J Fam Psychol. 2006;20(2): 239. 
 
72 Ahern J, Stuber J, Galea S.  
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 43                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
73 Ahern J, Stuber J, Galea S.  
 
74 Curran TW (2017). Reducing substance abuse stigma in employment application.  PhD Dissertation. 
Georgia Southern University. Spring 2017. 
https://digital commons.georgiasouthern.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2668&context=etd  Accessed 
December 31, 2018.  
 
75 Alexander M.  
 
76 Lee TY, Cheung CK, Kwong WM. Resilience as a positive youth development construct: a conceptual 
review. Scientific World Journal. 2012 , 390450. doi: 10.1100/2012/390450  
 
77 Rudzinski K, McDonough P, Gartner R, St rike C. Is there room for resilience? A scoping review and 
critique of substance use literature and its utilization of the concept of resilience. Subst Abuse Treat Prev 
Polic y. 2017;12(1): 41. doi:10.1186/s13011 -017-0125-2  
 
78 Aspinall EJ, Nambiar D, Goldbe rg DJ, et al. Are needle and syringe programmes associated with a 
reduction in HIV transmission among people who inject drugs: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Int 
J Epidemiol. 2013;43(1): 235-248. 
 
79 MacArthur,  GJ, van Velzen E, Palmateer N, et al. I nterventions to prevent HIV and hepatitis C in 
people who inject drugs: a review of reviews to assess evidence of effectiveness. Int J Drug Policy . 
2014;25(1)34 -52. 
 
80 McDonald R, Strang J. (2016). Are take ‐home naloxone programmes effective? Systematic review 
utilizing application of the Bradford Hill criteria. Addiction. 2016;111(7): 1177 -1187.  
 
81 Walley AY, Xuan Z, Hackman HH, et al. Opioid overdose rates and implementation of overdose 
education and nasal naloxone distribution in Massachusetts: interrupted time series analysis. BMJ . 
2013;346:f174.  
 
82 Neufeld K, King V, Peirce J, et al.  Kolodner, K., Brooner, R., & Kidorf, M. A comparison of 1 -year 
substance abuse treatment outcomes in community syringe exc hange participants versus other referrals. 
Drug Alcohol Depend . 2008;97)1 -2:122 -129. 
 
83 Silverman B, Thompson D, Baxter B, et al. First federal support for community based syringe exchange 
programs: A panel presentation by SAMHSA grantees. Presented at the  International AIDS Conference 
Poster Session, Washington, D.C. on July 25, 2012. Poster and abstract available online at 
http://pag.aids2012.org/abstracts.aspx?aid=20133  . Accessed: December  12, 2012.  
 
84 Seal KH, Thawley R, Gee L, et al. Naloxone distribution and cardiopulmonary resuscitation training for 
injection drug users to prevent heroin overdose death: a pilot intervention study. J Urban Health. 
2005;82(2): 303-311. 
 
85 Potier C, Laprévo te V, Dubois -Arber F, et al. Supervised injection services: what has been 
demonstrated? A systematic literature review. Drug Alcohol Depend . 2014;145:48 -68. 
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 44                                                                                                                                                                                            
86 Vanderplasschen W, Rapp RC, Wolf JR, Broekaert E. The development and implementation of case 
management for substance use disorders in North America and Europe. Psychiatric Services. 
2004;55(8): 913-922. 
 
87 Livingston JD. Milne T, Fang ML, Amari E. The effe ctiveness of interventions for reducing stigma 
related to substance use disorders: a systematic review. Addiction. 2012;107(1): 39-50. 
 
88 Cleary M, Hunt GE, Malins G, et al. Drug and alcohol education for consumer workers and caregivers: 
A pilot project ass essing attitudes toward persons with mental illness and problematic substance use. Arch 
Psychiat r Nurs . 2009;23(2):104 -110. 
 
89 Martin, S. A., Chiodo, L. M., Bosse, J. D., & Wilson, A. (2018). The next stage of buprenorphine care 
for opioid use disorder. Annals of Internal Medicine . 
 
90 Kleber HD. Pharmacologic treatments for opioid dependence: detoxif ication and maintenance options. 
Dialogues Clinical Neurosci. 2007;9(4): 455-70. 
 
91 Kelly JF, Bergman B, Hoeppner, BB et al. , Vilsaint, C., & White, W. L. Prevalence and pathways of 
recovery from drug and alcohol problems in the United States population: I mplications for practice, 
research, and policy. Drug Alcohol Depend . 2017;181:162 -169. 
 
92 Recovery Community Centers. Recovery Research Institute. 
https://www.recoveryanswe rs.org/resource/recovery -community -centers/  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
93 Becker DR, Drake RE, Naughton Jr, WJ. (2005). Supported employment for people with co -occurring 
disorders. Psychiatr Rehabil J. 2005;28(4): 332. 
 
94 Russinova Z, Gidugu V, Bloch P, e t al.  Restrepo -Toro, M., & Rogers, E. S. (2018). Empowering 
individuals with psych iatric disabilities to work: Results of a randomized trial. Psychiatr Rehabil J . 
2018;41(3):1960297.  doi: 10.1037/prj0000303  
 
95 Davidson C, Neighbors C, Hall G, et al. Asso ciation of Housing First implementation and key 
outcomes among homeless persons with problematic substance use. Psychiatric Services. 
2014;65(11): 1318 -1324.  
 
96 The Fair Housing Act. US Department of Justice. https://www.justice.gov/crt/fair -housing -act-1 
Updated December 21, 2017. Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
97 Bleiberg J. The unreulated Maine industry that’s grown with the opioid death toll. Bangor Da ily News. 
July 13, 2018. https://bangordailynews.com/2018/07/12/news/portland/the -unregulated -maine -industry -
thats -grown -with-the-opioid -death -toll/ Accessed De cember 31, 2018.  
 
98 Bleiberg, J.  
 
99 Public Law 2015, Ch. 296.  
 
100 17-A M.R.S. § 1107 -A(1)(C).  
 
101 20 U.S.C. § 1091(r)(1)  
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 45                                                                                                                                                                                            
102 42 U.S.C. § 13661(c)  
 
103 See, e.g. , 32 M.R.S. § 9410 -A(1)(F) (person with three or more misdemeanors in the past five years is 
ineligib le to be employed as private security guard license); CMR 10 -144-101 § 12.07(J) (person with 
any misdemeanors in the past 10 years ineligible to provide consumer directed attendant services under 
MaineCare).  
 
104 See, e.g. , 32 M.R.S. § 8105 (person with thre e or more misdemeanors in the past 5 years ineligible for 
private investigator license); 38 M.R.S. § 1310 -N (person who has been found in violation of any law 
may be denied license to operate solid waste facil ity); 8 M.R.S. § 231 (person with three or more  
misdemeanors in last five years ineligible for fireworks technician license); CMR 16 -222-001 (person 
must submit to criminal background check in order to be eligible for motor vehicle inspection technician 
license).  
 
105 This would also mean the repeal of 1 7-A M.R.S. § 1106 -A(2), which allows prosecutors to aggregate 
the amount of drugs confiscated from a person over a 48 -hour period in order to increase the class of 
crime charged.  
 
106 Glenn Greenwald, Drug Decri minalization in Portugal . The Cato Institute. 2 009. 
https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/pubs/pdf/greenwald_whitepaper.pdf  Accessed December 31, 
2018.  
 
107 Ferreira S. Portugal’s radical drugs policy is  working. Why hasn’t the world copied it? The Guardian . 
Dec. 5, 2017. https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/dec/05/portugals -radical -drugs -policy -is-working -
why-hasnt -the-world -copied -it Accessed  December 31, 2018.  
 
108 de Andrade PV, Carapinha L. (2010). Drug decriminalisation in Portugal. BMJ. 2010:341: 4554.  
 
109 Hughes CE, Stevens A. A resounding success or a disastrous failure : re-examining the interpretation of 
evidence on the Portuguese decrimin alization of illicit drugs. In New Approaches to Drug Policies.   
Palgrave Macmillan, London, 2015:137 -162. 
 
110 National Report 2008: Portugal. European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and D rug Addiction. 
http://www.emcdda.europa.eu/html.cfm/index86763EN.html  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
111 National Report 2018: Portugal. European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addict ion. 
http://www.emcdda.europa.eu/countries/drug -reports/2018/portugal_en  
 
112 Casteel K. A Crack Down On Drug Dealers Is Also A Crackdown On Drug Users, FiveThirtyEight. 
April 5, 2018. https://fivethirtyeight.com/featu res/a -crackdown -on-drug-dealers -is-also-a-crackdown -on-
drug-users/  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
113 See, e.g. , 17-A M.R.S. § 1103(3) (permissible inference of trafficking allowed for possession of, 
among other things, more than one pound of marijuana, fourte en or more grams of cocaine, four or more 
grams of cocaine base, fourteen grams of methamphetami ne, ninety or more pills of any narcotic other 
than heroin); id. § 1105 -A(1)(G) (aggravated trafficking when a person possesses 300 or more pills or 100 
grams o f methamphetamine) id. § 1105(1)(H) (aggravated trafficking for possessing 6 grams or more or 
270 baggies or more of heroin).  
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 46                                                                                                                                                                                            
114 The law provides a person who possesses 6 grams or more of heroin is trafficking in heroin. 17 -A 
M.R.S. 1105(1)(H). A heavy user could use up to 1 gram of heroin per day, and could therefore be 
prosecuted for trafficking fo r possessing less than one week’s worth of heroin.  
 
115 LEAD National Support Bureau. What is LEAD? https://www.leadbureau.org/about -lead Accessed 
December 31, 2018.  
 
116 Maine Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, Memo to the U.S. Commission 
on Civil Rights, Summary and Analysis of Racial Discrimination in Criminal Prosecution and  Sentencing 
in Maine. December 7, 2017. https://www.usccr.gov/pubs/docs/2017 -12-07-Advisory -Memo.pdf  
Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
117 United States Census Bureau. Quick Facts: Maine . 
 
118 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services. National Survey on Drug Use and Health. Annual 
National Reports.  
 
119 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services. National Survey on Drug Use and Health. Annual 
National Reports.  
 
120 Maine Advisory Committee to  the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights.  
 
121 Maine Advisory Committee to the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights.  
 
122 US Department of Justice, Survey of State Criminal History Information Systems, 2014. Washington, 
DC: US Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics. 
https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bjs/grants/249799.pdf  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
123 Stacey CP, Cohen M. Ban the box and racial discrimination: A Review of the evidence and policy 
recommendations. Urban Institute. February 21, 2017. https://www.urban.org/research/publication/ban -
box-and-racial -discrimination  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
124 Wedell, K. $5M pilot program to encourage employers to hire recovering add icts. Dayton Daily News . 
September 8, 2018. https://www.daytondailynews.com/business/employment/pilot -progr am-encourage -
employers -hire-recovering -addicts/RBCRy95fVIFcmjwFMeBVBL/  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
125 Agan AY, Sonja BS. 2016. “Ban the Box, Criminal Records, and Statistical Discrimination: A Field 
Experiment.” University of Michigan Law and Economics Re search Paper No. 16 -012. June 14, 2016. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2795795   
 
126 Shoag D, Veuger S. Banning the Box: The Labor Market Consequences of Bans on Criminal Record 
Screening in Employment A pplication . Working Paper. September 17, 2018. 
https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/shoag/files/banning -the-box-september -2016.pdf  Accessed December 3 1, 
2018.  
 
127 Atkinson DV, Lockwood K. The Benefits of Ban the Box: A Case Study of Durham, NC. The 
Southern Coalition for Social Justice. October 2014. http://www.sout herncoalition.org/wp -
content/uploads/2014/10/BantheBox_WhitePaper -2.pdf   Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
128 Agan, Amanda Y. and Sonja B. Starr.  
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 47                                                                                                                                                                                            
 
129 Doleac JL, Hansen B. Does ‘Ban the Box” Help or Hurt Low -Skilled Workers? Statistical 
Discrimination  and Employm ent Outcomes when Criminal Histories are Hidden. National Bureau of 
Economic Research. July 2016. https://www.nber.org/papers/w22469  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
130 Stacey CP, Cohen M.  
 
131 Livingston J, Miln e T, Fang ML, Amari E. The effectiveness of interventions for  
reducing stigma related to substance use disorders: a systematic review. Addiction . 2012;107(1):39 -50.. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1360 -0443.2011.03601.x.   
 
132 It’s time to talk it’s time to change. Mind. 20 13. https://www.mind.org.uk/news -
campaigns/campaigns/time -to-change/  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
133 Nice people take drugs. Release. 2018. https://www.release.org.uk/  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
134 Maine Office of Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services. The Cost of Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
in Maine, 2010. April 2013. https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/samhs/osa/pubs/data/2013/Cost2010 -
final%20Apr%2010%2013.pdf  Accessed December 31, 2018.  
 
135 Annual Cost of Maine’s Substance Abuse Epidemic. Maine Cent er for Economic Policy. 2015.  
https://www.mecep.org/wp -content/uploads/2017/03/Substance -Abuse -Epidemic -Costs.pdf  Accessed 
December 31, 2018.  
 
136 Earlier ve rsions of the marijuana excise tax were pr ojected to earn the state  $85 million in the first 
year, as opposed to the rou ghly $8 million per year estimated in the fiscal note  of the final legislation . 
 
137 Stopping the Opioi d Profiteers: How Policy Makers and Communities Can Fight Back. Hedge Papers 
No 57. May 2018. http://hedgeclippers.org/wp -
content/uploads/2018/ 04/HedgePaper57_SpecialStateReleases -May2018.pdf   
 
The Opioid Manufacturer Windfall profit tax is modeled after the fed eral Crude Oil Windfall Profit Tax 
Act (PL 96 -223) passed in the 1980s. The “purpose of the tax was to recoup for the federal government  
much of the revenue that would have otherwise gone to the oil industry as a result of the decontrol of oil 
prices. Supp orters of the tax viewed this revenue as an unearned and anticipated windfall caused by high 
oil prices, which were determined by the OP EC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) cartel.” 
Essentially, the profits of pharmaceutical companies that be nefited from an epidemic caused by their 
products should be similarly deemed worthy of a windfall profit tax. Like the tax on excess oil  profits, a 
baseline of opioid consumption could be set at, say, 1999, prior to the spike in use precipitated by the 
deceptive and misleading practices of manufacturers. Then, profits above that baseline should be taxed at 
similar levels to the excess crud e oil profits, anywhere from 22.5 -70%. The tax should be applied 
retroactively, and for future years.  
 
138 For more information on the tax conformity package passed by the legislature in 2018, see the Maine 
Center for Economic “Policy Brief: Legislature spli ts the difference in final tax compromise.” August 
2018. It outlines the provisions that benefited a bro ad base of Maine families, as well as tax breaks with 
little evidence of efficacy, targeted at a very small subset of upper -income individuals and corpo rations. 
https://www.mecep.org/wp -content/uploads/2018/08/2018 -Tax-Conformity -Final -Deal.pdf  Accessed 
December 31, 2018.  
 
Recommendations for Sensible Drug Policy  
 48                                                                                                                                                                                            
139 In 2017, Maine Equal Justice Par tners advocated for a comprehensive anti -poverty program that 
included a state housing voucher for low -income people whose housing costs exceeded 30% of their 
income. Unspent and accumulated federal funding from Temporary Assistance for Needy Families 
provided the resources for the program. Maine Equal Justice Partners, “ LD #1475 An Act to Reduce 
Child Pover ty by Leveraging Investments in Families Today (LIFT).” 2017. 
http://www.mejp.org/sites/default/files/2017%20LIFT%20three%20pager%20LD%20%231475.pdf   
Accessed  December 31, 2018.  
