Testimony of Public Safety Director Jason Moffitt  
Brewer Police Department  
 In support of L.D. 824  
"An Act to Amend the Maine Bail Code " 
Judiciary Committee  
Wednesday, March 29, 2023  
 
 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen  and other distinguished members of 
the joint standing committee on the Judiciary.  My name is Chief Jason Moffitt 
and I am here to represent the Brewer Police Department in support of L.D. 824, 
“An act to Amend the Maine Bail Code.”  
L.D. 824 seeks to rev erse the changes made to the Maine Bail Code enacted by 
Public Law 2021, Chapter 397.  Since this bail reform law took effect, public 
safety has been adversely affected.   
Specifically, officers are continuously dealing with repeat  offenders on bail  that 
have little fear of consequences for committing new crimes.  The list of offenders 
with multiple sets of bail for multiple crimes has grown substantially.   Officers 
often encounter offenders with multiple “sets” of bail from previo us arrests who 
display a brazen attitude, often commenting that the trip to jail is wasted as they 
will be “out in a couple of hours.”  Of ficers report that offenders with 8 -10 active 
sets of bail are not uncommon.   At its core, bail is a contract to beha ve and not 
commit additional offenses after the accused is released from jail.  Now this is 
often not the case.  
Recently the Brewer Police Department responded to an incident where store 
clerk had been assaulted by a customer.  The offender in this case had 24 
active sets of bail  and an active arrest warrant.  The suspect in this case was 
released and re -arrested on new charges within a 48 -hour period.   
The bail reform law enacted in 2021 essentially created a “cashless” bail for 
Class E misdemeanors (suc h as Criminal Trespass and Disorderly Conduct). 
Additionally, judicial discretion is limited in many cases for more serious law 
violations.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Respectfully,  
 
Jason J. Moffitt  
Chief of Police /Public Safety Director  
Brewer Police Department  

