PO Box 7860 
Portland, ME 04112 
(207) 774-5444 
www.acIumaine org 
AMERICAN CIVIL UBERTIES UNION 
Maine 
1 
TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ. 
LD 1299 - Ought Not to Pass 
An Act To Amend the Maine Bail Code 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
April 10, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, andI 
am the.policy director at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to 
advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and 
U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I am here to oppose LD 1299, that 
would repeal a small but meaningful step Maine made two years ago to eliminate 
our two-tiered system of justice. 
In 2021, the legislature passed LD 1708. This bill did the following things: 
- Eliminated cash bail for most Class E crimes except crimes 
related to domestic violence, against a household or family member 
or dating partner, or when a person was out on bail and accused of 
committing a new crime 
- Clarified an already-existing rule that if a person cannot afford 
the $60 bail commissioner fee, that cannot be the reason that they 
are held pretrial 
~ Eliminated random searches for drugs or alcohol unless a person 
is participating in a specialty court (like drug or veterans court) 
~ Required judges to put in writing, if they impose cash bail, Why 
they chose the amount of bail ordered paidl 
LD 1299 proposes to undo all of these modest but important changes to Maine’s Bail 
Code. 
One of the essential principles of our justice system is that everybody is equal 
before the law. Whether a lobsterman or a lawyer, a carpenter or a CEO, you willbe
treated the same. You have the same rights. But when wealthy people can buy their 
freedom, while those struggling to support themselves and their families are locked 
up because they can’t afford to pay, money bail undermines the promise of equality 
under the law. 
The modest changes made to Maine’s bail laws in 2021 were a crucial step 
towards restoring the true purpose of bail—to make sure people return to court- 
while preserving public safety. It is important to note that we worked with the 
Coalition to End Domestic Violence to ensure that their concerns around safety were 
met, before the legislature voted on the final language. 
Money bail, and pretrial incarceration as a result of it, should be reserved for 
the most serious crimes. That is not What the 2021 law affected. Class E offenses 
include littering, trespassing on a public beach, petty theft, and a technical violation 
of condition of release, like being late for curfew or having a beer in your refrigerator 
when you are not supposed to possess alcohol. 
The bail amounts assessed for Class E offenses are often low — 50 dollars, 100 
dollars, occasionally 500 dollars. These are amounts that people with money can 
afford to pay and not have to sit in jail Waiting for their case to be resolved. But it is 
people without money, those living hand-to-mouth, who get stuck in jail for ClassE 
crimes, simply because they do not have the money to pay their way out. 
How much money you have should never determine the justice you get. The 
2021 law that modestly amended Maine’s Bail Code took an important step to make 
sure that is true. We urge you not to roll back the progress made.
