  
2021-202 2 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. Morgan  
 
Treasur er 
Walter F.  McKe e 
 
Secret ary 
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
202 1-2022 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sher man  
Adam Swanson  
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXE CUTIVE DI RECTO R 
 
    
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523- 9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com 
 
April 6, 2023 
 
 
Senator Anne Carney  
Representative Matt Moonen 
Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station, Room 438 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE: LD 1299 --  An Act to Amend the B ail Code  
        
Dear Senator Carney, Representativ e Moonen , and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary,  
 
MACDL opposes  LD 1299. 
 
This bill s eeks to reverse ch anges that were made just two years ago to the Bail Code 
to make it more fair and equit able, especially for those who are indigent.   
 
This bill would allow  a person to  be held in jail just because they could not pay the 
$60.00 fee for the bail commissioner .  If this bill was passed, a person who did not 
have $ 60.00 to pay for the bail fee could sit in jail for days, weeks, e ven months, 
because they  were poor.  That is not fair, and that is why the law w as passed two 
years ago to t ake into consideration  a person ’s inability  to pay a bail commissioner 
fee. 
 
The bill would also allow  for a bail condition to be that a defendant report on a 
regular basis to her or his attorney.  That condition is problematic when it comes to 
enforcement  because it potentially forces a defendant ’s atto rney to discl ose to a co urt 
whether they have or have not been in touch with the defendant. These are attorney -
client privilege communications, and the relationship between a defendant and the 
attorney is sacrosanct.  An attorney should not be forced into the situation where they  
have to indicate to the court their communicat ions or lack of communications with 
their client.  
 
Finally, the bill would strip the consideration when it comes to bail as to whether a 
person is primarily responsible for the c are of another person, whether the defendant 
has a special healthcare need, and whether a defendant who was kept in jail would 
have significant employment consequence s.  All of these are very fair and just 
considerations when it comes to bail , and eli minating them makes little to no sen se. 
 
Thank you for the opport unity to address this bill.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Walter F . McKee  
Chair, Legi slative Committee     
                          
                          
 

