Testimony on L.D. 1299 “An Act to Amend the Maine B ail code” 
Zachary Caron 
 
Distinguished Members of the Judiciary Committee,  
 My name is Zachary Caron, I am a Patrol Sergeant w ith the Brewer Police Department, I have been a pol ice 
officer for over 9 years. The bail system in Maine is a disaster, I see it first hand every day. Crimi nals in Maine know they 
can break the law, make bail, and be back out on th e streets before the police even finish the report.  The purpose of jail 
is the prevent new crimes, promote rehabilitation o f the offender, and deter further crimes to be comm itted.  A bail 
system in place that does not prevent or deter the offender from committing further crimes after relea se is a failed 
system.  A failed system produces more victims, mor e crime, and more cost to the public. I have specif ic examples where 
I believe the bail reform has failed citizens from protecting them from further criminal activity: 
 In December of 2022 a suspect was arrested for ass aulting a person in Brewer, Maine. This offender ha d 24 
active sets of bail conditions. The current bail co de had determined incorrectly 24 times that he was not a further risk to 
commit a crime or flight risk. The offender was arr ested, and made bail again. The next day a warrant was entered as the 
offender had failed to appear for a court date, and  he was arrested again, and again made bail. The of fender currently 
has a warrant for his arrest regarding the assault in December, as he did not show up to his court dat e. The bail system 
failed to protect the victim of the assault, and fa iled to determine the flight risk associated with t he suspect.  
 In March of 2023 I was investigating a domestic in cident, where an assault had occurred. During the c ourse of 
the investigation I was assaulted by two subjects t hat were on scene, I did receive a minor injury dur ing this altercation. 
One of the offenders was charged with Domestic Viol ence Assault, Refusing to Submit to arrest, and Ass ault on a Police 
Officer (A class C felony). This offenders bail was  set at $750 dollars.  This individual decided to a ssault a police officer, as 
well as another person, and it was determined that if he had $750.00 he would not be a threat to the p ublic.  Offenders 
now see that price tag to try to fight the police i s worth the risk of trying to get away. Offenders w ill think that if they try 
to incapacitate the police, and fail, they still ha ve a good chance at making bail.  
 My third example is not as personal.  In 2019 New York state eliminated the use of cash bail, this re sulted in a 
huge increase in violent crime (5%).  Crime statist ics have shown that in 2019 10% of offenders were r e-arrested for 
violent felonies. After cashless bail was enacted, January 2020 to June 2021 23% of offenders released  were re-arrested 
for violent felonies, 41% of offenders were arreste d on criminal charges of any kind.  
 I choose to live in Maine for the great people tha t live in this state, the beautiful scenery, and th e safety of my 
family. I choose my career because I believe everyb ody has the right to feel safe in their home. Maine  does not need to 
base its bail code off a system that is failing to protect the citizens its designed to protect.  For this reason, I strongly 
support the passage of LD 1299.  
  
 
 
Sincerely,  
Zachary Caron 
