STATE OE MAINE 
f"‘"§~; HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
HOUSE REPUBLICAN OFFICE 
AUGUSTA. MAINE O-1333-0002 
. .. Office: (2()7)187~l44O ST.- TE l‘EPRE.\ET\'T. \» 
A ‘ W E Cell‘ non 4(»(>~(»<>@? 
BILLY BOB FAUI_KINOHAl\-I Fax.‘ (E07, 3874449 
HOL SE REPLiBLKAi\' LEADER E-l\'lnil: \\‘iIIiam.F;u|ll<ingl1z1m:'{1 legis|mt|1'c.11nxn: :o\ 
April ll, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 1303 
“An Act to Exempt Boats and All-terrain Vehicles Purchased for Qualiﬁed Commercial 
Fishing or Commercial Farming from State Sales Tax” 
Good Afternoon, Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation. I am Representative Billy Bob Faulkingham and I am here to present my bill, LD 1303, 
“An Act to Exempt Boats and All-terrain Vehicles Purchased for Qualiﬁed Commercial Fishing or 
Commercial Farming from State Sales Tax 
If the members of the committee are not aware, farmers, ﬁshermen, and loggers are able to apply for 
a tax exempt card that can be used to purchase without paying sales tax certain exempt items that are 
used for their businesses. 
After the bill was drafted, I have received new information on the bill. Attached to this testimony is 
a new amendment to the original bill that changes it to include commercial wood harvesting and to 
only include ATVs. 
This bill would remove the restriction of exemption of all-terrain vehicles outlined in the Maine 
Revenue Services Sales, Fuel & Special Tax Division Instructional Bulletin NO. 59. 
There are many uses for ATVs within the ﬁshing industry, especially when working with traps and 
other equipment when preparing for the season. Many farmers use ATVs in their daily farm 
business. Loggers will use an ATV in their operations. I believe that these should be exempted from 
sales tax and a bill is necessary ATVs are explicitly excluded from exemption card use in Tax 
Bulletin No. 59. 
Farmers, ﬁshermen, and loggers are our heritage industries. It is important to support the industries 
that support the state. This bill ensures that the current intent of the law applies to purchases that are 
essential to the operations of these vital industries. 
I ask you to support this bill that will be a minor cost to the state, but provide a signiﬁcant beneﬁt to 
the heritage industries of the great State of Maine. 
Thank you for your time and consideration, I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Respectfully, 
Representative Billy Bob Faulkingham
