TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: April 1], 2023, at 1:00 P.M. 
L.D. I303 — “An Act to Exempt Boats aha’ All-terrain Vehicles Purchased for 
Qualified Commercial Fishing or Commercial F arming ﬁom State Sales Tax” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
here today at the request of the Administration to testify Neither For Nor Against 
L.D. 1303, “An Act to Exempt Boats and All-terrain Vehicles Purchased for 
Qualified Commercial Fishing or Commercial F arming ﬁ"0m State Sales Tax.” 
The Administration is generally supportive of proposals that would exempt 
business purchases from the sales and use tax. Extending the current sales tax 
exemption for certain depreciable machinery and equipment used in commercial 
activities to all-terrain vehicles, or ATVs, and boats used in these sectors of the 
natural resources industry would be consistent with existing sales and use tax 
exemptions on business inputs; however, it is uncertain whether the bill as drafted 
would truly achieve this goal. 
Currently, the sales tax refund and exemption program for certain 
depreciable machinery and equipment is enumerated in Title 36, section 2013. In 
order to qualify for refund or exemption, the “depreciable machinery and 
equipment ” must be used “directly and primarily ” in either commercial agricultural 
production, commercial aquacultural production, commercial ﬁshing, or 
commercial wood harvesting. Section 2013 also requires that if the equipment is
1
not fully depreciable under federal tax law, full exemptions are not allowed, and 
refunds must be prorated on equipment that is partially depreciable under federal 
tax law. There is not a similar requirement provided within the text of L.D. 1303. 
In order to meet the “directly ” requirement under current law and further 
described in Maine Revenue Services ’ Rule 323, the machinery and equipment 
must be used in an activity or operation that constitutes an integral and essential 
part of the commercial activity, as contrasted with and distinguished from activities 
or operations that are incidental, convenient, or remote to those activities. 
Generally, products and equipment used in support operations, including storage 
activities, administration, or highway transportation, are not used “directly ” ina 
commercial activity. 
L.D. 1303 identiﬁes that the purchase of a boat or an ATV must be used 
directly and exclusively in either commercial ﬁshing or commercial agricultural 
production; “exclusively ” being a more restrictive standard than “primarily, ” 
which is deﬁned by rule as “more than 50% of the time.” It is unclear whether the 
purchases of ATVs and boats as allowed under L.D. 1303 would still qualify for 
exemption, as the ATV or boat must be exclusively used directly in the integral and 
essential operations in their identiﬁed commercial activity, and not in supporting 
activities, such as storage or highway transportation. 
Motor vehicles, including ATVs, and trailers are speciﬁcally excluded from 
the deﬁnition of depreciable machinery and equipment under the existing section 
2013; however, those engaged in commercial ﬁshing can currently request refund 
or exemption on the purchase of new and used watercraft used directly and 
primarily in commercial ﬁshing; it’s unclear what the exemption for “boats used in 
commercial ﬁshing” would provide that is not already covered under current law.
2
If the Committee wants to provide the exemption to ATVs used in 
commercial agricultural production, MRS instead recommends amending the 
deﬁnition of “depreciable machinery and equipment ” under section 2013 to say 
that a motor vehicle does not include an all-terrain vehicle, which would achieve a 
similar result to L.D. l303’s proposal without needing to enact a new, separate 
exemption under section 1760. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
3
