Restorative Justice Project 
P.O. Box 141, Belfast, ME 04915   T 207.338.2742    www.rjpmidcoast.org
                                                                                                        February 26, 2023
State of Maine
Judiciary Committee
Augusta, Maine
Re: Public Hearing Testimony on LD 452- An Act to Reform the Law Regarding
       The Payment of Criminal Fines
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and Distinguished Members of
The Committee on Judiciary:
Restorative Justice Project Maine, headquartered in Belfast Maine, supports LD 452.
It is common sense that our laws and rules be fair and realistically enforceable, 
otherwise they are hollow and burdensomely ineffective. LD 452 is a law that is fair 
and importantly, enforceable.
LD 452 upholds the obligation of a convicted person to pay any fines imposed by the
legal system for a violation of the law.  It simply offers terms of repayment that are 
attainable for the person, according to their ability to pay. It can prevent unnecessary 
additional legal charges, and in doing so reduce the time and costs that our State would 
need to incur in dealing with fines. It requires that the convicted person prove by a 
“preponderance” of proof that they cannot meet the original terms of repayment for 
reasons that they cannot control. This seems fair to all parties concerned. And, this law 
would free-up time and money for more important legal matters in our overburdened 
system.
When we look through our lens of restorative justice and practices, this law will allow the 
convicted person and harmed party ( the State of Maine in this case) to come together 
to find a solution to harm that is fair to all, and has a reasonable chance of success, 
rather than failure.
For these reasons, Restorative Justice Project Maine supports passage of LD 452.
Thank you for the opportunity to address the Judiciary Committee.
Restorative Justice Project 
P.O. Box 141, Belfast, ME 04915   T 207.338.2742    www.rjpmidcoast.org
Sincerely,
John P. Williams
Board Member and
Legislative Committee 
        
 
