 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 452 (NFNA)   
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 452, An Act to Reform the Laws Regarding the Payment of Criminal Fines  
 
DA: March 2 , 2023  
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits this testimony 
neither for nor against LD 452.   The following provisions related to fines may be helpful as 
background for the Committee’s discussions .    
 
 Certain provisions of the Crimin al Code (Title 17 -A) apply to crimes defined outside of 
Title 17 -A.  17 -A M.R.S .  § 6.   This is true for the general provisions governing criminal fines, 
which are in Part 6 of Title 17 -A.  17 -A M.R.S., Part 6, Chapter 65.  Thus any change to section 
1710  will apply to criminal fines imposed pursuant to statutes outside  the Criminal Code, including, 
for exam ple, fines imposed for motor vehicle crimes such as OUI, and hunting and fishing crimes.  
 
 The Legislature has established a number of mandatory criminal fines in Title 17 -A (the 
Criminal Code) as well as for crimes defined outside the Code.    The proposal creates a conflict 
between mandating fines and terminating fines.  
 
 Sentencing courts ha ve broad discretion to establish and modify the manner and method of 
fine payments, and may allow  additional time for payment and r educe  the amount of periodic 
payments.    17-A M.R.S. §§ 1708, 1710.  In cases of excusable default, community service in lieu  
of a fine may be permitted.   17 -A M.R.S. § 1711 (governing default hearings and enforcement).    
 
 Certain statutes establishing mandatory fines nevertheless  authorize the sentencing court to 
suspend or impose fines less than the otherwise mandatory amou nt at the time of sentencing , in 
effect creating presumptive fines .   See, e.g., 17 -A M.R.S. § 207(4) [assault] and § 1126(3 ) [drug 
offenses],  Finding by court necessary to impose other than minimum fine.  Such statutes allow a 
sentencing court to impose a  different amount if it finds, by a preponderance of the evidence, 
“exceptional circumstances.”   The provision identifies the types of factors that the court may 
consider, including hardship on the individual, family and dependents; special needs of the 
individual, family and dependents; income, assets and earning capacity; pecuniary  gain from the 
crime; and restitution obligations.  This approach  at the time of sentencing avoids a potential 
constitutional issue that might  be generated by termination of  a fine after final judgment  other than 
through an appropriate appeal or by commutation.   However, CLAC did not address the question of 
whether termination of a fine at the point in the process proposed by the bill interferes with the 
Governor’s clemency authority established by the Maine Constitution.   
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
 
 defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code  
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.  
