  
2021-202 2 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. Morgan  
 
Treasur er 
Walter F.  McKe e 
 
Secretary  
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
202 1-2022 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph  Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sher man  
Adam Swanson  
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXE CUTIVE DI RECTOR  
 
    
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523- 9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com 
 
February 17, 2023  
 
 
Senator Anne Carney  
Representative Matt Moonen 
Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station, Room 438 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE: LD 452 – An Act to Reform the Law Regarding the P ayment of Cri minal 
 Fines  
        
Dear Senator Carney, Representativ e Moonen , and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary,  
 
MACDL supports  LD 452. 
 
LD 452 is a long time coming.  Fines ar e regula rly and routinely imposed as part of 
criminal cases, often because  there is a mandatory minimum fine.  These fines can be 
as high as thousands and thousands of dollars.  
 
But the reality is that our courts spend a ridiculous amount of ti me dealing w ith 
defendants who simply cannot pay the fines that are i mposed.  It is  an all -too-common 
refrain  every day in court to hear a defendant indicate that she or he cannot pay a fine 
but will pay at the rate of $25.00 per month.  For many fines, this means tha t the fine 
collection  process is sometimes many years , and often with a lot of administrative 
time spent when a fine payment is missed, a defendant has to ask for additional time 
or an extension, or a whole host of other  processes that are required  because a fine 
was imposed . 
 
This bill allows a pe rson to make her or his case to a judge that they simply cannot 
pay the fine despite their good faith effort.  To be clear, the burden is on the 
defendant to make this pitch to the court.  I f a defendant is in def ault because she or 
he cannot pay the f ine, they can file a motion with the court to terminate the fine, and 
the burden of proving that failure to pay the fine was not intentional or knowing is on 
the defend ant, and the defendant must prove it by a prepond erance of the evidence.  
 
Fines have l ong been considered just an add- on to a case where a defendant is 
convicted of  a crime.  It is a rare day where a financial penalty is anything that 
anyone in the criminal justice system seems as a deterrent to future crimes.  If this 
bill passes, it w ill free up significant assets in the court system that are devoted to 
dealing with fines , and the staff can spend their time dealing with other more 
important court issues. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to address t his issue.  
 
  Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 Walter F. McKee  
 Chair, Legi slative Committee  
 
                        
 
 
  
  
 
  
             
  
             
                          
                          
 

