 
 
 
 
131st Maine Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs  
Monday, April 24, 2023 
 
President Jerald “Jerry” Paul, Maine Maritime Academy 
LD 1556, “An Act to Provide a Private Support Organization for the Maine Maritime 
Academy” 
Testimony in Support  
 
 
Good morning Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Maine 
Legislature’s Joint-Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs. My name is Jerry Paul and I 
proudly serve as President of Maine Maritime Academy. It is always good to see you and I thank you 
for providing a remote option for my participation today as I am currently traveling for business on 
behalf of MMA. I am here today in support of LD 1556, proposed legislation for which we have been 
grateful to work with Sen. Grohoski. I extend sincere gratitude to thank Sen. Grohoski and many 
other members of this committee who either indicated support for the bill early on or signed on as 
a cosponsor.  
 
Maine Maritime Academy prides itself as Maine’s leadership college. Established in 1941, we are 
one of only six (6) State Maritime Academies in America (including neighbors Massachusetts 
Maritime Academy and SUNY Maritime Academy). The State of Maine is one of only 6 states hosting 
these special-purpose colleges that are vital to our Nation’s maritime interests and national security 
via the training and preparedness of able, qualified mariners. 
 
We provide undergraduate and graduate degrees in the fields of engineering, marine 
transportation, marine biology and oceanography, and international business and logistics, among 
others. The U.S. Maritime Administration provides a fleet training ship loaned for students to 
receive sea time and training, and MMA also maintains and operates Maine’s Flagship, Schooner 
Bowdoin, as a platform for student training, research in the Arctic, and promotion of the State of 
Maine.  MMA maintains versatile and vibrant college-based waterfront infrastructure, including a 
ship and many other vessels, which it makes available to other Maine colleges for activities 
necessitating waterfront activities.  
 
The legislation before you today would authorize the creation of an “institutionally related 
foundation” (IRF) at MMA, also referred to as a “private support organization”, or for our purposes 
today a “foundation”. The creation of a dedicated Maine Maritime Academy Foundation would 
supplement our operational funding in service of MMA’s growth and advancement.  The inclusion of 
a philanthropic board solely dedicated to MMA’s structural wellbeing is a key component of better 
funding the institution in the future. This additional board widens MMA’s network of supporters by  
 
 
 
 
leveraging their own industry and professional networks. In fact, these strategically-minded, 
financially-savvy advocates would support the vision and priorities of the college during this period 
of innovation and change in Maine’s economy.  
 
A foundation board’s focus on fundraising and advancement would expand MMA’s circle of donors, 
contributors, and fundraisers domestically and worldwide.  Typically well-run foundations can 
return 5 to 1 return on investment. Some college foundations return as much as 10 to 1 ROI. Some 
major donors, including other foundations, prefer this model and will only contribute to formal 
support organizations like IRFs. It also provides them with the opportunity to make anonymous 
gifts. The foundation board will serve as a force multiplier and, working closely together, better 
allow the Board of Trustees to focus on governance of the institution.  
 
IRFs serve as an essential tool for any modern post-secondary institution seeking to provide a fully-
resourced, world class education while participating in a host state’s long term goals and economic 
well being. Many of our peers in Maine’s public higher education systems maintain private support 
organizations and the same is certainly true for many of our competitor SMAs like Mass. Maritime 
Academy and SUNY Maritime Academy, as well as other military-affiliated colleges.  
 
However, this legislation is also about fulfilling our promise to this Committee, the Legislature, and 
Governor Mills. As you know, we have spent a great deal of time discussing our operational funding 
challenges with you throughout the spring. MMA is pleased to step up and fully utilize all of our 
own available tools for fundraising and advancement, elevating our own self-help efforts in concert 
with the request to you for funding parity with peer institutions. MMA's Board of Trustees has 
sought input and advice from the nation’s leading expert on college and university governance and 
management, AGB (Association of Governing Boards). AGB is also the nation’s leader on creating 
and managing IRFs, which most colleges have. 
 
While we look forward to continued conversations with you around our share of state-contributed 
operational funding, this will not be the last time you see us reaching forward to fully employ the 
self-help tools available to us.  
 
In conclusion, I thank Sen. Grohoski, Rep. Milliken, and members of this Committee for joining with 
us in this undertaking. I humbly ask for your continued support of LD 1556, and would be glad to 
answer any questions from committee members. Thank you. 
 
 
