Nicole Grohoski 4 P.O. Box 1732 
Senator, District 7 Ellsworth, ME 04605 
‘T”‘*"" 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Nicole Grohoski 
In Support of LD 1556, “An Act to Provide a Private Support Organization 
for the Maine Maritime Academy” 
Before the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
24 April 2023 
Greetings Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the 
Education & Cultural Affairs Committee. My name is Nicole Grohoski and I am honored to 
represent the 22 coastal and island communities of Senate District 7. I am hereto present and 
express support for LD 15 5 6, An Act to Provide a Private Support Organization for the Maine 
Maritime Academy. 
This is a straightforward piece of legislation that formally authorizes Maine Maritime Academy 
to create a private support organization, or “institutionally related foundation ” (IRF), to help 
achieve the Academy’s growth and advancement. As a Maine institution of public higher 
education, the Academy must receive legislative authorization to proceed with the creation of 
such an entity. 
As the Senator representing MMA’s host town of Castine and many of the towns Where its 
faculty, staff and students live, I am pleased to have the opportunity to collaborate with MMA on 
this bill. A foundation will help the Academy remain strong and vibrant for the region and state 
as a Whole. President Jerry Paul will share additional information following my testimony. 
MMA is a distinguished institution that has been a pillar of Downeast Maine for many years. It is 
renowned for providing high-quality education, and training to its students, many of whom go on 
to serve in the maritime industry and related ﬁelds. The institution has played a signiﬁcant role 
in shaping the economic and cultural landscape of Hancock County and the entire state of Maine. 
Creating an IRF at MMA would have several beneﬁts. The foundation would enable the_ 
institution to diversify its funding sources to better manage operational funding challenges. It 
Would also provide an avenue for a wide array of individuals, businesses, and organizations to 
support MMA’s mission and goals. In a competitive landscape, it is critical that MMA has the 
resources it needs to fulﬁll its operational mission and ambitious growth plan. 
3 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 
State House (Z07) 287-1515 * Fax (207) Z87-1585 * TOll Free l-800-423-6900 * l l Y 711 
Nic0le.Grohosl<i@legislature.rnaine.gov * legislature.maine.gov/senate
Maine Maritime Academy is a center of innovation and an important economic engine for 
Maine, and its ability to ﬂexibly employ the beneﬁts of an IRF would strengthen it further. I 
appreciate MMA’s efforts to ﬁnd new, non-state revenue streams to address the operational 
funding disparity it faces. 
Thank you for your time and consideration of this bill. I hope you agree it is essential that we act 
to empower MMA’s fundraising capabilities. The Academy has been an important cultural 
hallmark of my region and the entire state for over 80 years, and We can help ensure its longevity 
by giving it the tools necessary to remain competitive, nimble, and forward looking. I would be 
glad to answer any questions you have.
2
