4,“,-1* “ I on 
“I5. I‘. 
,43;_- -r 
Lisa M. Keirn 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 19i 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
Assistant Republican Leader THE MAINE SENATE 
13 1 st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Lisa Keim before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
LD 1801, “Resolve, to Increase Transparency and Evaluate Emergency Response Through a 
COVID-19 Review Commission ” 
May 8, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and the distinguished members of the Committee on Health 
and Human Services I am Lisa Keim, and I proudly represent the citizens of Senate District 19, which 
includes Northern Oxford County and communities in Franklin County. I am proud to sponsor LD 
1801, “Resolve, to Increase Transparency and Evaluate Emergency Response Through a COVID-19 
Review Commission. ” 
Paraphrasing Spanish philosopher George Santayana, Winston Churchill said “Those that fail to learn 
from history are doomed to repeat it. 
The Spanish ﬂu of 1918 had a devastating effect on the world, claiming an estimated 21 to 50 million 
lives over two years. In his 1989 book, America ’s Forgotten Pandemic, Alfred W. Crosby points out 
that the Spanish ﬂu was omitted from all the great midcentury American history textbooks, even by 
those written by historians who lived through it. 
COVID-19 was a once in a century event. It required an all of govermnent response. Worldwide, 
deaths have been estimated to just under 7 million. If we think of COVID as a war, it is the most 
expansive global struggle since the Second World War. Yet it is one that we fought without a prepared 
army or a battle plan. Americans spent more public money on the crisis than anyone. Yet the U.S. 
suffered many more casualties than any other afﬂuent country, with the impact on Mainers being of the 
most severe. 
Countless decisions were made to protect public health. Shifting decisions may have been reasonable 
given the best information at the time, but the consequences were not measured. A full accounting of 
the State’s decision making process and impact is in order. 
Review commissions, such as After Action Reviews in the military, are a regular response within our 
federal government, its departments and agencies, and within our branches of the military. The purpose 
of these reviews is to learn about What happened, how we reacted, what was result of those actions, 
and how was it good/bad/indifferent. 
Despite our best efforts, nobody is infallible and it is certain that mistakes were made in COVID 
policies. As lawmakers, it is our duty to learn from our mistakes. Across the political spectrum, it 
seems that leaders have drifted into treating this pandemic as if it were an unavoidable natural 
catastrophe. This way of thinking risks not only failing to reform, but also failing to remember what 
actually happened.
As the emergency comes to an end, the greatest danger is that we rush to move on, to forget. Future 
generations will face another pandemic. Although viruses are different and there is no way to know 
how the next pandemic will spread or how it will affect people, we owe it to Maine’s future and our 
community to gain a more complete understanding of how this pandemic was handled. 
They will want to know: What was the impact on overall health of social distancing and severe 
disruption of normal life‘? Were schools closed for too long and what impact did closures have on 
educational attainment and mental health? Was the cure worse than the disease? How well did the 
government balance the needs of keeping everyone safe from the spread of a dangerous, unknown 
disease with allowing personal thriving and economic stability? 
LD 1801 sets up a commission to review and study the state’s response to the pandemic. Government 
oversight should be an equally bipartisan process. Therefore, this commission is designed with equal 
members from the Democratic and Republican caucuses and one Independent House member. 
This resolve isn’t about placing blame on people or agencies. It is about learning what worked and 
what didn’t so that we can be better prepared if and when this happens again. 
Thousands of good people and organizations, all across Maine, made a dramatic shift from ‘normal’ 
routine and actions, putting forth heroic, life-saving efforts, which, as I remember in my district, 
started ﬁrst with hand sewn masks and meals delivered to shut-ins and health professionals of every 
level stepping out into the scary unknown to be our ﬁrst line of defense. Maine people are up for any 
challenge and made us proud; but we must do better in the future. 
The COVID pandemic was all-encompassing and all-consuming - touching every life and every 
communities. Now that the pandemic is behind us, surely a teachable moment has arrived. Hindsight is 
2020; but only if we take time to look and make an honest assessment. 
This resolve will provide us with the opportunity to look back and evaluate policies that dominated the 
lives of Mainers for years and leave future generations better prepared.
