TESTIMONY OF HILARY D KOCH  
In Support of LD 329, An Act to Ensure Health Care for All Maine Resident s 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services  
May  9, 202 3 
Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services , my name is Hilary Koch  and I live in Waterville .  
For many years, m y husband and I struggled with infertility,  and we felt blessed to have two chil dren that 
were almost a decade in the making.  When we took our youngest for his six -month checkup, we were 
asked  if we had any questions or concerns. We said we were worried about the size of his head – it was 
unusually large. He was wearing hats that fit our two -year -old. His pediatrician was worried too , and h e 
scheduled a CAT scan for the following Monday.  
But we didn’t make it to Monday. My son had a seizure that night  and was rushed to the ER. He was 
diagnosed with hydrocephalus. A condition in which the ventricles inside the brain fill with fluid causing 
pressure on the brain, the eyes,  and the skull. And much like a water balloon continuing to expand, failure 
to relieve the pressure would prove fatal. Surgery was essential. There was no cure. In fact , because there 
wasn’t a cure and technology was imperfect, we were told he could face more than 30 surgeries in his 
lifetime. A shunt was placed, and his surgery carried a price tag of over $80,000.  
In addition to just being a parent, I needed to learn e verything I could about hydrocephalus, how to 
advocate for my son, and everything about health insurance benefits. I had to ensure that we always had 
insurance because we knew more surgeries could come at any time . 
Two years later, he was diagnosed with ty pe 1 diabetes. Another incurable condition. Even more relentless.  
We’ve spent t housands of dollars. And I’ve spent countless hours so he could have access to the proper 
care and supplies he  has needed just to stay alive.  
My son turns 17 in a few weeks. He has had five neurosurgeries and he manages his type 1 diabetes like a 
rockstar . His doctors are in awe of him. He is thriving. But he will always require access to health insurance 
to stay alive.  
I’ve been a caregiver an d I’ve also worked in health policy. I ’ve helped shape state and federal bills and 
worked with  lawmakers and patient advocates on both sides of the aisle to help ensure access to affordable 
prescription drugs.  
Through all of this, it is clear that healthca re should be a basic human right, not a privilege. But how we 
achieve that is complicated. And I have worked with many extraordinary professionals along the way. Yet 
nothing can replace patient voices. They simply must be at the table in this discussion.  
However,  looking at the proposed working group of LD 329, patient voices are absent. So, I implore you to 
include two members that would represent the patient community. Perhaps a senior citizen and someone 
living with a medical disability. These people re ly on our healthcare system and would bring essential 
perspectives unique to other members proposed in the current amendment. Then I urge you to support LD 
329.  
