   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
 Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
Testimony in support of LD 329, “ An Act to Ensure Health Care for All Maine Residents ” (with 
proposed amendment of 5/8/23)  
May 9, 2023  
James Myall, Economic Policy Analyst  
 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Care, Insurance, and Financial Services. My name is James Myall. I am an economic policy analyst at the 
Maine Center for Economic Policy and I’m writing to express MECEP’s support for LD 329 , “An Act to 
Ensure Health Care for A ll Maine Residents,” with the amendment proposed by the sponsor on May 8 to 
create a work  group to study implementation of a Maine Health Plan.  
 
Even with the passage of the Affordable Care Act, and the adoption of expanded Medicaid in Maine, 
there are still tens of th ousands of Mainers who are uninsured or underinsured, and who find it difficult 
to get the care they need because of the cost . In 2021, one in ten a dults under the age of 65 (as well as a 
small portion of older adults) had to mi ss a doctor ’s appointment because they couldn ’t afford the cost 
– the equivalent of 86 ,000 Mainers.1 
 
We also know that poor health i s a leading cause of under - or non-employment for M ainer s. Around 
40,000 Mainers who are currently  out of the workforce completely list either a n illness or a disability as 
the reason they aren ’t working.2 For some (not all) of these individuals, access to timely and affordable  
health care would allow them to participate more fully in our econom y. 
 
In 2019, I completed a study for the group Maine AllCare, to examine the potential scope and costs of a 
univers al single -payer health care plan for Maine.3 I was fortunate to be able to present my findings to 
this committee previously, but would like to take this opportunity to remind you of the most salient 
points:  
• Creating a government -funded health care plan  to cover all Mainers would be a 
significant endeavor. Assuming existing programs such as Medicaid, Medicare and the 
Veterans’ Administration health care plans were left in place, a new plan would enroll 
652,000 Mainers . 
• My analysis estimated the net cost of a program (after accounting for federal subsidies 
and waivers to use federal funds) of $4.9 billion per year. Obviously, this is a very large 
sum. However, my analysis showed that even after requiring some form of premium 
from individuals and employers,  and after raising ta xes to cover the remaining costs, the 
vast majority of Maine households would save money, on net. In other words, the 
savings from better coverage and a less complex health care system would outweigh the 
costs through premiums and addi tional taxes.  
• The report also showed significant savings to some employers  ($300 million /year in  
health insurance premiums, and $155 million/year from reduced worke rs’ 
compensation costs) , and to local governments  ($214 million /year)  in Maine.  
• Depending on the design of the program, the impact on health care providers could be 
neutral, with lost patient revenues from private insurance being balanced by savings in 
administration and an increase in revenue from previously  uninsured patients.  
 
My 2019 report only showed one way that a universal health care system could be designed , and it 
would certainly be possible for the worki ng group envisaged in LD 329 to come to different conclusions. 
The report does illustrate that there are many design choices to be made in any program, including how 
much providers are to be reimbursed, and how the program should be paid for. A working gro up would 
be a good venue in which to have these discussions.  
 
The 2019 report did not look at the implementation of a plan, or how it might be phased in. There are 
certainly several ways in which enrollment could be gradually increased, to make the progra m easier to 
establish, and to reduce the initial cost. This would be another worthwhile topic of discussion for the 
working group.  
 
Creating a universal health plan to ensure that no Mainer has to choose between their health and their 
pocketbook is a worthwh ile goal, and I urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 329.  
 
As always, I’m happy to answer any questions, and I can be reached at jmyall@mecep.org   
 
 
Notes  
 
1 US Centers for Disease Control  and Prevention, Behavioral Risk Factors Surveil lance Survey, 2021 dat a. 
2 MECEP analysis  of data from US C ensus  Bureau, Ho usehold Pulse Survey, periods 44 -56, covering April 2022 -April 
2023.  
3 James Myall, “ Assessing the Costs and Impacts of a State -Level  Universal Health Care System in Maine,” Maine 
Center for Economic Policy. Dec 2019. https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/3626   
