Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, Senator Tipping and members of 
the Committee. 
My name is Lynn Cheney. I live in Blue Hill, and I am speaking today on behalf of Maine 
AllCare in support of LD 329. Maine AllCare is a non-profit, formed in 2010, established for 
the sole purpose of promoting publicly funded health care for all Maine residents. We are 
concerned that small, incremental steps will not achieve this goal. We see the need fora 
comprehensive plan that will corral the federal dollars being spent on health care in our 
state and establish a unified payment system with the ability control costs and provide high 
quality coverage for every resident. 
In the 130*“ Legislative Session, this committee, chaired by Sen. Heather Sanborn, voted to 
approve LD1045, An Act to Support Universal Health Care, as amended. This bill was 
vigorously supported by Maine AllCare. it was passed by the Legislature and became 
Public Law 391 in July 2021. lt establishes the Maine Health Care Plan to provide for all 
medically necessary services for all residents of Maine. It establishes the Maine Health 
Care Board to create, implement and oversee this Plan. However, PL391 requires that 
Federal legislation enabling state-based plans be enacted before the law takes effect. 
ln the same session, the Legislature passed a Joint Resolution, sponsored by Sen. 
Sanborn and other members of your committee, asking Congress and the President to 
pass such legislation. The resolution speciﬁcally references HR 5010, the State-Based 
Universal Health Care Act introduced by California Representative Ro Khanna. ln essence, 
this bill bundles the existing federal funding streams to states from Medicaid, Medicare and 
the Affordable Care Act and adds a waiver for the Employee Retirement Security Act 
(ERISA). Rep. Khanna \will be reintroducing a similar bill in September 2023. However, 
given the current political reality in the House, the chances of this bill even coming up fora 
vote are slim. 
Senator Tipping’s LD329 affords us the chance to start the work on PL391. It establishes a 
Working Group on Guaranteed Health Care with a charge of determining the steps required 
for designing a uniﬁed health care financing system and obtaining needed federal waivers. 
It also acknowledges that outside experts will be needed in this process. 
The Working Group will find that in order to apply for federal waivers, CMS will require 
Maine to have a health reform plan that meets its requirements and legislation passed that 
seeks the speciﬁed waivers. Maine AllCare urges the formation of this Working Group and 
stands ready to provide assistance.
