May 9, 2023 
Senator Donna Bailey . 
Representative Anne Perry 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
Cross Building, Room 220 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services; 
Thank you for the opportunity to share feedback regarding LD 329. I appreciate the intent of this bill and 
its goal of providing accessible and equitable health care to all Maine people. l do, however, oppose the 
bill due to concerns about duplication of effort to study and analyze potential public option plans. 
Last year, the Legislature enacted P.L. 2021 Ch. 518, which directs the Office of Affordable Health Care 
to provide a report to the legislature analyzing several policy options, including the introduction ofa 
public option plan, to this committee by January 1, 2024. I believe this report can provide a helpful 
foundation from which to further consider the potential benefits, and trade-offs, of instituting a publicly 
funded health plan in Maine. 
L.D. 329 creates a workgroup which is directed to ”determine the necessary steps that must be taken on 
a policy and legislative basis in order to fully implement the Maine Health Care Plan" and to include "an 
assessment of what information is needed to apply for a federal waiver to provide for all medically 
necessary health care services for all residents of the State through a unified health care financing 
system." At this time, however, no such waiver exists at the federal level. If such a waiver program is 
authorized by federal law, it seems likely it would establish specific provisions related to 
comprehensiveness of coverage, quality of care, and federal budget neutrality with which state 
programs would be required to comply. Requiring a workgroup to convene to design a program that is 
contingent on a hypothetical future change in federal law may not be the most efficient or effective use 
of members’ time and the State's resources. 
Again, l welcome engaging with this Committee and legislators on any ideas with the potential to 
improve the affordability of equitable and high-quality health ca re. Thank you for your consideration. 
Sincerely, 
~¢z4g[,;.c//Z4_ 
Meg Garratt-Reed 
Executive Director, Office of Affordable Health Care
