   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
 
Testimony in support of  LD 512, “An Act to Promote Student Enrollment and Degree 
Completion in the University of Maine System by Providing Tuition Waivers to Eligible 
Students ”   
 
Arthur Phillips, Economic Policy Analyst, Maine Center for Economic Polic y 
March 6, 202 3 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan , and members of the Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs , thank you for the opportunity to testify . My name is Arthur Phillips, 
and I am an analyst at the Maine Center for Economic Policy.  
 
MECEP strongly supports  efforts to invest in higher education  for two reasons: to make it 
more affordable for students from working class households and to ensure th ese vital 
public institutions have the resources they need to thrive.  
 
We applaud  the efforts  the Governor and legislators have taken in recent years to make 
higher education  more accessible . These include free community college for recent high 
school graduates, raising the value of the  Maine State Grant, expanding  Maine’s Student 
Loan Repayment Tax Credit , and ensuring students have access to their transcripts and 
diplomas . However, for the reasons  outlined below, we believe there is more work to be 
done . 
 
 
The need to stabilize the University of Maine System  
 
The initiative to extend free community college to recent high school graduates  has been a 
huge success . Due to its bold design and the relatively easy transferability between the 
Maine Community College and University of Maine systems, however , we are experiencing 
a profound increase in community college enrollment and an associated decline at UMaine. 
Savvy s tudents seeking a four -year degree have a clear incentive to attend two years of 
community college before transferring to the University of Maine for the final two years.  
 
We should therefore take similarly bold steps to shore up the s tability of our universi ty 
system, which was already facing significant  financial headwinds before the community 
college policy was passed . Senator Tipping’s LD 512 would create a parallel initiative to the 
community college program and offer students from working class households  greater 
opportunity  to attend the University of Maine for all four years . 
 
 
 
   
  
The need to limit Maine students’ debt burden  
 
According to The Institute for College Access and Success (TICAS), Maine was in the top 10 
states  for 2020 graduates’ average student debt at $32,764. Nearly two -thirds (63 percent) 
of graduates had student debt, which was the eighth  highest in the nation. The state’s 
share of the cost of higher education has been on a steady downward trajectory since the 
late 1980s, leaving students and familie s to cover the difference. In 1989, the state covered 
78 percent of the cost of full -time -equivalent enrollment. Over the past decade, those costs 
have been evenly split , leaving more students and families in debt.  
 
Limiting student debt is also an equity imperative . According to the Brookings Institution, 
nationally, Black borrowers with undergraduate degrees default at five times the rate  of 
white borrowers (21 versu s 4 percent) and are more likely to default than white borrowers 
who do not complete their degree. In 2017, the Center for American Progress found  that 12 
years after entering college, the typical Black student who started in the 2003 -04 school 
year and took on debt for their undergraduate education owed more on their federal 
student loans than they originally borr owed.  Research has also shown that rural students 
accumulate 60% more student debt by age 25 than do those who grew up in suburban and 
urban areas.  
 
Again, we urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD 512. Thank you for the opportunity to 
testif y. 
