TESTIMONY OF BRENDAN MCQUADE
Ought to Pass—LD 512
An Act to Promote Student Enrollment and Degree Completion in the University of Maine 
System by Providing Tuition Waivers to Eligible Students
Submitted to the 
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
March 6, 2023
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and other members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee. Thank you for this opportunity to address the committee.  My name is 
Brendan McQuade and I am an associate professor in the criminology department at the 
University of Southern Maine. I am here to testify in support of LD 512, An Act to Promote 
Student Enrollment and Degree Completion in the University of Maine System by Providing 
Tuition Waivers to Eligible Students.
I have been teaching at college-level since 2008, first as a graduate student and teaching 
assistant, and, since 2014, as full time faculty. During this time, I have taught at four 
institutions: Binghamton University, DePaul University, SUNY-Cortland, and the University of 
Southern Maine. Despite the different profiles of these institutions, students confront the same 
major problem. Due rising tuition costs, many students work full or part time and they simply 
do not have enough time to complete work required of a full time college student. 
As a general guideline, it is recommended that students spend at least 2-3 hours of study time 
for every hour of class time. For example, if a student is taking a 3-credit hour course that 
meets for three hours per week, they should plan to spend an additional 6-9 hours per week 
outside of class studying and preparing for that course.  The University of Maine System defines 
full time status as enrollment in four courses per semester. Many students take five classes a 
semester. This means 24 to 45 hours per work of studying and preparation in addition to 12 to 
15 hours of class time. When we add the demands of personal circumstance and obligations to 
the expectation of full time college-level work, it is immediately clear that many students are in 
impossible time crunch.  How is a student supposed to balance their course work with a full or 
part time job?
Many of they cannot manage.  Administers see this reality in declining enrollments and 
problems with student retention and completion. Every semester, I see the human face. 
Students breaking under the pressure of unrealistic demands and impossible time crunch. Some 
students are unable to complete the work and stop attending class. Other show up for class but 
struggle to complete the work and take incompletes, which many do not finish. Still others try 
to do the impossible and push themselves to the breaking point. Every semester, I have 
students breaking down in my office and opening up about the compounding pressures of 
study, work, and family obligations. The details are tragic: veteran students dealing with PTSD; 
working parents trying to finish their degrees, while supporting a family and raising children; 
traditional students with significant responsibilities to care for younger siblings or aging or ill 
family members; students of all backgrounds dealing with disruption, death, and loss connected 
to COVID-19 or the opioid epidemic.  
Often, there is little I can do for these students. I can and do refer students to resources 
available to them through the university for extra support of various kinds. I can and do offer to 
meet students outside of class time to help them work through the material or review 
assignments but it is often be hard for my students to find the time in their schedules. I can and 
do give generous extension and never hesitant to offer students incompletes. I can and do 
make these efforts but I cannot make college more affordable. There is nothing I can do 
address the underlying issue.
The legislature, however, can fix this problem. The tuition waivers proposed by LD 512 would 
reduce the financial burden on many students and allow them to focus on learning full time. 
Beyond the impact on individual students, this waiver program would help the State of Maine 
as whole in four key ways: (1) it would increase access to education and ensure that more 
Mainers have more options to access to the type of higher education that is appropriate for 
them, regardless of their economic background: (2) it would reducing student debt and allow 
graduates to start their careers without a large debt burden; (3) it would facilitate economic 
growth by creating a more skilled and educated workforce; (4) it would help increase social 
mobility by providing opportunities for students from low-income backgrounds to pursue 
higher education and improve their job prospects.
Please do the right thing and support higher education in Maine.
