Daniel Jenkins
Brunswick / USM
LD 512
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and other members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, My name is Dr. Daniel Jenkins and I am a Full Professor 
of Leadership & Organizational Studies at the University of Southern Maine.  I also 
have a Ph.D. in Higher Education Administration and have worked in the Florida 
legislature, in academic administration at the University of South Florida, and as a 
town councilor in Brunswick, Maine.  I am here to testify in support of LD 512, An 
Act to Promote Student Enrollment and Degree Completion in the University of 
Maine System by Providing Tuition Waivers to Eligible Students. I have been 
working in higher education since 2007 and have many observations that lead me to 
support this legislation.  As you are aware, the State of Maine is currently 
experiencing a decrease in enrollment in our public universities, and this has resulted 
in competition with community colleges that currently offer free tuition in Maine. In 
order to remain competitive and attract students, we need to take action to make 
higher education more affordable and accessible for all.
The proposed tuition waiver would provide a much-needed solution to this issue by 
offering free tuition to all qualifying students in our public universities. This would 
not only make higher education more accessible to low-income families but also help 
to keep our talented students in Maine. Many students who are accepted into Maine's 
public universities ultimately end up attending community colleges instead because of
the lower cost of tuition. By offering a tuition waiver, we can encourage more 
students to choose our public universities and ensure that we retain our best and 
brightest.
In addition, offering a tuition waiver will also have positive economic effects on our 
state. When more students attend our public universities, they are more likely to stay 
in Maine after graduation and contribute to our local economy. These students are 
also more likely to start businesses, create jobs, and innovate, leading to a more 
prosperous future for Maine.
Therefore, I urge you to support the proposed tuition waiver for students in our public
universities in Maine. This will not only benefit our students and our state but also 
demonstrate our commitment to making higher education accessible to all.
Thank you for your consideration.
Sincerely,
Dan Jenkins, Ph.D.
