James Laverdiere  
 
LD 512 : An Act to Promote Student Enrollment and Degree Completion in the University of Maine 
System by Providing Tuition Waivers to Eligible Students  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs . My name is James  Laverdiere and I am a resident  of South Portland who is 
writing with some concerns with  LD 512 as it is currently written.  
I am a parent of a 2022 high school graduate who is currently attending the University of Maine in the 
Computer Engineering program and I fe el like this bill is le aving him behind.  My son could have attended 
the community college for free under the Maine Free College Scholarship program but instead opted to 
go the U niversity of Maine for the 22 -23 academic year.  We are a middle class family from southern 
Maine and  are paying full tuition and fees along with room and board.  You may wonder why we made 
the choice to go into debt to attend the University of Maine when the Community College would have 
been free?  The answer is simple, while there are many programs at t he Community College that 
seamlessly transfer to the University  as a 2 plus 2 , that is not true of all programs.  If my son would have 
taken the two-year  pre-engineering program through the community college system and then 
transferred, he still would have  had to attend the University for another 3 years to obtain his bachelor’s 
degree in computer engineering . He would have been on a 5 year enrollment plan as opposed to the 
traditional 4 years.  
While I agree that something should be done to help alleviate t he costs of tuition and fees at the 
University to attract new students to higher education, I disagree with how this bill is written in that it  
has left students like my son to fend for themselves  and does nothing to help retain students  like him . It 
was m y understanding when the original Maine Free College Scholarship program was introduced, it was 
targeted at those students and families who were most impacted by the pandemic. The class of 2022 
was included in t he Maine Free College Scholarship program int entionally and shouldn’t be excluded 
now from tuition assistance at the University. We need to do more to make college affordable for all 
Maine students  and I hope that if this bill passes, that it would be amended to  include the same 
graduating classes th at were included in the Free Community  College bill regardless of the fact they 
made the decision to enroll at the University  the fall of 2022.  
Thank you fo r your time  and consideration.  
Sincerely,  
James  Laverdiere  
South Portland  
 
 
