482 Congress Street, Suite 303, Portland, ME 04101    207-347-8638    info@educatemaine.orgThe Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
Testimony from Jason Judd, Executive Director, Educate Maine
In Support Of
L.D. 512: “An Act to Promote Student Enrollment and Degree Completion in the University of 
Maine System by Providing Tuition Waivers to Eligible Students”
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, I am Jason Judd, the Executive Director of Educate Maine, a 
business-led education advocacy organization. In addition, we are one of the founders of the 
MaineSpark Coalition, the state attainment coalition focused on increasing adult education 
attainment to 60% by 2025 to address the needs of our economy. 
I am writing to you today to support L.D. 512. The investment in free community college for 
Maine students from the graduating classes of 2020 – 2023 has made a significant impact on 
students and families. Students who were not able to attend college or who did not believe they 
could afford college, are now enrolled in programs across Maine. The simplicity of the free 
college message has worked well for students and families across Maine. These community 
college students are working diligently to prepare to enter the workforce and be a part of the 
Maine economy. 
This particular bill would expand the initiative to include tuition waivers to students planning on 
going to one of the University of Maine System campuses for a four-year degree. It would help 
both graduating high school students and learners who are very close to degree completion. This 
bill would also help Maine reach its state attainment goal of 60% of Maine adults with a 
credential of value or degree.
Great Schools Partnership recently released their 2022 Common Data Project report which 
includes essential indicators for high school and postsecondary education across New England. 
In Maine, the percent of students who attend postsecondary education in the fall directly after 
their high school graduation is 52.7% which is a 10% decline over the last five years. This rate is 
also 6% points below the New England average. The majority of jobs in Maine require education 
and training beyond high school, and we need to invest in postsecondary education to help more 
Maine learners participate in these pathways. 
In 2022, Educate Maine, Maine State Chamber of Commerce, and Maine Development 
Foundation released the Making Maine Work report about the top needs of the business 
community. Three of the top six priorities of the Maine business community for the new 
administration are about workforce development including the need for entry level workers, the 
availability of skilled technical workers, and the availability of professional workers. Investing in 
Maine’s higher education institutions is one key strategy to expand the workforce and address 
the needs of our economy. 
According to a report called “The College Payoff” from the Georgetown University Center on 
Education and the Workforce, bachelor’s degree holders earn 75% more in wages compared to 
students with only high school diplomas. Over a lifetime, these earnings are $1.2M more for 
college graduates compared to students with only a high school diploma. It is clear there is a 
tremendous benefit for individuals and the Maine economy if additional learners are able to 
enroll, persist, and complete their degrees. We need to continue to scale innovative models like 
the ones proposed in this bill in order to make sure we have a future trained workforce in our 
state. 
Although we completely support this particular bill, we want to encourage the committee 
members to support initiatives for all of Maine’s higher education institutions. The focus of the 
investments should be focused on Maine learners regardless of where they would like to attend 
postsecondary education. Each institution has unique programs, and it is important to recognize 
the vast variety of education pathways and institutions for Maine learners. 
Thank you for your time. I am available if you have any questions. 
