Liam Anderson 
Orono 
LD 512 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and other members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, My name is Liam Anderson and I am a junior Early Childhood 
Education Student at the University of Maine in Orono, and I am here to testify in support of LD 
512, An Act to Promote Student Enrollment and Degree Completion in the University of Maine 
System by Providing Tuition Waivers to Eligible Students. 
As an aspiring educator, studying to become the best teacher I can be in the midst ofa 
teacher shortage crisis; there is a weight on my shoulders. There is a weight on all of our 
shoulders as a new generation of educators enters the profession. We are making sacriﬁces 
ﬁnancially with the weight of student debt and low entry salary looming over us everyday. When 
I was evaluating my future, I made the conscious decision to take on these hardships that 
education majors face— because the passion I have for making a difference in the classroom and 
in the community sang a lot louder. I chose to value my education above the anxieties of future 
tuition debt and the stress of present ﬁnancial instability. 
And as me, and the education students I am representing today, continue to make these 
sacriﬁces to help take on this teacher shortage directly, our numbers only continue to deteriorate. 
The college of education and human development has faced concerning enrollment decline over 
the past 5 years. The solution to the teacher shortage: the next generation of teachers; they are 
struggling to ﬁnancially justify going to our universities to receive critical knowledge, build 
essential skills, and establish meaningful career relationships. 
These numbers are partly because students are abandoning four year university 
opportunities, because they just can’t afford the ﬁnancial burden when made to compete with 
free. Many of our college students are foregoing critical opportunities for career advancement, 
access to masters and doctoral programs, as well as study-abroad experiences that our 
universities provide. Not to mention our students are losing equitable access to the social 
relationships, moral development, and the opportunity to ﬁnd themselves; losing equitable access 
to make a career impact in their ﬁeld of study at a four year university. 
Tomorrow I will be turning just 20 years old. I am just scratching the surface of whatI 
hope to be an extensive and impactful career in education. And it is because of the opportunities 
the four year University of Maine in Orono has given me that I ﬁnd myself here before you today 
supporting this bill, and in turn advocating for every student looking to pursue higher education 
in the state of Maine. And every student in the state of Maine deserves their own opportunity, 
and these tuition waivers can provide an equitable opportunity, parallel and justiﬁable to our free 
community college program, for all of our youth to go out and make a difference in this world. 
Thank you. it 
‘Y. 
it 
i. 
ii 
> 
ll
I 
ll 
‘t 
,3 
ls»
l
r
