March 6, 2023
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of 
the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, thank you for the 
opportunity to speak to you today.
My name is Dr. Lisa Leduc, I am a professor of Criminal Justice at the 
University of Maine at Presque Isle and I am here to testify in support of LD 
512, An Act to Promote Student Enrollment and Degree Completion in the University of Maine 
System by Providing Tuition Waivers to Eligible Students.
 
As a 20 year faculty member I unfortunately have seen the direct negative 
impact of COVID 19, the state demographic cliff and the community college 
tuition waiver on our University of Maine System campus enrollments.
While the Community Colleges are a great source of transfer students for 
our campuses, 2 year transfers will not keep us alive.  We cannot compete 
with free. For many of our UMS programs, a 2 year transfer makes things 
like 5 year Masters, 3+3 Law School, and study abroad programming 
unattainable for students who started in community college.
I strongly believe the legislature should support students looking to go to 
community college, and I am equally passionate about the need to support 
students whose goals are more suited to a four year institution. Those 
goals may include things like graduate school or study abroad or even a 
more extensive athletic experience; or may be their course of study and 
career goals is not available at a 2 year school.
Our state is coming out of a most difficult time and it is important that 
these students, many of whom have never had a “normal” high school 
experience, be given opportunities to pursue and experience any type of 
post secondary education. 
I encourage you to pass LD 512 to afford equitable opportunities for all 
Maine families
Finally I would like to thank Senator Tipping for proposing this bill and his 
outreach to community, academic and administrative stakeholders alike as 
he attempts to find a path forward for improved higher education in our 
state.
Thank you very much for you time and consideration
Dr. Lisa Leduc
Professor of Criminal Justice
Criminal Justice Program Coordinator
University of Maine at Presque Isle
