Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and other members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee,  
My name is Lydia Savage (she, her, hers) and I am Professor of Geography at the University of 
Southern Maine and I am here to testify in support of LD 512,  An Act to Promote Student 
Enrollment and Degree Completion in the University of Maine System by Providing Tuition 
Waivers to Eligible Students.   I also support the continued funding of the free community 
college program .  I believe that our goal goal should be to make sure we are helping all students 
achieve their goals and for some students the four -year institution is a better fit for their life 
and c areer goals.   
I speak in  support of this legislation as a first-generation  college student who attended a 
community college in California and transferred to UC Berkeley.  I chose a community college 
based on costs and received an excellent education.  Howe ver, transferring into a 4-year  
institution in my junior year left me at a disadvantage in many ways. As a student who knew 
they wanted to attained a 4-year  institution, I felt like I was playing catch up in many ways.  I 
learned of opportunities too late in my college career at Cal to take advantage of them.   I had 
no connection to faculty and students in my major or at the university - other juniors were 
already at work in faculty labs, classrooms and studies and in the community.  Students who 
had spent  their first two years at Cal already had established relationships with faculty mentors 
and other students and had established networks with internships and future employers.   
 
I think the impact on Maine students who want to go directly to a 4-year  institution of public 
higher education would be amazing by opening up opportunities and translating into a less 
expensive education  overall and keep them on track for degree completion in a timely manner. 
Not all students would opt for this path and many will find a community college education to be 
their best path either to earn an  associate  degree or to earn a degree and transfer  to a 4 -year 
institution .  This bill also proposes a degree completion component - we have many students 
within a year of graduation  who have had to leave for multiple reasons  - particularly with the 
challenges brought about by COVID -19 - that would be supported to degree completion by this 
bill.   
 
This bill proposes a comparable path for the University of Maine System  that students a t our 
community colleges have access to and while I am focused on the benefit for the students 
based on my experience, this proposal would benefit the state of Maine.   For those students 
who opt for a UMS campus, I think the investment to cover 50% of the  tuition costs (after 
accounting for financial aid available) would pay off for the state of Maine by enhancing the 
human and social capital of the state in every area - theater, science, technology, art, 
engineering, education, etc.  The economy of Maine would benefit by employers viewing Maine 
as a state investing in higher education and choosing to remain her e or locate or expand here.   
 
Thank you for your time.   
 
