Michael Cauvel
Sidney
LD 512
I wish to strongly express my support for LD 512 - An Act to Promote Student 
Enrollment and Degree Completion in the University of Maine System by Providing 
Tuition Waivers to Eligible Students. 
I am an Assistant Professor of Economics at the University of Southern Maine. As 
both an economist and an educator within UMS, I believe that I can speak to the 
benefits of this bill from multiple different perspectives. 
As an economist, I am well aware of the considerable amount of evidence showing 
the benefits of higher education. 4-year college degrees are increasingly essential, 
both for individuals to succeed and for societies as a whole to flourish. Those with a 
bachelor’s degree earn nearly 40% more than those with an associate’s degree, and 
roughly 65% more than those with no college education. They are also less likely to 
be unemployed (3.5% vs. 4.6% and 6.2%, respectively). Societies with 
better-educated workers experience faster economic growth, lower rates of crime, and
enjoy better health. My own research, for example, suggests that a primary reason life
expectancy has been improving at a slower rate and even beginning to decline is that 
higher education is increasingly unaffordable. Economic theory tells us that an 
essential role for the government is to provide services like higher education that 
benefit society as a whole but will be under-consumed if the costs must be paid for by
individuals.
Maine needs a skilled workforce to attract and retain businesses, especially those that 
provide high-quality jobs with decent pay. Yet fewer than 36% of Mainers above the 
age of 25 have a bachelor’s degree. This is the lowest in New England. For example 
over 40% have a bachelor’s degree in our neighboring New Hampshire, and nearly 
47% in Massachusetts. While our education lags behind, our economy will as well.
Although I believe reducing the cost of community college is a step in the right 
direction, these efforts do not go far enough. They are also creating some unintended 
side effects. Community colleges are overburdened, while Maine’s public universities
are facing declining enrollment and budgetary crises. This bill would help restore 
balance to our higher education system. Although it would cost slightly more on a 
per-student basis, we can expect that these costs will be at least partially offset by the 
growing tax base that will come with a more skilled workforce, and reduced need for 
state funds to support our public universities if enrollments continue to decline. 
It will also benefit students by helping them get on the path to a beneficial four-year 
degree. Although it is true that students can enroll in one of our public universities 
after completing a two-year community college degree, this can make it more difficult
for students to succeed. In my experience, students learn most effectively when they 
are in a comfortable environment. This is harder to achieve when students have to 
adjust to a completely new school after two years. It also makes it more difficult for 
students to form connections with fellow students and faculty members, and these 
connections are essential for student success.
For all of these reasons, I strongly support this bill.  

