Testimony in Support of L.D. 512  
An Act to Promote Student Enrollment and Degree Completion in the 
University of Maine System by Providing Tuition Waivers to Eligible Students  
Education and Cultural Affairs Committee  
March 6, 2023 
 
Sharon S. Tisher, J.D.  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Committee:  
 
I would like to tell you why our UMS students deserve the support that L.D. 512 
would provide, from the perspective of a non-traditional member of the UMaine 
faculty.  *  I started teaching at UMaine in 1994,  after deciding to return to my home 
state of Maine and resigning from my position as a partner in Connecticut’s largest 
law firm.   I have taught Environmental Law and Policy, EES 324, every year since then, and soon after my arrival also joined the Honors College and have taught at all levels of the Honors curriculum  as well.  I re tired from my faculty position last 
September, but continue to teach EES 324 as an adjunct, and to engage in various projects on campus.  
 
I can’t remember  the name of the  prominent antiwar activist in the 70’s , who was 
interviewed a couple of decades later, and said that he now realized that if you want 
to make America a better place, you should  “go teach in a public university .”  I 
endorse that notion.  The country, now more than ever, needs the rich education in 
critical thinking, reading, writing, collaboration and problem solving that is 
embedded in all the disciplines that we teach.   And our students need this experience 
to be affordabl e.   
 The open letter you received from economic researchers and instructors in 
economics underscores the social and economic benefits to the state to provide as 
much support as possible  for higher education.  I would like to more narrowly focus 
on lessons learned at UM  through the Covid years. In  this time,  I have been  
tremendously impressed by our students, committed to getting the best education they could, overcoming numerous challenges and most specifically the challenge of 
being able to pay for it.  I  am sure you are aware that CNN did a story on UMaine’s 
experience delivering education in the context of Covid, and held it out as a model  
 
 
*These comments represent my personal views and I do not purport to speak for the University of Maine.  
 
 for the country:  
https://www.cnn.com/2021/10/07/health/university -of-maine -
covid -rates -low/index.html . The recognition was wel l deserved, but obviously our 
success depended upon the care with which each and every one of our students approached the ir education:   first, learning remotely with often inadequate internet 
resources and little quiet  space , and, later, warding off the ri sks of in -person 
instruction ,  to themselves  as well as  to faculty and staff .  
 It has been a pleasure and an honor to have a second career  teaching at UMaine .  My 
students’ performance over the decades has been remarkable.  But there are too many 
instances where I know family resources are hard pressed to pay for their education. 
Show me a student with poor attendance or trouble completing assignments well and 
on time, and odds are you will find a student juggling one or two jobs or even three  
to make ends meet.  
   
Together, the UMS administration, faculty, students and staff have crafted a n 
outstanding  collaborative and supportive environment to serve the needs  of our 
collective  future. It just needs one major improvement:  to become more accessible 
to Maine’s students.   
  
 
Sharon S. Tisher, J.D.  
 
Emerita Lecturer  
School of Economics and Honors College  
307 Winslow Hall  
University of Maine  
Orono, Maine 04469  
https://umaine.edu/soe/tisher/
 
https://umaine.edu/climatechronology/   
sharon.tisher@maine.edu  
Resident of Orono   
