Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
‘1\<‘<\ 
Testimony 
In Support- 
LD 151»: An Act Regarding Special Education Function for So-called Minimum Receiver School 
Administration Units‘ 
LD 385: Resolve, Directing the Department of Education to Examine Alternative Metrics for 
Determining the Disadvantaged Student Factor in the School Funding Formula 
LD 1402: An Act to Provide an Additional Allocation in the School Funding Formula to Cover 
Tax-exempt Property or a Large Economically Disadvantaged Student Population 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1160: Resolve, Directing the Department of Education to Conduct a Study on the Equity of 
the State Education Subsidy Formula 
in Opposition 
LD 951: An Act to Amend the State Education Funding Formula to Create Equity Between 
Municipalities by Adding Median income to the Formula 
LD 1369: An Act to Amend the Essential Programs and Services Funding Formula to Include 
All Costs for the Transportation of Students 
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association 
Before the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
April 12, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and other esteemed members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee, 
My name is John Kosinski (he/him) and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA). The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly every public school in the state and faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems. 
I submit this testimony on behalf of the MEA. 
The MEA is in support of LD 154, An Act Regarding Special Education Funding for So-called 
Minimum Receiver School Administration Units. 
In this Committee we often talk about the ballot initiative passed by voters in 2003 and 2004 (and later 
affirmed with a ballot initiative in 2016) to fund 55% of the cost of prek-12 public education with state 
aid. But we often overlook another component of that ballot initiative. In fact, the 2004 initiative 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I I349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622~5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
4. 
5; ‘$7 Maine Education Association 
MEA Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
clearly stated the state shall pay “l00% of the costs of special education services that are mandated by 
federal or state law.”l This component of the ballot initiative was designed to provide direct state 
support for special education for minimum receiver towns, since so much of the special education 
requirements bome by public schools are directly attributable to federal and state regulation. 
In addition, the 100% state ftmding for mandated special education services was designed to help 
minimum receiver towns — these are towns with high property values. The funding fonnula computes 
the required local contribution and when the minimum mil rate is applied to these towns, the formula 
calculates that they will have the funding necessary from property taxes to meet the calculated cost to 
operate their local public schools. However, these towns can and should receive funding for mandated 
special education services as per the ballot initiative passed nearly two decades ago by voters. 
LD 154 proposes a modest increase in funding for required special education programming from the 
current 50% to 55%. It is important to note, in ﬁscal year 2005-2006 until ﬁscal year 2007-2008, the 
state was paying 84% of the special education costs for minimum receivers. But like other funding for 
public schools during the LePage years, special education funding for minimum receivers was squeezed. 
From ﬁscal year 2011-2012 until ﬁscal year 2016-2017, the state only paid 30% of the cost of qualiﬁed 
special education services, except for one year where the state contribution was liﬁed to 35%. While we 
hold the state can and should provide the 100% funding for required special education services as per the 
ballot initiative approved by voters, we support any effort to lift the amount the state pays for these 
services to students. 
As written, we believe LD 154 will require an appropriation. The bill proposes to increase the special 
education funding for school districts in the current school year and solidiﬁes the 55% state aid 
payments for succeeding years. The school funding calculations for next school year have already been 
set, as per LD 424, the current services budget passed in March. If nothing else, we propose at least 
establishing 55% state aid or more for special education costs of minimum receiver towns beginning in 
the 24/25 school/ﬁscal year. 
While we support increasing the state’s special education ﬁmding for minimum receivers, we do not 
believe Section 4 requiring a “review and report” is necessary. We feel the fonnula is working as 
intended, and we are already aware of the “trends” and “factors” impacting these towns and 
communities. Speciﬁcally, skyrocketing property values in some communities are directly impacting 
their state aid. This Committee in the past has helped by allowing for the smoothing of property values 
to account for sudden gains and losses. We believe the solution is for bills like LD 154 to pass so the 
state can realize its commitment to these towns by supporting their special education programs. 
I 
Please see, Maine School Finance and Tax Reform — Carry Over (2004), found here: Maine School Finance and Tax 
Reform §§}Fl’.:9\*‘@‘5- Question 1 € 299:1)- 
__5l.£l§,Q!l2§i% 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME OM06 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
we/. 
Maine Education Association 
“L, Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director
I 
The MEA is in sugport of LD 385, Resolve, Directing the Department of Education to Examine 
Alternative Metrics for Determining the Disadvantaged Student Factor in the School Funding 
Formula. 
This is an important bill and we hope the Committee will consider moving this forward expeditiously. 
As the Committee has already heard in other testimony, the free school meals program is a smashing 
success. All kids in public schools have access to nutritious food while at schools — every day they are 
in school. Not only have meal programs improved, especially with the Work that has been done in 
previous sessions by this Committee to prioritize local foods in schools, but now every child can eat 
while at school for free regardless of whether their parents completed the USDA form. 
However, as this Committee has also heard, we have found downstream impacts of the free meal 
programs. Speciﬁcally, schools have struggled to incentivize families to complete the required 
free/reduced meal forms. Not only does this result in less federal aid to support our school nutrition 
program, but it also impacts key elements of our school funding formula and complicates socioeconomic 
metrics for students. 
For decades, the free/reduced lunch rate has been the key indicator for student poverty. The 
free/reduced lunch rate is baked into our school funding formula and the fonnula provides additional 
state support for schools based on the number of students who qualify. Yet, with the gaps in families 
completing the forms, the free/reduced lunch ﬁgures are likely a poor reﬂection of the socioeconomic 
configuration of schools and the state may be not sending state aid to communities that need it to support 
low-income students. Updating this metric in our funding formula is important. 
While Maine is on the forefront with our free meals programs, other states are grappling with this same 
question. Luckily, there are many great people and organizations hoping to solve this problem. 
Certainly, the staff in the Maine Department of Education have been deeply engaged in this effort. Our 
friends at Full Plates, Full Potential have engaged various stakeholders and they are regularly 
communicating with the Department of Education. Maine Equal Justice and Maine Center for 
Economic Policy among others have also been engaged in discussions. 
We support this bill because we feel an altemative metric is important, necessary and should be ﬁgured 
out quickly. By requiring a Working Group, more hands and stakeholders can be engaged in ﬁndinga 
solution. We suggest the Resolve be amended to allow the Committee to report out a bill. The solution 
will likely require a change in statute to reﬂect an altemative socioeconomic metric. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I I349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 041401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736129 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
» 
Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
The MEA is ogposed to LD 951, An Act to Amend the State Education Funding Formula to Create 
Equity Between Municipalities by Adding Median Income to the Formula. 
While the Picus study of Maine’s school funding formula is now ten years old, it still provides a 
valuable touchpoint for evaluating any proposed changes to the school funding formula. We fully 
understand and appreciate why this Committee sees proposals such as LD 951 nearly every session. 
Some towns may be minimum receivers due to high property values, often due to coastal or lakeside real 
estate. Yet some of these same towns may be low income or have large pockets of low-income 
communities tucked away from the high value areas. 
The Picus study of the school funding formula reviewed this subject. Here are a few key quotes from 
their report, “An Independent Review of Maine’s Essential Programs and Services Funding Act: Part 2:” 
“Overall, Maine has designed a school funding system that provides SAUs with an equitable resource 
distribution, as revenues are computed by the system. Within the EPS component our analysis shows 
Maine’s equity to generally meet the strict equity standards established in the school ﬁnance literature. ”2 
“We found no relationship between EPS per pupil funding and SAU property wealth. The Maine system, 
as designed, met (or very nearly) met all of the strict benchmarks established by Odden and Picus (2014) 
for ﬁscal neutrality and equity. In other words, the level of spending was not strongly related to the 
wealth of the SAU (measured in tenns of property wealth per pupil and in terms of per-capita income), 
and overall per pupil spending levels were generally equitable across all students. When adjusted for 
student characteristics, per pupil spending remained equitable, providing roughly the same level of 
revenue for students with similar characteristics. ”3 
“This led us to conclude that trying to solve the problems of [High Property Wealth/Low Household 
Income] SAUs through the school funding formula would be difﬁcult and likely very expensive. In 
discussions with the Committee, we recommended that they consider a circuit breaker approach to focus 
the assistance more directly on low-income households. ”4 
“How income is incorporated as a measure of a school district ’s wealth is just as important as whether it 
is included at all. Simply adding income to property values often results in unintended consequences 
such as funding decreases for low-income districts and funding increases for high-income districts. ”5 
Instead, after thoroughly reviewing this subject, the Pious study underscored the need to provide targeted 
property tax relief to low income households. Many of the High Property Wealth/Low Household 
Income (HPW/LHI) communities have second homes for vacationers or summer people. Programs like 
the Homestead Exemption or Property Tax Fairness Credit, formerly the “circuit breaker, ” are designed 
to provide targeted relief to primary residents and low-income homeowners. 
2 Please see, 539'! gmainegov I, page iv. 
3 
Ibid. 
‘I 
Ibid, page ix. 
5 
Ibid, page 13. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME UA330 I 131;‘? Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
Maine Education Association 
- 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
This session, LD 1202, An Act to Increase the Homestead Exemption to $50,000 sponsored by 
Representative Theriault, will liﬂ the Homestead Exemption for all Maine residents from the current 
$25,000 exemption to $50,000. This will help HPW/LHI communities, if it passes. It will help all 
Maine residents with property taxes on their primary residence by exempting more of the value of their 
property from the local real estate tax. The impact on a property worth $200,000 will be far greater than 
a property valued in the millions. A more generous Homestead Exemption will provide targeted relief to 
all Maine homeowners, while allowing local towns to collect more in property taxes from vacation 
homes, second homes, short-term rental properties, and another non-Homestead property. 
Another bill, LD 1225, An Act to Protect Housing by Increasing the Property Tax Fairness Credit 
sponsored by Representative O’Nei1 proposes to increase the maximum Property Tax Fairness Credit. 
This proposal, if passed, would increase the Property Tax Faimess credit to $1500 per tax year for 
qualiﬁed residents under 65, and to $2000 for those over 65. This proposal will provide greater support 
for low-income households struggling with property tax increases. 
We would argue LD 1202 and LD 1225 are better solutions for HPW/LHI communities. We are 
concerned about signiﬁcant changes to the school funding formula at this stage. It has been only a few 
years that the state has ﬁnally fulﬁlled its obligation to fund 55% of the cost of public schools, and we 
encourage more analysis and data at the 55% funding threshold before making signiﬁcant adjustments to 
the formula. 
The MEA is neither for nor against LD 1160, Resolve, Directing the Department of Education to 
Conduct a Study on the Equity of the State Education Subsidy Formula. 
We do not believe another equity study is warranted. We feel strongly the Pious study of 2013 was 
exhaustive and informative and remains relevant today. Many of the funding formula questions that 
come before this Committee were interrogated as part of that study. The Pious review was clear — our 
state’s funding fonnula is among the most equitable in the country, and the major ﬂaw was the lack of 
state aid through the funding fonnula. 
However, while we do not feel another study regarding equity is warranted, we believe there are 
signiﬁcant concems about the state’s commitment to school construction. Many of Maine’s public 
schools are old and in need of replacement or repair, evidenced by the school construction list produced 
every few years. Typically, scores of schools put in for the school construction process, but each cycle 
the state can only fund less than 15% of all the proposed projects. Many communities are forced to pay 
for these projects with local property taxes, thus putting more pressure on homeowners and crowding 
other funding for educator salaries and programs for students. 
We encourage the Committee to consider analyzing our state’s current school construction model and 
capacity and to better understand other state models for school construction. Fully understanding the 
capital needs of public schools and proposing new models for school construction ﬁnancing could chart 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 06106 
20'7~622 —5866 I 207-888~207D fax I www.maineea.org
Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
‘ ‘ new and novel approaches to helping local cormnunities have safe, well-designed 
and up-to-date schools. 
While the bill calls for a third party to conduct the study, we encourage the Committee to consider using 
the talent and in-state expertise of the Maine Education Policy Research Institute (MEPRI) of the 
University of Maine System. MEPRI typically produces high value reports for this Committee and the 
Maine Department of Education through speciﬁc contracts. 
The MEA is 0p_p0sed to LD 1369, An Act to Amend the Essential Programs and Services Funding 
Formula to Include All Costs for the Transportation of Students. 
We certainly understand and appreciate the sponsor’s intent. We know some school districts cover vast 
areas and especially with the rising cost of fuel, some districts have seen unexpected cost increases to 
transport students. 
But our opposition to LD 1369 is because of the concerns it raises about equity. As you have already 
heard, some towns have enough property values locally to support all the required costs of public 
schools. The towns of Mount Desert Island are a prime example, where the required mil rate for schools 
creates enough revenue to support the local public schools and to cover all the necessary costs for local 
public schools. Without dedicated, set-aside funding for this purpose, the bill would distribute less 
money through the school funding formula and therefore will have a negative impact on districts that 
receive most of their funding from the state — Lewiston and Calais are prime examples. 
Earlier this session we supported LD 386, An Act to Assist Schools with Heating and Transportation 
Fuel Costs During the School Year. This bill was a one-time appropriation to help schools with the 
rising cost of ﬁiel for the current school year. Since then, gas prices have remained mostly stable, and 
will hopefully remain that way for the foreseeable future. This proposal too would cause inequity, again 
as some school districts pay well above the minimum mil rate for schools. But that bill reﬂected a one- 
time payment to support schools with the unexpected ﬂuctuations in fuel prices. We would be deeply 
concerned if LD 1369 was passed and this inequity was able to live on year-after-year in our school 
funding formula. 
The MEA is in support of LD 1402, An Act to Provide an Additional Allocation in the School 
Funding Formula to Cover T ax-exempt Property or a Large Economically Disadvantaged Student 
Population. 
This bill proposes a novel approach to providing additional targeted supports to schools with 
concentrations of economically disadvantaged students and attempts to account for cities and towns with 
a signiﬁcant amount of tax-exempt property due to the presence of private colleges, hospitals, state 
government properties, among others. LD 1402 attempts to create its own cascade to capture unspent 
revenue dedicated to public education and redirects that funding to schools to provide additional targeted 
support to disadvantaged students. Every year there is unspent funding in the General Purpose Aid for 
Local Schools line of the budget. This bill will capture that funding in a separate account, and allow the 
Commissioner to disburse the funding to districts with plans to address “academic and social success” of 
disadvantaged students. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 H3149 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 013736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.rnaineea.org
if“ *1’ 
Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
During the LePage administration, some time was spent on better understanding the 
impact of tax-exempt property on school funding, but the analysis was minimal and 
should be better understood. While tax-exempt property is not directly included in the state’s- valuation 
property calculation, tax-exempt property often has downstream impacts on cities and towns and may 
have a direct impact on the ability for cities and towns to raise their required local share, or more. Tax- 
exempt property often reﬂects positively on a community. I live in Brunswick, for example, home to 
Bowdoin College and a private, tax-exempt hospital, among other tax-exempt properties. Our 
community beneﬁts from these 
institutions, no question. But in some communities, Brunswick included, as institutions grow andI 
expand they may remove more property from the tax rolls. We are unsure whether the 15% threshold 
called for in the bill is the right ﬁgure, and we suggest the Committee consider additional study to fully 
understand the impact of tax-exempt property in Maine and any downstream impacts on local school 
funding. 
Thank you for your time and your service to the people of Maine, and I will do my best to answer any 
questions you may have. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 06106 
207-622~5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
