State of Maine 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCAITON 
Testimony of Paula Gravelle, Director of School Finance 
In Support of: L.D. 1160 
Resolve. Directing the Department of Education to Conduct a Study on the Equity of the State. 
Education Subsidv Formula 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Representative Geiger 
Co-sponsored by: Senator Beebe-Center and Representative Matlack 
Date: April 12, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Paula Gravelle, and I am here today representing the Department of Education 
speaking in support of L.D. 1160, Resolve. Directing the Department of Education to Conduct a 
Study on the Equity of the State Education Subsidy Formula. This bill proposes that the 
Department of Education contract with a 3‘d party to conduct a study on the equity of the 
Essential Programs and Services (EPS) funding model and the way the state subsidy ﬁmds 
capital projects. 
As outlined in Title 20-A, Chapter 606-B, §l5686-A, individual components of the EPS formula 
are reviewed on a rotating basis. These reports are submitted to the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee each year and can be found on the Department of Education website. These 
reviews are conducted every three years in groups of EPS components. With this approach, a 
segment of EPS is always under review. The EPS model was last reviewed in totality ina 
comprehensive study in 2013, completed by Lawrence Picus and Associates and commonly 
referred to as “the Picus report.” 
The Department believes that the time may be right for another comprehensive review. FY 22 
was the ﬁrst year that the 55% State share has been fully funded, which means this is the ﬁrst 
time the EPS formula is working the way it was intended to. Both the economic and educational 
landscapes of Maine have changed since the Picus report in 2013. We are seeing changing needs 
throughout the State, and an updated comprehensive review will more accurately assess the 
equity of our funding model at this time.' 
It is important to note the interconnectedness of EPS funding formula components. Individual 
component adjustments to the EPS formula always have positive and negative impacts on school 
administrative units (SAUS). Given the ﬁnite amount of funding, a calculation to increase one 
segment will necessarily decrease another segment. It would be prudent to examine any one 
element in the context of a comprehensive study such as the one LD ll60 proposes. In order to
1
make equitable decisions that cause the least harm to our SAUs, the Department will need to 
dedicate time and resources to analyze the implications of any change. 
Due to the staff time and resources required to perform the functions required by this bill, the 
Department of Education recommends a ﬁscal note of $5,000. 
For these reasons, the Department of Education is in support of L.D. 1160, Resolve, Directing 
the Department of Education to Conduct a Study on the Equity of the State Education Subsidy 
Formula. I am happy to answer any questions the Committee may have, and I will be available 
for Work sessions on this bill.
