LD-1160 : Study on S tate Subsidy Formula  Testimony: Sara H. Languet  4/12/2023 1: 00 PM--Page 1 of 3 April 12 , 2023 . 
Belgrade Lakes, ME  
 
Senator Rafferty, Senate Chair  
Representative Brennan, House Chair  
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
131st Maine Legislat ure, First Special  Session  
2 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0002  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, Representative Campbell and Distinguished Members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee:  
 
Testimony IN FAVOR  of LD 1160 :  
Resolve Directing th e Department of Education to Conduct a Study  
and the Equ ity of the S tate Education  Subsidy Formula  – April 12, 20 23 
 
My name is Sara Languet,  and I am one of the two  Belgrade RSU#18 School Board Director s.  I also represented the 
Town of Belgrade in the 2022 RSU#18 Cost Sharing Formula (CSF) committee.   
 
Participating in a CSF committee does give residents of a Regional School Units (RSU) a direct view of how the State of 
Maine calculates a fair estimation of the “ total school operation al cost” and how the “ funding contributions ” are  
figured  for the member municipalities of such RSU.   The table below  gives  a good summary of such efforts.  
Every year , by statutory law, the State of Maine places  out a report called ED -279, where each town’s educational cost s 
are calculated,  and educational revenues are allocated  using the Department of Education Mill Rate (DOE -MR) .  So, t he 
education al operation al costs are determined by municipality specifically and generally based on the ir student 
population.  By the time each  municipality  education al operational costs are determined ; they basically are the same 
per student for all municipalities  (which happen to share the same resources in the RSU)  as noted in COLUMN A 
below .  Then, once “STATE SUBSIDY” is applied per municipality ; the cost per student drops significantly for most  
municipalities that receive such state subsidy as noted in COLUMN B  (TOWNS L OCAL EPS  Contributions ). 
 
Table 1. Summary of FY’24 ED-279 Report  for RSU#18  
 
Since the 1970 s (when MSADs were instituted), it was understood that such LOCAL EPS  Contributions seek to balance 
“wealth”  variances between neighboring towns and neighboring districts by exclusively  using the municipality’s  
valuation and a DO E-MR as the main metric s to determine revenue sources  (which are local contributions and state 
subsidy) .  The present  fiscal  worldwide circumstances need a different paradigm.  That is why such present SCHOOL 
FUNDING FORMULA should be reviewed  including further public opinion/hea rings during the updating  process .   
 
 
 
 

LD-1160 : Study on S tate Subsidy Formula  Testimony: Sara H. Languet  4/12/2023 1: 00 PM--Page 2 of 3 To start with t he volumetric cost of education will not be sustaina ble on two counts .  First, the cost of education is 
growing at a pace that is double the cost of living, at least in my RSU .  But so, I understand this  is a state and 
nationwide problem.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
And second , with the present revenue assigned contributions which currently  have  some municipalities paying more 
than others for the same services .  That is not fair, nor does it  proclaim s EQUALITY  in being evenly and fiscally 
responsible for their own cost share of the same services. In any association, every member pays the same unit fee 
for membership, that concept should not be different in an RSU.   
HARD NOTE : A realistic and specific point of reference is that the  annual tuition at the UMaine System is about 
$12,000 for an undergraduate student ; and the town of Rome is paying about $19,000 annually for a Kindergartener . 
 
RSU#18  is not the only School district with this dil emma , the following  towns mentioned below are paying significantly 
more per student than neighboring towns  in the same RSU  –almost in a disparaged manner : 
RSU 1 — with Arrowsic and Phillipsburg   
RSU 2 - with Dresden and Hollowel  
RSU 3 - Freedom, Liberty, Monr oe and Waldo  
RSU 38 - Wayne  
RSU 54 - Smithfield  
RSU 9 - Weld  
The above are the only RSUs I have time to do calculations for ; but certainly,  in most every RSU there is an affected 
town.   Most towns will not complain as they are habituated to their local proper ty taxes (which are a conglomeration 
of Education al, Town Operations and County taxes) and  will have no idea of the financial disparity that they live in 
unless such is pointed out.   And, certainly, this issue affects  mostly municipalities with high valuati on and low 
number  of pupils/student s, which are usually  the minority  towns  (with less weighed points in voting  when deciding 
expenses ) in every RSU.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

LD-1160 : Study on S tate Subsidy Formula  Testimony: Sara H. Languet  4/12/2023 1: 00 PM--Page 3 of 3 For the ED -279 Report to provide fiscal EQUALITY , few considerations might be reflected  on: 
a. Real town property valuations need to happen  at the municipalities every so often ( maybe  every 5 to 10 years 
at least) .  Instead of continuously using estimates for  the town’s property valuations.  
 
b. Use the total State Subsidy amount as a lump sum that impacts the entire RSU  finances .  Meaning that  once 
the Total Cost of RSU Operation s and the Total Town Contribution  from the Municipalities are determined . 
Then , the  Total Educational Cost of Town ’s Pupils  can be calculated.  
 
So: 
[Total Town Contribution ] = (Total Cost of RSU Operation s) – (Total State Subsidy lump sum ) 
 
Then:  
[RSU Cost per Pupil ] = (Total Town Contribution )/ (Total Number of RSU Pupils)  
 
Finally, Total Educational Cost of Town ’s Pupils  can be calculated by u tilizing [RSU Cost  per Pupil ] to determine  
the fiscal responsibility of each town (municipality) .   
 
So, for each town (municipality):  
[Total Educational Cost of Town ’s Pupils ]= [RSU Cost per Pupil]  x [Number of Town Residing pupils]  
 
Certainly, this proposal will benefit the “overcharged towns ” while increasing taxes in towns with lower educational 
taxes ; but since the lower educational taxes  towns have much more population the impact at the town mill rate level 
will be minimal  as belo w $6  per week  increase in their annual taxes  on a $100,000 property .  Most RSU’s residents do 
not realize how minimal is the financial impact and believe that their tax increase will be unbearable when such is far 
from real.  
 
c. Possibly the first order of ac tion is to establish that after 15 years from school districts reorganization  with 
RSUs; the allocation of Additional Local Funds (ALF) should be determined exclusively by the student 
population  (100%) while not considering town valuations at all .  Usually,  ALFs are like 10% to 25%  of any 
RSU’s Total Budget Expenditures.  That will be a “soft” start point on progressively achieving financial EQUALITY 
among town ( municipalities ) members  of the same RSU.  That will place the tax increase to certain town s to be 
below $2  per week  in their annual taxes  for a $100,000 property .   
So, for example, looking  at Column D  in Table 1 above all towns  will pay exactly the same $2,952  per student 
for ALFs  rather than the different figures below per town… $4 ,485; $2,851, $2,271, $6,970, $2,553.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please, feel free to reach out to me via email any time.  At your discretion, I will welcome a future invitation to answer 
any further questions or concerns.    Thank you for your consideration and your time devoted to these causes that 
foster the educatio n of our children as they are the future of our state and our country.  Thank you for your service.  
 Sincerely,  
 
Sara H Languet  
Email: slanguet@gmail.com  

