mmwz 
,, §%.DQRENT 
FEDEQQTEON 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, Members of the Educational and Cultural Affairs Committee 
RE: LD 1526 An Act to Provide Grants to Support Reading Proﬁciency Programming in Schools 
My name is Carrie Woodcock I live in Saco, I am the parent of two children with different abilities, 
(disabilities) and the Executive Director for Maine Parent Federation (MPF). I am intentionally using 
the tenn different abilities as opposed to disabilities to acknowledge that every individual has different 
abilities. MPF is the federally funded Parent Training and Information Center (PTI), Family to Family 
Health Information Center (FZFHIC) and Statewide Family Network. We assist families of children 
with different abilities to navigate all systems of care including education. I am submitting this 
testimony in support of LD 1526 An Act to Provide Grants to Support Reading Proﬁciency 
Programming in Schools. 
Today I want to speak to you more from a parent perspective than a professional perspective. My son 
Noah, who is now 18, was diagnosed with Dyslexia at the age of 9 as he was entering his 2“d grade 
year of schooling. Noah’s diagnosis came after spending a week with his grandmother, a former 
special educator and ﬁrst grade teacher. When she expressed concern about his reading abilities, I 
approached the school to inquire about a referral for an evaluation. I was told by the school that Noah’s 
reading levels, according to the Developmental Reading Assessment (DRA) was at grade level and 
therefore he did not need an assessment or Response to Intervention. 
Despite, this I inquired with my neighbor, the Director for the Dyslexia Center in Portland. Per her 
recommendations I was able to privately obtain a full Independent Neuropsychological Evaluation. 
The results showed that not only did Noah have Dyslexia he also had ADHD and recommended 
intense science-based reading interventions. I provided the school with this evaluation and was again 
denied any interventions. I inquired about the phonics program the school was using and was told 
Reader’s Workshop, at the time not a science-based reading program. There is also now a lot of 
research showing how Reader’s Workshop has failed many of students in all our classrooms (see Sold 
a Story podcast). 
Outside of school we decided Noah needed intervention and we put him on the waitlist to receive 
services through the Dyslexia Center and provided him with private tutoring. 
I continued my efforts to advocate for services through the school throughout Noah’s 2"d grade year to 
no avail. As Noah changed schools and entered 3“ grade, I once again advocated for his needs through 
the new school’s leadership. This time when performing the DRA and considering the independent 
evaluation, it was determined Noah was at least 2 years behind in his reading performance. This was 
not due to regression over the summer and they were not sure how any DRA in the past year could 
have reﬂected that Noah was reading at grade level. 
It took me a year and half of advocating for Noah’s reading needs before he was identiﬁed and 
provided intervention through his school system. If it was not for having a grandmother that wasa 
teacher, a neighbor who Worked in the profession, and myself who also works in the profession Noah 
may never have been identiﬁed. 
The story of Noah is one that is repeated over and over in our State. In my ofﬁce I am often the 
individual taking phone calls from parents whose children are struggling with what special education 
labels as a Speciﬁc Learning Disability. They are struggling to get identiﬁed as our state’s 
identiﬁcation process for a Speciﬁc Learning Disability is one of the most difﬁcult to qualify. We are
mnms PQQENT 
$1 FEDEPQTIQN 
also seeing schools blaming the gap in learning on the gap in instruction from the pandemic and based 
on this reasoning denying further evaluation and/or RTI. 
The interventions which are being provided in our schools are not always science-based nor enough to 
move the needle forward for these students. Science-based programs like Wilson, Lips, and Spire are 
often only offered through Special Education services and not available to all students in our schools. 
By the time students are identiﬁed these programs are not enough to close the gap. If it were not for 
Noah receiving Orton-Gillingham privately (often referred to the Cadillac of reading intervention) I am 
conﬁdent he never would have closed the gap. I shudder to think what that would have meant for Noah 
now and in his future. 
If you are unable to read you will never have access to your education. When these students go 
unidenti ﬁed, they often get labeled as behavior students and are disciplined further alienating them 
from their education and their peers. The damage to their self-esteem is immeasurable and the 
alternative pathway they experience can lead to failure academically, socially, and emotionally. These 
students have great minds they just learn differently. Our schools need to not only identify them we 
need to teach them in the way in which they learn. 
It l1as not been easy for Noah. I am so proud to be his mom and to see what he has overcome and 
accomplished in his life. He has worked so hard, often harder than his peers, his perseverance is 
admirable. 
I hope this legislation can bring to more individuals like Noah reading identiﬁcation and interventions 
that will positively impact their pathway. For this reason, I ask this committee to please support this 
legislation. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
Carrie Woodcock 
Executive Director 
Maine Parent Federation
