State of Maine 
DEPARTIVLENT OF EDUCATION 
Testimony of Lee Ann Larsen, Director of Early Leaming, Department of Education 
In Support of: L.D. I526 
An Act to Provide Grants to Support Reading Proficiency Programming in Schools 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Representative Brennan 
Co-Sponsored by: Senator Rafferty and Representatives Dodge, Gattine, Gramlich, Malon, 
Peny, Salisbury, Shagoury, and Zager 
Date: May 2, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Lee Anne Larsen, and I am here today representing the Department speaking in 
support of L.D. 1526, An Act to Provide Grants to Support Reading Proficiency Programming in 
Schools. This bill proposes to create a Reading Proficiency Grant Fund to award grants to school 
administrative units (SAUs) for programming to strengthen reading proficiency. 
The Maine Department of Education (DOE) continues to focus on improving reading 
achievement among Maine’s students to ensure they are proficient with literacy skills. Reading 
achievement is an issue of equity; it is directly connected to leaming, wellness, and civic 
engagement. In order to successfully navigate today’s world, students must build and apply 
strong reading and literacy skills. Many of the DOE’s teams share responsibilities related to 
promoting reading achievement, including Early Learning, Interdisciplinary Instruction, ESEA 
Federal Programs, Special Services and Inclusive Education, Assessment, and Adult Education. 
The Maine DOE’s State Literacy Team, a stakeholder group composed of Maine educators and 
DOE specialists, and its Literacy for ME initiative, help implement the Department ’s ggp 
literacy plan which identifies key strategies to strengthen literacy education efforts across Maine. 
An example of these strategies is the DOE’s recently launched Maine Association for Improving 
Literacy Network (MAIL), which provides opportunities for Maine educators to learn about and 
share promising literacy practices. The DOE has also developed a guidance document outlining 
tenets of high-quality, evidence-based literacy instruction for Pre-K to Grade 3 students. 
This bill would support a key recommendation outlined in the Department ’s Reading Proficiency 
Report of December 2022, specifically targeted support to schools working to improve students ’ 
beginning reading achievement. In this report, the DOE asserted that Without adequate 
reading/literacy abilities, students ’ attainment of a Well-rounded education is significantly 
compromised. The report also noted that science in the field of reading reading/literacy has 
grown tremendously in the past quarter century, illuminating instruction and assessment 
practices that promote brain development. Another key finding included in the report Was the 
call from Maine educators for timely access to professional learning in beginning 
reading/literacy practices grounded in current research, including brain science, foundational 
reading skills, interdisciplinary and Whole student approaches, and culturally responsive 
practices, particularly for multilingual learners.
1
The Department has one suggestion to strengthen LD 1526. As written, lack of a specific grade 
span focus may not ensure that grant funding is directed at the intended audience. The DOE 
suggests including a targeted grade span so that the limited funding may be dispersed in the most 
beneficial Ways. Based on the findings in the Reading Proficiency Report, the DOE recommends 
focusing on the K-3 grade span. 
The Department of Education supports L.D. 1526, An Act to Provide Grants to Support Reading 
Proficiency Programming in Schools. I am happy to answer any questions the Committee may 
have, and I will be available for work sessions on this bill.
2
