May 2, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 1526, An Act to Provide Grants to Support Reading Proficiency 
Programming in Schools. 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and the distinguished members of the Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affair. 
Thank you Rep Brennan for bringing this important bill. My name is Nancy Cronin, I live in 
Fayette Maine, and I am a parent of a teenager with profound dyslexia. I also have dyslexia as 
does my brother and sister. I received special education for specific learning disability in 
Augusta Maine in 1978 with dyslexia. Three years after the Education for All Handicapped 
Children Act, forerunner to IDEA. I knew what dyslexia looked and felt like. When my son was 
ready, I knew what to look for but was surprised at how difficult it was to get what he needed. 
My son was formally identified as having a Specific Learning Disability in Kindergarten. I 
immediately started advocating for a multi-sensory, structured literacy program that is heavy 
with phonics. The school said that they knew what they were doing and I knew that, asa 
Mother, I had no right to ask additional questions until they tried the schools interventions. My 
son continually came home with flash cards for sight words but he didn't seem to understand 
how to read. At my sons 3'“ year re-evaluation we found that he hadn't improved at all, he was 
still reading at a Pre-l_ ( level. A teacher said to me, trying to comfort me, "today with 
technology it doesn't matter that much if he doesn't learn how to read." Ridiculous, I thought, 
my son will be literate. I went to the school and said this is not adequate according to the law 
and my son needed a reading specialist in orton-gillingham. He was so behind and lost so much 
ground but during Covid my son was able to receive tutoring from an orton-gillingham specialist 
with intensity. He went from a pre-k level of reading to fifth-grade in a year and a half. 
Today, my son is in 7"‘ grade and he receives special education for spelling which is the 
expression part of dyslexia — but he can read at grade level, albeit it takes him longer. Today on 
our way to school he couldn't stop talking about a book that he is reading that he can't put 
down. I have no doubt that my son will go to college and one day enter the workforce to 
share his amazingly unique mind. 
One in five children have dyslexia. Only a small percentage of those children will be eligible for 
special education. Many won't NEED special education. But they will be failed if schools don't 
know how to teach structured literacy. Unfortunately, those kids will notjust pick it up. 
Reading needs to be learned. Literacy IS important. Knowing how to teach reading is
important. l hope you will support this bill to give teachers the tools they need to open the 
world of literacy to all students. 
This bill is a start. It needs to be so much more — but if this is the step that people are ready to 
take. Please take it. 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide input and I am available for any questions. 
77%as
