Testimony of Nicole Flynn 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
LD1‘56Z, An Act to Provide Grants to Support Reading Proﬁciency Programming in 
(574-' Schools 
May 2, 2023 
Good morning. I am a teacher and a parent of two children who attend Maine schools. I 
appreciate the opportunity to speak today, about this crucial issue affecting Maine 
children. We have decades of scientific research on how learning happens in the brain, 
and what types of reading instruction are effective. We owe it to our children to use 
thesemethods to teach them to read and write. l have been a kindergarten teacher, and 
I'm currently a response-to-intervention teacher for children in grades kindergarten 
through grade two. Students see me when they are determined to need intervention in 
reading or math to reach typical grade level standards. 
l am here today to advocate for adding language to LD 1526 that requires schools to 
choose a program that aligns with Structured Literacy standards or the science of 
reading. 
This year, for the ﬁrst time, l was given the opportunity to use a structured literacy 
program to teach reading. Structured Literacy includes the foundational building blocks 
of literacy, decoding, spelling, as well as comprehension and written expression. As with 
math instruction, children are taught certain skills, practice the skills until they are 
solidified and then move on to the next. They read books that re-inforce what they have 
learned. As they gain more understanding of “the code” of English, they can read books 
with increasing complexity. lt’s been wonderful to see smiles on the face of a second 
grader who told me she hated reading at the beginning of the year, and now has 
realized she can read chapter books and she actually enjoys them! 
The results my team and l have seen this year have been exciting. I have worked with 
children who have been later evaluated to have learning disabilities and moved on to 
more individualized instruction in special education. l have worked with both native 
English speakers and English language learners, and every one of these students has 
shown a great deal of growth this year. ln most of my career, I have been taught to use 
balanced literacy programs. This is usually called readers workshop, and consists ofa 
teacher-led mini-lesson focusing on a reading strategy, and then 20-30 minutes of 
independent and partner reading as the teacher meets with small groups. Especially in 
kindergarten, this experience is, at best, most of the children looking at the pictures in
books. l didn't understand the problems with these methods until my second daughter 
was in first grade. The balanced literacy curriculum masks signs of dyslexia. 
Balanced literacy begins in kindergarten with books that have predictable patterns. For 
instance, “on a sunny day, l swing. Next page, "On a sunny day, l climb.” Accompanied 
by pictures of a child doing these activities. This is an example of a book used for an 
assessment. The teacher is directed to read an introduction to the student which 
includes the phrase that will be on every page. Then the child just needs to look at the 
picture. Vlﬁth this used as a measurement of reading ability, my daughter raised no red 
flags in kindergarten. 
It is a well-known fact that early intervention changes literacy outcomes for kids like my 
daughter. By first grade, there was some concern, and she started seeing an RTI 
teacher. By the end of 2nd grade we requested that the school evaluate her for learning 
disabilities. At the meeting, it was questioned whether one year “behind benchmark ” 
was far enough behind to require an evaluation. The evaluation revealed that she had 
dyslexia. l include this piece of our stoiy to say that l am an educator, and I happened to 
be working in RTI when l noticed that my child needed more help, than to be told to, 
“read more!" Getting an evaluation for my daughter was a challenging process. There 
are kids in every classroom who have the same disability as Lexi, but have been sliding 
through each year, and being told to “read more” and to “focus!” We know that for the 
vast majority of readers, explicit systematic instruction is beneﬁcial. For a smaller 
percentage, like Lexi, structured literacy is vital. 
My daughter was ﬁrst introduced to structured literacy, during the summer between 4th 
and 5th grade. We drove her from Brunswick to Cape Elizabeth where she attended a 
program from 8:00 to 12:00 ﬁve days a week for 4 weeks. It was an intensive program 
with only 5 minute breaks between each hour of instruction. l expected her to complain 
about it, but what happened was that she’d come home excited to tell me what she had 
learned and happy. She said, “They know how to teach me the way my brain learns!" 
There is no reason we can’t do this for kids in the public school system. Structured 
literacy works, and we need to implement these programs as soon as possible. 
Thank you, 
Nicole Flynn
