Page 1 of 3 
 Testimony from the University of Maine System from Sara Flanagan , University of Maine , 
Rachel Brown -Chidsey , University of Southern Maine , and Kathryn Will , University of 
Maine Farmington , Regarding LD 1526, An Act to Provide Grants to Support Reading 
Proficiency Programming in Schools - May 2, 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Committee on Education  and 
Cultural Affairs: Thank you for your continued support of Maine students and their teachers. Our 
names are Sara Flanaga n (University of Maine), Rachel Brown -Chidsey (University of Southern 
Maine) and Kathryn Will (University of Maine Farmington). We are all teacher education faculty 
and teach courses in and support Maine teachers’ reading instruction.   
 
Together, we rece ntly surveyed 346 Maine elementary general education and special education 
teachers on their reading instructional and assessment practices, challenges they face teaching 
reading, what works well teaching reading, and other needs they may have. We also int erviewed 
45 teachers to better understand these areas. Most of the teachers in our study taught in public 
schools and were experienced educators having taught for more than 10 years. We are writing to 
overview the findings of our research in hopes that it will inform your consideration of LD 1526, 
An Act to Provide Grants to Support Reading Proficiency Programming in Schools . 
 
Reading is an essential skill, not just for school, but also for employment, socialization, and day -
to-day activities from reading a bus schedule to a menu. Yet, reading is difficult for many 
students, necessitating the importance of effective instruction. On the National Assessment of 
Education Progress , 29% of Maine students at the 4th and 8th grade levels performed at or above 
the proficient level in reading; this suggests that the remaining students may have unmet needs in 
reading and/or reading difficulties. Organizations like the National Council for Learning 
Disabilities  and the National Center for Educational Statistics  estimate that 20% of all K -12 
students n ationally have a learning disability; the majority of these students have difficulties 
reading and writing, and most are educated in the K -12 general education, inclusive classroom.  
 
In our study, almost 98% of the Maine teachers reported that they taught  students who struggle 
in reading and about 91% teach students with learning disabilities. Essentially, almost all of the 
teachers teach students with reading needs. When asked what aspects of reading their students 
experience difficulties with (e.g., flue ncy, comprehension, phonological awareness, phonics), 
teachers most commonly listed multiple. This suggests that difficulties reading are not isolated to 
any one specific area nor that difficulties are only experienced by their students with learning 
disab ilities. Because the reading needs for Maine’s students are broad and multifaceted, this 
supports the importance of effective reading instruction to improve students’ reading 
proficiency.   
 
Teachers reported a variety of reading curriculums, and that they  teach and assess students in 
both the foundational skills of reading (i.e., phonological awareness, phonics and decoding) and 
higher -level skills like reading comprehension, fluency, and vocabulary. These skills are critical 
areas of reading that Maine te achers are teaching and assessing. However, general education 
teachers suggested that they may not always collaborate with a special education teacher for 
reading instruction. This could be problematic as struggling readers receiving special education 
services may need reading support in both the general education and special education settings; 
students with disabilities also often receive instruction which includes reading (e.g., reading a 
worksheet in science, reading a story in English/Language Arts) in  the general education setting.  
Page 2 of 3 
  
When asked about their level of confidence in teaching reading, 87% rated themselves as very 
confident or confident on a scale of not confident all to very confident; specific to teaching 
reading to students with learning disabilities, only one third said that they were confident or very 
confident. Additionally, slightly over 76% reported being confident in their abilities to select 
research -based (i.e., effective) reading instructional strategies to support all students’ r eading 
compared to approximately 40% specific to selecting strategies for students with a learning 
disability. Teachers attributed their confidence level, including lower confidence levels, in 
teaching reading to several factors including the following: (1 ) if they had access to an effective 
curriculum and other materials; (2) if their current curriculum was effective for their students’ 
reading needs; (3) prior receipt of training and coursework on reading; (4) their prior experiences 
teaching reading; and , (5) their level of knowledge of reading, including instructional strategies. 
Similarly, teachers shared that these areas also described the barriers they faced regarding 
reading instruction and assessment, such as not having had a needed training, lack o f access to 
materials, or needing information on topics like best practices in reading. Teachers indicated they 
would like to have access to more training and resources to teach reading, including to struggling 
readers. Despite challenges, teachers were ve ry clear in both the survey and the interviews that 
they want to support Maine students in reading through effective instructional practices.  
 
The survey asked teachers what resources they needed to teach and assess reading. They listed a 
number of areas including access to professional developments and/or other resources (e.g., 
webinar, websites, coaches, conference, materials) on reading broadly and specific topics like 
strategies for supporting students with a learning disability and the Science of Read ing. Teachers 
also suggested that time and funding are critical for any reading curriculum or instruction. This 
also includes, but is not limited to, access to staff such as a reading specialist and having time to 
collaborate with other teachers to plan re ading instruction for their students’ reading needs.  
 
Based on our study data and other researchers’ publications on effective reading instruction, 
“good” reading instruction is comprised of several, intwined components including the following 
knowledge a reas (1) pedagogical (e.g., teaching strategies, methods, instructional activities); (2) 
effective reading instruction and best practices; (3) how students learn to read and why they may 
experience difficulties; (4) how to identify reading strengths and ne eds to develop instruction; (5) 
how to be a “critical consumer” of information to evaluate the appropriateness of a curriculum or 
other instructional strategy for their reading instruction; and, (6) student engagement. It is 
important to note that effectiv e reading instruction is not just accomplished through giving 
teachers information to increase their knowledge in these areas or providing a new curriculum, 
but also that there is classroom application along with ongoing support (i.e., teacher receives a 
reading curriculum, gets training on it, uses it in their classroom, meets with an instructional 
coach to look at the students’ reading tests to determine if they’ve made growth in reading and 
areas of need). This was echoed by teachers in this study about the importance of teachers having 
support in selecting, implementing, and evaluating a reading curriculum.   
 
Our study resulted in the following key takeaways  relevant to LD 1526:   
 
1. Teachers may not universally be using or not fully using effective pract ices for reading in 
students with or without a learning disability,  but they want to learn more about reading 
instruction and want to support their students using the most effective instruction possible . 
Page 3 of 3 
 2. The importance of collaboration between general educ ation teachers, special education 
teachers, and other instructional staff to best support all students’ reading; and,   
3. The overall importance of classroom -applicable and easy -to-access information about 
reading instruction and strategies, struggling reader s, the science of reading, and other 
reading topics at the teacher preparation and in -service levels.  
 
The study supports not only that teachers see reading as a critical instructional area, but also that 
it is essential that there are initiatives to supp ort reading proficiency in Maine. We are happy to 
provide support and resources, including more detail about our research, to the Committee and 
the Maine Department of Education  as this legislation and others move forward .  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Sara Flanagan, Ph.D., sara.flanagan@maine.edu  
Assistant Professor of Special Education  
College of Education and Human Development, University of Maine   
 
Rachel Brown -Chidsey, Ph.D., NCSP, rachelb@maine.edu   
Associate Professor of Special Education  
School of Education and Human Development, University of Southern Maine  
 
Kathryn Will, Ed.D., kathryn.will@maine.edu   
Associate Professor of Literacy Education  
College of Education, Health, and Rehabilitation, University of Maine Farmington  
 
