 
 
 
  
 
 
March 19, 2021 
 
Committee On Criminal Justice and Public Safety Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE: LD 207 HP 128 "An Act to Transfer Responsibility for Administering the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code 
from the Department of Public Safety, O ffice of the State Fire Marshal to t he Department of Professional and Financial 
Regulation " 
 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and Members of the Committee,  
 
I am Carl Chretien a residential contractor in southern Mai ne, member of the Home Builders and Remodelers Association 
here in Maine as well as a State Rep at the National Association of Home Builders in Washington DC. I’m also a certified code 
official, third party inspector as well as a subject matter expert on building issues.  
 
This is testimony I gave at the public hearing on Tuesday, March 20, 2023 10:00 am, State House, Room 436 in favor of the 
bill LD 207 “ An Act to Transfer Responsibility for Administering t he Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code from the 
Department of Public Safety, Office of the State Fire  Marshal to the Department of Professional and Financial 
Regulation ”, l as the HBRAME has always in the past a supporter of the building codes to be a standalone department mf 
the state government.  We have had several roadblocks, the first one I remember                was having a statewide code which in 
2004 the state moved towards with the “Maine Model Building Code” enacted in April o f that year. The other was in 
jurisdictions under 4000 not have the funds or personnel to enforce the code. 
 
The HBR of Me has been a strong supporter of a statewide c ode with its own director and were behind the formation of 
the Department pf Building Codes and Standards under the dire ction of Richard Dolby. It has since been moved once to 
the DEDS which is formerly the State Planning office. It was then moved to the State Fire Marshall’s office becoming part 
of the there program. It is unfortunate that this move has had so me the same inefficiencies as the move before it, it is also 
unfortunate that person involved also do es amusement ride inspections which ha s nothing to do with building codes.  
 
As there are one if not two bills that are waiting for language that deal with builder licensing which in their best interest 
would have in their best interest at the Bureau of Professionalis m. Be it known the code officials get their certifications 
renewed thru the B of P which only makes sense that the co des reside their as well no different than plumbers and 
electricians. 
 
If you look at the other New England states this is how their models are, being that the codes are standalone from the FMO. 
 
Welcome | State Building Code 
Review Board | NH Department of 
Safety 
nh.gov   
 
Codes and Standards | Division of Fire Safety 
firesafety.vermont.gov  
 
 
 
 
Board of Building Regulations and 
Standards 
mass.gov   
 

 
https://ribcc.ri.gov/forms-resources/laws-rules-and-regulations  
https://www.sos.ri.gov/divisions/open-government -center/rules-and-regulat ions/building-and-fire-codes  
Connecticut State Building Code--
Regulations 
portal.ct.gov  
 
https://dos.ny.gov/laws-and-regulations-division-building-standards-and-codes  
 
  This is the same in Michigan, New Mexico, Florida and Louisiana. It only makes sense that it be standalone 
from any other department. You will here from other that  since this is public safety it should be in the public 
safety arena which is untrue as plumbing which is as equally a public safety issue was the first building code across the country developed by the federal government in 1928 under the direction od SoS Herbert Hoover being nicknamed the Hoover code. The plumbing code is under the B of P.  
I have spent the better part of the past twenty years trying to get this program in a place where it can thrive and 
be efficient. I see many distractions where it is now. This needs to be moved as the current fire marshal doesn’t need this on his plate and would make his performance a lot better and many of the issues that code officials and builders deal with are not relevant to the FMO.  At this time the surcharge from the commercial permits the state collects can easily be moved each quarter 
into a new ledger for this newly formed department. As the current person overseeing this now could then 
concentrate on the original tasks, he was hired for instead of filling in gaps that the FMO has. When this was looked in 2019 it was never disclosed the new duties of people hired for this. In my opinion we are not much better than then and the training while happens more is of no great significance than before either. As code official I have seek other resources for training to stay relevant in this field in order to not be bored to death. 
 
I will be forwarding to this committee ahead of tomorrows public hearing in the event this is truly pulled from the schedule as the public hearing notice in the paper today states  
 
 
 
  
 
  Sincerely, 
 
Carl M Chretien 
 
President 
TPI #29 
35 Berry Road | Saco, Maine 04072-9744 | Phone 207.284.5843 | Fax 207.284.5843 | Cell 207.229.5843 | Email carl-ch@chretiencons tructioninc.com

