 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 2 07 
As Amended by the Sponsor’s Amendment  
Resolve, to Direct the Department of Public Safety to Examine the Responsibilities, Fees, and Duties of 
the Technical Building Codes and Standards Board  
March 20 , 2023 
 
Senator Bibbe-Center , Representative Salisbury , and Honorable Members of the Crimin al 
Justice and Public Safety  Committee; 
On behalf of the Maine Real Estate and Development Association (MEREDA), I am pleased to 
submit this testimony in support of LD 2 07, as presented by the Sponsor’s Amendment, entitled 
“Resolve, to Direct the Department of Public Safety to Examine the Responsibilities, Fees, and Duties of the Technical Building Codes and Standards Board.”    
MEREDA has long supported a robust M aine Uniform Building and Energy Code and was one 
of the original supporters of adoption of the uniform code. Today, the MUBEC is taking on even greater significance as building codes evolve, new building materials and design styles emerge 
to battle climate change, and as much-needed new housing construction gets underway. As this 
important work ramps up, MEREDA believes it is appropriate for the legislature to direct the 
Department of Public Safety to consider how best to manage and support the MUBEC Board.  
The MUBEC Board plays a critical role in the implementation of the international building codes 
in Maine. The MUBEC Board reviews the newly updated international codes (including the 
International Building Code, the International Existing Building Code, and the International 
Energy Conservation Code). The purpose of this Board review is to determine whether any provisions in the international codes are inappropriate for Maine, and to amend the code as it is 
adopted to account for those changes.  
MEREDA b elieves the MUBEC needs additional financial support to assist in its important work. 
We believe a study to review where funds could be sought, what the best oversight agency for 
future MUBEC operations should be, and what considerations will be critical during code review 
and adoption. We also strongly support bolstering education and resources for the Code 
Enforcement Officers who enforce the codes on the ground.  
MEREDA appreciates the sponsor’s efforts at coordinating with stakeholders regarding this 
legislation, and strongly supports the enactment of a study. We look forward to being part of 
these ongoing discussions and thank the committee for its thoughtful consideration of this important measure.  
Please support LD 2 07 unanimously with an Ought to Pass as Amended report.  
Sincerely,  
Elizabeth M. Frazier  
On behalf of the Maine Real Estate & Development Association 
 
 
 
 
  
