Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association
In Opposition To
LD 207 -An Act to Transfer Responsibility for Administering the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code 
from the Department of Public Safety, Office of the State Fire Marshall to the Department of Professional 
and Financial Regulation
March 20, 2023
Sen. Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury and distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I providing testimony, in opposition to LD 207, An 
Act to Transfer Responsibility for Administering the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code from the 
Department of Public Safety, Office of the State Fire Marshall to the Department of Professional and 
Financial Regulation, on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association, which represents the interests of 
municipal government before the Legislature. The positions of the Association are established by our 70-
member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC), who are elected by the councils and selectboards of 
municipalities in each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts.
Many of the officials on our LPC where many hats include that of Code Enforcement Officer for 
their towns and cities. Since the training has left the Department of Economic and Community 
Development and has been placed with the Fire Marshalls office, Code Enforcement Officers feel better 
supported and more closely aligned with the life safety specialties that interest most closely with their 
roles. Previously the program was understaffed, underfunded and not a priority for DECD to promote 
investing greater budget resources into. This bill seems to be an attempt to again disrupt the program and 
make it harder to pursue future investment and expertise to support code enforcement activity. 
Officials believe moving this complex multi-discipline certification role out of the Fire Marshall’s 
office will again disrupt their technical support programs, and further make communication between all of 
the regulatory requirements to maintain their professional certification problematic. The is no compelling 
reason why the program should be removed from its current operations, though they do support attempts 
to collect greater revenue for its support and expansion. Life safety codes are the most important 
regulations that code enforcement officers must review and ensure and there is no nexus between that 
priority and the proposal to place the program into DAFS, 
Officials ask that you keep the current program within the Department of Public Safety and 
review ways to support code enforcement training more robustly, not disrupt it again. 
