TESTIMONY OF RICHARD MCCARTHY 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
OFFICE OF STATE FIRE MARSHAL 
(Oppose) L.D. 207 
"An Act to Transfer Responsibility for Administering the Maine Uniform 
Building and Energy Code from the Department of Public Safety, Office of the 
State Fire Marshal to the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation" 
Presented by: Representative Morris 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
AND PUBLIC SAFETY 
Hearing Date: Monday, March 20th, 2023, at 10:00 AM in Room 436, State House 
Good morning, Senator Beebe—Center, Representative 
Salisbury, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety. 
My name is Richard McCarthy, and lam the State Fire 
Marshal, I am here today representing the Department of 
Public Safety and the Office of State Fire Marshal to testify in 
opposition to LD 207. 
We understand the reason behind the bill as proposed but 
have some concerns about moving this program out of the 
Office of State Fire Marshal. This program started its life asa 
Bureau located in DPS after a bumpy start with staff leaving and 
no true direction, our office was asked to help keep moving the
program along. After a short time, it was determined that the 
MUBEC should reside within DECD. At that time the program 
was moved within DECD. The program remained there until 
2019 when the Legislature decided to move the MUBEC back to 
DPS, into the Office of State Fire Marshal permanently. At the 
time of the move the program came over with no staff anda 
limited income stream. Our office went through the process to 
create 2 positions within the Inspection Division to oversee a 
program that did not exist. Our first mission was to createa 
database to track certified Code Officials and third party 
inspectors. When we got the program the tracking system was 
not manageable and had to be replaced. 
After the tracking system was created, we were able to 
hire the 2 positions to run this portion of the office. The first 
priority was to create a workable training program for Code 
Officials who are employed by municipalities. The funding 
stream provided for this program has not been sufficient to 
allow us to have a true training budget. We have relied on 
grants and creative methods to fund training. At this pointl 
believe we have a training program that is serving the code 
officials well. Could we make it better most definitely with 
some funding we could expand the program to include more 
advanced training opportunities and possibly expand the 
program to allow builders to attend. 
This program has moved many times and at this point it 
needs to have a consistent home. l believe our agency can
provide that for the MUBEC program. Thank you for your time 
today and I would be happy to answer any questions you may 
have at this time or during the work session.
