Ann Sawchuck
Cumberland ME
LD 52
OPPOSE LD 52
Chairpersons Rafferty and Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee, thank you for reading my testimony OPPOSING LD 52, An Act 
to Allow Certain School Employees to Carry Firearms on School Property.
My name is Ann Sawchuck and I am a resident of Cumberland, Maine. I am the 
daughter of a public school teacher and for 10 years, following my retirement from 
business, I was a volunteer academic coach for ESL students in the Portland Public 
Schools. I am also a grandmother.
Maine has been fortunate to escape a mass shooting in our schools, maybe because 
our schools are now firearm free zones (20 MRSA 6552, Firearms), like Maine’s 
courts and the Statehouse. LD 52 will do nothing to increase school safety and much 
to harm it by intentionally bringing dangerous weapons into schools.
Under 20 MRSA 6552, Firearms, law enforcement officers are the only persons 
allowed to carry weapons on school property.  Arming teachers is a bad idea that 
would be ineffective and would drive more dedicated people out of the profession. 
Teachers want to teach, not carry guns. It would also increase the danger at school. 
Troubled kids would now have one more way to access guns. Trained law 
enforcement officers are the only persons who should have firearms on school 
property.  Arming teachers will make our children less safe.
And someone at the school would have to keep track of the crisis management and 
gun training of all the personnel who carried guns in the school.  And the location of 
the guns.  And the condition of the guns.  Because it is certain that if there were a 
tragedy involving a school board approved gun (school board approval is part of LD 
52) the school board or the school or the teacher (or all) would be liable. Our schools 
will now be more like armed forts or prisons.  That is not what I want for my 
grandchild.
I loved coaching in Portland.  I never felt unsafe or threatened.  The school was a 
welcoming and safe place for teachers and students.  Let’s keep it that way.
LD 52 is a bad idea.  Please OPPOSE it.  Thank you.

