 
  
Testimony before the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
LD 52 An Act to Allow Certain School Employees to Carry Firearms on School Property  
April 26, 2023   
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Committee,   
My name is Rev. Carolyn Lambert, and I am a resident of Kennebunk where I serv e as chaplain to the police, fire and 
EMT departments.   I am also the Vice -President of the Maine Council of Churches, an ecumenical coalition of seven 
mainline Protestant denominatio ns and two associate member churches who combined have 437 congregations across the 
state with 55,000 parishioners in their care.   I am OPPOSED to LD 52, 518, 1326, and 1557 , as is the Maine Council of 
Churches.   
I write  to you today  as a minister, a chaplain for first responders , a person of faith, and a former classroom teacher adding 
my voice to the  voices of countless  others asking  that legislation is not passed  that would  allow teachers and 
administrators  to ca rry guns in scho ols.  
As a person of faith, I join with my colleagues from many faith traditions – Christian,  Jewish , Muslim, Baha ’i, Buddhist - 
across Maine and across the  country who honor the sacred principles  of our elders and forbears .  Our faith teaches us that 
each of us is a precious  individual created  to live in  a community in which peace  – shalom  – is the vision. Such  a vision is 
not simply a community in which  there is no war but a community in which every person is valued, treated with respect 
and has the resources necessary to thrive, including education. And our faith teaches  us, as well,  that violence  will ne ver 
overcome violence.  I add my voice  to the  voices – past and present  – of those who choose justice  and peace  over violence 
and who recognize that violence will never  overco me, eliminate or subdue violence .  
As a c haplain for first responders  in my community I  seek and promote  the welfare of the officers, firefighters and EMT ’s 
with whom I work and I also honor their wisdom.   Many of the  officers  in this community , including  our Police Chief, 
Bob MacK enzie  (who is a wise and  compassionate professional ) do not support the arming  of teachers . Instead, they 
prom ote the placement  of well-trained , well -educated and courageous SRO’s (School Resource  Officers) in ou r schools, 
individuals  who fi nd meaning  and value not just in protecting children and teachers , but in supporting  them and working 
with them in countless  ways  every single day. I add my voice to the voices of those in law enforcement  who want teachers 
to teach rather than bear arms. These voices include  local LEOs, as well as the President  and Executive Director of the  
Major Cities Chiefs Association  and Michael Sausch uck, Maine Commissioner of Public Safety.   
Finally, as a former first grade teacher, I understand personally  the dedication , hard work  and passion that moves 
individuals  to become teachers. In this country and in this state, indi viduals have to successfully complete years  of 
vigorous and specialized education to be credentialed as teachers.  And t he majority of teachers, the  best teachers , are 
absolutely  passionate  about teaching and helping  their stu dents grow and  develop  in countless ways. But they aren’t 
trained or educated to use guns in school . It takes significant and continuing  education /training  for LEOs to be prepared  to 
use a fi rearm especially when responding  to a potentially  dangerous and chaotic situation . And anyone who has ever 
taught  in a classroom knows that even a simple  distraction – losing a hamster  or spilling milk  - can quickly escalate into 
chaos. I magine how quickly  a dangerous situation  could escalate into unprecedented  chaos ! That is not the  kind of 
situation  in which  a teacher  should be armed with a deadly weapon !   
I have heard the voices and the fears of countless  teachers , principals , administrators  and parents who are speaking out 
against arming  teachers  saying that such an initiative  is a disaster in the making  and that having guns in the  classroom  will 
increase  the likelihood that an innocent  bystander will be hurt or killed  in the ensuing chaos . And  Emma Gonzalez, who 
survived th e Stoneman  Douglas High School shooting, h as said that “Teachers do not need to be armed with guns to 
protect their classes; they need to b e armed with a solid education in or der to teach  their classes .” Teachers  throughout  
Maine and the country are decr ying the  possibility of being armed. And with an alr eady cr itical shortage of teachers , we’ll 
lose even more  good teachers  if these laws should pa ss. Therefore , I stand with the vast majority of  teachers , principals , 
administrators , students and parents  as well as the N ational Education Association, the  American Federation of Teachers , 
the N ational School  Safety and Security  Service and the American B ar Association , to say NO! Arming our teachers is a 
terrible  idea.  
For these reasons, I urge you to vote Ought Not To Pass  on these bills.   Thank you.  

Carolyn Lambert
Kennebunk
LD 52
 
Testimony before the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
LD 52 An Act to Allow Certain School Employees to Carry Firearms on School 
Property
April 26, 2023
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Committee,
My name is Rev. Carolyn Lambert, and I am a resident of Kennebunk where I serve 
as chaplain to the police, fire and EMT departments.  I am also the Vice-President of 
the Maine Council of Churches, an ecumenical coalition of seven mainline Protestant 
denominations and two associate member churches who combined have 437 
congregations across the state with 55,000 parishioners in their care.  I am OPPOSED
to LD 52, 518, 1326, and 1557, as is the Maine Council of Churches.
I write to you today as a minister, a chaplain for first responders, a person of faith, 
and a former classroom teacher adding my voice to the voices of countless others 
asking that legislation is not passed that would allow teachers and administrators to 
carry guns in schools.
As a person of faith, I join with my colleagues from many faith traditions – Christian, 
Jewish, Muslim, Baha’i, Buddhist - across Maine and across the country who honor 
the sacred principles of our elders and forbears.  Our faith teaches us that each of us is
a precious individual created to live in a community in which peace – shalom – is the 
vision. Such a vision is not simply a community in which there is no war but a 
community in which every person is valued, treated with respect and has the 
resources necessary to thrive, including education. And our faith teaches us, as well, 
that violence will never overcome violence. I add my voice to the voices – past and 
present – of those who choose justice and peace over violence and who recognize that
violence will never overcome, eliminate or subdue violence.
As a chaplain for first responders in my community I seek and promote the welfare of
the officers, firefighters and EMT’s with whom I work and I also honor their wisdom.
Many of the officers in this community, including our Police Chief, Bob MacKenzie  
(who is a wise and compassionate professional) do not support the arming of teachers.
Instead, they promote the placement of well-trained, well-educated and courageous 
SRO’s (School Resource Officers) in our schools, individuals who find meaning and 
value not just in protecting children and teachers, but in supporting them and working 
with them in countless ways every single day. I add my voice to the voices of those in
law enforcement who want teachers to teach rather than bear arms. These voices 
include local LEOs, as well as the President and Executive Director of the Major 
Cities Chiefs Association and Michael Sauschuck, Maine Commissioner of Public 
Safety. 
Finally, as a former first grade teacher, I understand personally the dedication, hard 
work and passion that moves individuals to become teachers. In this country and in 
this state, individuals have to successfully complete years of vigorous and specialized 
education to be credentialed as teachers. And the majority of teachers, the best 
teachers, are absolutely passionate about teaching and helping their students grow and
develop in countless ways. But they aren’t trained or educated to use guns in school. 
It takes significant and continuing education/training for LEOs to be prepared to use a
firearm especially when responding to a potentially dangerous and chaotic situation. 
And anyone who has ever taught in a classroom knows that even a simple distraction 
– losing a hamster or spilling milk - can quickly escalate into chaos. Imagine how 
quickly a dangerous situation could escalate into unprecedented chaos! That is not the
kind of situation in which a teacher should be armed with a deadly weapon! 
I have heard the voices and the fears of countless teachers, principals, administrators 
and parents who are speaking out against arming teachers saying that such an 
initiative is a disaster in the making and that having guns in the classroom will 
increase the likelihood that an innocent bystander will be hurt or killed in the ensuing 
chaos. And Emma Gonzalez, who survived the Stoneman Douglas High School 
shooting, has said that “Teachers do not need to be armed with guns to protect their 
classes; they need to be armed with a solid education in order to teach their classes.” 
Teachers throughout Maine and the country are decrying the possibility of being 
armed. And with an already critical shortage of teachers, we’ll lose even more good 
teachers if these laws should pass. Therefore, I stand with the vast majority of 
teachers, principals, administrators, students and parents as well as the National 
Education Association, the American Federation of Teachers, the National School 
Safety and Security Service and the American Bar Association, to say NO! Arming 
our teachers is a terrible idea.
For these reasons, I urge you to vote Ought Not To Pass on these bills.  Thank you.

