Testimony against Bill LD 52 Cathy Daphna Harris 
Dear distinguished members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. My name is 
Cathy Harris and I am a retired school teacher with over 28 years of experience both in the 
regular classroom and as a Special Education Teacher. 
If teachers are armed that introduces a loaded weapon into the environment of our most 
vulnerable students, those with behavior health issues, emotional disabilities, autism and 
intellectual disabilities. The chances of a student getting their hands on that weapon is very 
possible. Young people who commit school shootings often steal their weapon from home. 
This bill puts the weapon right there in the classroom with them. Students in crisis may try to 
overpower their teacher. Incidents of students hitting, biting and pushing staff does happen in 
our schools. A few years ago I was pushed against the wall by a ten year old. 
Thankfully, there has been no school shootings in Maine but if guns are permitted in the 
classroom, there will be a shootings in one of our schools. This bill will cause the very act we 
are trying to prevent. 
Teachers do not want to be armed. I would have left the profession if my colleagues were 
wearing loaded weapons to work and I know many others who feel the same way. Teachers are 
not trained law enforcement. My husband is in law enforcement. He leaves the house every 
day with his weapon on his hip, wearing a bullet proof vest and his mental state is vigilant 
about what could happen that might require him to use his pistol. Teachers are thinking about 
instruction and nurturing students. They should not be preoccupied with having to use a gun. 
How are we supposed to take on the roll of a law enforcement officer, in a moment of crisis, 
while at the same time remaining responsible for the twenty or more children in our care? 
When an officer in Maine uses deadly force they are placed on administrative leave while 
the incident is investigated by the Attorney GeneraI’s office to determine if that force is justified. 
What kinds of policies would be in place for teachers? Would they, or their district be liable for 
a wrongful shooting or an accident ’? What if a school shooting occurred and the armed teacher 
failed to stop it. Would they be held liable’? This bill places teachers in an impossible situation. 
This bill does not take into consideration the views of the key players, teachers, students 
and parents. The parents I have spoken to do NOT want their chiId’s teacher to have a loaded 
weapon at school and would remove their child from that class or that school if that was the 
case. 
Thank you.
