p HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE House STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
Q‘) TTY: (207) 287-4469 
Danny Costain 
292 Ridge Road 
Plymouth, ME 04969 
(20?) 852-1932 
Dan Costain@legislature.maine.gov 
Testimony on 
LD 52, “An Act to Allow Certain School Employees to Carry Firearms on 
School Property ” 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Wednesday, April 26, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished 
members of the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. I am State 
Representative Danny Costain, and I proudly represent District 33, Dixmont, Etna, 
Newport, Plymouth, and Corimia. It is an honor to appear before you today for the 
purpose of speaking on the merits of L.D. 52, “An Act to Allow Certain School 
Employees to Carry Firearms on School Properly. ” 
When faced with violence that threatens life, seconds count and help from police 
can be minutes (if not much longer) away. Active killer events can be over in 
minutes. According to statistics from the FBI: 69% of active threat events end in 
ﬁve minutes or less, and 67% are over before ofﬁcers arrive. 
This bill recognizes the fundamental right of self-defense and the defense of others 
when facing a deadly situation.A 
Contemporary training teaches that evacuation, when safe to do so, removes 
potential victims from the threat and sheltering in place by locking down and 
barricading to delay access to victims, which buys time for law enforcement to 
respond. It also prescribes ﬁghting to save lives when necessary because 
evacuation and sheltering in place are not viable options. 
This bill allows for school employees to possess a ﬁrearm on school property 
providing that: the local school board establishes a certiﬁcation standard and 
training program; the employee voluntarily consents to being armed; and the 
employee successfully completes certiﬁcation and training prescribed by the 
Board of Trustees of the Maine Criminal Justice Academy. r 
District 33 Corinna, Dixmont, Etna, Newport and Plymouth
The key to making such a program beneﬁcial is by requiring training and 
proﬁciency standards, something the Board of Trustees of the Maine Criminal 
Justice Academy are good at. 
Thank you for your time and I’ll be happy to answer any questions you may have 
District 33 Corinna, Dixmont, Etna, Newport and Plymouth
