 
Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
 
Board of Directors 
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medical Student Representatives 
 
Staff 
 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
 
www.maineaap.org   
Testimony of Deborah Hagler MD, MPH, FAAP in Opposition to LD 52, An 
Act to Allow Certain School Employees to Carry Firearms on School Property; 
LD 518 - An Act to Allow Armed Security in Schools and  LD 1557 -  An Act to 
Increase and Enhance School Safety by Allowing Individuals with Concealed 
Carry Permits to Possess Handguns on School Property. 
 
 
Senator Rafferty and Representative Brennan and esteemed members of the 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. Dr. Deborah Hagler, I reside in 
Harpswell ; I am a general pediatrician and I have practiced in Brunswick for 
the past 26 years. I am the immediate past president of the Maine Chapter of 
the American Academy of Pediatrics. 
 
 
Kids should feel safe at school. They don’t. I have patients that don’t want to 
go to school because they are afraid of being shot. I have patients that tell me 
they look around their classrooms to make sure they understand exit routes 
and cover and I have patients that tell me they feel anxious in classrooms when 
there is no clear way out other than the way they came in. My own children tell 
me they have grown up in the school shooting generation. Arming individuals  
in schools or  having armed guards in the schools will cement the fear that 
school is not safe.  
 
Firearms in the school setting create opportunities for further tragedies. A 
third-grade student in Texas recently found a principal’s loaded gun1  in a 
bathroom and then a short debate among teachers ensued to determine  if it 
was real. A calamity narrowly averted. The principal resigned. 
 
Fuses seem short lately and even in the circumstances of an ordinary mishap 
we have become trigger happy as demonstrated by a series of recent shootings 
of young people going to the wrong homes.   
 
What will happen when tempers escalate in a classroom and now you’ve added 
firearms to the mix. Will students really feel safe?  We know firearms in the 
home increase the risk of suicides and homicides by several fold. 2,3  
 
Having armed personnel in the school  will not make anyone safer; it is a recipe 
for future tragedies and regret. While it is truly laudable to wish to keep 
children safe at school and it is something we can all agree upon, this is not the 
path to take to keep our children safer at school. Please vote ought not to pass 
for LD 52, LD 518 and LD1557. 
 
1.https://www.texastribune.org/2023/02/23/texas-superintendent-gun-school-safety/  
2NEJM Suicide in Home and Fire Arms - 
3. Annals of Internal Medicine- Homicide Deaths and Firearms in the Home  
 
 
 
 
 
  
