No on LD52, LD518, LD1557 – April 26, 2023 
 
My name is Emily Chaleff and I am a 15-yr resident of Portland, ME.  I grew up in a home where 
firearms were safely kept and locked away.  The firearms were used for sport and for hunting.  
At age 10 I started target shooting and for a long time my father was a skeet shooter and 
hunter.  My son will attend a camp this summer where he will also learn to shoot rifles. I am 
here to voice my strong opposition to LD52, LD518, and LD1557.  
 
I am also a mom of two boys, ages 9 and 11 in the Portland Public Schools.  I am also the sister 
of Alice, my sister who stood on a street corner in my original hometown of Highland Park, IL 
this summer, on American Independence Day, July 4th.  As a man rained bullets down from 
directly above her, killing 5 parade-goers and gravely injuring 43 more – including a 9 yr old 
child who is paralyzed from the waist down. She was able to run away with her life. My 9 yr old 
niece Rosie was able to do the same.  
 
There were many armed officers at the parade that day, and they could not get the gunman, 
that would happen 8 hrs later, and thankfully they did not take out their guns, because they 
knew they would only hurt those around them.  Thankfully there was no vigilante justice from 
someone with a concealed weapon, where more stray bullets would have hit more children.  
 
We do not want guns in our schools! Stop! Stop making guns a forced part of our lives and our 
children’s lives. When my 9 yr old, Asher, heard that there were people in Maine who wanted 
to arm teachers in schools he asked if he could be home-schooled. More guns = more death. As 
we all know, gun death is the leading cause of death of children in this country. The guns will 
make our schools more dangerous as the chances of an accidental shooting will greatly 
increase. The chances of a teacher or officer overreacting to a fight or argument will only 
increase the chance of our children dying in school.  For the love of God, please stop trying to 
put guns in our schools.  Please keep our children safe.   
 
Emily Chaleff 
81 Brighton Avenue  
Portland, ME 04102 
207-321-9421 
emilykaterose@gmail.com     
