Episcopal Diocese of Maine, Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, Presbyterian Church (USA), 
Religious Society of Friends, Unitarian Universalist Association, United Church of Christ, United Methodist Church  
 
Testimony before the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
LD 52 An Act to Allow Certain School Employees to Carry Firearms on School Property 
April 26, 2023 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Committee, 
 
My name is Jane Field and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Council of Churches, an ecumenical coalition of 
seven mainline Protestant denominations: Episcopal, Lutheran, Methodist, Presbyterian, Quaker, Unitarian Universalist 
and the United Church of Christ, and two associate member churches, who combined have 437 congregations across the 
state with 55,000 parishioners in their care.  We are OPPOSED to LD 52, 518, 1326, and 1557. 
 
The idea of arming teachers with guns is often circulated after school shootings. It gained attention after the massacre at 
Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut, in 2012—I know this firsthand because I was serving a church 
just one town over from Newtown when it happened.  I met families who lost someone that day.  I met first responders 
and clergy who dealt with the horrific aftermath.  But it wasn’t these survivors and first responders who started advocating 
for arming teachers.  They opposed it.  Instead, they established the nonprofit Sandy Hook Promise to develop programs 
that research has proven actually save lives and prevent school shootings—and none of these involve putting guns in the 
hands of school employees. 
 
Retired Montana Principal John Moffatt, who was shot by a student at school in 1986, says arming teachers and school 
staff is not the right way to respond to the threat of school shootings and he actively campaigns in state legislatures around 
the country against bills like LD 52, 518, 1326 and 1557. 
 
In fact, the research journal Education Week has spoken to many school shooting survivors who think arming school 
employees with guns is a bad idea. And the data supports their beliefs. There is no evidence from actual incidents that 
having an armed staff person would have made any difference in the outcome. All the major teacher, principal, school 
employee, and school security organizations oppose guns in schools, except when carried by a police or security officer. 
Most teachers believe that arming themselves—and their peers—would make schools less safe. And so do most 
Americans. 
 
But I am not a teacher, or a principal.  I am a Presbyterian minister who leads a coalition of Protestant denominations here 
in Maine.  And while we agree that arming school employees would make schools less safe, we also believe escalating 
gun violence by adding more guns into the equation violates a central tenet of our faith: that we are called to build a 
community by turning swords into plowshares, following in the way of Jesus who never acted violently when he fought 
injustice or defended the innocent but sought to embody the prophets’ visions of a kin-dom where lions lie down with 
lambs and peacemakers are blessed. 
 
We agree with Rabbi Shana Mackler who spoke after the recent Covenant School shooting in Nashville, calling out the 
“idolatry” of the Second Amendment, saying, “As a nation, we have been sacrificing to this idol, offering our loved ones 
up in schools and synagogues and churches and on street corners and in malls and in movie theaters.” 
 
And we remember the words of the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., who wrote, “The ultimate weakness of violence 
is that it is a descending spiral, begetting the very thing it seeks to destroy. Instead of diminishing evil, it multiplies it. …  
So it goes. Returning violence for violence multiplies violence, adding deeper darkness to a night already devoid of stars. 
Darkness cannot drive out darkness: only light can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate: only love can do that.” [Where Do 
We Go from Here: Chaos or Community? (1967)]  
 
For these reasons, we, as people of faith, urge you to vote Ought Not To Pass on these bills.  Thank you. 

Jane Field
Maine Council of Churches
LD 52
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Committee,
My name is Jane Field and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Council of 
Churches, an ecumenical coalition of seven mainline Protestant denominations: 
Episcopal, Lutheran, Methodist, Presbyterian, Quaker, Unitarian Universalist and the 
United Church of Christ, and two associate member churches, who combined have 
437 congregations across the state with 55,000 parishioners in their care.  We are 
OPPOSED to LD 52, 518, 1326, and 1557.
The idea of arming teachers with guns is often circulated after school shootings. It 
gained attention after the massacre at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, 
Connecticut, in 2012—I know this firsthand because I was serving a church just one 
town over from Newtown when it happened.  I met families who lost someone that 
day.  I met first responders and clergy who dealt with the horrific aftermath.  But it 
wasn’t these survivors and first responders who started advocating for arming 
teachers.  They opposed it.  Instead, they established the nonprofit Sandy Hook 
Promise to develop programs that research has proven actually save lives and prevent 
school shootings—and none of these involve putting guns in the hands of school 
employees.
Retired Montana Principal John Moffatt, who was shot by a student at school in 1986,
says arming teachers and school staff is not the right way to respond to the threat of 
school shootings and he actively campaigns in state legislatures around the country 
against bills like LD 52, 518, 1326 and 1557.
In fact, the research journal Education Week has spoken to many school shooting 
survivors who think arming school employees with guns is a bad idea. And the data 
supports their beliefs. There is no evidence from actual incidents that having an armed
staff person would have made any difference in the outcome. All the major teacher, 
principal, school employee, and school security organizations oppose guns in schools,
except when carried by a police or security officer. Most teachers believe that arming 
themselves—and their peers—would make schools less safe. And so do most 
Americans.
But I am not a teacher, or a principal.  I am a Presbyterian minister who leads a 
coalition of Protestant denominations here in Maine.  And while we agree that arming
school employees would make schools less safe, we also believe escalating gun 
violence by adding more guns into the equation violates a central tenet of our faith: 
that we are called to build a community by turning swords into plowshares, following 
in the way of Jesus who never acted violently when he fought injustice or defended 
the innocent but sought to embody the prophets’ visions of a kin-dom where lions lie 
down with lambs and peacemakers are blessed.
We agree with Rabbi Shana Mackler who spoke after the recent Covenant School 
shooting in Nashville, calling out the “idolatry” of the Second Amendment, saying, 
“As a nation, we have been sacrificing to this idol, offering our loved ones up in 
schools and synagogues and churches and on street corners and in malls and in movie 
theaters.”
And we remember the words of the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., who wrote,
“The ultimate weakness of violence is that it is a descending spiral, begetting the very
thing it seeks to destroy. Instead of diminishing evil, it multiplies it. …  So it goes. 
Returning violence for violence multiplies violence, adding deeper darkness to a night
already devoid of stars. Darkness cannot drive out darkness: only light can do that. 
Hate cannot drive out hate: only love can do that.” [Where Do We Go from Here: 
Chaos or Community? (1967)]
For these reasons, we, as people of faith, urge you to vote Ought Not To Pass on these
bills.  Thank you.

