Janice Vance
Kennebunk
LD 52
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the 
Education & Cultural Affairs Committee. My name is Janice Vance and I am a 
resident of Kennebunk – one of Senator Rafferty’s constituents. I am also a member 
of the Maine Gun Safety Coalition. I cannot attend the hearing today. I am opposed to
LD 52, which pre-supposes that school employees actually want to carry firearms. 
The vast majority do not.  Also, school employees are human: in other states that 
allow them to carry firearms in schools, teachers and other employees have left 
firearms in bathrooms, accidentally discharged firearms in classrooms, and were 
careless enough that students were able to steal their firearms. If there was ever an 
actual active shooter situation, police responding to it could easily mistake an armed 
school employee for the shooter. The delusion that an armed teacher or school 
employee with a gun can stop a mass shooter is just that, a delusion, because most 
school shooters use AR-type weapons of war that shoot hundreds of bullets in just a 
few moments.  I question the so-called “training prescribed by the Board of Trustees 
of the Maine Criminal Justice Academy” cited in the bill. There are dozens of courses
offered at the Academy, all designed to train police and corrections officers. The bill 
says the school employee isn’t authorized to exercise law enforcement powers, yet the
employee is required to take the same courses as law enforcement? If a school board 
has to determine which courses qualify, doesn’t that make them legally liable if an 
employee’s firearms is responsible for a death or injury? Taking any of these courses 
requires a huge time commitment as well as a financial outlay. Would taxpayers 
(already concerned about the cost of school budgets in most towns) want to pay for 
someone’s time, as well as the cost of the course, only to risk kids’ lives and put the 
school district at risk for potential lawsuits? Please do not advance this bill, and thank 
you for your time.
