Joan Barker
Portland Public Schools
LD 52
I am a Middle School teacher in Portland. I have previously worked as a defense 
contractor teaching ESL overseas, including an assignment working in a combat zone.
To come home from that experience and see bills like this being proposed makes my 
heart sink. I am left in shock and disgust that we are normalizing our public schools 
becoming more and more like combat zones instead of safe, supportive learning 
environments. I believe the best way to achieve this is to address the root causes, not 
the symptoms of, mass shootings. We must lobby for stronger laws that prohibit 
individuals from accessing the weapons that cause these shootings, not further 
endanger staff and students by introducing more weapons in classrooms. Furthermore,
I find it appalling the lack of thought and detail that have gone into these bills- a lack 
of which only further puts students and staff at risk. For example, in LD 52, the 
language about permitting someone to "possess or discharge a firearm for the purpose
of enhancing the safety and security" provides no detail as to what qualifies as 
"enhancing safety" and could potentially run into the same fatal loopholes as "Stand 
Your Ground" where the carrier is the arbiter of what qualifies as enhancing security. 
It is also very concerning that there is not language discussing safety protocols for 
staff or personnel who are carrying weapons on school grounds (proper storage, 
holstering, clearing, etc.). As someone who worked on a military base and 
understands all of the safety protocols and regulations needed to secure an area in 
which multiple personnel are carrying loaded weapons, it is beyond shocking that 
such life and death protocols are not even mentioned in this, or related bills, before 
the legislature. Having been witness to the damage of accidental discharge in those 
circumstances, and the lingering and heightened anxiety this causes, I can only 
imagine what an environment this would create in our schools. I firmly stand in 
opposition of these bills and the inevitable death and danger they would create. 
