Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
immediate Past President 
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
Board of Directors 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP 
Valerie O'Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medical Student Representatives 
Staff 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME 04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
www.maineaap.org Maine Chapter 
lNC()RP()RATED IN MAINE 
. . » Ajgww 
American Academy of Pediatrics 
I)F.DiCAT!Zl7 TO THE i(i'§A!.TH OF ALI. CHlLDRP.Ni ‘ \ éokxlt n 
April 25, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Joe Anderson. I ama 
resident of Portland, a hospital-based pediatrician, and I serve on the board of the 
Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics. I am writing today to 
express our strong opposition to three pieces of legislation that would increase 
the presence of guns in schools: 
0 LD 52, An Act to Allow Certain School Employees to Carry Firearms on 
School Property 
0 LD 518, An Act to Allow Armed Security in Schools 
0 LD 1557, An Act to increase and Enhance School Safety by Allowing 
individuals with Concealed Carry Permits to Possess Handguns on School 
Property 
We ask that you vote Ought Not to Pass on these three bills. 
As individuals in positions of leadership or influence in our communities, I'm sure 
you've been asked the question ”What keeps you up at night?" As a pediatrician, 
that issue is gun violence. l have cared for children and teenagers who have 
suffered life-altering injuries or death as a result of firearms far more often thanl 
care to admit. Their injuries are seared into my memory and serve as a constant 
reminder of how unbelievably easy it is in this country for children and teenagers 
to have their lives interrupted by firearms, made possible by weak or misguided 
policies regarding gun safety. 
Gun violence is a public health crisis in the US, where deaths by firearms have 
outpaced motor vehicle accidents as the leading cause of death for children and 
teens aged 1 to 19 in the United States.‘ There are significant opportunities to 
improve these statistics with gun safety policies that are supported by a majority 
of Americans, and in many cases by most gun owners as well. 
These three bills are not what we would consider common-sense gun safety 
policies, and in fact, may make schools a more dangerous place for children. The 
Giffords Law Center‘ compiled a comprehensive list of nearly 100 publicly 
reported incidents of mishandled guns at schools in the last five years alone. 
These include incidents where a gun was left accessible to children, a firearm was 
discharged unintentionally, or a gun was used in times of personal stress or 
conflict, all taking place in school. in many of these incidents, trained school 
resource officers and security guards mishandled or unintentionally fired their 
weapons — incidents more likely to occur if teachers or other adults without 
specific law enforcement training are allowed to bring firearms to schools. Time 
and time again, research has shown that the simple presence of a gun in the 
house increases the risk for firearm-related injury or death.2’3 It's hard to imagine 
that the outcomes would be any different in the school environment.
Maine Chapter 
lNC()RI>()RA ‘I‘ED IN MAINE 
American Academy of Pediatrics
\ DEDiC!\T ﬁD TO THE HEMIH OF ALI. Cl*lll.DR§ ‘,N" a 
School has become an anxiety-filled environment for many students these days, 
given the prevalence of school shootings and the subsequent implementation of 
enhanced security practices and active shooter drills. We should focus on doing 
whatever we can to 1) keep kids safe while they are in school, and 2) ensure that 
the school environment is engineered to foster a successful learning environment. 
Adding more guns into the school setting has not been proven to support the first 
goal, and would likely add to the stress and anxiety many students experience. 
There is a strong public opposition to arming teachers: 7 out of 10 teenagers, 8 
out of 10 teachers, and 7 out of 10 parents oppose this approach. ‘ 
The American Academy of Pediatrics is committed to protecting children from 
firearm-related injury and violence. We support specific, research-supported 
measures to reduce the destructive effects of guns in the lives of children and 
adolescents, including universal background checks, increasing age limits for the 
purchase of certain types of firearms, instituting waiting periods for firearm 
purchases, establishing child access prevention laws and extreme risk protection 
order laws, and introducing bans on semiautomatic military-style weapons and 
high-capacity magazines. Legislation such as LD 52, LD 518, and LD 1557 are not 
supported by research, data, or public opinion, and we urge you to vote ought not 
to pass on these three bills. 
Respectfully, 
4r</Wear 
Joe Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Co~Chair, Advocacy Committee 
Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics 
I 
Giffords Law C enter to Prevent Gun Violence. Every Incident ofMisl1;mdlcd Guns in Schools. 
(https://giffordsorg/lawcenter/rcport/cve1'v-incident-otlmisliandlccl-guns-in-schools/). April 7. 2023. 
Centers for l)iscusc Control and Prevention. CDC Wonder. 2021 (litlps://wondcrsclc.govi). 
2 Linda l... Dulilberg. Robin M. lkecla, i\*lm'cie-jo Kresnow, Guns in the Home and Risk ofa Violent Death in 
the l>l0m<:: Fiiltlings from :1 Nmiorral Study. Arum‘/'cm'1Jozu ‘/ml Qflipzklerzzio/ogi/, Volume I60. Issue I0. I5 
Novcrnber 2004. Pages 929—936, llttpsz.//(l0i.o1"g/ ’l O. l 093.r’u_ie/k\vl1309 
3 l)ul1ll.1e1"g Ll... Guns in the home and risk ofu violent clezxtli in the home: ﬁndings from a national 
study. American Journal oi‘ Epidemiology. 2l)O4; l6lI)(l()): ‘)29-936, hﬂpsif/d0i.o1'g! l().l l26!'scie11ce.na|18I79
