Thank  you members  of the Education  and Cultural  Affairs  committee  for the opportunity  to submit  written  
testimony  in opposition  to the following:  
LD 52 An Act to Allow  Certain  School  Employees  to Carry  Firearms  on School  Property  LD 518An  Act to 
Allow  Armed  Security  in Schools  
LD 839An  Act to Increase  School  Security  Through  Design  and Protocol   
LD 1557An  Act to Increase  and Enhance  School  Safety  by Allowing  Individuals  with  Concealed  Carry  
Permits  to Possess  Handguns  on School  Property  
 
I was very disappointed  to learn  that these  bills had been  introduced  in our legislature  to force  Maine’s  public  
schools  to allow  loaded  firearms  including  handguns  in schools.  I thought  about  the dangerous  impact  it would  have  
on the lives  of Maine  students  from  the perspective  of someone  who has worked  in the Maine  public  school  system  
for over 30 years  now,  as a graduate  of PPS System,  a graduate  of the USM,  and as the mother  of a beautiful  25-
year-old  woman  whose  life was taken  in a single  act of gun violence.    
  
On January  8, 2010,  my daughter  Darien  was asleep  in her own bedroom  in her duplex  in Portland,  when  masked  
intruders  burst  into her room  and started  shooting.  She died on February  28, 2010.  Darien  never  had the chance  to 
reach  her full potential.  Darien  was born,  raised  and educated  here in Maine.  She graduated  with a degree  in 
sociology  from  Bowdoin,  and had an infectious  smile  and love for life. She had her whole  life ahead  of her. In fact, 
her goal was to become  an elementary  teacher.  My husband  and I decided  to dedicate  ourselves  to preventing  others  
from  the pain and suffering  we have  felt since  our daughter’s  death.  Today,  that means  asking  you all to vote against  
these  bills that would  put young  lives  at risk. 
 
As legislators,  you have  a responsibility  to take steps  to make  Maine  citizens  safer.  We can all agree  that school  
should  always  be safe places  where  students  can learn,  grow,  graduate  and go on to reach  their full potential.  As 
educators,  our primary  focus  is the education,  safety  and general  welfare  of students  and staff.  At no time should  
educators,  parents  or others  be encouraged,  permitted  or required  to carry  firearms  on school  property.  
 
The solution  to gun violence  and school  shootings  is NOT  to allow  more  guns  in schools.  These  bills would  make  
us less safe by allowing  more  guns  in schools.  It would  force  guns  into our classrooms,  cafeterias  and gyms.  It 
would  put all our students  and educators  at risk.  Our primary  focus  as educators  must  remain  the education,  safety,  
and general  welfare  of students  and staff.  At no time should  parents,  students,  educators,  or others  be encouraged,  
permitted  or required  to carry  firearms  on school  property.  No amount  of training  can prepare  teachers  and other  
school  employees  to act as police  officers  and provide  armed  responses  to threats  to school  safety.  The very 
presence  of guns  in schools  raises  the risk of both intentional  and unintentional  shootings.   
 
Polls  show  that students,  faculty,  and law enforcement  across  the country  overwhelmingly  oppose  guns  on school  
grounds.  So why would  our legislature  propose  these  laws when  there  is zero evidence  that making  guns  accessible  
in schools  makes  students  safer?  Rather  than passing  these  dangerous  bills I urge you to focus  on solutions  such as 
investing  in school-based  health  professionals  and resources  and initiating  effective,  trauma-informed  emergency  
planning  and implementing  expert-endorsed  school  security  upgrades.   
 
I can tell you firsthand  as someone  whose  life has been  forever  altered  by a single  act of gun violence,  that the 
decision  you make  about  this bill will impact  people’s  lives  in ways  you may not even  imagine  here today.  I urge 
you to prioritize  public  safety  by opposing  bills that would  allow  guns  in our schools  such as LD 52, LD 518, LD 
839 and LD 1557.  Thank  you. 
 
Judi Richardson   
184 Fellows  Street   
South  Portland,  ME 04106   
 
