 
 
In Regard to: 
 
 LD 52: An Act To Allow Certain School Employees 
To Carry Firearms On School Property 
 
LD 518: AN Act To Allow Armed Security In School 
 
LD 1557: An Act to Increase and Enhance School Safety by Allowing Individuals with Concealed 
Carry Permits to Possess Handguns on School Property 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, Members of the Committee on Education and Cultural 
Affairs:  
My name is Laura Parker. I am the President of Gun Owners of Maine and am submitting testimony on 
behalf of our Board of Directors, and our members who are unable to submit testimony on these 
proposed bills. 
We stand together in full support of LD’s 52,518, and 1557, because we know that Gun Free Zones of 
any type do nothing to keep Maine’s children safe. 
Maine schoolchildren deserve to have the same protection they are entitled to in nearly every other 
area of their lives. On average, Maine children in public schools spend upward of 30 hours a week in a 
Gun Free Zone, making them prime targets for violence, because criminals know that they will be met 
with very little initial resistance should they attack a school.  
Regarding LD 52: The language of the proposed bill is important. It allows a school board to establish the 
program if it so chooses. School employees have a choice to participate, or not.  
Regarding LD 518: Again, the language of the proposed bill is important. School districts may employ, 
may engage, may establish. Nothing in this bill requires any school district to take any new action while 
leaving those districts that do want to increase their security the ability to do so. 
Regarding LD 1557: All Maine residents who have a permit to carry a concealed handgun have 
undergone training and background checks. Their addition to a school zone would increase the safety of 
Maine’s school children attending public school by decreasing the response time of armed help in the 
case of an active shooter.  

I welcome any questions you may have, they can be directed to my email address as noted below. 
Thank you for your time and consideration, 
Laura B. Parker, President 
laura@gunownersofmaine.org 
