 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 52 (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Josep h Rafferty  
          Representative Michael Brennan  
          Joint Standing Committee on Education  and Cultural Aff airs 
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 52, An Act to Allow Certain School Employees to Carry Firearms on School Property  
 
DA: April 26, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 52.   
 
 There is no requirement in the proposal that a person authorized to possess  a firearm on 
school pr operty be permitted to possess a firearm under state law.  15 M .R.S. § 393.  This may 
create confusion as to whether a school board  could create a certification program to authorize  
possession de spite a section 393 prohibition.   (Possession of a firearm in v iolation of 15 M.R.S. 
§393 is a Class C or Class D crime, depending on the basis for the p rohibition .) 
 
 The statutory purpose  of the Maine C riminal Justice Academy “is to provide a central 
training facil ity for criminal justice personnel. The academy shall promote the highest levels of 
professional law enforcement performance and facilitate coordination and cooperation between 
various criminal justice agencies. ”    25 M.R.S. § 2801(1).   Training civilian school employees who 
have no law en forcement powers or duties is not within the statutory ro le of the Criminal Justi ce 
Academy.     
 
 The proposal in LD 52 should be considered alongside the federal prohibition established by 
18 U .S.C. § 922(q), which pro hibits possession o f firearms in school zones, to ensure that the LD 52  
would satisfy the exceptions in the federal statute, so as not to inadvertently  put a participa nt in such 
a program in violation of federal law.   
 
   
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
