April 26th , 2023 
LD 52 
“An Act to Allow Certain School Employees to Carry Firearms on School 
Property" 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My Name is Paul Stearns and I live in Piscataquis County in the town of Guilford. l 
have 37 years of experience as an educator in rural Maine schools and I ask that you 
give strong consideration to LD 52. 
When Representative Foster approached me regarding giving testimony on this matter 
of school safety l was more than willing to do so. 
Any bill with “firearms ” and “school” in the title is certain to touch off the usual heated 
debates with the same talking points and division that we are all familiar with. This isa 
“response time" piece of legislation and only allows a specially trained person to react to 
an active shooter and offer at least a chance of limiting injury and loss of life. 
lt is no secret that school shootings are all too prevalent and we need to work diligently 
to cut down on that rate. Despite the fact that Maine students and staff are far more 
likely to be harmed by lightning than by gunfire we cannot rest on the matter of school 
safety through preventative strategies. 
This bill is not primarily preventative in nature. This bill is for that horrid moment in time 
when all preventative actions have failed and an active shooter is within one of our 
public schools, systematically or randomly killing students and staff. 
We know for a fact that response time is absolutely critical in neutralizing an active- 
shooter. Columbine led to the current best practice of aggressively finding the shooter 
and stopping them. The Uvalde, Texas massacre was a grim reminder of that best 
practice. 
We know for a fact that average response times for emergency personnel in rural areas 
are much greater than in more urban ones. As a parent and grandparent, I cannot help 
but think of the difference in outcome between a 2 minute response and a 22 minute 
response. 
We know for a fact that in many cases law enforcement agencies are understaffed. The 
State Police are reducing their rural presence and staying closer to the I-95 corridor. 
Some rural police forces are disbanding.
LD 52 would allow local school committees, in conjunction with their law enforcement 
community, to have the option of having a specially trained armed person on site, thus 
cutting response time dramatically. 
Schools have contracted for armed security for decades. lt is common to see an officer 
at a basketball game, school prom, graduation or other major function. I believe that 
students and staff should have these same protections during routine school hours. 
Some schools have Resource Officers that may, or may not, be specifically trained in 
active shooter protocol, however many schools do not have this resource available. 
When you folks as legislators gather in the House chamber for special speeches and 
events have you ever noticed the folks in suits stationed on the perimeter of the room? 
These folks are armed and trained in communication and neutralizing any threats. 
They blend in, but they are present. Most of our hospital emergency rooms have 
trained, armed security staff; the same with federal buildings and court houses. Do we 
not owe that same chance for a swift response to unspeakable violence to our public 
school students and staff? 
There is one important preventative aspect of LD 52 as well; the sign posted at the 
campus entrance stating: “Our school system reserves the right to have highly trained 
and armed school personnel on site to protect our students and staff” might give pause 
to a potential intruder. 
Nothing in LD 52 suggests that the Maine Legislature and Congress do not need to 
seek preventative measures in an effort to reduce the frequency of these senseless 
events. It does allow local school and law enforcement officials to make the decision to 
significantly reduce active shooter response times if this tool fits the needs of their 
community. 
lf, heaven forbid, an active shooter is on a rampage in one of our schools, do we prefer 
wait 2 minutes or 22 minutes for a trained, professional response? 
I will gladly answer any questions that committee members may have to the best of my 
ability. 
Paul Stearns
