Peggy McGehee 
F almouth, Maine 
Testimony Opposing L.D. 52 (arming teachers) 
Dear Chairs Rafferty, Brennan and Members of the Education and Cultural Aﬁairs Committee: 
I am Peggy McGehee, a resident, former school board member and town councilor of the Town 
of Falmouth. I oppose L.D. 52, as someone who believes fervently that we need to protect our 
students, and who is part of a gun-owning, public service family. 
This bill would require teachers to have ﬁrearms both loaded and accessible, making 
students and school personnel less safe. In January 2023, a third grader found a Texas 
superintcndent ’s gun in the school bathroom. When the student reported the gun to a teacher, the 
teacher sent another student to the bathroom to verify the gun’s presence. Fortunately, the third 
graders did not ﬁre the gun. This incident is not unique. From 2017~22 there were nearly 100 
similar incidents, including when a teacher ’s loaded gun fell from his waistband duringa 
cartwheel. Guns have been stolen from teachers, been misplaced and later found in the hands of 
students, and have been intentionally or unintentionally discharged on school grounds. Some of 
these incidents caused eye, leg, foot and neck injuries. 
Armed teachers facing active shooters cannot just transform into a specially trained law 
enforcement officers. This bill does not propose any gtm use training program for teachers. A 
2019 ABA report found that in l60 active shooter incidents, there was only one successful armed 
civilian intervention--and that civilian was a highly trained U.S. Marine. 
In his analysis, “Arming School Personnel: School Safety Reform & Liability, ” , Pcpperdine 
Prof. Bernard James advises that arming teachers may subject them and their schools to 
liability for gun injuries: “T he single most important aspect” of arming school personnel is 
"liability to the school district and its employees...Once educators voluntarily assume a speciﬁc, 
additional safety policy by arming teachers or other school personnel, the law imposes a duty to 
exercise reasonable care in light of foreseeable and unreasonable rislcs' ...for example, failure to 
keep a ﬁrearm under lock and key would result in liability. [Further] the inadequacy of training 
and supervising armed school personnel will lead to liability under both federal and state tort 
standards. " Such potential liability and increased risk may not be insurable. 
In a school’s active shooter situation responding police may not be able to tell who is the 
shooter and who is the defending armed teacher. Thus, a teacher carrying a gun is put at risko 
being mistakenly shot. The risk is just as great with hoax swatting alarms. In Maine, last 
November, hoax swatting calls reported active shooters in ten Maine schools. The schools were 
put into lockdown, and area police rushed to the schools to intercept the shooters. In Portland, 
the entire police force of 40 on-duty ofﬁcers converged on Portland High School. Had these law 
enforcement officers who were searching for a shooter in these 10 schools come acrossa 
defending armed teacher, who knows what might have happened? 
Thank you for your consideration of these comments. Peggy McGehee pmcgehee4@gmail.con1
