Good morning, Chairs Rafferty and Brennan and Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee. 
My name is Peter Fromuth, I’m a resident of Yarmouth, a parent of a daughter in Yarmouth High 
School, and an attorney.  I speak today in opposition to L.D. 52, an act to allow certain school 
employees to carry, and, if they believe necessary to protect a school community, to fire guns on 
K-12 school property. 
In public policy, as in medicine, we should not let the cure be worse than the disease.  There are 
many measures we could take to reduce the danger of gun violence in our schools and 
communities, some are before the Legislature now.  This proposal is not one of them.  On the 
contrary, by expanding the presence of firearms in our schools - - potentially to an enormous 
degree - - it would increase risk to our kids and the staff, not reduce it.  In fact, elsewhere in the 
country it already has. 
Data collected by the Gun Violence Archive1 demonstrates that when guns are in schools or on 
school property dangers escalate.  The findings show numerous occasions when a teacher’s or 
staff’s guns end up in kid’s hands.  They are left in bathrooms, locker rooms, on bleachers at 
sporting events, they fall from a waist holster, or are simply forgotten on a desk, a shelf or in an 
unlocked drawer.  Sometimes they are stolen from teachers by students, sometimes accidentally 
discharged during a disciplinary encounter.  And sometimes an adult, a school employee even a 
father or mother, uses a gun against someone else, or even themselves.   
Considering that the unintended consequences of guns in schools are so often dangerous, and 
occasionally tragic, one would hope that the intended consequences, a reduction in school 
shootings, in fact occur.  Apparently that is not the case.  Rigorous studies, by the Journal of 
Adolescent Health and by the Rand Corporation found that arming certain school staff has not 
correlated with any observable reduction in the severity of school shootings. 
Rand also noted the lack of correlation with any increase in severity either. But that beggars the 
question.  If those studies show no reduction in school shootings while the incidents counted by 
the Gun Violence Archive show that as guns enter schools a plethora of dangerous, occasionally 
tragic, gun-related incidents, enters along with them, then why let guns through the door in the 
first place?       
Let’s not pretend that in schools all of the normal, messy stuff of life is miraculously suspended.  
Teachers are people and people are forgetful, distractable, sometimes careless, even negligent.  
Good kids can be defiant and act out.  Once guns are introduced all of the occasionally messy but 
normal stuff of school life can become deadly.  Let’s not do it.  Please vote ought not to pass 
L.D. 52.  
 
1 “Every Incident of Mishandled Guns in Schools”, Kelly Drane,  
  Giffords Law Center, April 7, 2023, a compilation and analysis based on data from publicly    
  reported incidents collected by the Gun Violence Archive from 2014 to 2021.  
 
 
