April 23, 2023 
 
Dear Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, 
 
LD 52 is a terrible bill for many reasons, but primarily because guns do not belong in school. My 
husband is a high school teacher and I retired from classroom teaching in 2020. We have spent 
our careers trying to give children a safe and stimulating educational experience, and reaching 
out to those marginalized children so everyone feels welcomed In our classrooms. Our schools 
are places of learning. You must not give in to people’s fear and the gun lobby’s talking points. 
Arming persons in schools will put everyone at risk of harm.  
 
Additionally, I find it unreasonable to ask our school boards to “set firearm carrying certification 
safety standards” on top of all their other important responsibilities. The idea of hardening our 
schools is the opposite of what we need to do. This bill is  yet another shallow ploy by the gun 
lobby and those legislators who benefit from the NRA to make guns more prevalent in our 
society.  
 
I say, “Enough is enough.” We must say “No” to more guns as the solution to the epidemic of 
gun violence. Let’s treat the disease at its root—by addressing the causes of gun violence 
through research-informed policies at the state and national level.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Robin Brooks 
(she, hers) 
 
47 Ivanhoe Drive 
Topsham, Maine 04086 
 
207-232-9734 
 
 
Robin Brooks
Topsham
LD 52
April 23, 2023
Dear Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee,
LD 52 is a terrible bill for many reasons, but primarily because guns do not belong in 
school. My husband is a high school teacher and I retired from classroom teaching in 
2020. We have spent our careers trying to give children a safe and stimulating 
educational experience, and reaching out to those marginalized children so everyone 
feels welcomed In our classrooms. Our schools are places of learning. You must not 
give in to people’s fear and the gun lobby’s talking points. Arming persons in schools 
will put everyone at risk of harm. 
Additionally, I find it unreasonable to ask our school boards to “set firearm carrying 
certification safety standards” on top of all their other important responsibilities. The 
idea of hardening our schools is the opposite of what we need to do. This bill is  yet 
another shallow ploy by the gun lobby and those legislators who benefit from the 
NRA to make guns more prevalent in our society. 
I say, “Enough is enough.” We must say “No” to more guns as the solution to the 
epidemic of gun violence. Let’s treat the disease at its root—by addressing the causes 
of gun violence through research-informed policies at the state and national level. 
Sincerely,
Robin Brooks

