www.FLDOE.org
1
Education ProgramCoach Aaron Feis Guardian Program
www.FLDOE.org
2
Establishing the Guardian Program 
On February 14, 2018, a gunman took the lives of 
17 people at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High 
School in Parkland, Fl. Coach Aaron Feis gave his 
life saving others. The legislature passed a bill 
creating the Coach Aaron Feis Guardian Program.
www.FLDOE.org
3Senate Bills 7026 & 7030
30.15 Powers, duties, and obligations. —
•Sheriffs are tasked with assisting district school 
boards and charter school governing boards in 
providing access to a Coach Aaron Feis Guardian 
Program to aid in the prevention or abatement of 
active assailant incidents on school premises. 
•Any person certified as a school Guardian has no authority to act in any law enforcement capacity, 
except to the extent necessary to prevent or abate an active assailant incident.
www.FLDOE.org
4•If a local school board has voted to implement a 
Coach Aaron Feis Guardian program, the Sheriff in 
that county shall establish the program to provide training, either directly or through a contract with 
another Sheriff's office that has established a 
Guardian program. 
•If a charter school governing board wishes to 
implement a Guardian program and the county 
Sheriff denies the request, the governing board may contract with a Sheriff in a different county.Senate Bills 7026 & 7030
30.15 Powers, duties, and obligations. —
www.FLDOE.org
5Senate Bills 7026 & 7030
1006.12 Safe -school school resource officers at each public school. —
•Each district school board and superintendent shall 
partner with law enforcement agencies or security 
agencies to assign one or more safe -school officers 
at each school facility within the district, including charter schools. District school boards must 
collaborate with charter school governing boards to 
facilitate charter school access to all safe -school 
officer options available. The school district may implement any combination of the options to best 
meet the needs of the district and charter schools.
www.FLDOE.org
6Baker County Guardian Program
“Our community is very thankful 
for these individuals, and their 
dedication to the safety of our 
students and employees.” -
Superintendent Sherrie Raulerson
Click here to view a 
brief testimonial .
www.FLDOE.org
7
Safe -School Officer Options
www.FLDOE.org
8Safe -School Officers
•School Resource Officers -Certified law 
enforcement officers who are employed by a law 
enforcement agency.
•School Safety Officers - Law enforcement officers 
certified by a law enforcement agency or by the district school board. A school safety officer has the 
power to arrest persons under the same conditions 
that deputy Sheriffs are authorized to make arrests.
www.FLDOE.org
9Guardians
•A school district or charter school employee or 
personnel, including teachers, who volunteers to 
serve as a school Guardian in addition to his or her 
official job duties.
•An employee of a school district or a charter school 
who is hired for the specific purpose of serving as a 
school Guardian.
www.FLDOE.org
10Contracted Private Security Guards
•A school district or charter school governing board 
may contract with a private security agency to 
employ an individual who holds a Class “D” and 
Class “G” license, provided the security guard has 
completed the Coach Aaron Feis training program.
www.FLDOE.org
11Pasco County Guardian Program
“It is a phenomenal working 
relationship because we train 
together, our tactics are the same, 
our procedures are the same... and 
if God forbid that worst day 
happens, we are in the best 
possible scenario to protect our 
students and our teachers .” -
Sheriff Nocco
Click here to view a brief testimonial .
www.FLDOE.org
12
Training and Screening Requirements
www.FLDOE.org
13Guardian Training
•Each Guardian candidate must complete a 144 -
hour training program, consisting of 12 hours of a 
certified nationally recognized diversity training and 
132 total hours of comprehensive firearm safety 
and proficiency training conducted by Criminal 
Justice Standards and Training Commission -
certified instructors.
•Though these are the minimum requirements, 
some Sheriffs’ offices may choose to require 
additional hours.
www.FLDOE.org
14Statutory Requirements
•Eighty hours of firearms instruction based on the 
Criminal Justice Standards and Training 
Commission’s Law Enforcement Academy training 
model, which must include at least 10 percent but 
no more than 20 percent more rounds fired than 
associated with academy training. Program 
participants must achieve an 85 percent pass rate 
on the firearms training.
www.FLDOE.org
15•Eight hours of 
instruction in defensive 
tactics. 
•Twelve hours of instruction in legal 
issues. 
•Sixteen hours of instruction in precision 
pistol.•Eight hours of 
discretionary shooting 
instruction using state -
of-the-art simulator 
exercises.  
•Eight hours of 
instruction in active 
shooter or assailant scenarios. Statutory Requirements
www.FLDOE.org
16Screening
•Candidates must pass a psychological evaluation 
administered by a licensed psychologist designated 
by the Department of Law Enforcement and submit 
the results of the evaluation to the Sheriff's office.
•Submit to and pass an initial drug test and 
subsequent random drug tests in accordance with 
the statutory requirements and the Sheriff's office.
•Successfully complete ongoing training, weapon 
inspection, and firearm qualification on at least an 
annual basis.
www.FLDOE.org
17Suwannee County Guardian Program
“The benefit to our community is 
that, folks in our county realize that 
we are serious about school security, 
and we are serious about protecting 
our students. We have had great 
success with the program .” –
Malcolm Hines, School Safety 
Specialist
Click here to view a brief testimonial .
www.FLDOE.org
18
Certification
www.FLDOE.org
19•Training shall be provided by a Sheriff's office once 
the district school board and Sheriff's office 
approve implementing the Coach Aaron Feis Guardian program.
•The Sheriff shall issue a school Guardian certificate 
to individuals who meet the statutory 
requirements. 
•The Sheriff shall maintain documentation of 
weapon and equipment inspections, as well as the 
training, certification, inspection, and qualification records of each school Guardian appointed by the 
Sheriff.
www.FLDOE.org
20Recertification
•Guardians must be recertified on an annual basis. 
Any expenses incurred by the Sheriff's office to 
facilitate recertification are eligible for 
reimbursement by the FDOE using Coach Aaron 
Feis Guardian Program grant funds.
•Recertification requirements are determined by the Sheriff’s office responsible for the initial 
certification, in conjunction with the Department of Law Enforcement.
www.FLDOE.org
21
Funding
In 2018, the legislature appropriated funding for grants 
to Sheriffs’ offices who establish a Coach Aaron Feis 
Guardian program. $500,000 in recurring funds are 
made available each subsequent funding period.
www.FLDOE.org
22Funding Allocation
•Funds are provided to Sheriff's offices for 
screening -related and training -related costs, as well 
as to provide a one -time stipend of $500 to district 
and charter school employees, personnel, and 
teachers who volunteer to serve as a Guardian.
•Any expenses incurred by the Sheriff's office related to screening, training, or stipends is eligible 
to be submitted to the Department of Education for reimbursement.
www.FLDOE.org
23
Grant Reimbursement Process
www.FLDOE.org
24•Request for 
Application (RFA) 
submitted 
to FDOE by Sheriff's 
Office
•RFA routed 
for approval
Initial 
Approval•Request for reimbursement submitted
•Receipts, 
invoices, etc. 
submitted 
electronicallyDocumentation•Amendments 
handled accordingly
•Contract 
Summary 
Form 
executed
Award 
provided to 
Sheriff's 
Office

www.FLDOE.org
26•Q: Would the public 
know which individuals 
are Guardians?
•A:Some districts 
choose to have their 
Guardians wear 
uniforms, whereas 
some have them wear 
plain clothes.•Q: Would Guardians 
openly carry their 
firearms or keep them concealed?
•A:Each district has 
their own preferred method, some have Guardians open carry, 
and some have concealed carry.FAQ’s
www.FLDOE.org
27•Q: Are school districts 
required to participate 
in the Guardian program?
•A:No, a school district 
may choose to satisfy the safe- school officer 
requirement by appointing any 
combination of a 
school resource officer, 
a school safety officer 
or a school Guardian.•Q: Can individuals be 
trained elsewhere if 
the local Sheriff's office denies a request to 
establish a program?
•A:That individual may 
contract with another 
Sheriff's office that has established a Guardian 
program, given the superintendent and 
local Sheriff's office has 
been notified.
www.FLDOE.org
28www.FLDOE.org

