Testimony of Tara Williams 
before the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
in opposition to 
LD 52 An Act to Allow Certain School Employees to Carry Firearms on School Property, 
LD 518 An Act to Allow Armed Security in Schools, 
LD 1326 An Act to Increase School Security Through Design and Protocol, and 
LD 1557 An Act to Increase and Enhance School Saﬁzly by Allowing Individuals with Concealed 
Carry Permits to Possess Handguns on School Property 
April 26, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Education and 
Cultural Aﬁairs Committee, my name is Tara Williams, and I am a resident of Cumberland. I am 
a mom of two children in Maine public schools, one in elementary school and one in middle 
school. I oppose LD 52, LD 518, LD 13265, and LD l557 with every ﬁber of my being, asa 
mom and as an educator. 
I taught for many years, working in child care programs and elementary schools in Maine and in 
Washington, DC. I have been in many lockdown drills as a teacher and one particularly difficult 
day when it was not a drill. My assistant teacher and I cared for our class of 4-year-old students 
for several hours of lockdown while an active shooter was in the neighborhood. We were 
together in the classroom into the late afternoon and early evening, trying to shield the 
preschoolers from the reality of the moment and help them enjoy the “special” long day we were 
having, reading books, drawing, and ﬁnding ways to pass the time quietly with all the blinds 
drawn and the doors and windows locked. There is never a situation, even that scary lockdown 
day, where I would have felt safer with a gun in our school. 
The presence of guns in schools raises the risk of both intentional and unintentional shootings. 
Safe schools are the heart of our Maine communities. They are places for books and blocks and 
backpacks, not Weapons. Some states have made the mistake of passing legislation like the 
proposals in the bills before you today: 
v There have been numerous incidents where guns carried into schools were misplaced- 
guns left in bathrooms, locker rooms, sporting events, even an incident where a gun fell 
out while a teacher did a backﬂip. 
- There are also multiple incidents where guns were stolen from teachers by students, or 
cases where guns were misplaced and later found in the hands of students.l6 
o There have been several incidents of ﬁrearm suicides by faculty or staff at schools, as 
well as unintentional incidents by both school resource officers and teachers who 
accidentally discharged their ﬁrearms.i 
Gun safety legislation is rather misplaced in this committee and should be addressed in the 
Committee for Criminal Justice and Public Safety, with background checks, 72-hour waiting 
periods, extreme risk laws, and other evidenced-based policies that protect our children and our 
schools. Rather than try to pass these dangerous bills, please focus on real school-based solutions 
in this committee such as investing in mental health professionals and resources, community 
education and outreach led by schools that encourages the secure storage of firearms, and 
trauma-informed emergency planning with administrators and teachers.
