 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST  
 
L.D. 892 
 
AN ACT TO IMPROVE SCHOOL SAFETY AND PREPAREDNESS THROUGH COMPREHENSIVE 
HEALTH AND SAFETY AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLANNING  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affair s Committee. I 
am Eileen King, deputy executive director  of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of 
the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association,  neither for nor against  L.D. 8 92. 
 
School Boards a nd superintendents, without question, support school safety and already are required to adopt 
a comprehensive health and safety and emergency management plan  that is pu blic information. We work with 
our teachers and staff and local publ ic safety officials to keep students and employees safe. Current law also 
allows for a steering committee that includes school employees  and further stipulates that a steering 
committee mu st be formed if requested by a board member or full -time school empl oyee . 
 
Our associations have some significant concerns about this bill. Requiring nationally approved practices is an 
unfunded mandate. These programs cost money and they requi re time to train staff.  Many districts already use 
nationally approved practices while others have worked hard to develop a plan in collaboration with law 
enforcement  personnel in their districts. These decisions need to be made locally as safety plans a re tailored 
for individual districts according to their location, size and with input from the steering committee. What our 
associations recommend is a template that outlines the required components of a plan. This would provide 
consistency in safety pla ns across the state while allowing local conditions to determine  the contents of the 
plans.  
 
We solicit an d value input from our employees around school safety but question what is mean t by 
empowering school employees to have oversight regarding school safety.  We are conce rned about mandated 
requirements and believe a process already is in place that engages a ll stakeholders.  
