Calista Cross
Cornish
LD 1122
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, Honorable members of the transportation 
comittee,
My name is Calista Cross.I have lived in Cornish for 80yrs.I am here to speak in 
support of LD1122 to name the three bridges in the town of Cornish.
I have been working with DOT as first to find out what I need to do naming the 
bridges.I was told they were state owned bridges, so I looked & researched 
possibilities on the names.
A great example is the VETERANS MEMORIAL BRIDGE in Steep Falls, in which I
would like to see here in Cornish Bridges.
Cornish has grown so as I have watched the changes over the last 80 years.This is 
something I & many others would like to see added to this town to make it more of a 
historic town then it already is..
What a better way to add history to these lovely bridges & make them a bigger part of
this town & all surrounding towns.for our VETERANS, 911 HERO;S, HARRIET 
TUBMAN..all saving lives.
With all that said.
1. Bridge ,,VETERANS MEMORIAL BRIDGE "would be to honor in memory of all 
VETERANS who have served & still do with a POW & AMERICAN FLAGS on 
each side of the bridge posting.
2 bridge,,911 MEMORIAL BRIDGE" as a reminder we will never forget our hero's 
on that day. A 911 flag would be placed on each side of the bridge in their honor.
3 bridge,,"HARRIET TUBMAN MEMORIAL BRIDGE"..with a HARRIET 
TUBMAN FLAG on each side of the bridge in her honor for bringing slaves to 
FREEDOM.
This is history,,this is good for our kids to learn & remember as years go by.
This is going to brighten up our town of Cornish & all towns around us that are 
neighbors. Tourist will come in & see how much dedication & appreciation folks all 
around have given.
PLease give this a chance, if you it in your hearts.
I want to thanks TROY JACKSON & LILYWILSON for all your help getting me 
here.
I do hope this bill passes to make a better historic community for Cornish & all towns 
who supported this bill & look forward to the new historic look.
Thank you Calista CRoss Cornish

