 
 
 
April 24th, 2023  
 
Senator Stacy Brenner , Senate Chair  
Representative Lori Gramlich , House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC Testimony in OPPOSITION to L.D. 1411: An Act to Require the Adoption of Sector -specific 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Limits  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee:  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide 
business organization consisting of a netw ork of more than 5,000 small and larg e companies across Maine. The 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce is submitting testimony in respectful opposition to L.D. 1411.  
 
The Chamber supports a healthy environment,  one that protects our natural resources and our people . Maine 
businesses are committed to protecting our environment. In compiling our, “Making Maine Work” report, we 
surveyed businesses across the state and according to those businesses, “Maine’s two greatest economic 
development assets are its quality  of life and its quality of place." Our quality of life is measured in large part by 
the state's natural resources and its physical beauty. Maintaining the pristine nature of our surroundings is 
vitally important to continuing to attract more businesses. M aine has one of the most pristine and cleanest 
environments not only in our country but in  the world.  
 
We have two main concerns with L.D. 1411. The first being adopting industry specific greenhouse gas 
emissions is going to be very difficult to do and we believe could create an unnecessary burden on both the 
business community, and the regulators that will be responsible for doing this at both the DEP and DOT. It is 
unclear how a system like this would be regulated, how we would set emission standards, and then how 
companies will be needed to comply with this. We feel this could create uncertainty for the business community 
and that is always a concern.  
 
Secondly, the Chamber has been an active member of the Maine Climate Council since it was created. We  
support the high-level  goals of the Climate Council, and we believe that we should allow the work of the 
climate council to continue as is without any conflict. The Climate Council is working hard to address the goals 
of limiting the amount of greenhouse carbon emissions released in Maine, and since the Climate Council has 
been working hard at this for several years now, we believe L.D. 1411 is unnecessary.  
 
 
 In closing, we have confidence in the current regulatory structure that is in place at Ma ine DEP  and with the 
Maine Climate Council . We look forward to continuing to work with those agencies to help address the 
economic and environmental challenges that climate change poses on all of us. We would respectfully ask the 
committee to vote, “ought not to pass” on L.D.  1411. Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony. I am 
happy to bring back any additional information for the work session.  
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
