TESTIMONY OF HM“ gm,“9
, 
Brian Parke “mam” _,~, 
E 1» |_.o. 1411, “An Act to Require the Adoption modems of Sector-specific Greenhouse Gas '“_,,§_;,§
u Emissions Limits” (2ﬂ‘fl1li!~4?-1! 
Good morning, Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Committee 
On Environment and Natural Resources. My name is Brian Parke and I am the President 
and CEO of the Maine Motor Transport Association and a resident of Brunswick. The 
Association is comprised of more than 1,700 member companies, whose employees make 
up a large portion of the 32,000 people who make their living in the trucking industry in 
Maine. 
We are testifying today neither for nor against LD 1411, but to provide our input on the 
trucking industry ’s position if sector-specific greenhouse gas emissions were adopted. 
As a backdrop to our testimony on this bill, the MMTA understands the trucking industry ’s role 
in finding solutions to addressclimate change and we want to be a proactive participant. WeA 
have been active and engaged contributors on the Transportation Working Group of the 
Maine Climate Council and our industry remains committed to investing in cleaner 
technologies to move tomorrow ’s freight. 
It is important to note that our members continue to express a desire to find voluntary free 
market solutions that encourage our industry to be proactive and that setting limits like the 
ones proposed in this bill must be realistic, affordable and attainable. 
And the trucking industry has already invested in improved emissions through advancements 
in engine technology and fuel refinements. lt might surprise you to know that today’s new 
diesel truck engines produce 98% fewer particulate matter (PM) and nitrogen oxides (NOX) 
emissions than a similar engine manufactured prior to 1990. In fact every 60 new trucks 
purchased today roughly equal the NOx and PM emissions produced by a single new truck
purchased in 1980. That has been accomplished by serious investments to address a 
serious problem. 
All of this is to say that if LD 1411 passes, the trucking industry will be active and engaged 
with the DEP process to set sector-specific greenhouse gas emission limits because they 
need to be developed with a reasonable path to achievement in mind. 
We are optimistic about the promise of ZEV’s for commercial trucking applications, but the 
practical reality is that the technology and availability aren’t there yet. We are hopeful fora 
future that starts with electric trucks for local deliveries and transit buses, or maybe hydrogen 
or CNG trucks for regional haulers. While there won't be widespread use in Maine tomorrow, 
ZEV’s are definitely in the future for many commercial freight transport applications once the 
barriers and hurdles are able to be overcome and the economics improve for broader 
implementation. 
And if the plan includes widespread ZEV adoption, we continue to see a number of obstacles 
for our industry to overcome -_~ and, to be clear, there are a lot of smart people . working on 
these problems in an effort to minimize the time to deploy in order to maximize the positive 
impact on the environment. 
- The first obstacle is grid investment. What is needed, how much is it going to cost and 
who is going to pay for it? 
- Second is charging infrastructure and how that is going to work for the variety of 
commercial trucking applications, whether it is an over-the-road trucker, or a package 
delivery operation, or a logger in the middle of the woods, or a dump truck that goes to 
and from a remote quarry every day. In Maine, and in most places, almost every 
trucker hauls different commodities that weigh different amounts to different places at 
different times. This makes predictability and consistency hard to calculate for 
charging and investment. 
- There are also questions like battery life, the weight of the batteries taking away from 
payload, cold climate applications, range anxiety and then the exponentially higher 
cost of ZEV trucks. All of these things need to be answered before we get the cart 
before the horse on widespread adoption.
As you know, we are in what a lot of experts call the “Messy Middle” where an emissions 
solution (or a set of solutions) have been identified as the beginning, we know where we 
would like to be in the end, but getting there is clunky and messy and fraught with twists and 
turns that make it seem like we will never get there. But we will, eventually. 
Thank you for your consideration and for allowing me to testify. I would be happy to answer 
any questions the committee has now or at the Work Session.
