Testimony on Maine LD 1411 April 24, 2023  Setting targets to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is a critical step to address the climate crisis. While Maine already has a strong, bipartisan framework in place for greenhouse gas reduction benchmarks, those benchmarks are far in the future and at a relatively high level.  The recent IPCC Synthesis of the Sixth Assessment Report (AR6)1 has reviewed decades of scientific research on climate change to conclude that we have a rapidly narrowing window of opportunity to retain a liveable and sustainable future for all.   An axiom that many of us who actively work on reducing greenhouse gas emissions live by is “you can’t manage what you don’t measure”. Given the rapidly narrowing window of opportunity, we no longer have the luxury to only think on 5 to 10 to 20 year time scales. Rather we need to act now and measure the effectiveness of those actions on annual or biannual time scales. In addition, we require this information for each sector: transportation, residential, industrial, commercial, and electric power. This more frequent and sector specific accounting – if organized properly – will provide detailed and timely information to modify sector specific programs and efforts in the near-term to ensure we meet our longer-term sector-specific greenhouse gas reduction targets quantified in Maine’s Climate Action Plan.  This timely feedback is essential as the significant emissions reduction Maine has already committed to will take transformational change in all sectors of our economy. This rapid transformational change requires frequent feedback to modify programs and incentives to ensure we are meeting short-term targets.  For comparison, we manage state and municipal budgets for specific sectors on at least annual time frames to track spending against objectives. Accounting for greenhouse gas emissions should parallel the time frame used for state budgets to provide timely and sector-specific feedback so that we can track near-term progress towards our 2030 greenhouse gas emissions obligations of 45% gross reductions by 2030. Waiting 4 to 5 years to measure state-wide emissions reductions against our targets is not sufficient to manage what is arguable the most important action Maine needs to plan and implement on a time-scale of years, not decades. As the IPCC has clearly indicted, time is of the essence and we just cannot wait many years to measure our emissions reductions.  Cameron Wake, PhD Chair, Kittery Climate Adaptation Committee Josephine A Lamprey Professor of Climate and Sustainability, University of New Hampshire  1 IPCC AR6 Synthesis Report:  Climate Change 2023.  https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/ 
