Representatives Ankeles, Boyle, Dodge, Gramlich, Jauch, and Warren and Committee members of the 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Henry Sharpe, President of Frenchman 
Bay United. I am writing to submit testimony on LD #1411, An Act to Require the Adoption of Sector-
specific Greenhouse Gas Emission Limits. 
The Governor, the DCED, DMR, DEP, and Maine & Co. have all demonstrated active interest in increasing 
the aquaculture sector of Maine’s economy. However, Maine has recently been the target for several 
industrial-scale finfish operations on land and in the ocean that would use massive amounts of fossil fuel 
producing very significant carbon emissions. Without appropriate oversight, the zeal to develop the 
industry could saddle Maine with massive, long-term carbon footprints that would make it impossible to 
attain our climate goals.  
This potential is exacerbated by recent industry trends. As recognition grows that the long-term costs 
and risks of the finfish aquaculture industry offset short-term gains, bans have been placed on ocean-
based salmon farming on North America’s entire west coast, in Denmark and in Argentina. In January, 
Norway (the world’s largest salmon producer) imposed a 40% income tax on salmon produced in ocean-
based pens to incent more sustainable, land-based “true RAS” production. And, just a month ago, Nova 
Scotia put a moratorium on all new ocean pens that’s expected to last for at least three years. These 
actions are likely to increase the pressure and growth of Maine’s finfish aquaculture sector since it is 
largely unregulated, and license fees are thousands of times less expensive than in other regions. 
While shellfish production and some forms of kelp aquaculture have modest carbon impact, Maine’s 
growing experience over the last five years with both land and ocean-based industrial-scale finfish 
projects, tells a very different story. All Maine’s recent finfish aquaculture projects would use massive 
amounts of fossil fuel that would produce very significant carbon emissions.  
The fuel required for these projects would be used several ways: 
• Grid-based power (supplied mostly by coal and natural gas) to power generators to pump 
staggering volumes of water needed to support fish respiration and waste removal. 
• Because finfish aquaculture facilities are often in rural (land or ocean-based) locations without 
adequate grid-based power, diesel is often used to power generators to pump the water 
required to support fish respiration and waste removal. For example, the American Aquafarms 
project would have transported, stored, and burned 80,000 gallons of diesel every 7-10 days at 
their ocean pens to power ten, full-time, always-on 500kw generators for a total of 5MW of 
capacity. The Nordic Belfast project is expected to use 32,000 gallons of diesel every 7-10 days 
to power 2MW of full-time diesel generating capacity. 
• Diesel to transport cultivated fish to distant out-of-state markets by truck. 
• Diesel for long-distance transport for fish feed, fish waste, liquid oxygen, and diesel fuel by 
truck. To put the quantities for just the fish feed requirements in context, roughly a pound of 
feed is required to raise a pound of fish. The four projects listed in the table below would thus 
require truck transport (e.g.: using diesel fuel) of 220 million pounds of feed -- typically from 
out-of-state -- each year. 
• Diesel and Low-sulfur fuels to power ships supporting ocean-based finfish operations. 
A partial list of the recently proposed projects with annual production, land vs ocean siting, and species 
illustrates the scale of the enterprises: 
Name Location Project’s Annual 
Production of 
Salmon in 
 Million lbs and 
Metric Tonnes Land or ocean 
based Fish Species 
Raised 
Whole Oceans Bucksport 44 M lbs   
20,000 MT Land Salmon 
Nordic Belfast 73 M lbs  
33,000 MT Land Salmon 
American 
Aquafarms Gouldsboro 66 M lbs  
30,000 MT Ocean Salmon 
Kingfish Jonesport 40 M lbs  
18,000 MT Land Yellowtail 
Kingfish 
TOTAL ANNUAL PRODUCTION: 220 M lbs 
100,000 MT   
 
This paper  cites references suggesting that each metric tonne (MT) of fish produced by aquaculture 
requires between 5,460 kWh and 7,509 KWh of power. Applying those power estimates to the projects 
listed above suggests that together, they’d consume 545 to 750 Megawatts of power annually, a sector 
consumption with very significant climate impact. Going forward, Maine should find ways to produce 
this power renewably if it wants to develop its aquaculture industry. 
For example, to elaborate further on just the diesel fuel used to power generators in the American 
Aquafarms and Nordic projects alone, their respective consumption was 80,000 and 32,000 gallons 
every 7-10 days. Combined annually that’s between 4.1 and 5.8 million gallons of diesel that would 
produce 40,000 to 60,000 MT of CO2. To put this figure in context, according to the US Energy 
Information Administration (EIA), in 2018, Maine’s electric power generation sector  produced 1.07 
million metric tonnes (MT) of CO2. Combined diesel consumption at the just the American Aquafarms 
and Nordic projects alone would have produced between ~4% to 5.5% of the total CO2 produced in 
Maine for electric power generation. These figures do not include the very significant diesel emissions 
from trucks the sector produces.  
Hopefully these examples illustrate the magnitude of the potential aquaculture climate footprint. The 
good news is that commercially proven, in-production, renewably powered, true “RAS” systems exist 
that produce zero-effluent, both in terms of CO2, but also, in terms other SOx and NOx air-borne 
particulates, as well as in terms of nutrient, biological, viral, chemical discharges to water and air. It’s 
worth noting that these are not the “pseudo-RAS” systems proposed by the Nordic or Kingfish projects. 
If Maine wants to develop its aquaculture industry, there are many viable solutions that don’t increase 
our carbon footprint.  
 
