/‘e ’~>~_ aﬁ Natural Resources Council of Maine 
3 Wade Street e Augusta. Maine 04330 ~ (207) 6228101 ~ Fax: (207) 622-4343 - \'.'ww.nrcm.org 
Testimony in Support of LD 1411, An Act to Require the Adoption of Sector-specific 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Limits 
To the Joint Standing Committee on the Environment and Natural Resources 
by Jack Shapiro, Climate and Clean Energy Program Director 
April 24, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, honorable members of the Enviromnent and Natural 
Resources Committee, my name is Jack Shapiro, and I am the Climate and Clean Energy 
Director at the Natural Resources Council of Maine (N RCM). NRCM has been working for 
more than 60 years to protect, restore, and conserve Maine’s enviromnent. I’m here today on 
behalf of our 25,000 members and supporters to testify in strong support of LD 1411, An Act to 
Require the Adoption of Sector-specific Greenhouse Gas Emissions Limits. 
Maine has ambitious greenhouse gas reduction goals set by the Legislature, and Maine’s Climate 
Council has been established to develop strategies and recommendations to meet those goals, 
including policies that address emissions across all of the various sectors of our economy. 
The Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) already does exemplary work in their 
biennial greenhouse gas reports describing past emissions trends across multiple sectors over 
time. 
What this bill would do is ask DEP to build on that work looking forward to create interim and 
sector-specific greenhouse gas reduction targets every four years based on each iteration of the 
Climate Action Plan. 
This would codify the emissions reductions laid out in the Climate Action Plan, better enable the 
implementation of those plans across the government, and increase transparency and 
accountability, giving confidence that we are actually on track to achieve these critical targets. 
Here are two quick examples of how this could help spread accountability and make progress 
across the govemment. 
The Public Utilities Commission has a mandate to “facilitate the achievement ” of our emissions 
reduction goals, but there are no electricity sector goals on which they can base any policy 
actions or decision-making.
Transportation accounts for about half of our emissions from fossil fuels, but the Department of 
Transportation (DOT) has no transportation sector goals in the near or long-temi to help them 
scope or scale any changes to Department policies that might be necessary to ensure we address 
this critical piece of our emissions profile. 
To be clear, there is no implied criticism of DEP’s existing work in this bill. But long-temi 
efforts, like the effort to decatbonize Maine’s economy, are always difficult to implement, 
especially over many years, and when Legislatures and administrations change. The best thing 
We can do is institute the structures today that are necessary to ensure We are maintaining 
transparency and consistent accountability to achieve these goals over time. 
Setting sector-specific and interim emissions targets is an essential step for us to take to make 
sure our greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets are not just distant numbers on paper, but 
serve as a transparent guide for planning, forecasting, investing, and decision-making for entities 
across the state. 
We urge the Committee to vote Ought to Pass on LD 1411 and Would be happy to answer any 
questions that you have. 
Thank you.
