S T A T E  OF  M A I N E  
DEP A R T MEN T  OF  EN VIR ON MEN T A L  PR OT EC T ION  
 
 
 
  
  
AUGUSTA  BANGOR  PORTLAND  PRESQUE ISLE  
17 STATE HOUSE STATION  106 HOGAN ROAD, SUITE 6  312 CANCO ROAD  1235 CENTRAL DRIVE, SKYWAY PARK  
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 -0017  BANGOR, MAINE 04401  PORTLAND, MAINE 04103  PRESQUE ISLE, MAINE 04 769 
(207) 287 -7688 FAX: (207) 287 -7826  (207) 941 -4570 FAX: (207) 941 -4584  (207) 822 -6300 FAX: (207) 822 -6303  (207) 764 -0477 FAX: (207) 760 -3143  
 
website: www.maine.gov/dep  
 MELANIE L OYZIM  
COMMISSIONER  
 JANET T. M ILLS  
GOVERNOR  
  
 
TESTIMONY  
 
OF 
 
JEFFREY S. CRAWFORD  
 
DIRECTOR, BUREAU OF AIR QUALITY  
 
MAINE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION  
 
 
 
 
SPEAKING IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 1411  
 
AN ACT TO REQUIRE THE ADOPTION OF SECTOR -SPECIFIC GREENHOUSE 
GAS E MISSION LIMITS  
 
PRESENTED BY REP. DOUDERA   
 
 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON 
ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES  
 
 
  DATE OF HEARING:  
 
April 24, 2023  
 
 
 
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich , and members of the Committee, I am 
Jeffrey S. Crawford , Director of the Bureau of Air Quality at the Department of 
Environmental Protection, speaking in opposition to L.D. 1411.  
 
LD 1411 , An Act to Require the Adoption of Sector -specific Greenhouse gas Emission Limits  
Written Testimony of Jeffrey Crawford /DEP  
Public Hearing:  April 24, 2023  
Page 2 of 5 
 
I would first like to provide the Committee a brief refresher on the Administration’s 
efforts to address Climate Change in Maine.   
 
On June 26, 2019, Governor Mills signed into law LD 1679, “An Act to Establish the 
Maine Climate Change Council to Assist Maine to Mitigate, Prepare and Adapt to 
Climate Change.”1  The Climate Council — an assembly of scientists, industry leaders, 
bipartisan local and state officials, and engaged citizens — was charged with 
developing this four -year Climate Action Pla n to put Maine on a trajectory to decrease 
greenhouse gas emissions by 45% by 2030 and 80% by 2050, and achieve carbon 
neutrality by 2045. Starting in September of 2019, the Climate Council along with 
working groups and a subcommittee  began this work.  Mai ne’s Climate Action Plan, 
Maine Won’t Wait,  was released in December of 2020, and is the consensus result of 
those months of painstaking study, dialogue, discussion, and public deliberation to 
determine the steps Maine must take to combat climate change.2 
 
The Maine Won’t Wait  Climate Action Plan details principal strategies for addressing 
climate change in Maine:  
• Embrace the Future of Transportation in Maine  
• Modernize Maine’s Buildings: Energy Efficient, Smart and Cost -effective Homes 
and Businesses  
• Reduc e Carbon Emissions in Maine’s Energy and Industrial Sectors through Clean 
Energy and Innovation  
• Grow Maine’s Clean Energy Economy and Protect our Natural Resources 
Industries  
• Protect Maine’s Environment and Working Lands and Waters: Promote Natural 
Climate Solutions and Increase Carbon Sequestration  
 
1 P.L. 2019, ch. 476.  
2 Maine’s Climate Action Plan has four overarching goals: 1) reducing gas emissions; 2) avoiding the 
impacts and costs of inaction; 3) fostering economic opportunity and prosperity; and 4) advancing equity 
through Maine’s climate response.  
 
LD 1411 , An Act to Require the Adoption of Sector -specific Greenhouse gas Emission Limits  
Written Testimony of Jeffrey Crawford /DEP  
Public Hearing:  April 24, 2023  
Page 3 of 5 
 
• Build Healthy and Resilient Communities  
• Invest in Climate -Ready Infrastructure  
• Engage with Maine People and Communities  about Clim ate Impacts and Program 
Opportunities  
 
Although Maine’s Climate Action Plan includes a wide range of recommendations 
regarding regulatory measures and other State actions to ensure attainment of the 
statewide greenhouse gas emission limits , it does not establish sector -specific  emission 
targets.  Statewide greenhouse gas emission limits are established in statute at 38 
M.R.S. Section 576 -A, which specifies statewide gross greenhouse gas emission 
reduction goals3 which include all statewide  emissions. Although the statute states that 
future rulemaking should prioritize greenhouse gas emission reductions by sector, it 
does not require specific reduction goals by sector. Furthermore, although the source 
categories of energy and industrial proc esses can be attributed to sectors, not all 
greenhouse gas emissions fall neatly into one of the five primary sectors (transportation, 
residential, commercial, industrial, and electric power). For example, the source 
categories of agriculture and waste are  not included in any of these five sectors.  
Even if all emission sources could be neatly categorized, mandating sector -specific 
emission reduction targets could significantly reduce our ability to best leverage some of 
the many federal funding opportunities under the American Rescue Plan Act, the 
Infrastructure and Investment Jobs Act, and perhaps most importantly, the Inflation 
Reduction Act.  Allowing for tradeoffs between sectors is of key importance, especially 
in light of rapid technological innovation and  uncertain but potentially substantial federal 
investments in federal priority areas over time . The transportation sector provides a 
case in point for greater, not lesser flexibility in achieving greenhouse gas emission 
reductions.  Although the Maine Climate Council’s Clean Transportation Roadmap  
 
3 The Department’s 06 -096 C.M.R ch. 168 Statewide Greenhouse Gas Emission Regulation (effective date 
11/28/21) quantifies the statutory GHG percentage reduction requirements as 14.41 and 25.62 MMTCO 2e 
for 2030 and 2050 respectively.  
LD 1411 , An Act to Require the Adoption of Sector -specific Greenhouse gas Emission Limits  
Written Testimony of Jeffrey Crawford /DEP  
Public Hearing:  April 24, 2023  
Page 4 of 5 
 
identifies the policies, programs, and regulatory changes needed to continue 
decarbonizing Maine’s transport ation sector in coming years , our implementation of 
these recommendations has been hampered by funding limitations and an uncertain 
regulatory environment.   
There are also many sectors where at least some strategies for proportionate 
reductions are either technically or socially infeasible  at this point in time .  For example, 
mandating zero or low carbon heating for new residential construction, and establishing 
a cap -and-trade program for the transportation sector are simply not viable emission 
reduction strategies in the short term.  Likewise, environmental justice and  equity 
considerations are a high priority at both the state and federal level, and programs 
should be developed and implemented to better address disproportionate impacts to 
systemica lly disadvantaged communities.   
 
As an alternative to the proposed bill language, the Department would support 
additional reporting and progress evaluation metrics.  The Department currently reports 
Maine’s progress in meeting its greenhouse gas reduction  goals on a biennial basis.  
Title 38 Section 578 requires the Department to evaluate the State’s progress toward 
meeting the State’s greenhouse gas reduction goals and progress toward implementing 
the Climate Action Plan.  Our most recent report, published in July 2022, provides a 
quantitative evaluation of Maine’s progress toward meeting statutory greenhouse gas 
reduction goals  since the development of Maine’s original Climate Action P lan in 2004.   
Although our reports have analyzed a number of metrics including: gross greenhouse 
emissions; emissions by source category  and sector ; and Maine’s net greenhouse gas 
emissions (or carbon budget), codifying these, and additional, reporting req uirements in 
statute would provide valuable information on Maine’s progress to the Legislature, the 
Climate Council and the public as we move forward with the development of additional 
greenhouse gas reduction programs.  
 
LD 1411 , An Act to Require the Adoption of Sector -specific Greenhouse gas Emission Limits  
Written Testimony of Jeffrey Crawford /DEP  
Public Hearing:  April 24, 2023  
Page 5 of 5 
 
To that end , we have prepared an al ternative proposal that would amend Title 38 
Section 578 to explicitly require the biennial progress report to assess and address:  
 
1. Gross greenhouse gas emissions, including: greenhouse gas emissions by 
source category; energy emissions and consumption; and an economic analysis of 
greenhouse gas emissions  per unit of economic activity ;  
2. Net greenhouse gas emissions, including: the Maine State carbon budget; 
forest carbon markets; and a time series analysis of net greenhouse gas emissions; 
and  
3.  Sector -specific progress in meeting the greenhouse gas reduction goals.  
 
In closing, w e feel that we have ample direction from Maine Won’t Wait to take 
meaningful action; the policies recommended in the Maine Climate Action Plan are 
already based on sector -specific emissions reduction goals .  Greenhouse gas 
emissions as a whole, by sector, and by source category will continue  to be reported in 
the Department’s biennial reports to the Legislature on progress toward greenhouse gas 
reduction goals for  full transparency , and t his detailed  data will continue to inform future 
strategies and policies focused on meeting Maine’s greenhouse gas reduction goals.  
 
Thank you for your consideration in allowing this testimony. I’m joined here today by  
the Bureau of Air Quality’s Stacy Knapp, and together we would be happy to answer 
any questions that you might have.   
 
 
