MicroRail & Southern Mai ne Research Institute 
Kenneth A. Capron, ret. CPA, MCSE 
1375 Forest Avenue D-11, Portland, Maine 04103 
Phone: 207-797-7891     kcapron1@maine.rr.com; maglev@maine.rr. com 
History 
SkyWay by MicroRail is the cul mination of research from 1999-20 12 documented in FTA Report 
000026 " FTA Low-Speed Urban Magl ev Research Program " as undertaken by 
MagneMotion(MM) of Devens, MA.. That effort was successful in a ll but one way - cost. This 
current project and my follow-on d ialogue with Richard Thornton , PhD, of MIT, in his YouTube 
webinar " https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eijRFZc6o5M " leads to innovation in scale, 
materials, methods, and transpor tation technology to create a n ew mode of transportation. 
 
Videos - Representative Syst ems, Materials and Expertise 
1. German 1970 Prototype - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rdXlVBNL42M  (4:15) 
2. MagneMotion components - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d7uNrDQDFCU  (7:36) 
3. Richard Thornton, PhD., - https://www.youtube.com /watch?v=eijRFZc6o5M  (33:19) 
4. Research on Novel Vane Device to  Improve Helical Pile Performan ce for Transportation 
 Structures https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x7-KjZKaqJU  
5. Niron Magnetics-the Clean Earth Magnet™  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0DtM82fJAoY  
Potential Routes will be based o n terms of grant funding and MO U. Prefer ZERO match. 
• https://tigerweb.geo.census.gov/tigerweb2020/  
 
What is the SkyWay System? 
SkyWay is a new mode of transportation. SkyWay is not a train. It is not a monorail. It is not 
light rail. It is not actually rail. So what is it? It’s a smal l lightweight elevated guideway on which 
4-passenger pods travel powered by  magnetic levitation under vo ice control. 
  There is no argument that this is the best alternative to exist ing transit. SkyWay is a tram-like, 
elevated lightweight fixed gui deway of stainless steel and comp osites which uses limited space 
above the sidewalk and/or parking lane in the public R.O.W. to avoid congestion. It uses four-
passenger non-shared car-like ePods to move people and freight.  Lightweight, silent, smooth, 
fast, reliable, cheap, expandable.   It is also the least expensive and most environmentally friendl y mode of transit with near-zero 
energy usage, near-zero carbon  production and miles of solar ge neration. Safe? This system 
eliminates accidents. Snap-togeth er construction eliminates the  need for disruptive heavy 
equipment, concrete trucks and en vironmental damage during cons truction. 
  This offers personal rapid transit that is autonomous, on-deman d, non-stop, 24/7/365, all 
weather, door-to-door, stationl ess, uses empathic AI and that i s driven by LSMs (linear 
synchronous motors)(magnetic levitation).   SkyWay has ten different reve nue sources with an overall 11/1 B enefit-Cost Ratio. Unlike any 
other mode of transportation, th is is not ridership dependent. Is Maine ready for this? The 
answer is that if we hope to reach our climate goals, it is the  only option. MicroRail will deploy 
its guideways above the public R OW, both sides of the road (to eliminate the risk of crossing 
MicroRail & Southern Mai ne Research Institute 
Kenneth A. Capron, ret. CPA, MCSE 
1375 Forest Avenue D-11, Portland, Maine 04103 
Phone: 207-797-7891     kcapron1@maine.rr.com; maglev@maine.rr. com 
streets), so as not to interfere with whatever sidewalks or par king exist at surface level. Its low 
costs offer an expansion of acce ss for low-income and all diver se populations. 
 Dr. Thornton suggests reducing si ze of vehicles and weight of i nfrastructure would be impactful 
ways to reduce costs. We are planning a suspended three-foot wi de overhead guideway made 
of pultruded composites support ed by helical piles with collar vanes
1. Currently pultrusion 
results only in straight beams. We will need to invent a way to  pultrude beams that follow the 
contours of the roadside.2 The piles-plus-collar-vane are in final evaluation but we need  to 
determine if they can support mor e than light posts and roadsid e lighting. 
 
In 2014, Univ. of Minnesota spun off the bulk manufacture of a new type of magnet using iron 
nitride via Niron Manufacturing. We need to test whether its cl aim to be twice as strong at one-
tenth of the cost is true in action as permanent magnets in a m aglev drive/guideway. This will 
be a huge cost reduction for a  project that involves miles and miles of guideway. How do we 
use this most effectively? Can i t be manufactured to match our needs? 
 
One major cost and weakness of all transit systems is the use o f fixed destinations - aka 
stations. The ability to board/deboard at any location along a route adds tremendous 
functionality to SkyWay and if done well, saves time and money all around. It adds a level of 
convenience, especially for people with mobility challenges, un matched by any other mode. 
How? The power of the magnet. Without going into full detail - eddy currents. Each pod is 
equipped with a robotic arm that can grab the pylon closest to your destination, releases from 
the guideway and descends slowly  by eddy currents down the pylo n to the surface. It returns to 
service much the same way. Person al, door-to-door, on-demand, 2 4/7/365, all-weather rapid 
transit. Lenz's Law. Induction. 
  
In our effort to keep costs low, the plan is to apply 4’ x 100’  sheets of Perovskite solar on the 
upper surface of the guideway. Not only will this power the mag lev drives but it will provide for 
lighting and communications inside and out of the pods. As Pero vskite increases in efficiency, 
SkyWay can carry more and more o f the system load as well as su pplying a local DC power grid  
- much like community solar. 
 
Engineers will appreciate our ‘snap-together’ construction meth od. Set the pylons in the 
ground guided by a civil engine er every 25’, 50’ or 100’. Set h angers on tops of pairs of pylons. 
Attach the connector units to the hangers. Attach the guideway to the connector at each end – 
Voila! Although we had planned a crew of five, by confirming an d marking the ROW and spots 
for the pylons in advance, we make more efficient use of time. And time is money.  
 
                                                 
1 UMO and URI - joint study awaiting white paper.  
2 UMO and ATI - common need, potential partnership. 
MicroRail & Southern Mai ne Research Institute 
Kenneth A. Capron, ret. CPA, MCSE 
1375 Forest Avenue D-11, Portland, Maine 04103 
Phone: 207-797-7891     kcapron1@maine.rr.com; maglev@maine.rr. com 
Dr. Thornton suggested using many  small vehicles rather than tr ain-sized passenger cars. I took 
that one step further and will fully implement swarm theory - m uch the way drones were 
displayed at the 2022 Olympics. Only pods with passengers will be in service - no more empty 
buses. 
The work of the pilot deployment  primarily includes working wit h businesses and towns to pick 
a preferred route. From that, th e legal and civil engineering t eams will go about getting access 
to the public ROW and marking ou t the specific placements of py lons (helical piles) and 
installing them. From there it i s a matter of hanging the guide way beams and connectors and 
plugging in the electrical and Internet connections. Solar pane ls will be added after all testing 
has passed scrutiny. This will ta ke place over 2-3 years in tot al. Note the simplicity of our snap-
together construction methods. No digging. No heavy equipment. A five-person team can 
deploy a mile per week. The more  teams, the farther we go. This  is also a prime reason our 
costs are so low.  SPECIAL NOTE: 
SkyWay by MicroRail has been sugge sted as a transportation mode  for planetary deployment 
due to its light weight and ease o f deployment. MicroRail plans  to pursue this idea to maximize 
consideration by NASA . 
  

MicroRail & Southern Mai ne Research Institute 
Kenneth A. Capron, ret. CPA, MCSE 
1375 Forest Avenue D-11, Portland, Maine 04103 
Phone: 207-797-7891     kcapron1@maine.rr.com; maglev@maine.rr. com 
 
Benefit-Cost Analysis (BCA) 
Baselines 
• The BCA should measure costs and benefits of a proposed project  against a baseline “no 
build” alternative. We want to co mpare the state of the world w ith and without the 
proposed project improvement. 
 
Safety Benefits 
1. No accidents  - vehicles operate autonomously on fixed elevated guideway; co ntrol 
software prevents collisions; hum an factor eliminated; zero fat alities. Sensors prevent 
collision. Vehicles never come in  contact with surface vehicles  and obstacles. 
2. No worry about distracted driving ; passenger can check email s and social media while 
riding to/from work; saves lives ; reduces accidents and deaths.  
3. No concern about dozing  off while driving; saves lives; reduces accidents and deaths. 
4. Passenger can relax and avoid stress  and arrive at destination fresh and alert; may 
reduce domestic violence. 
5. Drunk drivers  no longer a road hazard; saves lives; reduces accidents and de aths; ePod 
can be instructed to take drunk p atron to specific home address  or hospital or police 
station. 
6. Risk of surface vehicle crash  damaging vehicle or support pylon same as for telephone 
poles. Repair  of pylon is a quick snap-together module. 
7. Rides well above  bike/pedestrian lanes; may save  lives, reduce accidents and de aths.  
8. ePods are not shared ; no unsavory strangers; passenger feels safe  and secure; no fear 
of being attacked/robbed means m ore likely to use service in fu ture. 
9. Riders with aging  issues (dementia) unlikely to get  lost or have accidents; can be tracked 
electronically .  
10. Works in all weather, 24/7/365,  except high winds; eliminates accidents due to rain, 
snow, sleet, ice, and flood.  
11. No more road kill ; no dodging squirrels, cats and dogs; no collisions with deer,  moose, 
cows, etc.  
12. Should be zero work zone  accidents due to snap-together design. 
13. Rapid evacuation w/extreme capacity in emergencies. 
14. No need to chase background checks for drivers. 
15. In lieu of CPR and other training , SkyWay provides rapid trans.  to hospital. 
16. NASCAR-like “Safer Barrier” plac ed on pylons at sites of freque nt accidents.            
 
Travel Time Savings 
1. Faster  than ground transport. Maglev tr avels at zero to 150 mph. Can be voice 
controlled . 
2. ePods travel above congestion ; no delays ; no idling  at intersections and rail crossings ; 
don't have to pull off road for fire/police/ambulance ( safer for 1st responders ); 
3. ePods will adjust speed  to make up time (if late for wo rk or appointment); also a safe ty 
benefit  
4. No wasted time looking for parking .  
MicroRail & Southern Mai ne Research Institute 
Kenneth A. Capron, ret. CPA, MCSE 
1375 Forest Avenue D-11, Portland, Maine 04103 
Phone: 207-797-7891     kcapron1@maine.rr.com; maglev@maine.rr. com 
5. No time wasted fooling with GPS nor getting lost.  
6. Non-stop feature provides fastest route  to destination self-selected. 
7. Door-to-door service eliminates time wasted  walking to/from bus stop and waiting,; 
8. Solar self-charging eliminates stops  for refueling gasoline, battery, other. 
 
 Operating Cost Savings 
1. Near-zero maintenance: 
a. Near-zero wear from minimal friction 
b. No moving parts to repair/replace 
2. Existing transportation systems can remain in place (without disrupting  traffic) 
throughout general adoption and implementation of MicroRail tra nsit services 
3. Costs of gasoline  replaced by costs of electricit y; ePods est. use is equiv. to 3 x 100w 
lightbulbs 
4. Low Operational labor  costs - due to autonomous ope ration. Control room. EPod 
detailing. Limited repairs expecte d for guideways, ePods, solar  and electronics. 
5. Simplistic design reduces weight  and stress on vehicles; reduc es costs of ePods ($2k to 
$5k) 
6. Eliminates shortage of drivers. 
 Emissions Reduction Benefits  
1. Zero or near-zero carbon emissions ; Miles of solar  generation; uses proprietary internal 
transmission lines and micro-grids  (community solar). 
2. Frictionless operation eliminates particulate  matter in environment. 
3. Pylons raise system well above floods or sea level rise  for 200+years. 
4. No idling exhaust  fumes.  
5. Produces no greenhouse gases.  
 Community Benefits  
1. No more dealing with potholes. 
2. ePods ride well above bikes and pedestrians and likely reduce n umbers of surface 
vehicles making streets safer  for bike-pedestrian corridors.  
3. ePods carry bikes, bikers and hikers to more remote  destinations. 
4. Footpaths  have usually formed under guideways so people can stay out of the weather .  
5. Compatible intermodal  connections with all other modes of transit.  
6. Potential to service rubbish-removal , leaf pickup, etc. 
7. Eliminates fret over storm-related, construction-related parking bans.    
8. Future expansion to replace USPS , UPS, FedeX, and others. 
9. MicroRail infrastructure can be used for Holiday  decorations and lighting. 
10. MicroRail infrastructure can be used as community bulletin boards  for posting flyers, 
banners, posters, announcem ents and more.                                                         
                                       
Health Benefits 
1. Priority  transport to health care facili ty or office upon voice request . 
MicroRail & Southern Mai ne Research Institute 
Kenneth A. Capron, ret. CPA, MCSE 
1375 Forest Avenue D-11, Portland, Maine 04103 
Phone: 207-797-7891     kcapron1@maine.rr.com; maglev@maine.rr. com 
2. First-responders  priority to fire or accident by dispatch. 
3. Planning is underway for design of specialty ambulance  ePods for quick responses. 
 Modal Diversion 
1. People will always default to that mode of transit that is most convenient and least 
expensive . MicroRail is all of that. It i s expected to attract more car- owning riders and 
transfers from other modes. 
2. The barrier to college graduation : transportation (source - VIA ) 
"A lack of reliable, affordable transportation has made it more  challenging for college 
students  — particularly low-income students and students of color — to finish school." 
 
Other Benefits and Issues 
1. System runs silently  and smoothly  
2. Projected zero impact on wildlife  above or below due to enclosed and elevated design. 
3. Priority transport to health care  facility or office upon voice  request. 
4. First-responders priority  to fire or accident by dispatch. 
5. Planning is underway for design of specialty ambulance  ePods for quick responses. 
6. Compatible intermodal connections with all other modes of transit. 
7. Footpaths have usually formed under guideways so people can sta y out of the weather. 
8. Impact on property values  uncertain although system e xpands commuter range for 
housing and jobs 
9. Average annual cost of vehicle ownership (AAA). 
10. Installation process is non-disruptive due to snap-together met hodology 
11. Will not require expansion of electrical distribution  systems 
12. Integrated payment  systems 
13. System will provide real-time traffic data /statistics 
14. “IEA (International Energy Agenc y) says that with the current l evel of innovation, an 
electric car requires six times m ore mineral inputs than a conv entional car” 
15. MicroRail is U.S. sourced and manufactured  (no rare earth meta ls are used at all). 
16. Perfect statistics on regional transportation usage. 
17. No more school “snow” days. 
18. MicroRail runs full-time on Holidays, weekends, 24/7/365 
19. Special pod deployments for big  events to move parking and cong estion away from 
events.                .                                                   
 Hikers & Cyclists, Walkers & Talkers  
1. Accident-free 
2. Carbon-free 
3. Fare-free 
4. Stationless 
5. Timeless 24/7/365 
6. Safe 
MicroRail & Southern Mai ne Research Institute 
Kenneth A. Capron, ret. CPA, MCSE 
1375 Forest Avenue D-11, Portland, Maine 04103 
Phone: 207-797-7891     kcapron1@maine.rr.com; maglev@maine.rr. com 
7. Carries bikers and hikers to remo te areas to begin their advent ures without having to 
use a surface based gas-powered vehicle 
8. For people who want to hit the sk i slopes without long drives t o the mountains 
9. Is that bike trail you always wanted to try just a bit too far away? Not anymore. 
10. Fast 
11. Dependable 
12. If someone gets hurt, MicroRail will be 1st on scene and fast t o the hospital 
13. Tell Alexa what you need and we'll take it from there  
Capital Costs - Grant Funded 
• 5.1. Capital Expenditures 
1. Land Acquisition 
2. Row Acquisition 
3. Planning And Design 
4. Environmental Reviews 
5. Legal 
6. Utility Relocation 
7. Construction 
 Labor 
 Material 
 Equipment Rentals 
8. Financing Costs 
9. Installation Labor And Materials  
 Grant Sources 
1. USDOT -  New Starts  – "Major new fixed guideway pro jects, or extension to existing  
systems financed with New Start s funds, typically receive these  funds through a full 
funding grant agreement that defines the scope of the project a nd specifies the total 
multi-year federal commitm ent to the project." 
https://www.transit.dot.gov/funding/grants/major-capital-invest ments-new-starts-
small-starts-5309b1  
2. USDOT - RAISE 
3. USDOT - CRISI 
4. USDOT - REGAIN 
5. USDOT - ( RCP) Reconnecting Communities Pilot Discretionary 
6. CDS - Congressionally Designated  
7. USDOE -VTO; Vehicle 
8. USDOE -SETO; Solar  
9. USDOE - NETL -Grid Resilience and Innovation Partnerships (GRIP )  
10. NSF - Mobility (M0) 
11. NSF - Computer and Information Sc ience and Engineering (CISE) 
12. Maine -solar and other rebates 
MicroRail & Southern Mai ne Research Institute 
Kenneth A. Capron, ret. CPA, MCSE 
1375 Forest Avenue D-11, Portland, Maine 04103 
Phone: 207-797-7891     kcapron1@maine.rr.com; maglev@maine.rr. com 
13. Maine -FAME - Grow Maine 
14. FREIGHT subject to weight testing of guideway. 
 
Operating Costs - Self Funded 
• Maintenance - frictionless; no moving parts = negligible mainte nance costs 
• Maintenance Labor - cleaning Pods 
• Labor - autonomous operation = r educed operational labor costs 
• Electricity - usage in e xcess of self-generation 
• Software & Hardware (custo mizations and enhancements) 
 
 
Revenue Sources  (est. for Maine)  
1. Ridership assumed to be zero 
2. Sale of statistics and travel patterns databases  
3. School bus alternate transportation (Portland= 1.1 million boar dings per year) 
4. Marketing - $200-500 per pod @20  pods per mile for assumed 12 m ile corridor  
  
5. Solar generation c 
 
6. Subscriptions - includes personal pylon 
7. Carbon Exchange  (RGGI; TCI; Cap & Trade) 
8. Value Capture  from new economic development opportunities and municipal serv ices. 
9. Utilities  - fiber; broadband; Renewable energy (DC) ; telephone; Wi-Fi 
10. Corporate contracts; VPN’s 
11. Municipal Lighting  (motion-sensing programmable LCDs ) - standard lighting is fre e; custom 
lighting available for fee 
12. USM ridership contract (186,000 riders/year) and other campus-t o-campus connections.  
13. Community Solar; DC grid  management  
14. FREIGHT - small package delivery ; home food deliver (meals on wheels) 
 
A. Broadband  is the transmission of wide ba ndwidth data over a high-speed i nternet connection. So what is broadband? 
According to the FCC, the definit ion of broadband internet is a  minimum of 25 Mbps download and 3 Mbps upload speeds. 
Broadband connections can be wired or wireless . miles pods/mile rev/podmonthly
revenue
12 20 200 $       48,000     
12 20 300 $       72,000     
12 20 400 $       96,000     
12 20 500 $       120,000   
miles W L sq.ft./miletotal
sq.ft. Acres LOW HIGH effiiencymonthly
revenue
1 4 5280 21120 21120 0.4848485 10,303      20,606      23%
12 4 5280 21120 253440 5.8181818 123,636    247,273    23% 247,273    
MicroRail & Southern Mai ne Research Institute 
Kenneth A. Capron, ret. CPA, MCSE 
1375 Forest Avenue D-11, Portland, Maine 04103 
Phone: 207-797-7891     kcapron1@maine.rr.com; maglev@maine.rr. com 
B. Wi-Fi  is wireless connectivity that uses radio waves to provide an i nternet connection. Broadband is open connectivity in 
which a high-speed internet co nnection is always available 
C. https://ecotality.com/can-you-ma ke-money-with-solar-panels/ 
 
Added Value  –  
• Value of elimination of municipal transit subsidies. 
• Value of street lighting 
• Reduction of street usage and maintenance 
• Safety on streets 
• Reduced roadkill 
• Privacy for riders  
Additional Areas of Exploration 
1. Energy Storage – PolyJoule/MIT Battery 
2. Energy Storage – Super Capacitors 
3. District Heating - capture excess solar and electrical heat und erground 
4. 3D Printing of components  
5. Angular Levitation 
6. Regenerative braking 
7. Graphene and Silk Reinforced Polymer 
8. Halbach Arrays 
9. Inductive Charging - Wireless Power Transfer 
10. Fare Systems? 
11. SynRM 
12. Micro-heat-pumps 
13. Maximum Speed 
14. EV Charging Stations 
15. Autonomous Trash Collection  
 
Full Production  plans are to make our own components  
1. Pultrusion Factory 
2. Composites Factory 
3. Pod (automotive) Factory(ies) 
4. Stainless steel forming 
 
Kenneth Capron
Portland
LD 1411
The SkyWay by MicroRail would address nearly all of the net 54% GHG contribution
from the Transportation sector while providing even greater benefits overall. Not only
does SkyWay have a zero-carbon drive system, it also does not produce atmospheric 
particulate.
SkyWay is by far the cleanest, most equitable, most affordable solution to the 
challenges in the transportation sector. It provides positive impacts to the education 
sector, the econdev sector, the tourism domain, the social services domain and 
essentially all other concerns about getting from here to there wherever one may be.
The Transportation Department and the Transportation Committee needs to be forced 
to adopt SkyWay as a solution if it intends to meet its goals for 2030 and 2050.
