 
 
 
April 24, 2023  
Senator Stacy Brenner , Chair  
Representative  Lori Gramlich , Chair  
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Re: Testimony  on LD 1411 , “An Act to Require the Adoption of Sector -specific Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions Limits”  
 
Senator Brenner , Representative  Gramlich , and members of the Environment & Natural 
Resources Committee : 
 
Founded  right here in Maine  twenty years ago , ReVision Energy is a local, employee owned , 
certified B Corp oratio n construction company with over 385 employee s across our five branches 
in New Englan d, with 220 staff in Maine at our Montville and South Portland locations . Our 
mission is to lead our community in solving the environmental problems caused by fossil fuels 
while alleviating social injustice to ensure  New England is a thriving place  where our children, 
grandchildren, and future generations can enjoy a clean environment and just society . In 2022 
alone, we installed 10,000  kilowatts of residential solar  and nearly 24 megawatts of commercial 
solar, eliminating over 950  million  pounds of  future CO2 emissions . We have also established 
ourselves as a leader in providing electric vehicle charging infrastructure for private and public 
entities in Maine and have installed the bulk of the state’s DC Fast Charging non -Tesla network 
as well as hundreds of level 2 char ging applications.  We see the intersection of clean energy 
and clean transportation as a very real opportunity to grow jobs and hasten reduction of carbon 
emissions.  
 
We believe setting sector specific emissions reduction targets is  a critical  component o f 
achieving our state’s climate goals of a chieving a reduction of gross annual greenhouse gas 
emissions 45% by 2030 and 80% by 2050, and carbon neutrality by 2045. Given our mission  is 
in direct alignment with achieving these goals, we ask you to  support L D 1411 .  
 
Setting ambitious sector -wide greenhouse gas reduction goals in a bipartisan manner se nt a 
clear message  regarding the vision we wish to achieve  and rightly instigated significant work in 
an effort to advance  emissions reductions , including the Maine Climate Council’s Maine Won’t 
Wait Climate Plan . However, we believe the  goals set  forth in these landmark laws are too high 
level to effectively guide  metric development, policy change, and ultimately, definitive action. 
Quite simply, in corporate speak, we do not set objectives without identifying key results of 
progress indicated  along the way.   
 
We appreciate that this proposal encom passes all sectors and creates accountability, especially 
for the transportation sector, which  accounts for 54% of our state’s total emissions. A sector 
specific goal would ultimately orient the Department of Transportation (DOT) toward the state’s 
climate  benchmarks , which to date is a critical missing link . The decarbonization of our 
transportation sector  clearly plays a ma jor role in our potential to achiev e our climate  goals —
and we must allow for thoughtful policy change given  both Maine’s rural communities and 
tourism economy ultimately depend on transportation.  Jumpstarting DOT’s engagement would 
allow the agency to start the consideration of and adoption of policies recommended in  Maine’s 
Climate Plan that will cut emissions and ensure our communities and economy continue to 
thrive.  There is considerable research in electrification of the transportation sector showcasing 
 
 
effective  policy solutions  ripe for implementation here in Ma ine, such as creating more fleet 
purchasing and charging infrastructure mandates for state vehicles, promot ing charging at ride 
and drive facilities, work ing to electrify more transit opportunities, and p ushing the Advanced 
Clean Truck fleet purchasing mandates and medium duty/heavy duty charging along major 
alternative fuel corridors.  
 
As a solar installer, we also believe this thoughtful policy will be beneficial in providing guidance 
for the Public Utilities Commission  (PUC) , which does have a directive to facilitate the 
achievement of greenhouse gas reduction goals. An electric power sector target  would be 
immensely helpful  to guide the PUC in its work in this regard , especially in critical debates 
happening right now regarding the future of distributed generation  and the deleterious impact of 
demand charges on public charging . 
 
Finally, to be clear, there is no mandate upon an agency as to what policies they are required to 
implement, only that DEP would faci litate a process to utilize their expertise to set targets and 
assign accountability t o agencies  that would be allowed to determine the best strategies and 
solutions that will be the most effective for our state .  
 
The scientific data  has already shown  us that we have no leeway  with emissions redu ction 
when it comes to climate change , and there is already considerable unce rtainty as to whether 
we’ve already passed the trigger point for cascading effects of carbon pollution . To see this, we 
do not have to look further than the Gulf of Maine , which  is the fastest warming ocean body in 
the world.  We have the power to reset the  course. Let’s identify the path we need to follow to 
meet our climate goals and avoid the most catastrophic impacts of a warming world. We want to 
see our home state  live up to its motto, Dirigo, and knowing that action is more likely to follow 
concrete g oals,  we respectfully ask you to pass LD 1411.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of our perspective . We welcome further discussion, and we 
are available to address any questions you may have.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Lindsay Bourgoine  
Director, Policy & Government Affairs  
ReVision Energy  
207.819.5663  
 
 

