»§§_.~ PO Box 88 
- Belfast, ME 04915 
%-.. " 3 
z A '' , 5: in Phone (207) 761-5616 
|\/] A | N E C H A P T E R wwvv.s|erraclub.org/maine 
To: Committee on Environment & Natural Resources 
From: Matt Cannon, State Conservation & Energy Director, Sierra Club Maine 
Date: April 24, 2023 
Re: Testimony in support of LD 14-11: An Act to Require the Adoption of Sector-specific 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Limits 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Environment & Natural Resources 
Committee, I am testifying on behalf of Sierra Club Maine, representing over 22,000 supporters and 
members statewide. Founded in 1892, Sierra Club is one of our nation's oldest and largest 
environmental organizations. We work diligently to amplify the power of our 3.8 million members 
nation-wide as we work towards combating climate change and promoting a just and sustainable 
economy. To that end, we urge you to support LD 1411. 
Maine should feel proud about being a national leader in its current climate law, which requires a 
reduction in gross annual greenhouse gas emissions at least 45% below 1990 levels by 2030 and at 
least 80% below 1990 levels by 2050‘ . It created the Climate Council and the subsequent Climate 
Action Plan, moving us towards actionable policies in reducing emissions. 
However, the law should be strengthened, as it currently doesn't require tangible metrics for the 
state to measure and demonstrate its success and ensure we are on track to meet our statutory 
emissions reduction goals. Currently, our overarching, economy-wide targets are helpful for 
facilitating state-wide efforts like the Climate Action Plan, but are too high level to effectively guide 
quantified metric development in specific sectors, like transportation and heating. Why would we 
not give our state all the tools it needs to ensure we meet our emissions targets? The climate crisis 
requires us to meet our targets and to focus on specific sectors that are the largest emitters. 
Additionally, setting sector specific targets helps businesses and industries plan. 
The bill would strengthen the Department of Environmental Protection's (DEP) ability to ensure 
compliance with greenhouse gas emissions reduction goals by directing the DEP to promulgate and 
regularly update appropriate, sector-specific greenhouse gas emissions reduction limits on energy 
sources in each major sector and permit the adoption of limits on others. 
If this bill is passed, agencies, industries, municipalities, utilities, businesses and citizens will havea 
better understanding of where carbon cuts need to come from, by who, and when. These would be 
based in part on the climate solutions developed by the Climate Council, enabling development of 
tangible metrics and policies targeting them. These sector-specific metrics and rules will also better 
enable the state to spread the burden of decarbonization across various industries. 
1 
https://wvvwmainelegislature.org/legis/statutes/3 8/title3 8sec576-A.html
This bill limits not only C02 but also the far more powerful gasses of methane, nitrous oxides and 
others. The bill should be clarified to cover black carbon or soot that settles on snow and ice and 
absorbs heat. Specifically, black soot also contributes to the arctic warming four times faster than 
the global average, melting the arctic ice faster, hastening sea level rise and interfering with the Gulf 
Stream, among other things.’ 
Though DEP is still responsible for setting sector specific limits, LD 1411 also specifically requires 
the Department of Transportation (MDOT) to reduce emissions from transportation, responsible for 
nearly half of Maine's C02 emissions. The Climate Action Plan addresses transportation pollution 
through vehicle electrification in conjunction with strategies to reduce car and truck miles traveled 
and increasing public transportation. Yet, MDOT —the agency that manages and invests in all modes 
of transportation — has not been specifically obligated by the Legislature to orient its 
decision-making toward the state's climate benchmarks. LD 1411 would fix that. Because many of 
the state's necessary transportation policies fall outside of DEP’s jurisdiction, a legislative directive 
to the MDOT is necessary. 
We urge the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources to support LD 1411. Maine needs all 
the tools possible to tackle climate change and ensure that we stay on track with our targets for 
reducing greenhouse gasses and adjust them in accordance with the best available scientific 
information. Thank you for your time and consideration, and I would be happy to answer questions 
or provide more information ahead of or at the work session. 
Sincerely, 
Matt Cannon 
State Conservation & Energy Director 
Sierra Club Maine 
2 
https:1/wwv\zccacoalition.org/en/slcps /black-carbon
