188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741  
   
 
May 4, 2023  
 Senator Brenner, Senate Chair  Representative Gramlich, House Chair  
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: AGC Maine’s Opposition to LD 1411  “An Act to Require the Adoption of Sector -specific 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Limit s” 
 
Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Environment and Natural Resou rces my name  is Matthew  Marks,  I am a Principal at Cornerstone  
Government  Affairs,  and sending this on behalf  of my client  The Associated  General Contractors  of 
Maine.  AGC  Maine  is a statewide  commercial  construction  trade  association  and a Chapter  of AGC  
America  which  was founded  in 1918  with  27,000 contractors,  suppliers,  and service  providers  
nationwide .  
 
We respect  the intent of this bill but believe  the requirements  are premature  given  the work  of the 
Maine  Climate  Council  and the Council ’s Working  Committees.  In addition , the available  resources  for 
the construction  industry  are advancing slow er than  the consumer  market  for light -duty  vehicles  and 
equipment , a limiting  factor to consider.   
 
The construct ion industry  is currently  introducing new  electric  equipment  including bulldo zers and 
smaller  excavat ors. We recognize  some  of those  advantages,  including emission  reduction,  but noise  
reduction  is also positive.  Some  logistic barriers  currently  exist,  especially  with  charging  at remote  or 
construction  locations.  Each  year new  equipment  is introduced  including some  that can be operated  
outside  of the traditional cab “remotely .” 
 
With  heavy truck  operations , we are still limited  by access  to new  EVs. We are also challenged  by the 
accessory  equipment  oper ations  such  as pump  trucks,  deck -mounted  cranes , and other  devi ces that 
need  additional  power  requirements.  The industry  has continued  to explore  options  for bridge  fuel to 
reduce  GHG  emissi ons and those  discuss ions are currently  underway.  Construction  operates  long hours  
during the peak  season  and in certain  weather  conditions.  For example,  a heavy  snow  season  will 
require  running equipment  much  longer  and technological advancement s prohibit  a switch  at this time.   
 
One of the issues we are currently  evaluating  is the transmission  and delivery  upgrades  that will be 
necessary  to charge  a large  fleet  of vehic les and equipment.  We know  the range  is improving,  but to 
complete  construction  activity  we are often  located  in places  where  we cannot plan  for downtime  for 
expensive  equipm ent, the tools  must  be reliable  when  needed.  Unlike  some  other  operations,  our point -
to-point  travel  varies,  and that causes  concerns  for operations.  During the Transportation  Working  
Group  of the Climate  Counci l, we explored some  variations  that companies  are testing  to compare  
188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741 against  traditional  units.  As the manufacturers  see the growing  market  advancing,  we will have  
additional options.   
 
AGC  Maine  believes  the investment in any state  effort  to reduce  emissions  should  be focused  on the 
ability  to test or pilot the new  tools  rather  than  set limits  where  we have  few products  available.  We are 
encouraged  by the ongo ing work  between  the private  sector  and regulators.  As I shared,  we are 
particu larly  beholden  to the supply  market,  and while we are seeing  some  equipment  work  now,  it’s a 
major shift .  
 
The future  is bright  for new  technology  in the construction  industry  from  robotics  to battery -powered  
equipment . However,  we urge  the Committee to allow  the indust ry to continue  working  with  the 
Administration  and suppliers  as we transition  before  adding new  requirements.  I appreciate  the 
Committee’s continued  work  and am always  happy  to answer  questions.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Matthew Marks  
207-530-3001  
