u\A'"s 
»-’—\ 
Maine Forest Products Council 
0 The voice of Maine's forest economy M» ~"<£=- '"f"g“”*E:!:- fﬁ‘“‘-'*"*-*"" “""2;;'£":~" ‘~"-'~'1':w¥ YW smug, 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1411 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Limits” 
April 24, 2023 
Patrick Strauch, Executive Director 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Committee on 
Limits.” 
products. 
opportunities comes with its own carbon footprint. 
encourage because air emissions licenses would be limited. 
i 
reporting of the progress towards reaching our climate goals. 
Thank you for your consideration. l would be happy to answer any questions you may have at the work session 
535 Civic Center Drive, Augusta ME 04330 207-622-9288 www.maineforest.org “An Act to Require the Adoption of Sector-speci ﬁc 
Environment and Natural Resources, I’in Patrick Strauch of Exeter and I’m heie befoie 
you today to testify on behalf of the Maine Forest Products Council in opposition to LD 
141 1, “An Act to Require the Adoption of Sector-speci ﬁc Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
With more than 90% of our state forested, Maine’s status as a regional wood basket puts 
us in a unique position to meet growing demands for climate-friendly, sustainably 
managed alternative materials in response to the threat of climate change. From wood 
ﬁber insulation to food packaging and biofuels, research and development is evolving 
and investments are ensuing to create more ways to replace carbon-intensive materials 
and fossil fuels with wood-based products. We also have the potential to sequestei 
atmospheric carbon in our growing forests as well as store carbon in durable wood 
While these opportunities are a critical part of Maine’s Climate Action Plan, they aie all 
pait of a dynamic carbon cycle occurring at a time when wood markets in Maine aie 
shifting, closing some manufacturing facilities and opening others. Each of these 
As an appointed member of the Governor ’s Climate Council, we’ve adopted a stiategy 
based on the guidance of our scientific advisory committee, of establishing baseline 
information and working towards setting goals in the various sectors. Moving from this 
approach to one where we are setting caps in the various emissions sectors (and possibly 
sequestration paths) places the emphasis in a regulatory position that could limit the 
expansion of existing or growth of new wood manufacturing facilities we want to 
MF PC believes the best approach is to continue the Climate Council work of diiving 
climate solutions through good science, supporting climate smart initiatives and iegulai
