Testimony of the Industrial Energy Consumer Group 
In Opposition to 
L.D. 1411, An Act to Require the Adoption of Sector-speci ﬁc Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions Limits in the State 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
April 24, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. I am Steven Hudson, an attorney with the ﬁrm of 
Preti Flaheity, here today on behalf of the Industrial Energy Consumer Group (IECG). IECG has been 
representing medium and large sized consumers of energy in Maine for more than twenty-ﬁve years at 
the state, regional and federal level. We advocate for policies that reduce the cost of energy for our 
members and cost—effective1y help Maine achieve its climate goals. We share the concern of many of the 
people and organizations in this room about the work needed to adequately address climate change. Tat 
is the reason we emphasize cost-effective measures, in order to ensure that our collective resources are 
able to meet the challenge. IECG invites legislators, interested parties and the public to visit our website, 
https://wwwgetmaineclimateright.eorn/, to learn more about the IECG and its advocacy for cost- 
effective climate mitigation. 
IECG was the ﬁrst business group to advocate for the original Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative 
legislation, working with legislators, agencies, and environmental organizations to adapt the regional 
program to better meet Maine’s needs. IECG is also proud of the role it played in ensuring strong 
bipartisan support of the Climate Council legislation, and IECG representatives have sewed on the 
Climate Council and many of its workgroups. 
However, IECG feels that it must oppose LD 1411. We do so not because the industrial and energy 
sectors in Maine have failed to meet the challenge of reducing their climate impacts. The DEP’s most 
recent Greenhouse Gas Reduction Progress Report continues to bear this out. I have attached some 
pertinent pages from that report for the committee ’s considerations. It is clear that it is energy use from 
the transportation and residential sectors that need to be addressed and the Climate Council has correctly 
focused efforts on supporting EV adoption and infrastiucture and implementation of lower-emitting 
home heating options.
1
However, we are concerned that this bill represents a departure from the consensus-based, bipartisan 
efforts that have characterized Maine’s climate efforts to date. We believe that this approach is the main 
reason for the success of the Climate Council’s effort to date and we urge that this approach should be 
continued. 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments. IECG is happy to answer questions now or 
provide additional resources for the Committee at the work session.
2
