Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
Senator Joseph Rafferty, Chair  
Representative Michael Brennan, Chair  
Cross Building Room 208  
Augusta ME 04333  
 
Dear Chairmen Rafferty and Brennan  and members of the Committee  
 
The American Heart/Stroke Association supports  LD1183 , An Act "An Act  to Establish the 
School Meal Equipment and Program Improvement Fund ”.  The American Heart Association is 
the largest voluntary health organization fighting to be a relentless force for a world of longer, 
healthier lives.  
 
For almost two decades, the American Heart Association along with other health and food 
security partners have advocated to improve the school meals program at both the Federal and 
State level because we know that proper nutrition is critica l to children’s short - and long -term 
health outcomes. Food insecurity can lead to a variety of negative health conditions, including 
diet-related disease, and has severe consequences on a child’s future health. Schools are a vital 
source of nutrition and a re a bulwark against chronic food insecurity. Food insecurity is at an 
all-time high. This crisis has health, educ ational, and economic consequences, leaving children 
particularly vulnerable to the long -term impact.  
 
We know that providing nutritious  school meals will give all our kids a chance to thrive and 
succeed . Students who participate in school meals, particularly those who are experiencing 
food insecurity, have better health outcomes, have improved test scores, and are better able to 
concentra te in school. Many schools lack critical kitchen equipment to provide nutritious meals 
to meet the needs of their students. This bill would establish a fund to support purchas es of 
school kitchen and cafeteria equipment needed to provide nutritious meals to Maine students, 
as well as funding to support medically necessary dietary restrictions.  Let’s pay for good 
nutrition now instead of poor outcomes later.  
 
Sincerely,  
Allyson Perron  Drag  
American Heart Association/ Stroke Association  
Government Relations Director , Senior Regional Lead  
Allyson.perron@heart.org  
857-540-9686  
 
 

