Testimony of Laura Merrill, Food Service Director RSU 73 Jay, Livermore Falls & Livermore 
ln Support of LD 1183 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Laura Merrill. I am the Food Service Director at RSU 
73. 
Today, l'm submitting testimony in support of LD 1183 “An Act to Establish the School l\' 
/leal 
Equipment and Program Improvement Fund". 
Having grown up in rural Mane I understand the importance of having access to healthy and 
nutritious meals and as a parent I understand the value of healthy school meals. But as a Food 
Sen/ice Director in a community that is economically disadvantaged, ﬁscal responsibility is of 
essence. linherited a department with dysfunctional and decrepit equipment which often results in 
costly repairs. Just recently, we have been forced to replace a double commerical steamer, roughly 
$40,000.00, and a dishwasher, $25,000.00. Thankfully we were able to replace the steamer and 
have obtained grant funding for the replacement of the dishwasher. 
We are mindful that replacing a kettle is in our very near future. This 196?, Kettle will cost between 
$80, 000~100, 000 dollars. 
Staff have had to work creatively around the obstacles we have encountered over the past few 
weeks. This has resulted in additional cost for paper products, menu changes, and additional labor 
hours. The level of commitment and dedication of my staff has often presents as personal sacriﬁce, 
more difficult work, and longer hours. 
Food insecurity is all to real, effecting 1 in 6 students in Maine. Too often, the meals received daily at 
school are the only reliable and nutritionally dense food for many of our youth. No child is able to 
focus on learning when they are hungry. Many schools lack critical equipment needed to provide 
nutritious meals, often resulting in serving prepackaged and processed products. Establishing 
access to funding for replacing ancient equipment will help to ensure reliability and efﬁciency. TheI 
aforementioned will allow schools to focus on the quality of the products being sen/ed and not so 
much concern on HOW can we provide service to our community. 
As a parent and a professional I stand here today asking for your support for this bill. Your support 
for this bill will allow for successful cultivation of community partnerships all while possessing a keen 
sense of ﬁduciary responsibility and ensuring all children in the State of Maine can beneﬁt from your 
support. Thank you co-chairs and committee for your time and commitment to Maine ’s children and 
I will be happy to answer any questions they have. 
Laura Merrill 
Food Service Director RSU73
