- , HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
+ 2 STATE HOUSE STATIoN 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
S“Za“"‘* S““Sb“‘Y TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
134 Park Road 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Residence: (207) 899-6863 
Suzanne.Salisbury@legislature.maine.gov 
April 5, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Suzanne Salisbury in support of 
LD 1183, An Act to Establish the School Meal Equipment and Program Improvement Fund 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Aﬂairs 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Sue Salisbury. I represent House District 128, which is part of the 
town of Westbrook. I am here today to introduce LD 1183, An Act to Establish the School Meal Equipment 
and Program Improvement Fund. 
School nutrition programs across our state are tasked with the important job of feeding Maine’s students and 
often lack the proper equipment to do so. Many Maine schools are ill-equipped to prepare and serve 
nutritious meals as they are challenged with outdated, broken and missing equipment like ovens, stovetops, 
refrigerators, freezers and more. Additionally, Maine school nutrition professionals report an increase in 
students with medically diagnosed food allergies, and schools often lack adequate funding to purchase food 
that is safe for those students to consume. LD ll83 would establish a much-needed fund to support the 
purchases of large kitchen and cafeteria equipment as well as food allergy friendly items that cost more than 
other ingredients. 
In the time since I ﬁrst put this title in, I have come to understand that the Department of Education actually 
has some funding left over from a similar effort that was passed several years ago. Others who come after me 
can provide more information about that funding, why it was passed, and why a portion of the ftmds are 
unspent. For my part, I will simply recommend that you amend this bill to utilize the existing unspent funds 
from the Alternative Breakfast Delivery Service Program within the Department of Education established in 
2019 Public Law Chapter 480 (129‘h Legislature, LD 701). That funding was speciﬁcally intended for 
equipment needed to operate school breakfast, but at this point, what schools really need is a more ﬂexible 
pot of funding that can support the kitchen equipment, cafeteria equipment and specialized products that are 
needed for all meal programs, not just breakfast. Thankfully, we can utilize existing resources to help meet 
this need. 
Thank you for your time, and l am happy to try and answer any questions you may have. 
District 128: Part of Westbrook
