Testimony in SUPPORT of LD 398: “An Act to Make Agricultural Workers and Other Related Workers 
Employees Under the Wage and Hour Laws” & LD 525 “An Act to Protect Farm Workers by Allowing 
Them to Organize for the Purposes of Collective Bargaining” 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing:  
 
My name is Adam Nordell – I am a resident of Belfast, Maine.  I am testifying in support of LD 398 and 
LD 525.  Together with my wife, I operated a produce and grain farm for twelve years, most recently in 
Unity.  I believe that LD 398 and LD 525 should become law to bring Maine farms in-line with the rest of 
the economy, to protect and respect the people whose hard work directly underpins the success of 
Maine’s proud agricultural community. 
 
The milk in your coffee, the broccoli, potatoes & salad greens on your dinner plate, the burger on your 
grill, the blueberries and apples you enjoy all arrived in your home thanks to the daily hard work of 
farmworkers.  Without this workforce, Maine would have an anemic farm economy and our fridge 
shelves would be sparsely populated.  Farmworkers touch every aspect of a farm business from planting, 
cultivation and harvest to tractor operation and equipment maintenance to complex logistical planning.  
It is embarrassing that we fail to value this critical work in the same we value the work of all other 
employees across the economy.  It is inexplicable that we fail to offer the workplace protections for 
these critical workers that everyone else in Maine can take for granted. 
 
Many farms currently struggle to find enough workers to fill their crews, or grapple with training new 
employees every year.  Offering these basic protections and income standards for these workers will 
help stabilize the farm labor market and ensure that more farmworkers bring their expertise back to the 
same farms each year, reducing farmer stress and increasing farm profitability.  A rising tide lifts all 
boats. 
 
Farmworkers deserve a living wage, overtime pay and the right to organize if they are facing unfair or 
unsafe working conditions.  For the many Maine farms that already strive to offer a good place to work, 
extending these protections will only support their efforts to do right by their employees.  For the 
vulnerable farmworkers out there working long hours for sub-minimum wage pay, living in substandard 
employee housing and working in unsafe conditions, these two bills will offer a level playing field. 
 
When farmworkers succeed, farmers succeed and we all eat better.  We can do this.   
 
I urge you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 398 and LD 525.  
 
Thank you, 
Adam Nordell 
