Amelia Keleher
Portland
LD 398
My name is Amelia Keleher and I am a resident of District 2 in Portland, ME. I am 
submitting testimony in support of L.D. 398, An Act to Make Agricultural Workers 
and Other Related Workers Employees Under the Wage and Hour Laws. 
As someone who grew up on a small farm in an agricultural community in New 
Mexico, I saw firsthand how hard farmers and their employees work to bring food to 
our markets, grocery stores, and tables. 
When I first moved to Maine and learned that the state has a sizable migrant 
agricultural workforce, I was initially surprised. Yet since then, I have spoken with 
employees at Mano en Mano, Maine Mobile Health Program, the Maine Department 
of Labor, and most recently, Migrant Justice, all of whom who have provided 
valuable insight into the experience and working conditions of migrant and seasonal 
farmworkers throughout the state of Maine.
Having worked part-time on family-owned farms, I know that farm work can be 
incredibly challenging and exhausting. This is why I believe that migrant and seasonal
farmworkers deserve a safe place to sleep, live, and work, and that they deserve fair 
compensation for working to feed residents throughout Maine and beyond. I believe 
ALL agricultural workers should have the right to the same wage and hour laws and 
protections, without exception, that nearly every other employee has in  Maine. 
Moreover, studies have shown that a healthy and energetic workforce is more likely 
to be productive and reliable.  
A review of those exempt by the current employee protections under 26 MRSA §603, 
subsection 3 reveals a stark history of white supremacy and exploitation in labor 
across the food system. Agricultural workers – alongside employees of the fishing 
industry, taxi drivers, prisoners, and homeworkers – are among those who are 
EXEMPT from standard labor protections. The people employed in these industries 
are disproportionately people of color and/or impoverished in Maine and across the 
country. And white people in power have historically lobbied for these exemptions in 
order to continue to exploit poor people, especially poor people of color. 
Eight other states have enacted overtime protection for farmworkers. If the state of 
California can protect 377,593 farm workers under these laws, Maine can protect its 
13,440 farm workers, including 2,191 migrant workers (Source: 2017 USDA 
Agriculture Census).  
I understand that farming is a tough and uncertain business, often with slim profit 
margins and long hours. At the same time, the success of agriculture – along with a 
productive, healthy, and fairly compensated workforce – is critical to our survival. 
There should be no exceptions to protecting and fairly compensating farm laborers for
their essential work.  
Thank you, 
Amelia Keleher
Portland, Maine
