Testimony to Maine Legislative Committee on Labor and Housing
Chris Laughton, Director of Knowledge Exchange
May 1, 2023
Farm Credit East is a cooperative providing credit and financial services to farm, forest product and
fishing businesses throughout the Northeast. In Maine we provide $969 million in loan commitments to
our 939 customers served from our offices in Auburn and Presque Isle.
I’m submitting testimony today on behalf of our members to express my concern about the potential
impact of LD 398 and LD 525. Both pieces of legislation are likely to increase the cost to employ farm
workers in Maine, even as farm revenues have lagged.
And while proponents of the legislation might argue that farms can simply pass on increased costs to
their customers, in agriculture that is usually not an option. Because while some farms in Maine sell
directly to consumers, many farms sell wholesale with prices driven by regional, national and in some
cases international markets. Even for farms selling locally, there is always price pressure from competing
products from outside the state.
That is why these proposals are problematic, because they put Maine producers at a disadvantage to
producers in other states and countries not subject to the same laws. Maine producers are already
paying higher costs in many cases. Since 2017, minimum wage in Maine has increased by 53%. (from
$9.00 to $13.80 per hour) Most farm commodity prices have increased by substantially less than that,
and many have remained flat.
For farmers who use the H-2A visa program, their minimum wage rate has increased from $12.38 in
2017 to $16.95 in 2023, an increase of 37%. Payroll taxes and workers compensation have also
increased, as they are based on a percentage of wages.
Labor is a significant component of operating costs for Maine farms. According to the USDA, nationwide,
labor accounts for 12% of total farm expenses. In Maine, labor amounts to 24% of total farm expenses.
For Maine fruit farms, that figure is 34%.1
One reason is because farm labor is also more expensive in Maine than in other states. As of fall 2022,
national average wages for all hired farm workers came to $17.72 per hour. In the “Northeast I” region,
which includes Maine, that average comes to $17.87 per hour.2
Meanwhile, farm gross cash income increased by only 1.4% from 2014 to 2021.3
1 USDA 2017 Census of Agriculture
2 USDA NASS Farm Labor, November 2022
3 USDA ERS Farm Income and Wealth Statistics

Across all sectors, Maine agriculture is under pressure. Between the 2012 and 2017 agricultural
censuses, the number of farms in Maine declined by 573, a 7% decline. The amount of active farmland in
Maine also declined by 146,000 acres over that same period, roughly 10% of the total in just 5 years.
During this same period, 82 dairy farms, or 23% of the total, exited the industry. If costs continue to
outpace revenues, the rate at which farms exit the industry is likely to accelerate.
The community of farm workers is diverse, including farmers themselves, members of their extended
families, people from local communities, new Americans, and those on temporary visas. Their goals and
desires vary. Some wish to work as many hours as possible, to maximize their earnings.
If LD 398 were enacted, these workers may find such opportunities limited if farmers cannot justify the
overtime rate considering market prices for their products. Some will get second jobs, and work for
other employers (at straight time), and other workers may just have to accept a reduction in their
earning potential.
During planting and harvest, often the ability to complete work is dictated by the weather making the
overtime provisions of LD 398 unworkable. LD 525 is similarly problematic particularly regarding harvest.
With perishable products and limited windows of time to harvest them, a strike could be devastating to
Maine farmers, especially dairy farmers, who essentially face this situation daily.
I would urge the committee to consider the interests and concerns of farmers as well as farmworkers.
While overtime pay requirements and collective bargaining may seem like they would benefit farm
workers, these two provisions could negatively impact the competitiveness and viability of Maine’s
farms and have unintended impacts on the workers they are intended to help.
