126 Sewall Street . 
E Dina Ma|ua| 
,;g;;?é6M;gn5e8,4,M8,, M aine qu ustice 
www-maineequaliusrice-org People Policy Solutions dma'ua'@meJp"°rg 
MEJ Testimony in Support of 398, An Act to Make Agricultural Workers and Other Related Workers 
Employees Under the Wage and Hour Laws, LD 525, An Act to Protect Farm Workers by Allowing 
Them to Organize for the Purposes of Collective Bargaining, and LD 1483, An Act to Protect the 
Rights of Agricultural Workers 
April 18, 2023 
Good aftemoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor& 
Housing Committee. My name is Dina Malual, I use she/her pronouns, and I’m a Policy 
Advocate with Maine Equal Justice, a nonproﬁt legal aid provider working to increase 
economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. I am testifying in support 
of LD 398, LD 525, and LD 1483. 
Farmworkers are vital to the U.S. economy and to Maine’s economy. These essential 
workers provide an important service, yet they are poorly compensated, face dangerous 
work environments, and are restricted from unionizing and bargaining efforts. Despite 
their contributions, they are excluded from basic labor protections. Farmworkers, like any 
working group, deserve fair compensation, safe work environments, the ability to meet 
with key service and health care providers, and labor protections. 
The deep exploitation of farmworkers dates back to the 1930s during the Great 
Depression. In response to the economic downturn, President Franklin D. Roosevelt 
initiated The New Deal‘ , a series of programs and policies aimed at creating economic 
stability and labor protections; however, the new freedoms outlined in the federal laws 
excluded famiworkers. The two programs birthed from the New Deal, The National 
Labor Relations Act of l935,2 which established the right of workers to join unions and 
to bargain collectively with their employers and the F air Labor Standards Act of 193 8,3 
which set minimum wage, overtime, recordkeeping, and child labor standards, both 
explicitly excluded farmworkers. Despite these labor laws being enacted in the 1930s, 
they continue to negatively affect fannworkers today. 
1 
https://www.history.com/topics/great-depression/new-dea|#sect'ion_1 
2 
https://www.pbs.org/newshour/na ﬁon/labor-laws-left-farm-workers-behind-vulnerable-abuse 
3 
https://www.dol.g0v/agencies/whd/fact-sheets/12- ﬂsa-agriculture
It is clear that fannworkers continue to be excluded from labor protections and these bills 
attempt to correct historical wrongs. Farm wages have not changed since 2012 and its 
effects are evident on Maine farmworkersf where “25% live in poverty, making them 
4.5x as likely to live in poverty as other workers. ” Today, we have the opportunity to 
support farmworkers and help move these workers out of poverty. While we may not 
have been responsible for the exploitation of farmworkers in the past, if we do not 
support policies that correct inequities, we are continuing to make it harder for these 
workers to exercise their well-deserved rights as essential workers in Maine. While most 
Maine workers continue to see an increase in their minimum wage, farmworkers are not 
covered by those increases, despite their vital contributions to society. 
Maine farmworkers are also unable to unionize and bargain for better work conditions. 
This request for equity is not out of the ordinary nor impossible. In fact, similar laws have 
been enacted in California, Hawaii, Oregon, and other states. It is imperative Maine 
follow suit to ensure the safety and equity of farmworkers. 
These bills look to correct disparities that are rooted in historical inequities and work with 
legislators to support a fair and equitable work environment for fannworkers. The goal is 
to create better conditions for a group that is at the forefront of our food supply chain. It 
is imperative that we work together to ensure all Maine workers are protected. For these 
reasons, we urge you to support LD 398, LD 525, and LD 1483. Thank you for your 
consideration.
4 
https://www.mecep.org/blog/maine-must-end-carveouts-that-take-workers —rights-away-from-essential-farmers-an 
d-fo0d-producers/
