 
 
                                                 Testimony on LD 398      
An Act to Make Agricultural Workers and Other Related  
  Workers Employees Under the Wage and Hour Laws 
 
Good afternoon Senator Tipping. Representative Roeder and the other members 
of the Committee on Labor and Housing. 
I’m testifying against LD 398.  
This is the 3rd time I have testified before the Committee on Labor and Housing 
dealing with legislation on the matters before us today, and I have some 
observation of these experiences I would like to share. 
It is apparent that one of the driving forces behind this legislation has been to 
correct the wrongs made decades ago, mainly at the federal level with the 
omission of farm workers classification as employees. 
Much of the agriculture industry depends on the corporations or middle men to 
set the prices they receive for their products.  A smaller segment of agriculture, 
like myself, deal more directly to consumers or markets where they can set the 
price for their products.   
Today most all segments of Agriculture have evolved to its present economic 
form under this system that exempted farm owners from many of the labor laws 
such as minimum wage and overtime rules. Changing this system affects some 
agricultural commodities more than others. It depends on how labor intensive 
they are and through whom they sell their products. 
 
 
 
 
Most Maine farms have less than 6 months to grow and harvest crops to generate 
a year’s income. Because of this the farm work week has evolved to be longer in 
the growing season and shorter the rest of the year.  
Previous testimony has indicated that most farmers pay at least or above 
minimum wage. Many farms us migrant labor. This includes through the US 
government H2A program. 
Farms that obtain workers through the H2A program are required to pay the cost 
for the workers visa, transportation and per diem for travel to their work site and 
back home at the end of the season. They must be provided housing with cooking 
facilities and transportation at least once a weak to go shopping. Workers are 
paid a set rate calculated by the US government for the area they will be working.  
New England’s  2023 rate is $16.95an hour, up $1.29 from 2022. 
The migrant farm workers I know are expecting to work 60 to 70hours a week and 
may not come if they won’t be allowed to work those hours. 
This bill brings the status of the farm worker to the same as all other workers 
under the employee definition. It also affords the same overtime rules other 
employees’ receive. It is the assumption of a 40 hour work week that is most 
troubling in LD 398. Farming is not and never has been the same as other 
workplaces nor should the workweek be considered to be 40 hours.  
I have been using H2A worker for the last 5 years. They arrive in May and work 65 
to 70 hours a week through September. If we are require to pay overtime above 
40 hours there will be an impact to me, my workers and customers. As I have 
considered my options I will probably have to reduce the size of my farm and let 
one of my workers go. I will have to limit the hour the other worker can receive. I 
will also have raise prices to the consumers.  
 
 
 
All farms these impacts will have to make decisions as I am considering. I can’t see 
any winners in this. 
Please send this bill forward with an Ought Not to Pass recommendation. 
 
Respectfully, 
 Eric Seaman 
Seaman’s Farm 
Litchfield 
 
 
