Maine Dairy Industry Association Annie Watson, President 
PO Box 5013 | 337 State Street Dale Cole, Vice President 
Augusta, ME 04430 Jason Tessier, Secretary 
Heath Miller, Treasurer 
Dick Perkins, At Large 
4/l8/23 
LD 398 An Act to Make Agricultural Workers and Other Related Workers Employees 
Under the Wage and Hour Laws 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor 
and Housing, 
My name is Heath Miller I’m a dairy farmer from Newburgh and I am here today on behalf of 
the Maine Dairy Industry Association, otherwise known as MDIA. MDIA is a dairy fanner led 
organization that represents all the dairy cattle operations in the state. It is on behalf of the I58 
dairy farms left in our state that we are here to testify in opposition to LD 398, An Act to Make 
Agricultural Workers and Other Related Workers Employees Under the Wage and Hour Laws. 
Agricultural work is as unique, as the people who do the work. It often requires long hours that 
are not set by a clock, but instead the weather. It means some days are long days, while others are 
not. Many people choose to work in agriculture for the very reason that the long hours required 
during certain times of the year will afford them enough income to sustain them for the entire 
year. They reap beneﬁts that are not always marked in dollars and cents but may be viewed as 
quality of life in choosing when to work and when to rest. In the dairy world, the time 
requirement changes based on the season, but the work continues year-round. 
Labor challenges in Maine are one of the most widespread issues for our agricultural community, 
especially for our dairy farms. Getting dirty milking cows, every day, two or oﬁen three timesa 
day, 365 days a year, is not for everyone. The dynamics of the job often become self-selecting as 
one knows that hard work and long hours are part of the package. However, the competition to 
get people to work on dairy farms ~ or any farms — is extremely challenging. 
Most fanns are considered “price takers” , meaning that the farmer has minimal control over the 
price that they may be able to get for the crops and products they work so hard to produce. The 
only control they have toward achieving ﬁnancial sustainability is a reduction in expenses. If LD 
398 is passed, farms will be forced to limit employee hours as a means of controlling expenses. 
While the farm will likely have to hire more workers to do the same amount of work, the
Maine Dairy Industry Association Annie Watson, President 
PO Box 5013 | 337 State Street Dale Cole, Vice President 
Augusta, ME 04430 Jason Tessier, Secretary 
Heath Miller, Treasurer 
Dick Perkins, At Large 
individual workers will make less money, thus reducing the ability of Maine workers to eama 
living wage. 
As many of you know, many of our dairy farms are facing a ﬁnancial crisis due to the record 
inﬂation we have experienced in the last year. Again, the “price-taker ” position our farms are in 
has meant that many of our producers have been operating at a loss for at least the last year. 
Every penny-pinching method has been considered and utilized during this time, resulting in 
many of our dairies considering whether to stay in business. The money that does come into our 
farm operations goes right back out, ﬁrst to employees, then to vendors. Often, farmers forego 
paying themselves to ensure their labor force is adequately supported. 
Forcing a mandate to pay more through overtime will not change anything, other than potentially 
forcing farms out of business faster. This would mean fewer small businesses paying property, 
income, employment taxes; fewer available jobs for people in Maine; fewer options for Maine 
people to source food and fiber products locally. It would mean more house lots, and solar 
arrays, less open land for carbon sequestration and fewer open spaces for recreational activities. 
The dairy farmers of Maine urge you to vote “ought-not-to-pass ” on LD 398. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify . Im happy to answer any questions you have now or for 
the work session. 
Heath Miller 
MDIA Treasurer 
Greenvallefarm@hotmail.com
