Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and distinguished members of the Committee on Labor & Housing:  My name is Jane Makela, and I live in Falmouth. I offer this testimony in support of LD 398, An Act to Make Agricultural Workers and Other Related Workers Employees Under the Wage and Hour Laws. I spent most of my four-decade legal career focusing on labor and employment laws and advising employers how to comply with them. However, I write this testimony as a consumer and a person committed to equity, justice and human dignity for all Mainers, regardless of the nature of the business they work in.  It is shameful enough that we have a federal minimum wage that is stuck at a level that cannot provide employees with even the bare necessities, but the fact the State of Maine recognized the inadequacy of that minimum wage and increased it for those who labor in Maine but then simply defined farmworkers out of its benefit, is unconscionable. The fact that most Maine agricultural workers are already apparently compensated at or above Maine’s minimum wage according to the Maine Labor Department (testifying in the 130th Legislature on LD 1022) most likely reflects what employers must now pay to get agricultural workers to fill their jobs when there is a general labor shortage: it doesn’t excuse failing to embed that minimum wage protection in the law that would also apply if workers became more plentiful.  If the issue is really the economic consequence of providing agricultural workers with overtime rights, Maine should look to states that have enacted such protections for agricultural workers without apparent economic disaster ensuing—including California, Colorado, Hawaii, Minnesota, New York and Washington (some with modifications such as a graduated phase-in over a period of years, as the current bill proposes). But the fact that agricultural employers or consumers want to keep food costs from going up should have no weight in the decision whether to afford basic wage-hour protections to agricultural workers. Asking agricultural workers to subsidize our grocery bills (or keep our farming businesses afloat) by foregoing basic economic rights afforded to almost all other workers in our state is unjust and unacceptable.  I urge you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 398. Thank you.   
