Testimony of Jeannie M. Tapley, Director of Operations, Maine Potato Board to 
the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
April 18, 2023 
LD 398 — An Act to Make Agricultural Workers and Other Related Workers Employees 
Under the Wage and Hour Laws 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing Committee; I 
am Jeannie Tapley, Director of Operations for the Maine Potato Board (MPB) and would like to 
express the MPB's opposition to LD 398: An Act to Make Agricultural Workers and Other Related 
Workers Employees Under the Wage and Hour Laws. 
We are here in opposition to LD 398, which if passed would have an enormous negative impact 
on the potato industry in Maine and we believe all agriculture in this state. The long-standing 
exemption for overtime for agricultural workers was put in place recognizing the unique nature 
of agriculture production. In Maine, we have a very limited time in which to raise and harvest 
crops; in the potato industry, that is approximately 120 days. Agriculture is also faced with 
factors we have no control over such as the weather; we can’t plant a crop until ground 
conditions are suitable, we can’t plant in wet soil conditions and if it rains, cultivation and 
management of the crop during the summer is impacted. Harvesting can only begin when the 
crop has reached maturity and again can’t be done in wet conditions. 
What this all means is that Mother Nature has more control over when we can do our work then 
the grower. Therefore, overtime is unavoidable if growers are to plant, manage and harvest a 
quality crop, which is the key to their success and sustainability, as well as feeding our 
communities. We would all enjoy being able to work ﬁve days a week, eight hours a day and 
produce a quality crop; that just isn’t an option when you are working in agriculture. 
Understanding the limitations agriculture has as it relates to when and how long you have to 
work given various conditions, the elimination of the overtime exemption would have a huge 
negative impact on the potato industry in Maine. In preparing for this public hearing, we dida 
survey of twelve potato growers across the state on what the impact would be for them; just 
looking at the short period of time for planting and harvest. We looked at this short window of 
time because it was the easiest for growers to determine, but it’s not the only periods when 
overtime is needed. What we found was very eye opening when you look at the cost for labor 
with and without overtime. 
In surveying those growers, we found that average weekly wages paid with overtime would 
increase by $82,630 or $495,780 annually for those twelve growers, keep in mind this is only for 
the very short window of time for planting and harvest. The twelve growers included in this 
survey represent an estimated 7,000 acres or approximately 13.5% of the total potato production 
in Maine. There were 98 full-time and 279 part-time employees included in this survey with the 
average full-time wage being $21.30 and an average part-time wage of $16. 1 5. The increase of 
$495,780 annually would mean an increase of approximately $70.83 per acre; if you use this 
increase cost per acre and apply it to total potato production of 52,000 acres, the impact of 
elimination of the overtime exemption could cost potato growers in Maine an additional 
$3,683,160; this increase would be devastating to our industry. Again, these numbers only 
represent the short period of time of planting and harvest so the actual impact will be much
greater than the $3,683,160. The estimated increase does not include the increased costs of 
beneﬁts paid for by the grower such as Social Security, Medicare, workers compensation or 
unemployment all based on income. 
Some may say that this additional cost can be either absorbed by the grower or passed on to the 
buyer, but that is just impossible; grower margins are not large enough to allow for this increase 
and agriculture producers are not price setters, they are price takers with very little control of 
market prices. 
The potato industry in Maine has always taken great pride in what we do, how we take care of 
the land, and provide healthy quality food to Maine residents and beyond; this also includes 
taking care of our employees. If LD 398 passes many potato growers will have to make hard 
business decisions to ensure they can continue to operate; in some cases that will mean rather 
than paying more for labor they will invest in equipment that will allow them to hire fewer 
employees. I also worry with the current inﬂation on diesel, fertilizer, electricity, etc. that some 
of our small farm families will be faced with the hard decision on whether to get done farming 
because they won’t be able to afford labor at these rates. 
We ask that you vote ought not to pass on LD 398 and show your continued support for 
agriculture in Maine. I will be happy to answer any questions you have; I will be available for 
the work session and can provide any additional infonnation necessary.
