Jeffrey Spear 
Spear Farms, Nobleboro 
April 18, 2023 
LD 398 An Act to Make Agricultural Workers and Other Related 
Workers Employees Under the Wage and Hour Laws 
Good afternoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and 
members of the Labor and Housing Committee. My name is 
Jeffrey Spear. My family owns Spear Farm in Nobleboro, Maine 
where we raise vegetables, hay, and beef.
» 
I am here today in opposition to LD 398. I sat down and went 
through all of last year's time cards and ﬁgured out how much 
overtime I would have to pay. It ended up being 125,000 dollars 
extra in overtime pay. Taken with many other factors it's basically 
adding 25 percent to their yearly payroll.' 
This means ﬁnding a way to make another 125,000 dollars gross 
profit NOT gross revenue. Why grow more to have more 
expenses - fuel which has gone up in cost by over 78 percent 
from 2021 to 2022, seed which has gone up by 12 percent, 
fertilizer has gone up over 100 percent, packaging up by 25 
percent and repairs to equipment which of course is also sky 
high. Add in labor and now overtime and forget it we are done. 
We call this the trickle down effect- the trickle down effect of 
death.
Sure l can try to build more housing and increase my work force 
and the minute they hit 39 hours and 55 minutes their day is done 
and they go home for the week. 
l think that there is a perception here in Maine that farm workers 
are underpaid and mistreated. Minimum wage in Maine is 13.80 
under the H2A program which is a good majority of the production 
farmshere in the state it is 17.00! hour. That money is theirs 
without any costs taken out for where they live. The farm workers 
pay no housing costs- nothing -ZERO - no rent, electricity, heat, 
hot water, internet. They also pay ZERO travel costs to and from 
their country to Maine. All of this cost is on the backs of the 
farmers. 
lf you vote in favor of this because you think you are helping the 
farm workers you are so wrong. You will put Maine farmers out 
of business and farm workers out of a job.~ 
You can then tell Hannaford, Good Shepherd, Maine schools, 
universities, and all others that they can all take down the “We 
Support Local Farms” signs because there will not be any in the 
state. 
This is the most sure ﬁre way to support corporate - Walmart 
farming ever. 
Please Vote in Opposition to this bill on behalf of farmers. 
Thank you, 
Jeff Spear
