Maine Farm Bureau Association 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO LD 398 AN ACT TO MAKE 
AGRICULTURAL WORKERS AND OTHER RELATED 
WORKERS EMPLOYEES UNDER THE WAGE AND HOUR 
LAWS 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and honorable members of the Committee on Labor 
and Housing: 
My name is Julie Ann Smith and I am the Executive Director of the Maine Farm Bureau 
Association, the state’s largest farmer-run advocacy organization. We have represented the 
voice of all agriculture in Maine for the past 70 years and I am grateful to have the opportunity 
to serve as the voice of our farmers today. 
Our farmer members voted to strongly oppose this bill as presented. During the 129th 
Legislature, the chairs of this committee sent a letter to Commissioner F ortman requesting that 
interested parties be convened to “discuss wages, hours worked and collective bargaining for 
agricultural and seasonal employees. ” The interested parties met once, on November 4, 2019. 
As a result of the initial meeting, it was agreed that further discussions needed to take place. 
Regrettably, no further meetings were scheduled and no consensus was achieved. 
This bill was developed without any input from Maine’s 7,600 farmers. It is based on laws that 
have been passed in other states, however, it does not provide the same support to implement 
overtime requirements. Generally, when a state has implemented the change in overtime 
thresholds, these changes are implemented over a period of five to ten years. Typically, the 
threshold decreases in a tiered fashion, starting with a higher baseline weekly and/ or daily 
overtime threshold —e. g. 60 hours per week, 12 hours per day—and decreases each year until it 
meets the goal threshold. To expect Maine’s small family farms to change their wage structure 
in a mere three years is an unreasonable goal. 
Some states have set a final threshold of 60 hours per week, while others have implemented a 
threshold of 48 hours per week. Additionally, some states further differentiate the 
implementation of thresholds for different producers based on size or type and provide limited 
exemptions. The implementation can either differentiate based on the number of employees, 
the ﬁnancial size of the operations, or the nature of the operation. Some states require quicker 
implementation for larger producers, while others have different overtime thresholds for large 
and small operations. There is also an important distinction based on the nature of an 
operation. This nuance provides operations that are “highly seasonal ” a different threshold 
during the seasonal times, such as planting and harvesting. Additionally, states commonly 
allow producers to break the peak weeks into 2 or 3 periods. 
Farms in Maine are price-takers, not price setters. Farmers are generally told what price they 
will be paid for their product by wholesalers, sometimes long after that product is already on 
store shelves. Farmers have to make significant up—front investments in seed, soil amendments 
4 Gabriel Drive Suite 1, Augusta, Maine 04330 
(207) 622-4111 // www.mainefarmbureau.com // info@mainefarmbureau.com
1’ 
and other necessary products to produce the food our neighbors eat. Usually these upfront 
investment costs are covered by loans that have to be repaid shortly after harvest. Maine 
farmers have some of the highest production costs in the country coupled with the shortest 
growing season, which is why 90% of the food sold in Maine is imported. 
The price most farmers are paid for their product has remained stagnant or decreased in the 
past 5 years, while labor costs have risen 35% to 50%. Farm workers have seen their wages rise, 
but the farm owners, who are also farm workers, have seen their wages decrease. Maine farms 
cannot sustain any further substantial increase to labor costs. If the economic health of the 
farm fails, there will be no farm jobs. 
At some point, after years of negligible or negative income, farmers quit. They sell their land 
for house lots to pay off their debts and are lucky if they break even. Once a house is built, 
municipalities see their costs increase and the land will probably never be farmed again. 
As house lots increase and farmland decreases, Maine loses its ability to produce its own food. 
As the COVID-19 pandemic showed, Maine farms were able to step up and provide food to our 
neighbors when grocery store shelves were empty. If farms are forced to close due to increased 
labor costs, what will we do during the next pandemic? 
Thank you for your time today and your service to the people of Maine, especially our farmers. 
I would be happy to answer any questions. 
4 Gabriel Drive Suite 1, Augusta, Maine 04330 
(207) 622-4111 // www.mainefarmbureau.com // info@mainefarmbureau.com
