Kharma Amos
Lisbon
LD 398
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing: 
My name is Rev. Dr. Kharma Amos. I am a resident of Lisbon, I serve a congregation
in Brunswick, and I am testifying in support of LD 398 - An Act to Make Agricultural
Workers and Other Related Workers Employees Under the Wage and Hour Laws, and
LD 535 - An Act to Protect Farm Workers By Allowing Them to Organize for the 
Purposes of Collective Bargaining.  I believe LD 398 and LD 535 should become law 
first and foremost as an issue of basic human rights and equity. 
Farmworkers in Maine haven’t seen wage increases since 2012, and are 4.5 times as 
likely to live in poverty as other workers in Maine.  This is not fair.  We have a 
responsibility to care for all of our citizens, and excluding farm workers from Labor 
Laws governing other workers is doing harm to them and all of us who are dependent 
upon their work for our survival. LD 398 will phase in wage laws and overtime for 
farmworkers equal to that of other workers in Maine.  LD 535 will permit 
farmworkers to organize and join a union to advocate and lobby for fair wages, 
reasonable schedules, safe working conditions, humane housing accommodations, and
the removal of employer threats and intimidation.  
My Unitarian Universalist faith affirms and promotes the inherent worth and dignity 
of all people, as well as justice, equity and compassion in human relations.  LD 398 
and LD 535 will acknowledge the debt all the citizens of Maine owe to farm workers, 
and offer them a pathway to more just and equitable work.  I hope it might also 
contribute to a healthier state of mind and heart for farmers and their families, as 
resources currently being used to cope with anxiety, fear, and insufficient resources 
might be channeled in ways that leave them with a higher quality of life even as it 
increases the quality of their produce.
For all these reasons, we must act now to lessen current inequalities and empower 
farmworkers.  I urge you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 398 and LD 535. 
Thank you

