May 6, 2023  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder  and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing : 
 
We, the undersigned Maine potato producers , write to you to voice our opposition of LD 398: An Act to 
Make  Agricultural  Workers  and Other  Related Workers  Employees  Under the Wage and Hour Laws . We 
collectively represent all sectors of the Maine potato industry  – tablestock, processing and seed.  
 
The long -standing exemption for overtime for agricultural workers was put in place recognizing the 
unique nature of agriculture production.  In Maine, we have a very limited time in which to raise and 
harvest crops; in the potato industry, that is approximately 120 days.  Agriculture is also faced with 
factors we have no control over such as the weather; we can’t plant a crop until ground conditions are 
suitable, we can’t plant in wet soil conditions and if it rains, cultivation and management of the crop 
during the summer is impacted. Harvesting can only begin when the crop has reached mat urity and 
again can’t be done in wet conditions.  Maine is very unique and unlike any other state in regards to our 
growing season, which is very short  in comparison.  
 
Understanding the limitations agriculture has as it relates to when and how long you hav e to work given 
various conditions, the elimination of the overtime exemption would have an enormous negative impact 
on the potato industry in Maine.  As stated by our staff with the Maine Potato Board, that would be 
approximately $3.6 million dollar s. 
 
The potato industry in Maine has always taken great pride in what we do, how we take care of the land, 
and provide healthy quality food to Maine residents and beyond; this also includes taking care of our 
employees. If LD 398 passes many potato growers will h ave to make hard business decisions to ensure 
they can continue to operate; in some cases that will mean rather than paying more for labor they will 
invest in equipment that will allow them to hire fewer employees. With  current inflation on diesel, 
fertili zer, electricity, etc , another financial hit  like LD398 would cause could be the final blow.  
 
We apologize that we are not able to attend these hearings in person, but due to this being a busy time of year 
for the potato industry with planting starting, we hope you can understand our position on needing to be on our 
farms.  
 
We ask that you please  support Maine agriculture by not adding additional burdens on our family farms and 
vote ought not to pass on LD 398.  
 
Thank you,  
Ayotte Farms; Hamlin  
Campbell Family Farms ; Littleton  
Mountain View Seed Farms LLC; Bridgewater  
Three Oak Farms; Sherman  
LaJoie Growers LLC; Van Buren  
Hagan Farms; Hodgdon  
Jeff and Owen Smith, Inc.; Mapleton  
LaBrie Farms LLC; St. Agatha  
Crane Brothers; Exeter  
Fitzpatrick Peabody Farms; Houlton  
Irving Farms; Caribou  
Blackstone Farms; Caribou  
Miller Farms, LLC; Houlton  
Double B Farms; Bridgewater  
Corey Farms; Monticello  
County Super Spuds; Mars Hill  
Penobscot -McCrum; Washburn  
Miller Farms LLC; Houlton  
Bell Brothers; Mars Hill  Wright Farms; Littleton  
County Farms; Mars Hill  
White Farms; Washburn  
Marquis Farms; Van Buren  
Double G Farms; Blaine  
Bradstreet Family Farms; Bridgewater  
Bartlett Farms; Littleton  
Staples Farms; Presque Isle  
Kingsbury  Family Farm;  Mars Hill  
Blackstone Seed Growers; Caribou  
Flewelling Farms; Easton  
Hemphill Farms; Mapleton  
Whited Farms LLC; Bridgewater  
Paradis Farms, Inc; Frenchville  
G&S Farms, Inc.; Fort Kent  
Nightingale Far ms, LLC; New Limerick  
Seed Pro Inc; Cr ystal 
Maine Farmers Exchange; Presque Isle  
