 
Senator Tippi ng, Representative Roeder , and members of the Committee on Labor and 
Housing.  My name is Michael Goss and I am a 2nd generation farmer and farm manager at Goss 
Berry Farm in Mechanic Falls. I am writing to testify against LD398 and LD 525, An Act to Make 
Agricultural Workers and Other Workers Employees Under the Wage and Hour Laws  and An Act 
to Protect Farm Workers by A llowing Them to Organize for the Purpose of Collective 
Bargaining . 
We are a small family farm that grow s a variety of crops, b ut we  are most known for our small 
fruits ( raspberr ies, b lueberries,  and strawberries) . Like m ost farms in this state we are 
struggling against  rising input prices , scarce labor  availability , and foreign  competition 
undercutting prices . Current ly 60% of fresh fruit consumed i n the USA is grown in a foreign  
country  per the USD A.  
Farming has  been getting more expensive and more difficult  year to year.  These bill s will 
radically in crease farm labor cost, whic h is the biggest expense any farm has. If a farm sells to a 
grocery chain, such as Hannaford or Wal Mart then the farmer can not increase p rices  to make 
up for the increase d cost  because the  store s set the prices and the  farm can take it or leave it.   
Many farms hire foreign  workers under the H2A program w hich already has a minimum wage 
of $16.95/hr  in Maine , and increases eve ry year . Also , the farm is re quired to pro vide free 
housing to workers a t no cost to them. We are currently  renting a building for a year round 
lease  for $1,200/month plus utilities  just to hous e 2 workers from June -October .   Foreign  
workers t hat come to Maine to work for the summer want to work a s many hours as possible to 
make as much money as possible before they go home . If farms were to  limit H2A workers to 
40hr/week then those workers would not return back to work for so f ew hours.   
 If passed these bills will hurt Maine  farms and Maine ’s agriculture industry .  
