LD 398: An Act to Make Agricultural Workers and Other Related Workers Employees Under the Wage 
and Hours Laws 
Nathan Drummond, Six River Farm 
52 Center Point Rd, Bowdoinham Maine 04008 
(207) 666-8135 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the committee: 
I am an owner of Six River Farm, an organic vegetable farm located in Bowdoinham.  My testimony is 
neither for nor against LD 398.  Instead, I encourage this committee to hold LD 398 over to the next 
session to allow for the crafting of an improved bill that is more effective in both improving working 
conditions and compensation for farm workers and limiting financial stress on Maine’s farmers. 
 
There are passionate and accurate positions on both sides of this issue: farm workers need more 
protections and fair treatment and pay AND many Maine farms are already under significant financial 
stress due to drastic increases in input and labor costs over the last three years and overtime pay 
requirements, especially during busy harvest seasons, will be very financially challenging.  In my view, 
the proposed legislation, does not do enough to improve farm work conditions across a range of issues, 
including compensation, work requirements and housing AND it does not deal with the issue of 
overtime pay in a nuanced manner that reflects the seasonal, labor and financial realities of Maine’s 
diverse farming community. 
 
This committee need only look to legislation that other states have passed to address to see that there 
exists a range of approaches to this issue, many of which might offer guidance towards more balanced 
and comprehensive legislation.  Below is a quick analysis of existing state laws related to just one piece 
of this issue: farm worker overtime pay: 
 
Not surprisingly, actual overtime laws vary significantly.  Here is what I found (based 
on farmworkerjustice.org .  Also, I should note that some of these states still retain a range of 
exemptions for different definitions of ag. workers which continue to be uncovered): 
-New York: 1.5 pay rate after 56 hours with gradual phase in to 40 hours by 2032; refundable 
overtime tax credit and workforce retention tax credit for farmers.  
-Maryland: 1.5 pay rate after 60 hours 
-Pennsylvania: No overtime requirement, but employers are prevented from requiring seasonal 
agricultural workers from working in excess of 6 days/week, 8 hrs/day, 48 hrs/week 
-Minnesota: 1.5 pay rate after 48 hours 
-Colorado: 1.5 pay rate after 60 hours: “contains multiple exceptions including for seasonal 
agricultural employers and small farms.” 
-California: 1.5 pay after 40 hours; phased in at different rates for farms under 25 employees 
-Oregon: 1.5 pay after 40 hours; phased in by 2027 
-Washington: 1.5 pay after 40 hours; phased in by 2024 
-Hawaii: “The agricultural employer may pick 20 weeks out of the year when overtime pay is 
exempt up to 48 hours. After 48 hours a week, overtime is required” 
 
A couple things that stick out to me.  All states have set overtime pay rates at 1.5 times wages.  
However, states have varied considerably on what the weekly hour threshold for agricultural 
workers should be.  Some states, Colorado and Hawaii, have structured their laws with 
particular attention to seasonal exemptions.  Finally, there are regional differences.  California, 
Oregon and Washington are the most progressive in terms of their hour threshold.  These are 
all HUGE agricultural states with some of the largest, most mechanize, high-tech and efficient 
farms in the country (especially in labor intensive fruit and vegetable sectors).  Importantly, for 
this topic, they tend to share an agricultural labor pool, which I imagine helped make it 
politically possible for Oregon and Washington to set overtime thresholds at 40 hours.  In 
Northeast, few states currently have overtime requirements for farm workers, and those that 
do (NY and MY) have a much higher threshold at 56-60hrs.  Notably, PA does not have an 
overtime pay requirement, but does have laws preventing employers from forcing seasonal 
farm workers from working beyond 48 hours a week.  Vermont and Mass, the two state’s 
whose agricultural sectors are most similar to Maine’s in terms of scale and crops do not 
currently have overtime pay requirements for farm workers. 
 
Based on other states, I think there are numerous avenues for a compromise on the overtime 
issue in particular that would serve to both protect farm workers from exploitative practices 
and also reduce the financial stress on farmers, especially those that have significant seasonal 
labor needs and/or rely on the an H2A labor force.  The most obvious compromise would be to 
set the overtime hour threshold somewhere between 50-60 hours.  This would still make Maine 
a regional leader in terms of overtime protection for farm workers.  Potentially, this could be 
paired with legislation similar to that in PA, that would limit employers from requiring farm 
workers from working over a certain threshold of hours per week (say 50 hrs).  This would 
provide an enforceable measure to protect workers in exploitative work places, while reducing 
the potential harm to h2a (and other) workers who want to work longer work weeks.  Or Maine 
could look to emulate Hawaii and set an overtime threshold at 40 hours, but allow employers 
to choose a seasonal period (20-26 weeks) whereby the threshold increased to 50-60 hours.  
And finally, Maine could consider tax credits and/or other ag. Investment funding, similar to NY, 
that would offer farmers assistance in balancing the new labor costs imposed by overtime 
requirements. 
 
For those who will understandably counter that Maine should aim high on the issue of overtime 
and emulate California with a 40-hour threshold, I think it is worth considering the differences 
between the agricultural sectors in California and Maine.  Agriculture in California is deeply bi-
furcated between huge farm and very small farms.  There are few 150 cow dairies or 50-acre 
vegetable farms in California.  Maine, still has a number of medium sized farms, across different 
sectors.  One of my prime concerns about the overtime pay requirement in particular is that it 
will be financially stressful for this scale of farm, where labor needs are high but scale, capital 
and even landscape do not lend themselves to significant mechanization or uptake of 
technology.  
 
The above suggestions are just a few possible forms that legislation might take, but hopefully 
they can at least start the conversation.  The needs in regard to farm workers in Maine are real, 
but so too are the potential consequences for Maine farmers, both intended and unintended.  I 
strongly believe that both Maine farm workers and farmers deserve better legislation than LD 
398 – legislation that can position Maine as a leader in both farm worker rights and in 
promoting a future for a strong and sustainable agricultural sector.  I again, encourage this 
committee to hold over LD 398 to allow varied stakeholders in to come together and draft that 
legislation. 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration, 
 
Nate Drummond 
