Nicolas Lindholm
Penobscot
LD 398
I am an organic wild blueberry farmer, certified by MOFGA since 1996, with a 
seasonal full-time crew of 12-16 people that harvest and process 25,000-35,000 lbs. of
fresh-pack and frozen berries. My wife and I own and lease seven wild blueberry 
fields across five towns in the Blue Hill area, and sell much of our crop 
direct-to-consumer from our farm, with the balance being sold to Merrill’s freezer in 
Hancock. We are also now constructing a new wild blueberry processing/freezing 
facility in North Penobscot, where we will be expanding our business to process and 
market berries from other organic growers across the state, adding more year-round 
employment opportunities in our community.  We support LD 398, as we see farm 
work and farm workers as highly skilled, highly valued labor and would like to see 
the end of exploitive labor practices that cheapen food and devalue farm work. The 
current, longstanding conditions that these bills address are built on exploiting the 
labor (primarily of people of color) to the benefit of the industry business owners and 
landowners, and are the residue of policies steeped in racism from the 1930's when 
they were created. We have built our farm business on an economic model that 
supports and has always paid above-minimum wage labor and kept work weeks to 
under 45 hours, and so from experience know that changes in the status quo of how 
our country has come to produce its food can and should be changed to support an 
ideology that holds farm work as highly skilled and highly valued labor.  In our area 
and across Maine, there is a limited pool of labor, and each summer, we have to 
directly compete with all of the other non-agricultural job opportunities, which 
include restaurant, retail, and service industries work, where wages are always better 
than historically constricted farm-work wages.  We support efforts to create a level 
playing field where agricultural employment is held and seen in the same legal, social,
cultural and economic standards as all other employment opportunities in our state.  
Thank you.
