LD 398 
An Act to Make Agricultural Workers and Other Related Workers 
Employees Under the Wage and Hour Laws 
Penelope (Penny) Jordan Cape Elizabeth, ME 
(207) 671-5341 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the committee I am Penny Jordan, I am 
one of the owners of J ordan’s Farm a mixed vegetable farm in Cape Elizabeth and I am here to 
testify neither for nor against LD 398. I present this position because I believe this bill isa 
simplistic solution to a complex issue. 
I believe farm workers should be paid a fair and living wage, they should be treated respectfully, 
they should not be required/forced to work extoitionate hours, and their housing, if provided, 
should demonstrate respect and value for the employees. 
My fundamental question is — what is the root problem we are trying to solve and does this 
achieve that? Is it the inequity of how one perceives farm workers being treated? Does having 
agricultural workers deﬁned as employees truly address inequities? I suggest we recognize the 
value of farm workers by getting outside the box and creating policy that sets them apart from 
other workers — they are vital to Maine’s food system — they do not produce widgets they help 
produce food. 
I have researched how other states have implemented similar laws and there are elements that 
make sense, others are status quo and I believe serve as a band-aid, not a 21st-century solution. 
I believe compensation policy needs to recognize the characteristics of our fanns and consider 
elements such as the type of farm, seasonality, year-round operation, number of employees, 
hourly rate, piece work rate, and maximum hours, and how they inﬂuence crafting meaningful 
policy. 
Most importantly I ask that Maine push the envelope and considers radical change that 
recognizes fanns and farm workers are producing an important element for society and 
legislation should reﬂect this fact. 
This bill as written will reduce the amiual income of farm workers and will reduce food 
production at the same time we seek to expand food production in Maine. 
I could support a bill that is grounded in an understanding of the industry from the perspective of 
the farmers and the workers. I hope you consider holding this bill over until the next session and 
during that time bring a group of stakeholders together to dig deep and develop solutions that can 
work for farm workers and farm owners. I am more than willing to be part of that group. 
“You never change things by changing the existing reality. To change something, build a new 
model that makes the existing obsolete." 
R Buckminster Fuller
1
Elements to consider with input from industry stakeholders. Some of these elements have been 
implemented by other states: 
- HOUSING AND OTHER EXPENSES — Can there be an offset for housing, vehicles, and 
living expenses? When I estimate the cost of housing and a vehicle for our workers this 
equates to roughly $1,000/month/ee (ﬁguring market rate rent, split 3 ways along witha 
vehicle, cable, and utilities). 
- DAYS OFF — Require that farm workers receive a minimum of l full day off per week. 
- HEALTH CARE — Develop health and dental insurance program for fann workers. 
- PAID TIME OFF — I support paid time off for farm workers. We have offered this for several 
years and it has not presented an issue. We created a policy on when it can be used for 
planned events, and we recognize illness happens. 
- HOURS THRESHOLD — The hour’s threshold might need to vary at certain times of the 
year such as harvest time to beat the frost, or planting to hit a certain window. The threshold 
also needs to consider the desire of the workers that leave their families to earn a living ina 
very short window. 
- TAX CREDIT - One state implemented a tax credit for fanns to help with the transition. This 
is an interesting idea, but I don’t think it takes care of the fundamental issue that the solutions 
haven’t gotten to the crux of the issue. 
- MINIMUM WAGE — Most states that have passed an overtime law have a minimum wage of 
$13.00 - $15.00 per hour. Most farms in southem Maine pay above this rate. Maybe we need 
to look at the base rate for fann workers (hourly and piecework) and put something in place 
that works for farms and workers. 
- AG INVESTMENT — Any law that increases payroll should consider a ﬁscal note that 
invests in gaining efﬁciencies on farms. To implement a bill such as this there needs to bea 
strategy for funding investment in equipment and infrastructure to reduce the demand for 
labor. 
- REDUCE WORKER TAX LIABILITY — consider eliminating or reducing Maine income 
taxes for workers. I recognize they might get this returned to them, but this simpliﬁes things 
for the worker, and the portion they do pay in could maybe fund health care.. 
I also know that Maine hopes to grow agriculture not watch it erode and ﬁelds become fallow. 
Maine can, as we always say, become the breadbasket of New England ~ and we can only do this 
if we are able to maintain some level of proﬁtability and are able to afford skilled labor. 
I have said for many years that farms (and their employees) should be viewed differently— 
differently from other businesses — farms produce food — a critical element of life. Until we start 
to address this food imports will continue to exceed what we grow.
2
