STATE OF MAINE 
g I. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
Ti" SPEAKER'S OFFICE 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
*1“ (207) 287-1300 
RACHEL TALBOT ROSS 
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE 
Tuesday, April 18th, 2023 
Testimony of Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross presenting 
LD 3 98, An Act to Make Agricultural Workers and Other Related 
Workers Employees Under the Wage and Hour Laws 
LD 525, An Act to Protect F armworkers by Allowing Them to 
Organize for the Purposes of Collective Bargaining 
and in support of 
LD 1483, An Act to Protect the Rights of Agricultural Workers 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor & Housing 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and esteemed members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, I am Rachel Talbot Ross. I represent 
House District 118 which is the Portland neighborhoods of Parkside, Bayside, East 
Bayside, Oakland and the University of Southem Maine Campus and I also have 
the distinct honor of serving as the Maine Speaker of the House. I am here today to 
present LD 398, An Act to Make Agricultural Workers and Other Related 
Workers Employees Under the Wage and Hour Laws and LD 525, An Act to 
Protect Farmworkers by Allowing Them to Organize for the Purposes of 
Collective Bargaining. I am also here in support of LD 1483, An Act to Protect 
the Rights of Agricultural Workers though I will not be discussing that in detail. 
The Equal Protection Clause of the United States Constitution provides, “No 
state shall deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protections of the 
laws.” Similarly, Article l, section 6-A of the Maine Constitution has the following 
language, “No person shall be denied the equal protection of the laws.” I ask 
you to keep those constitutional principles in mind as you consider my testimony 
this afternoon. 
Historically, agricultural Workers, or farmworkers, have been speciﬁcally 
excluded from basic labor laws that protect most workers. They have been denied 
equal protection under both federal and state law. Currently, in 2023, Maine 
farmworkers are still not considered employees under fundamental state labor law. 
District 118: Portland neighborhoods of Parkside, Bayside, East Bayside, Oakdale and 
the University of Southern Maine Campus
work is available. Fannworkers who work year-round in Maine work long hours 
and have precious little free time to come to Augusta. 
Couple that with the fact that neither state nor federal laws protect 
farmworkers who might want to form a union, collectively bargain, or even talk to 
their fellow workers about improving their working and living situations, and it is 
easy to see why the lives and working conditions of many of these workers have 
changed little since Edward R. Murrow's Harvest of Shame was produced and 
televised in 1960, over 60 years ago. Unlike almost every working person in Maine 
and throughout the United States, fannworkers can still be ﬁred for simply talking 
about their working and living conditions and bringing those concerns to their 
employers. If they talk to their co-workers about seeking to change their wages or 
working conditions, they can lose their housing and lose their jobs while thousands 
of miles from their homes. Those ﬁrings have been and remain legal even thoughI 
believe they are both immoral and unjust. Please know that I readily acknowledge 
that many, if not most, farmers who employ migrant, seasonal, and year-round 
fannworkers treat them with great dignity and respect. 
Non-farmworker employees who are not represented by a union still have 
signiﬁcant rights under the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA). That federal 
law and the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) protect the rights of 
employees to engage in “concerted activity, ” which is when two or more 
employees take action for their mutual aid or protection regarding the terms and 
conditions of their employment. A single employee may also engage in protected 
concerted activity if he or she is acting with the authority of other employees, 
bringing group complaints to the employer ’s attention, trying to induce group 
action or seeking to prepare for group action. If farmworkers do any of those 
things, they can be summarily ﬁred, and that ﬁring remains legal in Maine. 
A few examples of the legally protected concerted activities that non- 
fannworkers can engage in are: 
- Two or more employees addressing their employer about improving their 
Pay; 
- Two or more employees discussing work-related issues beyond pay, such as 
safety concerns, with each other; and 
- An employee speaking to an employer on behalf of one or more co-workers 
about improving workplace conditions. 
Farmworkers do not have this basic protection. This is one of the main 
reasons their lives remain so difficult and their earnings so low. Farmworkers are
do better as a Legislature, as a people and as a state. Passing LD 525 could be the 
ﬁrst step in making that a reality. 
I will now tum to LD 398 which deals with the state minimum wage and 
overtime for farmworkers. 
Under current Maine labor law, in 2023, farmworkers are not considered 
employees under wage and hour laws. As a result, they are not protected by 
Maine’s minimum wage and overtime laws found at 26 M.R.S. § 664 (l) and (3). 
They are not provided the legal protections enjoyed by just about every other 
working person in Maine. Under current law, farmworkers in Maine, with limited 
exceptions, are only legally entitled to the federal minimum wage of $7.25 an hour, 
a ﬁgure that has not changed since 2009. While farmworkers in Maine generally 
make more than that amount, they are not legally protected by Maine’s minimum 
wage provisions, and they receive no beneﬁts or legal protection when it comes to 
overtime. 
Why is this still the case in 2023? 
In the 1930s, Congress passed a package of signiﬁcant labor laws as part of 
the New Deal Congress established minimum wages, though it was set lower for 
farmworkers. The New Deal also provided overtime pay and the right for workers 
to organize and collectively bargain. They did not provide any of those legal 
beneﬁts and protections to farmworkers. I have already explained the signiﬁcant 
impact that the exclusion from the protections regarding organizing have had and 
continue to have on the lives of farmworkers and will not repeat that here. 
The legislative history of laws regarding wages paid to farmworkers is clear. 
Members of Congress, particularly Southern lawmakers, were adamant that setting 
a ﬂoor on wages would undermine a lingering plantation system. Eliminating the 
historic wage disparities between farmworkers who were black and other people of 
color was not welcome. Democratic Representative Edward Cox said that it would 
allow for the “elimination and disappearance of racial and social distinctions, 
and... throw into question the determination of the standards and customs 
which shall determine the relationship of our various groups of people in the 
South.” 
Florida Representative James Mark Wilcox said “[t]here has always beena 
difference in the wage scale of white and colored labor... Now such a plan 
might work in some sections of the United States but those of us who know the
Other states have enacted laws to provide farmworkers with both minimum 
wage and overtime protection. Speciﬁcally, regarding just overtime, some states 
including California, Hawaii, Maryland, Minnesota, Washington, and New York 
have done so, along with the District of Columbia. 
Those other states also provide the same minimum wage to farm workers as 
is paid to all other working people. Those state wages are substantially higher than 
the stagnant federal minimum wage of $7.25 an hour. Are Maine’s farmworkers 
worthy of similar legal protections? In my mind, the answer is clearly yes. The 
time is right to extend the fundamental protections long contained in Maine’s wage 
and hour laws to all of Maine’s working people, including farmworkers. 
In closing, it goes without saying that, if there are no farms, there is no food 
and no farm workers. Farmers and farmworkers are all hardworking people. We 
also know that there are serious and deeply entrenched structural and systemic 
problems in our country with the way farm owners are compensated for the food 
they produce, and we must change that. But we carmot solve those problems by 
continuing to deprive farmworkers of basic labor rights by maintaining laws based 
on historical inequities. 
Thank you for your time and attention this afternoon. I am happy to answer 
any questions you have.
