 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LD 398 – An Act to Make  Agricultural  Workers  and Other  Related Workers  Employees  Under the 
Wage and Hour Laws  
 
Senator  Tipping , Representative  Roeder and members  of the Labor  and Housing  Committee : 
 
Aroostook County, Maine houses 30% of the State’s agriculture. Farming is an everyday need for 
families’ survival. The physical demand of farming is unmatched across the labor industry. Long days, 
early morning s, late nights, and weekends aren’t an option in operating a farm in Maine, it’s a necessity.  
 
Irving Farms operates in Caribou, Maine. We currently farm 2 ,700 acres of land u nder rotation, with the 
primary crop being potatoes. We also harvest small grains.    
 
In 2021, we were faced with the hard decision to hire migrant workers for a more reliable workforce. 
Doing so required a large financial investment including  housing, recruiting , travel, and living expenses. 
The Department of Labor requires us to pay the workers a minimum of $16.95 per hour. $3.15 per hour 
higher than the State’s minimum wage. The DOL also requires us to not favor migrant workers over our 
U.S. workers, meaning we  must pay them the same wage. We pride ourselves in paying a competitive 
wage with hopes to retain workers for long -term need.  
 
We employ roughly 50 people during harvest. Hopefully, most of you understand the long hours a 
harvest season requires. With on ly a short amount of time to get the potatoes out of the ground, an 
average 10-hour  day isn’t surprising. During the 2022 harvest, our payroll was roughly $113,000  for four  
weeks of work. During that time, we averaged 50 -hour weeks, meaning we would have  to potentially 
pay an additional $12,215  for our employees  for just those four weeks  of harvest work; that doesn ’t 
include the rest of the year .  
 
Factor that into economic increase s on all supplies needed for a successful crop and it’ s a recipe for 
disaster; fertilizer alone has increased 38% from the previous year.  
 
I’m positive that farmers across the state can attest that those who decide to work in the agriculture 
industry do so understanding the wage agreement and t he overtime exemption status. Passing LD398 
would impose a huge risk to our sustainability as a six-generation  farm that has been in operation for 
over 85 years. Imagine our company, one potato farm in Aroostook County, multiplied by the 765 other 
agriculture farms in the County and it’s obvious the impact it will have. Farming is a commitment, with 
the reward for good work being a delici ous potato on your kitchen table.  
 
We need employees. We also need the Legislature to understand how unrealistic it will be  to operate 
our farm and be a success story  if LD398 passes.  
 
 
Robert M. Irving  
Vice President  
 
(207)492 -0600  
 

