 
  97 Main Street, Belfast, ME 04915                     207.338.6575                      mainefarmlandtrust.org  
 
 
Testimony of Shelley Megquier , Policy and Research Director, Maine Farmland Trust , before 
the 1 31st  Legislature’s  Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing  
April 1 8, 2023  
 
Greetings  Senator  Tipping, Representativ e Roeder,  and members of the Joint Standing  Committee on Labor 
and Housing . My name is Shelley Megquier , and I am provid ing testimony on  behalf of Maine Farmland Trust 
(MFT ) with  comments neither fo r nor ag ainst  LD 398 – An Act To Make A gricultural Workers and Othe r 
Related Workers Employee s Under the Wage and Hour Laws .  
 
MFT is a member -powered statewide organization that works to protect farmland, support farmers, and 
advance the future of farming. Since our founding in 1999, MFT has h elped to permanently protect more 
than 330 farms and keep nearly 60,000 acres of farmland in farming. In 2022 alone, MFT supported 48 farm 
businesses with workshops, technical assistance, and grants – delivering over 680 hours of technical 
assistance and $ 309,000 in business and seed grants to help businesses grow their profitability. Our main 
program areas are Farmland Protection, Farmland Access, Stewardship, Farm Business Planning, PFAS 
Support, Climate Resilience, and Policy and Research.  
 
MFT believes that to revitalize Maine’s rural communities, farms must be economically viable. Over the years, 
MFT has collaborated with farmers, food businesses, and economic development organizations to establish 
enterprises and deliver a range of programs and services focused on establishing a vibrant and resilient 
agricultural sector and food system in Maine. We work directly with farmers of all experience levels as  they 
develop markets and grow successful businesses. MFT value s and appreciate s farm  labor ers and  employees 
as a critical part of Maine farm s and important contributors to our agricultural economy.  Many farm ers that 
we work with enjoy close working relationships with their  staff , often working together season a fter season, 
and a number of emp loyees go on to start their own farm  businesses  as part of the next generation . 
 
Unfortunately, Main e farm ers face many challenges creating and maintaining viable business. Among those 
challenges, w e often hear from farmers about issues  that they face  inclu ding finding both unskilled and 
skilled labor  and retaining  workers . Farmers so metimes articula te to us that they ’d like to pay their 
employees more than  their thin profit ma rgins allow them to . And, m any r ely on being able to ask workers to 
put in more than 40 hours a week during peak times of the year.  We’ve also heard  from farmers about 
requests from workers to work over 40 hours  and suggestions that workers will look elsewhere if they cannot 
get extra hou rs. 
 
LD 398  would make  agricultural employees and seasonal farm employees  subject to the laws that place limits 
on mandatory overtime.  Although MFT supports the concept of payment o f overtime to agricultural  workers, 
there is a like lihood that this bill will hit Maine ’s small -scale farmers the hardest  as well as those already  
struggli ng with farm viability.  Farm business owners may opt to choose to hire more staff , if they can find 
them,  to avoid having to pay overtime wages r ather than hiring fewer  staff with overtime requirements 
during  some weeks . To avoid unintended impacts to Maine agricultur e, MFT  suggest s an amendment to LD 
398 to init iate a slower and more public process with broad farmer and p roducer input across sect ors that 
considers projected impacts to particular agricultural industries  or types of businesses .  We appreciate the 
phased  approach pro posed in LD 398 that starts in 2024 and proceeds through 2026, however we anticipate 
that even that appro ach may be too fast to avoid negative impacts to the viability of certain produc ers.  
 
Alongside these con cerns, we also  affirm that Maine lawmakers and the public need  to put careful thought 
and consideration into the i ssue of overtime for agricultural workers  and move in a dir ection that upli fts the 
entire industry  – worker s and farm business owners alike. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
comments neither for nor against LD 398 and would be happy to answer any questions that you have.  
 
