 
 
4/17/2023 
 
Todd Merrill, President of Merrill Blueberry Farms,  Inc.  Testimony in OPPOSITION to LD 398:  An Act to Mak e Agricultural 
Workers and Other Related Workers Employees Under th e Wage and Hour Laws 
 
Esteemed members of the Committee on Labor and Hous ing:  Merrill Blueberry Farms is one of 5 wild blueb erry grower/processors 
in the state.  We manage 1600 acres of wild blueberry  land in Hancock and Waldo counties.  We harvest us ing both tractors and 
hand-raking.  In our processing plant, we wash, fre eze, and pack millions of pounds of wild blueberrie s each August.  Merrill’s 
houses and employs about 80 seasonal agricultural w orkers, most of whom are migrant workers.  Since ag e 11, I, personally, have 
been a raker, a field boss, and a general factory w orker.  Now, as President of Merrill Blueberry Farm s, I am responsible for 
everything from the harvest to the final sale of ou r Maine wild blueberries.  Here are some reasons wh y I believe LD 398 will be 
detrimental to every grower of wild blueberries in Maine. 
 
• Wild blueberry harvesting is considered “Piece-work ”.  Harvest workers get paid per box of wild bluebe rries they hand-rake, or 
per pound for machine-harvested berries.  Every per son works at different speeds with different skills .  An experienced, strong 
worker can rake 100-200 boxes of wild blueberries in a  day.  Another worker may only rake 20-30 boxes under  the same raking 
conditions.  On the weekends, some of my factory wo rkers like to go raking to earn some extra money.  They do not work as 
hard as the full-time hand-rakers, because it is ju st to earn a little bit more money, to work outside , and to be with their family 
members.  So, they work at a much more leisurely pa ce.  Rakers often take their personal vehicles to f ields, arrive and leave 
when they like, sit in their cars or in the shade w hen it is too hot, talk on their phones, and ultima tely work at their own pace.  
Some come back to the field in the evenings when it  is cooler.  If LD 398 passes, I would be forced to h ire and keep only the 
best rakers, and limit breaks.  Many families would  lose income. 
• Weather is a huge factor in harvesting.  Agricultur al workers (particularly tractor-harvesters) may wo rk 12+ hour days while it is 
sunny because they never know when it will rain, an d cause a day (or days) of no work.  The crop has t o be harvested quickly in 
August, because there are a finite number of berrie s, and the cold September nights will kill any berr ies still on the vine.  It is 
difficult enough as it is to find skilled tractor d rivers.  With LD 398 requirements, I would be forced to limit their hours worked 
to 40 per week, resulting in Merrill’s reducing the a mount of land we would manage, because of limited h arvesting capacity.  
This would ultimately mean even more wild blueberry  land would be taken out of production in the state . 
• This will no doubt accelerate the switchover from h and-raking to mechanical harvesting wild blueberrie s and other fruits and 
vegetables in Maine.  Or, agricultural land that re quires manual labor will be taken out of production , sold as house lots, turned 
into gravel pits, or used for alternative sources o f income like solar.  Only the largest growers with  the most land will survive. 
• LD 398 will put small wild blueberry growers and fiel d owners out of business.  In my estimation, the ma nual harvest cost per 
pound to a grower would increase between $.08/pound and $.12/pound.  This added labor cost would be an i nstant loss to 
growers, who have already been struggling to surviv e the past 8 years with low field prices. 
• On the selling end, up to 100 million pounds of Maine wild blueberries harvested annually are sold world- wide as a commodity.  
Maine wild blueberries have to compete with other f ruits for a place in cereal bowls, smoothies, jams,  yogurts, muffins, or pies.  
Wild blueberries’ greatest competition is cultivate d blueberries, from both the US and foreign countri es.  If Maine agricultural 
worker wages were subject to higher hourly rates an d overtime, it would raise the cost to harvest and process wild blueberries.  
I can’t simply pass off the increase in costs in th e selling price to my customers, because of competi tion from other fruits, 
especially from foreign countries.  If the price of  wild blueberries is too high, ingredient buyers wi ll just use cultivated 
(highbush) blueberries instead of wild blueberries,  or buy Canadian wild blueberries, or use strawberr ies or something 
cheaper.  And, because frozen wild blueberries coul d not be sold at a higher price, wild blueberry gro wers would have to 
absorb the increased harvest costs, and the 5 Maine wild blueberry processors would have to absorb the increased processing 
cost.  Lose, lose.  At the local level, prices will  increase for in-season fresh foods like wild blueb erries, strawberries, apples, and 
vegetables sold by small local farms at farmer’s ma rkets, roadside stands, or local grocery stores. 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
 
 
 
Todd Merrill, President, Merrill Blueberry Farms, I nc. 

