Dear Honorable Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and Members of the Committee,  
My name is Tomi and I am part of the 8th generation of my family farm. We grow 60 acres of fruits and 
vegetables and sell everything directly to consumers at our 4 roadside stands. The Chipman family has 
been farming on Range Hill Rd in Poland since 1781. LD 398 threatens the livelihood of my family 
business, and I am strongly opposed to the bill.  
Maine farmers are up against unparalleled challenges. We have the second shortest growing season in 
the US, second to Alaska. Our window to grow food is short. The input and overhead cost increases 
more each year, but the profit from our crops isn’t increasing at the same rate. Food grown out of state 
is cheaper at the grocery store. The labor shortage has been an issue for farmers since before COVID.  
Farming isn’t a 9-5 job, its based on the weather, the season and the demand. We have 2 weeks to get 
our strawberries picked, but we spend over a year tending to and investing money in the plants. When 
there is frost in May and June, we stay up all night running irrigation to make sure our strawberry plants 
don’t die. If there is a threat of a disease to our crops, we can only spray when the wind is 5mph or 
lower, which is usually at night. When it’s dry, we must irrigate, often around the clock to keep the crops 
alive. If we don’t act immediately when issues or threats arrive, we could easily lose my crop.  
In our peak season we employ over 50 workers, and we spend over $400,000 each year on labor for only 
5 months of work. Our top workers make more than our family members. They come to our farm 
because they know what it means to farm, they know the physical labor and challenges. They’re seeking 
seasonal work with a lot of hours. Every year we have many returning employees. Some have been 
working with us for over 20 years. They are happy and indescribably essential to our business. If LD 398 
takes effect, we would have to shorten our workers hours and hire more people. I know our best 
workers would leave, and they’re like family to us.  
Maine farmers cannot afford LD 398. This bill would cause small Maine farms to go out of business. 
Grocery stores would start importing more produce from out of state. The small family farm would 
become obsolete. Maine is a state unlike any others. Agriculture is an industry incomparable to any 
other. To compare Maine Agriculture to other states and try to subject us to laws from other industries 
is unfair and dangerous. Family farms feel like a dying breed, and this bill will strengthen that sentiment. 
Future generations will not be able to farm in Maine because it will be too expensive, with little return. 
Preserve Maine family farms, and do not allow LD 398 to take place.  
 
Thank you, 
Tomi Marie Chipman Ricker 
 
