\ Maine Human Rights Commission 
, # 51 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0051 
Physical location: 19 Union Street, Augusta, ME 04330 
Phone (207) 624-6290 ' Fax (207) 624~8729 ' TTY: Maine Relay 711 
CV 
wwzunzaine.govfmhrc 
Amy M. Sneirson Barbara Archer Hirsch 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR COMMISSION COUNSEL 
March 28, 2023 
The Honorable Anne Carney, Senate Chair 
The Honorable Matthew Moonen, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: An Act To Protect against Discrimination by Public Entities, LD 279 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
The Maine Human Rights Commission ("Commission") is Maine's quasi-independent, neutral, apolitical State 
agency charged with enforcing our state anti-discrimination law, the Maine Human Rights Act, 5 M.R.S. §§ 4551, et seq. 
(”MHRA"). The Commission's duties include (among others): investigating, conciliating, and at times litigating MHRA 
discrimination cases; promulgating rules and regulations to effectuate the MHRA; and making recommendations for 
further legislation or executive action concerning infringements on human rights in Maine. 5 M.R.S. § 4566(7), (11). 
With those purposes in mind, the Commission is pleased to provide this testimony in favor of LD 279. 
The MHRA's purpose is to stop discrimination based on protected-class status. 
The MHRA exists to "keep continually in_ review all practices infringing on the basic human right to a life with 
dignity, and the causes of these practices, so that corrective measures may, where possible, be promptly recommended 
and implemented, and to prevent discriminationin employment, housing, education, extension of credit or access to 
public accommodations on account of an individual ‘s actual or perceived race, color, sex, sexual orientation or gender 
identity, physical or mental disability, religion, ancestry or national origin and in employment, extension of credit and 
access to public accommodations on the basis of age" . 5 M.R.S. § 4552. That breadth of purpose carries into the 
Commission's specified powers andduties. The MHRA provides that ”[t]he commission has the duty of investigating all 
conditions and practices within the State which allegedly detract from the enjoyment, by each inhabitant of the State, 
of full human rights and personal dignity. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, it has the duty of 
investigating all forms of invidious discrimination, whether carried out legally or illegally, and whether by public 
agencies or private persons. Based onits investigations, it has the further duty to recommend measures calculated to 
promote the full enjoyment of human rights and personal dignity by all the inhabitants of this State." 5 M.R.S. § 4566. 
Places of public accommodation, which are privately- or publicly-owned places, privileges or services that are 
offered or open to the public, may not discriminate against ‘patrons or the public based on race, color, sex, sexual 
orientation or gender identity, age, physical or mental disability, religion, ancestry or national origin. 5 M.R.S.§ 
4592(1). The MHRA definition of public accommodation includes (among other things) a ”municipal building, 
courthouse, town hall or other establishment of the State or a local government" . 5 M.R.S. § 4553(8)(M). Many 
publicly-owned places or services have long been recognized in Maine and other states as "public accommodations" , 
including courts, state and municipaloffices that offer public services, and public safety services offered by state and 
local police departments. This makes sense because they do not require membership (as a"private club might) in 
providing services or admission —they serve all comers. V
In the MHRA, government-owned services or facilities are also ”public entities ” , which is defined the State ora 
local government, or any department, agency, or instrumentality of the same; these entities are covered by the MHRA 
in a limited fashion, whether or not they are open to the public. While most public entities are also public 
accommodations, there is one glaring exception: custodial settings within prisons and jails are public entities that are 
not generally considered places of public accommodation because they mostly are not open to the public and do not 
provide services to the public? 5 M.R.S. § 4553(8-C). For public entities that are not also public accommodations, the 
MHRA explicitly prohibits only disability discrimination. Id. at § 4592(1)(E). 
The MHRA should explicitly prohibit public entity discrimination based on protected class. 
The MHRA's statutory mandate confirms that the MHRA was intended, from its inception, to protect people in 
this state from invidious discrimination by the State itself, yet the State has purposely limited the MHRA's application 
in those facilities it owns, operates, and controls. As a result, currently it is not considered unlawful MHRA 
discrimination for Maine's jails and prisons to subject people in their custody and care to disparate treatment based on 
their race, age, religion, national origin, sex, color, or sexual orientation or gender identity. This is contrary to the 
MHRA's broad remedial purposes. By limiting the MHRA's applicability in public entities such as prisons and jails, the 
State has left someof its most vulnerable citizens without the ability even to have the Commission review their 
concerns. The Commission has received complaints of discrimination from prisoners which, if true, would be 
disturbing, including complaints of discrimination on the basis of race, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, and 
gender identity, as well as limitations on inmates’ abilities to practice their religions. In the past ten years, the 
Commission has dismissed ten complaints related to custodial settings in a State public entity for lack ofjurisdiction. 
The Commission's process is intended as a screening mechanism for Maine's courts, giving individuals a non- 
binding assessment of their claims and offering individuals an opportunity to be heard and resolve their claims without 
burdening the courts. The MHRA's limited scope does not allow this screening function to be performed for prison 
cases, which leaves prisoners with only the option of filing court claims for alleged constitutional violations. Rather than 
clogging the court system, or silencing the voices alleging discrimination by the State itself, the Commission should have 
jurisdiction to review and assess whether to investigate these complaints. 
Conclusion. 
Thank you for this opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD 279, a bill which would open the 
Commission's process to all individuals who believe that a public entity discriminated against them due to protected 
class status. This is, simply put, the right thing to do and consistent with the MHRA's purpose. The Commission would 
be.pleased.to discuss these issues with you at your convenience, including at the work session on this matter. 
Sincerely, 
“'7*
, 
Amy M. Sneirson, Executive Director 
cc: Commissioners 
1 
Another exception would be the Legislature's functions that are not open to the public. it is worth noting that Maine's 
correctional facilities and Legislature may have some discrete areas/functions that are places of public accommodations and 
other areas/functions that are solely public entities. For Maine's correctional facilities, prison/jail visiting facilities and parking 
lots are places of public accommodation as they sen/e visitors. The same is true for the Legislature's hearing rooms, public 
spaces, online functions, and parking areas. 
MHRC Testimony, LD 279 March 28, 2023 Page 2 of2
