E Q 
Q maine 
EQUALITYMAINE 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
LD 279 - An Act to Protect Against Discrimination by Public Entities 
March 28, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Judiciary Committee, my 
name is Gia Drew. I am the Executive Director of EqualityMaine, which has been representing and 
advocating for Maine’s LGBTQ+ community since 1984, and I am testifying today on behalf of 
EqualityMaine and American Academy of Pediatrics, Maine Chapter, in support of LD 279, An Act 
to Protect Against Discrimination by Public Entities. 
The Human Rights Act currently deﬁnes a "place of public accommodation" as a facility, operated 
by a public entity or private entity, whose operations fall within at least one of 14 categories. 
However, some public entities — such as jails, prisons, and detention centers — do not meet the 
criteria for any of these categories. This means that the safety and rights of LGBTQ+ people, those 
with disabilities, people of color, and others who are protected from discrimination when outside 
the carceral system are not ensured as soon as they enter a conﬁnement facility. Moreover, when 
discrimination does happen, there is no mechanism in place for obtaining complaint review anda 
determination through the Maine Human Rights Commission. 
LGBTQ+ people, particularly LGBTQ+ people of color and low-income LGBTQ+ people, are 
disproportionately likely to come into contact with the criminal justice system.‘ A history of bias, 
abuse, and proﬁling toward LGBTQ+ people by law enforcement, along with high rates of poverty, 
homelessness, and discrimination in schools and the workplace, has contributed to disproportionate 
1 
Center for American Progress & Movement Advancement Project. (2016). Unjust: How the Broken 
Criminal Justice System Fails LGBT People of Color. Washington, DC & Denver, CO. Available at: 
vwwv.lgbtmap.org/ ﬁle/lgbt-criminal-justice-poo.pdf [hereinafter Unjust].
contacts with the justice system, leading to higher levels of incarceration? 
Prisons and jails are inherently harmful for many people, LGBTQ+ or not, but LGBTQ+ people 
often face unique risks in these settings, especially anyone who doesn’t fit gender stereotypes. 
LGBTQ+ people are overrepresented in prisons, and they are often especially vulnerable to 
violence and other forms of mistreatment in these settings. 
By enhancing the Human Rights Act so that it contains a new section that speciﬁcally addresses 
public entities, prejudicial treatment will be prohibited in all spaces. No one, including those who 
are incarcerated, should be the victim of discrimination on the basis of race or color, sex, sexual 
orientation, gender identity, age, physical or mental disability, religion, ancestry, or national origin. 
I urge you to support this bill, and to vote ought to pass on LD 279. Discrimination against anyone 
is discrimination against everyone. 
Gia Drew 
(she/her) 
On behalf of: 
EqualityMaine 
American Academy of Pediatrics, Maine Chapter 
2 
James, S. E., Herman, J. L., Rankin, S., Keisiing, M., Mottet, L., & Anafi, M. (2016). The Report of the 
2015 U.S. Transgender Survey. (pp. 184-190). Washington, DC: National Center for Transgender 
Equality. Available at: www.ustranssurvey.org/report [hereinafter USTS].
