T 
=;_.,.= 1 tE¢~ALADv<><:ms 
anzrsmnzns 
M1§?f.lZ§§ ‘.‘;ﬁ.°' . -= 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Testimony of GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders & Maine Transgender Network and 
OUT Maine 
LD 279: An Act to Protect Against Discrimination by Public Entities 
March 30, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Judiciary 
Committee: my name is Quinn Gormley, I am the Executive Director of MaineTransNet, 
and I am testifying today for myself as Executive Director of MaineTransNet and for Mary 
Bonauto, attorney at GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders, in support of LD 279, An Act 
to Protect Against Discrimination by Public Entities. Our testimony today is joined by OUT 
Maine. 
No one should face discrimination because of who they are when they engage with public 
entities, whether municipal clerks’ offices, agencies, at the legislature, or in state prisons or 
county jails, among others. 
Some “public entities, ” meaning governmental entities, are also places of "public 
accommodation" and hold themselves out to the public to provide goods and services. Any 
place of public accommodation, whether a private business or a governmental entity, must 
comply with the Maine Human Rights Act’s nondiscrimination requirements. 
An individual frequenting a public accommodation - private or governmental - has 
protections against: discrimination “in any manner"; denial of the “full and equal 
enjoyment" of such places, including because of harassment or hostile environments; and 
“discriminat[ion] in the terms or conditions upon which access to accommodations, 
advantages, facilities, goods, sen/ices and privileges may depend.” 5 MRS sec. 4592 (1). 
Persons mistreated in ways the law prohibits by reason of their race or color, sex, sexual 
orientation or gender identity, age, physical or mental disability, religion, ancestry or 
national origin are authorized, should they wish, to bring a complaint of discrimination to 
the Maine Human Rights Commission for redress. 
We are deeply concerned that only some public entities are expressly obligated to follow 
our nondiscrimination laws rather than all public entities. This bill remedies that omission 
and makes the obligation not to discriminate specific. While we believe in the good willof
public entities and the people serving the public, the proposed new section 4630 of Title5 
(sec. 9 of the bill), clarifies what the law expects of those public entities and their 
employees for them and for the general public. 
The Maine Human Rights Commission has a clear and efficient process for handling 
complaints, including the possibility of administrative dismissal when a complaint is outside 
of the law, as well as investigation and fact finding, and conciliation processes. This isa 
more accessible and responsive system for Maine people than the alternative, that is, 
leaving the person the daunting task of filing a state or federal lawsuit for any number of 
constitutional violations due to mistreatment by a public entity or its employees. 
Even in more challenging situations, such as the prisons and jails, leaders of those entities 
want people to be safe and they also abjure discrimination. This bill offers a springboard to 
all public entities to work with staff and residents/members of the public to ensure equal 
application of rules and standards. Doing so would likely improve the health and safety of 
all persons held in or working at such facilities. 
We urge you to vote ought to pass on this bill and clarify that our nondiscrimination law 
applies to all public entities in Maine. Thank you. 
Mary Bonauto, GLAD Attorney 
Quinn Gormley, MaineTransNet Executive Director
