,8; STATE OF MAINE 
,_, ,, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
=;,~ ; SPEAKERS OFFICE 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
M‘ (207) 287-1300 
RACHEL TALBOT ROSS 
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE 
Tuesday, March 28th, 2023 
Testimony of Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross presenting 
LD 279, An Act To Protect against Discrimination by Public Entities 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary 
Good afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and esteemed 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, I am Rachel Talbot Ross.I 
represent House District 118 which is the Portland neighborhoods of Parkside, 
Bayside, East Bayside, Oakland and the University of Southern Maine Campus and 
I also have the distinct honor of serving as the Maine Speaker of the House. I am 
here today to present LD 279, An Act To Protect against Discrimination by 
Public Entities. 
The Maine Human Rights Act reads as follows: “To protect the public 
health, safety and welfare, it is declared to be the policy of this State to keep 
continually in review all practices infringing on the basic human right to a life with 
dignity, and the causes of these practices, so that corrective measures may, where 
possible, be promptly recommended and implemented, and to prevent 
discrimination[.] ” Maine Revised Statutes Title 5, §4552 outlines the details of 
protected classes. Protected classes include race, color, sex, sexual orientation or 
gender identity, physical or mental disability, religion, ancestry or national origin. 
This powerful declaration represents our effort, as the State of Maine, to 
fully realize the rights that are enshrined in our nation’s founding documents and 
are central to our guiding values. These are human rights that belong to all people, 
regardless of their background or circumstance.\ 
As we all know, living up to those ideals is still a work in progress as we 
strive to create a more perfect union. Both the Maine Human Rights Act and the 
Commission charged with enforcing it are shining examples of our efforts to 
protect these rights in law and in practice. 
District 118: Portland neighborhoods of Parkside, Bayside, East Bayside, Oakdale and 
the University of Southern Maine Campus
The MHRA has been amended over time to reﬂect our progress as a state 
and a society striving for justice. However, as Maine Human Rights Commission 
Director Amy Sneirson acknowledged in testimony before the 129*“ and 130th 
Legislature regarding proposed legislation similar to that before you today, those 
amendments have been made in a piecemeal fashion, leading to a number of gaps 
in coverage and inconsistencies. 
LD 279 seeks to build on that work of the Commission and this Legislature. 
To truly enact a comprehensive Human Rights Act, we must protect the rights of 
all people and ensure that everyone is equal under the law. We are not there yet. 
Under current law, public accommodations may not discriminate against any 
person based on race, color, sex, sexual orientation or gender identity, physical or 
mental disability, religion, ancestry or national origin. As public accommodations 
encompass places or services that are open to the public, it includes most 
govemment or publicly owned places and services, but not all. Currently, public 
entities are distinguished in the law as some government owned places or services 
are not open to the public. VVhile most public entities are also public 
accommodations, prisons, jails and even certain legislative spaces are not and are 
therefore treated differently under the law. Due to this distinction, these public 
entities are not held to the same standards that apply to government facilities and 
services deemed open to the public. For public entities that are not also public 
accommodations, the MHRA only prohibits discrimination based on physical or 
mental disability. Discrimination based on race, color, sex, sexual orientation or 
gender identity, religion, ancestry or national origin is permitted under the eyes of 
our law and considered legal. 
What does this mean in a practical sense? It means that Mainers interacting 
with these public entities — such as prisons and jails — do not have meaningful legal 
protections when they are the victim of discrimination based on any protected class 
status other than physical or mental disability. That sends a powerful and 
dangerous message. Under the laws of our state, you are not entitled to your human 
rights if you are incarcerated. As currently written, the MHRA betrays our most 
cherished ideals by violating the principle of equal protection for all under the law. 
Take a moment to contrast that the current MHRA with a foundational 
principle enshrined in both the United States and Maine Constitutions. The Equal 
Protection Clause of the United States Constitution provides, “No state shall 
deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protections of the laws.” 
Similarly, Article 1, section 6-A of the Maine Constitution has the following 
language, “No person shall be denied the equal protection of the laws.” Maine
is not living up to that principle or ideal. We have the opportunity to change that 
and LD 279 is the vehicle for that change. 
LD 279 would make that change by providing that public entities may not 
discriminate on the basis of race, color, sex, sexual orientation or gender identity, 
age, disability, religion, ancestry or national origin. This would allow persons who 
suffer from and are injured by discrimination due to the conduct and actions ofa 
public entity based on protected class status, to seek redress with the Maine Human 
Rights Commission. 
To be clear, we are not asking for a new protected class based on 
incarcerated status. Instead, this bill simply extends protections for existing 
protected classes to all Mainers, regardless of whether they are incarcerated. 
This committee has demonstrated its commitment to improving access to 
justice. I know the members of the committee are deeply involved in reforming our 
indigent legal defense system. I know you are intimately familiar with the Sixth 
Amendment Center report that discussed the ﬂaws in our legal defense system and 
the impact those ﬂaws have on access to justice. I submit to you that this, too, isa 
critical access to justice issue. 
The solution, however, is relatively simple. The solution is to amend the 
Maine Human Rights Act as proposed in LD 279. 
Thank you for your time and consideration today. Director Sneirson from 
the Commission is here today to answer any technical questions you might have.I 
would be happy to answer any questions you might have for me.
Complaints Filed Against Public Entities Regarding Custodial Setting Activity 
2023 Data Review 
Past two years 
16 complaints filed against State public entities related to activity not open to the public. 
. Administrative Dismissals (some with multiple claims). 
o 8 failure to substantiate 
0 2 failure to cooperate 
o 3 cases/claims were dismissed for lack ofjurisdiction (race, sexual orientation, 
religion). 
- Non-ADs: 
O 2 NRG findings 
0 2 open 
o In same time period, 1 intake related to custodial situations by State R screened out as non- 
jurisdictional. 
Past ten years 
56 complaints filed against State public entities related to activity not open to the public. 
~ Administrative Dismissals (some with multiple claims). 
o 13 failure to substantiate 
o 9 failure to cooperate 
0 10 cases/claims were dismissed for lack of jurisdiction (race, national origin/ancestry, 
sexual orientation, religion). 
O 2 Withdrawals without benefits 
O 1 Right-to-sue letter 
~ Non-ADs: 
0 2 NRG findings 
o 1 RG, unsuccessfully conciliated. Not litigated. 
o 2 open 
Comgarator state data: 
~ VT -all government entities covered as PAs. Receive about 20 intakes per year, open 3-10 
cases. Most of the cases are inmates with disabilities who have made reasonable 
accommodations requests that have been denied. On occasion, hostile environment cases 
(sex, race, LGBTQ). 
- MA - prisons/jails not covered as PAs. Receive about 20 complaints per year, all dismissed for 
lack ofjurisdiction.
