LD 313 "An Act to Ensure Consistency in Retirement Plans for 
Certain Law Enforcement Officer” 
Maine Law Enforcement Coalition 
Testimony of Peter A Herring - Maine Game Warden 
March 28, 2023 
Good Morning Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and distinguished members of the Labor 
and Housing Committee. 
My name is Peter Herring from Gorham Maine. I am a 3 lyear state of Maine employee and am 
currently employed as a Maine Game Warden. I am here today on my own time and at my own 
expense. 
I am here to speak in support of LD 313 "An Act to Ensure Consistency in Retirement Plans 
for Certain Law Enforcement Officers ” . I started my state service on May 4, 1992, at the 
Maine Correctional Center in Windham Me. At that time, I was hired as a Corrections Officer, 
and I served in this position until 1998. 
In 1998, I was promoted to Industrial Shop Supervisor. I was also assigned partial duties ofa 
Correctional Investigator. The then Investigator was retiring, and the department was 
transitioning me into that position, while also getting the position full time classiﬁed. I served in 
this part time capacity for approximately one year. 
In October l999, I was promoted to the newly created and classiﬁed position of Correctional 
Investigator. I was sent to the full-time police academy and served in this position until late June 
of 2009, over nine years and eight months. 
In June of 2009, I was swom as a Maine Game Warden, a position I currently hold today. 
Prior to my transition from Correctional Investigator to Game Warden; both of which are full 
time and certiﬁed Law Enforcement positions, I spoke with Maine retirement and State human 
resources regarding my beneﬁts. I was assured by both that all of my beneﬁts would transfer 
with me including my Special 98 retirement beneﬁts. Speciﬁcally, I was told by retirement that 
there was no issue where I was going into another State law enforcement special retirement, they 
would all blend together. I relied on those representations until I started speaking recently with 
Maine PBERS. It was explained that where I only did 9 and a half years under the Correctional 
Investigator special 98 plan it would convert from 25-55 to 25-62. I had no notice prior to June 
2009 that by leaving the so-called Correctional Investigator special plan for a certiﬁed law 
enforcement position as a Game Warden that it would be a disquali ﬁer. I was not told thatI 
needed to vest in one law enforcement special retirement because the Warden Service was 
somehow a different special retirement. ALL law enforcement special retirements awarded to 
member groups of the Law Enforcement Bargaining Unit have the same language, 25 years of 
service and age 55 or 25 years of service and no age to be eligible for full, unpenalized 
retirement beneﬁts.
In May of 2024, I will have 32 years of uninterrupted service as a Maine state employee and be 
58 years old. Speciﬁcally, I will have 25 years as a full- time law enforcement ofﬁcer for the 
state; but because I have worked in two different law enforcement positions for the state, I’m 
being told I will not qualify for full beneﬁts under either special plan. This means that because I 
won't be at normal non-special plan retirement age, 62 for me, I will take a 6% penalty for each 
year I am younger than that, which equals a 24% reduction in my retirement beneﬁt or be forced 
to work four more years to collect my retirement without penalty despite serving over 25 years in 
one or more law enforcement retirement plans. 
In conclusion, I am proud of my service as a state employee. I’m not asking for any special 
treatment or consideration personally. I am asking that state employees be added to the Maine 
Retirement Portability Law and be afforded the same privileges that are offered to the municipal 
police community. I believe the circumstance I and potentially others face is an error, as the 
expressed intent of the law enforcement special retirements was inclusive to those law 
enforcement bargaining unit member agencies awarded a special retirement. All those plans 
grant the same provisions of 25 years of service and either age 55 or no age to earn a participant 
the full retirement. 
I Want to thank you for the opportunity to speak directly to you and would be Willing to answer 
any questions you might have.
