AMANDA E. BEAL 
COMMISSIONER  JANET T. MILLS 
GOVERNOR  
STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRIC ULTURE , CONSERVATION & FORESTRY  
22 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA , MAINE 04333  
 
 
 
 
 
 
HARLOW  BUILDING   PHONE : (207)  
287-3200 
18 ELKINS LANE   FAX (207)  
287-2400 
AUGUSTA , MAINE   WEB
 WWW .MAINE .GOV/DACF  
  
    TESTIMONY BEFORE  THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOR AND 
HOUSING  
NEITHER FOR NOR  AGAINST LD 313  
An Act to Ensure Consistency in Retirement Plans for Certain Law Enforcement Officers  
March 28, 2023  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder , and members of the Joint Standing  Committee on 
Labor and Housing , my name is Robby Gross , and I am the Chief Forest Ranger of the Maine 
Forest Service  (MFS) at the Department of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry (DACF).  I 
am speaking  neither for nor against  LD 313 , An Act to Ensure Consistency in Retirement Plans 
for Certain Law Enforcement Officers . 
There is variability in retirement plans among  law enforcement officers within the Maine Public 
Employees Retirement System. If a law enforcement officer stays employed within one agency 
throughout their career , they are rewarded with retirement income consistent with the retirement 
plan that was in pl ace upon initial hire. If they decide  to move  between agencies within their 
career , they have to  navigate the details  of multiple retirement plans to determine what their full 
retirement benefit will be  and, in some cases , they can be penalized. In addition , other employee s 
who become law enforcement officers, but have previously paid into the Maine Public 
Employees Retirement System (teachers, firefighters) , also navigate the specifics of different  
retirement plans.   
In today’s workplace environmen t, recruitment and retention of employees are problems  that 
every law enforcement ag ency faces. Each agency attempts to find unique ways to attract and 
keep employees to conduct critical missions that protect and enhance the State of Maine. An 
employee ’s retirement benefit  shouldn’t be penalized if they switch agencies . In the end , that 
employee’s service benefits  all of Maine. LD 313 enables employees  to overcome penalties by 
allowing employees or thei r employers to buy  into retirement plans to recover the cost difference 
when changing employers. This essentially  allow s the portability of one Maine State Retirement 
Plan to another Maine State Retirement Plan.   
I supervise  Forest Rangers who have come t o the Maine Forest Service from other state law 
enforcement agencies, fire departments, and the education system where they were teachers. 
Retirement plans are one of the most discussed benefits impacting  an individual’s life and 
family. Likewise , it is a common talking point when I speak  with potential candidates . Making 
these subtle changes to the Main e Retirement  System will support  recruiting  great employees by 
 
 
ensuring  that the employee receives  full retirement credit for the service they provide the State of 
Maine.    
At this time, the potential financial impacts of this bill on the Department’s budget do give pause  
and will need to be evaluated . The elective nature of either the employee or employer being able 
to buy service time to make retirement plans whole is a concept worth developing. I would be 
happy to answer any questions that you may have.   
