Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association
In Support For
LD 516 - An Act to Reduce Cancer Among Firefighters by Providing Grants for Safety Equipment
March 27, 2023
Sen. Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury and distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I providing testimony, in support of LD 516, An Act 
to Reduce Cancer Among Firefighters by Providing Grants for Safety Equipment, on behalf of the Maine 
Municipal Association, which represents the interests of municipal government before the Legislature. 
The positions of the Association are established by our 70-member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC), 
who are elected by the councils and selectboards of municipalities in each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts.
Cancer, Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder and cardiac health are recognized in established public 
policy as significant consistent threats facing individuals who serve their communities via public safety 
roles. Such roles are often filled by volunteers, part-time and full-time employees, and those risks exist 
regardless of the employment relationship, or local capacity to address the risks in all possible ways. 
Maine has long benefitted from the willing service of volunteers, which has hidden the growing 
costs of that service in both fire and EMS services, and as a result, there are services that are struggling 
not only to attract new volunteers but also to shoulder the increasingly significant costs of providing 
appropriate gear for all individuals. 
As drafted this bill suggests a grant program that would provide for significantly expensive and 
important systems, heavy duty washing machines for gear exposed to multiple chemicals during use, and 
diesel vehicle exhaust systems.  Because many volunteer services are only able to purchase used fire 
equipment, both of these items could help mitigate the cancer risks posed that are increased by the use of 
used gear that cannot be provided in any other way. 
That said, it is vital that the administrative procedures necessary to pursue the grants proposed by 
LD 516 also remain easily accessible for all services, many of which have no or very limited 
administrative support. While the rules for the program will be developed by the Maine Fire Protection 
Services Commission which includes volunteer services and fire associations, it remains vital that such 
rules are developed with the lowest reporting capacity in mind. Officials trust that the Commission will be 
best placed to understand this and appreciate this. 
Additionally, officials ask that you make sure in the definitions of this program for eligibility, the 
term fire department references all services as established in 30-A §3151 and ask you to vote ought to 
pass on LD 516.
