£1 
,_ HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
1,5. 2 STATE HOUSE STATIoN 
pg AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
H_ Scott ,j;,m,,.y Jr_ TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
137 Shepherd ’s Lane 
Farmington, ME 04938 
Residence: (207) 491-9041 
Scott Landrv@legislature.maine.2ov 
March 27, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Scott Landry presenting 
LD 516, An Act to Reduce Cancer Among Fireﬁghters by Providing 
Grants for Safety Equipment 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, I am Representative Scott Landry. I serve House District 75, which includes 
the towns of Chesterville and Farmington. Thank you for the opportunity to present LD 516, An 
Act to Reduce Cancer Among Firefighters by Providing Grants for Safety Equipment. 
Fireﬁghters are at a signiﬁcantly increased risk for cancer because of the carcinogens they 
encounter while on the job. This bill would create the Fireﬁghter Safety Equipment Fund, 
allowing the Maine Fire Protection Services Committee to provide grants to ﬁre departments for 
the purchase and installation of certain equipment that can help limit ﬁreﬁghters‘ exposure to 
chemicals. 
Eligible equipment purchases would include diesel vehicle exhaust systems, which reduce 
exposure to high concentrations of toxic particulates and gases found in diesel exhaust. Grant 
funds could also be used for the purchase and installation of heavy duty extractor washing 
machines, which are used to remove contamination from protective apparel. 
I have been working closely with my constituent, Farmington ﬁreﬁghter Steve Bunker, on this 
proposal. He camtot be here today, but I would ask the chairs to please consider allowing him to 
speak at work session about his experience as a ﬁreﬁghter with a rare form of cancer and his 
work to prevent others from going through the same experience. 
Fireﬁghters respond at all hours to protect us. We should be doing all we can to keep them safe, 
too. Let’s give them the tools they need to minimize exposure to chemicals that cause cancer. 
Thank you for your consideration. I am happy to answer any questions. 
District 75: Chesterville and Farmington
