 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 516, An Act to Reduce Cancer Among Firefighters by Providing Grants for Safety Equipment  
 
March 27, 2023 
 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee in support of LD 516. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all of Maine’s 16 counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion.  LD 516 would establish a Firefighter Safety Equipment Fund. The Fund would direct the Maine 
Fire Protection Services Commission to provide grants to fire departments for the purchase and installation of 
diesel vehicle exhaust systems and heavy-duty extractor washing machines in an effort to protect Maine 
firefighters. 
 
Our Association writes in support of LD 516. Maine fire departments serve citizens in each county across the 
State, including fire departments within the unorganized territories governed by Maine’s counties. To the extent 
this bill is aimed at enhancing the protection of Maine’s fire fighters, we write in support of this bill. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
