LD 1129 "An Act to Enact the Curriculum Transparency Act" 
 
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Committee of 
Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Craig Caffrey of Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my 
testimony in support of LD 1129 “An Act to Enact the Curriculum Transparency Act.” 
As a parent, taxpayer, and veteran, I am appalled at the stone walling and lack of complete 
transparency within our school systems. The majority of teachers, and staff do go out of their way to 
assist and help parents with their child’s education and needs; however, there is a small group in each 
district who refuse to be transparent or allow parents complete access to their child’s education. By 
passing this bill, those who stone wall should be held accountable, something that is lacking in our local, 
state, and federal government agencies today. 
Transparency builds trust and the parents and taxpayers deserve and have a right to know what is 
being taught to our children. 
I urge this committee to vote “OUGHT TO PASS” on LD 1129 “An Act to Enact the Curriculum 
Transparency Act.” 
 
Thank you for your time, 
Craig Caffrey 
Bowdoinham 
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.)  
 
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
LD 1129
LD 1129 "An Act to Enact the Curriculum Transparency Act"
Good morning, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the 
Committee of Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Craig Caffrey of 
Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my testimony in support of LD 1129 “An Act to 
Enact the Curriculum Transparency Act.”
As a parent, taxpayer, and veteran, I am appalled at the stone walling and lack of 
complete transparency within our school systems. The majority of teachers, and staff 
do go out of their way to assist and help parents with their child’s education and 
needs; however, there is a small group in each district who refuse to be transparent or 
allow parents complete access to their child’s education. By passing this bill, those 
who stone wall should be held accountable, something that is lacking in our local, 
state, and federal government agencies today.
Transparency builds trust and the parents and taxpayers deserve and have a right to 
know what is being taught to our children.
I urge this committee to vote “OUGHT TO PASS” on LD 1129 “An Act to Enact the 
Curriculum Transparency Act.”
Thank you for your time,
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.) 
