Maine Atheist Freethinker and Humanist Association 
Maine Chapter - Freedom from Religion Foundation 
 
 
MAFHA   phone: 207-344-7852 
39 Gordon Lane    
Litchfield, ME  04350  www.ffrfmaine.org May 10, 2023 
 
Members of the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs,  
 
This is testimony AGAINST LD 1129.  
This bill is an unfunded mandate that will have a powerful negative effect on students and teachers 
in the state of Maine. 
 
This bill assumes resources, and places for those resources, that do not exist. Considerable 
resources would be expended to create an online portal and to coordinate all of the requirements 
of this bill. This would require a large investment to design and build, and a large investment to 
operate. There is no fiscal note, so there is no cost estimate to evaluate. Whatever number were to 
be pulled out of, um, thin air would, I’m sure, be too low. It would be an unfunded mandate large 
enough to do real damage to school budgets.  
 
This system would also make the data available to a wide audience statewide, for reasons which 
remain unclear. The data to be made available under this bill is already available locally to all 
interested parties.  
 
There is also language about what can and cannot be focused upon in the curricula, which reaches 
far beyond “transparency” and contributes to an attack on public education in Maine.  
 
Add the curricula and on-site program restrictions to the incredible cost, and then consider the 
additional requirements and constrictions on the trained, professional educators and you get this: 
another attack on public education in Maine. It would be a drain on school budgets and force the 
statewide common denominator for education lower and lower. I don’t want to think that this is 
intentional. I’d prefer to think of it as well-intentioned people who are making a tragic mistake – 
but the evidence otherwise is increasing by the day.  
 
Please vote “Ought Not To Pass” on LD 1129 and focus on improving public education, rather 
than damaging it.  
 
 
 
