Ryan Dippre
Bangor
LD 1129
I am writing in opposition to LD 1129, “An Act to Enact the Curriculum 
Transparency Act.”  This bill is an unfunded mandate that will have a powerful 
negative effect on students and teachers in the state of Maine.
The bill demands the creation of resources and places for those resources (such as an 
online portal) that do not exist.  If the state wants these to exist, then considerable 
resources would be needed to coordinate the curricula of the nearly two hundred 
thousand school-aged children in Maine.  This is without question a massive 
undertaking with a similarly massive financial commitment, and at no point does the 
bill address how these resources would be paid for.  
The bill also demonstrates a significant misunderstanding of how teaching happens.  
Time and again the field of education has highlighted the massive problems that arise 
from tightly scripted curricula.  And yet the bill claims to require policies and 
procedures that “ensure the approved curriculum presented is implemented in the 
classroom without change.”  This is far too vague to be helpful to anyone teaching.  
What if a student needs extra time to make sense of Romeo & Juliet?  Would that be a
“change” that this bill is against?  The language of the bill as it stands does not 
provide this information.
The bill has an odd concern with making data available to a wide public audience 
throughout the state.  Much of what the bill wants to require is already checked by 
local authorities.  This unfunded mandate would simply bring that to a state level.  
Why?  The decision-makers about education are already involved locally.  This seems
to add nothing but additional layers of surveillance to teachers, and for no appreciable
gain in community oversight in teaching.
Finally, the bill also tries to shoehorn in some language about what curricular 
materials can and cannot be focused on.  This is an overreach.  While we do have 
general guidelines (such as state standards and assessments) at the state level about 
what may and may not be included in curricula, the specific decisions are made at the 
local level: school districts in particular communities have ongoing and sometimes 
tumultuous conversations about what should and should not be taught in schools, 
come to a collaborative decision, and implement it in a school district.  This process is
more complex in the troublesome times we are currently living in, but that’s no reason
to bring the state in to attempt to make choices for local communities.  
For all of these reasons, LD 1129 ought not to pass.  
