I
=~ .. 
, MAINE . . 
5(;||[)Q|_ 49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
. “Anus Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
Q F : _ \ I_ \_ l\S$0(i|AT|Uil " ~J§;" 
I UBLI-_ \.DUL|-.T|ON !\D\D(_/KTEQ WebS1te' www'mSmaweb'c0m .\IAlncSchml SllPEl'i| “ﬁ.ﬁdCl\I§l\\ ‘iCdBlIGI\ 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. 1129—AN ACT TO ENACT THE CURRICULUM TRANSPARENCY ACT 
AND 
L.D. 1199——AN ACT TO PROVIDE TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC SCHOOL CURRICULA 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Steven Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the 
legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents 
Association, in opposition to L.D. 1129 and L.D. 1199. 
MSBA and MSSA are in opposition to L.D. 1129 and L.D. 1199 for a multiple of reasons. 
First of all the October 1 date for L.D. 1129 may be unrealistic for early October of any particular year. And 
while syllabi and materials may generally be planned out for the year, having all materials planned and ready 
by October 1 is unrealistic. Teachers need ﬂexibility based on needs of students in their classes, changes that 
might be needed based on unknown circumstances that may occur throughout the school year, and 
improvements they may see possible prior to or during the delivery of an instructional unit. Teachers also 
need the freedom to pivot based on their students ’ questions and interests on a particular topic to make the 
lesson relevant and meaningful. Requiring all information ready at that time of the school year disregards the 
judgement of the professionals in our schools, who have been hired because of their credentials, academic 
training and knowledge of students they teach. 
School library books and materials are already available through district websites. 
Curriculum materials selected for school use are based on the Maine System of Learning Results in all 
Content Areas. 
Data from state-based assessments are available on the data website for each school district as required by 
ESSA. 
Professional development is determined based on school district, school or employee needs as determined by 
planning conversations and requirements as stated in statute. Professional development is open to the public. 
Information on 3"‘-party providers of professional development is kept including planning conversations and 
expenses incurred connected to the speciﬁc professional development activity. 
Requiring a speciﬁc online portal, without funding to develop and maintain the data in this speciﬁc site, 
would in our view be determined an unfunded mandate. The information sought in section 7 of L.D. 1129 is 
already available on the website of schools or via conversations with school officials who do have this data. 
Steven W. Bailey Eilggn E_ King 
MSBA Executive Director MQSA Exgguﬂye Dim“);
Equally concerning is these bills undercut the role of the locally elected School Board, which is empowered 
under statute, to review and adopt curriculum guides, course descriptions and courses of study. 
These bills also ﬂy in the face of local control. 
They would have the Legislature undercut the legitimacy of locally elected School Board members, who are 
tasked with putting the best interest of students at the forefront in the decisions they make. They choose the 
superintendent and work with him or her on policies guiding school operations, including materials We use in 
our classrooms. 
State statute also reﬂects the belief that book selections should not be dictated from Augusta, but are the 
purview of locally elected boards. 
We understand that parents want a role in their child’s education, and they may object to some of the reading 
material being assigned. Those parents have the option of going to the superintendent or School Board to 
express their concerns, and school leaders will attempt to accommodate those concerns. Additionally, parents 
have the right to opt their child out of certain aspects of instruction or to not use a particular curriculum 
resource, via sample policy IMBB. 
Title 20-A, Section 1001, Duties of School Boards, l0-A, Educational materials, explicitly says the board 
“shall adopt a policy governing the selection of educational materials and may approve educational 
materials. ” School Boards, like legislators, are elected by their constituents and are charged with the 
responsibility of educating our children.
*MSMA SAMPLE POLICY* NEPN/N SBA Code: IMBB 
EXEMPTION FROM REQUIRED INSTRUCTION 
The curriculum of the school unit is designed to reﬂect the learning expectations for all 
students in all content areas of the system of Learning Results, as well as other statutory 
and regulatory requirements and content areas speciﬁed by the Board. 
The Board acknowledges that from time to time individual students may be exposed to 
some ideas and materials with which they or their parent(s)/legal guardian disagree. 
Students and their parent(s)/legal guardian cannot be required to adopt ideas with which 
they disagree, but such disagreement alone is not a sufﬁcient basis to exempt a student 
from the prescribed curriculum. Exemptions from the required curriculum should be 
minimized because they can detract from the overall instruction provided to the class asa 
whole and the educational objectives sought to be achieved by the curriculum. 
The Board recognizes, however, that there could be topics in the curriculum which may 
be objectionable to individual students and/or parent(s)/legal guardian based on their 
particular sincerely held religious, moral or philosophical beliefs. Exemption from 
instruction which infringes on such beliefs may be requested by the parent(s)/legal 
guardian. 
Requests for exemption from instruction must be made in writing to the building 
Principal and are subject to the approval of the Principal. The Principal shall notify the 
Superintendent as soon as practicable of any request for exemption from instruction and 
of his/her decision. If the Principal denies an exemption request, the parent(s)/legal 
guardian may appeal to the Superintendent. 
In considering requests for exemption, factors that the Principal should consider may 
include: 
A. The aligmnent of the curriculum with the system of Learning Results; 
B. Whether the course or content area is required by state law or Board policy; 
C. The educational importance of the material or instruction from which 
exemption is requested; 
D. Evidence regarding the sincerity of the belief on which the request is based; 
E. Whether the school has a legal obligation to accommodate the exemption 
request; 
Page 1 of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/NSBA Code: IMBB 
F. The effect of exemption or accommodation on the validity of the local 
assessment system; and 
G. Other factors that bear upon the particular request. 
Exemption from required instruction does not excuse the student from meeting the 
requirements of the Learning Results or from total credit hours or other requirements for 
graduation, or from performing alternative work. 
When the Principal determines that the curriculum that has been aligned with the system 
of Learning Results conﬂicts with sincerely held religious beliefs of a student or his/her 
parent or legal guardian, reasonable accommodation in the curriculum shall be made for 
the student, Within the scope of existing resources. Altemative instruction may be 
provided by the school or through approved independent study. Any alternative 
instruction shall be approved in advance by the Principal in consultation with appropriate 
instructional staff and shall meet the standards and objectives of the part of the 
curriculum that is being replaced. When requests for exemption from required 
curriculum are made for religious reasons, a parent/ guardian who is dissatis ﬁed with the 
Principa1 ’s decision may appeal to the Superintendent. If the accommodation in the 
curriculum that is requested is so great that the validity of the local assessment system is 
compromised, the Superintendent will determine how to address the situation, subject to 
the approval of the Commissioner. 
When a student is exempted from any portion of the regular curriculum for other than 
religious reasons (exemption based on sincere philosophical or moral beliefs), the staff 
will make reasonable efforts, within the scope of existing resources, to accommodate 
alternative instruction for the student. Alternative instruction may be provided by the 
school or through approved independent study. Any alternative instruction shall be 
approved in advance by the Principal in consultation with the classroom teacher, and 
shall meet the standards and objectives of the part of the curriculum that is being 
replaced. When requests for exemption are made for philosophical or moral reasons, a 
parent/guardian who is dissatis ﬁed with the Principal ’s decision may appeal to the 
Superintendent, Whose decision shall be ﬁnal. [OPTIONAL ADDITIONAL STEP: 
Local boards may wish to consider adding an appeal to the Board in the event thata 
parent/guardian is dissatis ﬁed with the Superintendent ’s decisi0n.] 
Legal Reference: 20-A MRSA § 6209 
LD 1536, Chap. 51 Resolves 
Ch. 127 § 3.07 (Me. Dept. of Ed. Rules) 
Ch. 131 (Me. Dept. of Ed. Rules) 
Page 2 of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
NEPN/N SBA Code: IMBB 
Cross Reference: ADF — School District Commitment to Learning Results 
IJJ - Instructional and Library Material Selection 
IM13 — Teaching About Controversial/ Sensitive Issues 
IMBAA — Alternatives to Biological Dissection 
Adopted: 
PLEASE NOTE MSMA sample policies and other resource materials do not necessarily reflect official 
Association policy. They are not intended for verbatim replication. Sample policies should be used asa 
starting point for a board’s policy development on specific topics. Rarely does one board's policy sen/e 
exactly to address the concerns and needs of all other school units. MSMA recommends a careful 
analysis of the need and purpose of any policy and a thorough consideration of the application and 
suitability to the individual school system. 
MSMA sample policies and other resource materials may not be considered as legal advice and 
are not intended as a substitute for the advice of a board’s own legal counsel. 
Page 3 of3 
MAINE SCHOOL MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
