Mainel-lealrh 
Local Health Systems 
Fr-.1nkl.' m Community 
Health Network 
Lint:olnl"le:1lth 
l\'lainel-lealth Care At Home 
Maine Belmvloml I-"lealthcztrc 
Memorial Hospital 
Maine l\"lcdical Center 
Nlicl Coast-Pa1"k\'ie\v lleztlth 
NorDx 
Pen Bay Medical Center 
Southern l\’laine Health Care 
V\/11l(l() County Clenerttl Hospital 
VVCSYCIII Maine l’lC"&l€l1 
Part of the 
l\’laincHcaltl1 Family 
z\’lai|1c-Hcaltli /\ccotmtahle 
Care Orgztnl‘/.;1tiot1 
l\’l ainclicalth Affiliates 
M '.1ine(§ener-.11 Health 
New England Rehzibilitzttion 
llospital oFPortl-.u1d 
St. Mary' s Health System l\/laineliealtli 
Testimony of Dr. Ed Kimlin 
MaineHealth 
In Strong Support of LD 1104 
Resolve, to Amend the MaineCare Hospital Readmission 
Protocol ” 
April 14, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Distinguished Members of the Health 
and Human Services Committee, I am Dr. Ed Kirnlin of MaineHealth, and I am 
here to testify in strong support of LD 1104, “Resolve, to Amend the MaineCare 
Hospital Readrnission Protocol. ” 
This bill would address a long-standing issue that we have experienced with the rule 
that governs penalties for hospital readmissions, and speciﬁcally the exceptions to 
those penalties. As a nonproﬁt health care system, MaineHealth is proud to provide 
high quality care to all in need, regardless of payer status. We serve a signiﬁcant 
number of MaineCare enrollees, and we have successfully participated in the 
MaineCare Accountable Cominunities program since its inception. In fact, We have 
achieved savings in many of our years of participation. MaineHealth supports value— 
based payment models, including those that are intended to hold us accountable for 
providing excellent care. 
During the budget process in the 2009-10, hospitals agreed to support readmissions 
penalties that excluded speciﬁc conditions. Substance use disorder was one of the 
conditions. MaineCare developed rules that included the exceptions. However, the 
language that MaineCare adopted for the exception for individuals with substance 
use disorder is extremely narrow. In addition, MaineCare has routinely denied cases 
that we believe clearly fall into this deﬁnition, but for which the primary diagnosis 
upon readmission is a physical manifestation of substance use disorder. Finally, 
MaineCare has denied claims for services provided to those whose primary diagnosis 
is substance use — and even those whose primary diagnosis is mental illness. 
This bill is intended to clarify the language for exceptions related to substance use 
disorder, as Well as to add the situation in which a patient leaves the hospital against 
medical advice (AMA), but returns within 14 days. 
As we stated in a memo to the Department in 2020, we believe strongly that 
readmissions for individuals Whose physical conditions are caused by substance use 
should be excluded from the Department ’s readinissions policy. These admissions 
are the consequence of chronic brain pathologies for which we can encourage, but 
not force, treatment. Examples of such scenarios include recurrent acute 
pancreatitis resulting from signiﬁcant alcohol use, recurrent acute exacerbation of 
alcoholic hepatitis due to alcohol use, acute alcohol and opioid Withdrawal 
syndromes, and serious acute infections that complicate intravenous drug use. 
ll0 Free Street ' Portland, l\-'lE 04101 Phone: Z07~(>6l-7001 Fax: 2()7—(»6l—702‘) mztinehealth ow
In the memo, we suggested two administrative actions that the Department could take to ease the process: 
(1) an enhanced appeals process and (2) an update to their revenue processing software to reﬂect the codes 
that should always be excluded from the policy. Given that the denials continue, including denials upheld 
following appeal, it appears that neither suggestion has been adopted. Thus I appear before you today. 
Finally, we do have unfortunate cases in which patients leave the hospital against medical advice. We ask that 
hospitals not be held ﬁnancially accountable for those readrnissions, over which we have no control. 
Thank you for the opportunity to address this issue that has created frustration, financial cost and unnecessary 
administrative burden to our providers. 
Thank you, and I would be happy to answer questions.
