  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 14 , 202 3 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1104 – Resolve, to Amend the MaineCare Hospital Readmission Protocol  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to amend its MaineCare 
benefits rules by excepting from its readmission protocol individuals who previously left the 
hospital against medical advice or were previously discharged with substance use disorder when 
the individual's p rimary or secondary diagnosis is a result of the individual's substance use 
disorder. It removes from the exceptions to the readmission protocol individuals who were 
previously discharged whose symptoms meet the American Society of Addiction Medicine Level  
4 Criteria.  
 
The policies in place are intended to create a  financial incentive for hospitals to treat the patient’s 
substance use disorder ( SUD ) at the time of admission  and get the patient connected to community -
based treatment to address their SUD to prevent unnecessary readmission to the hospital. The 
Department also has concerns that this bill could perpetuate  SUD -related stigma  by suggesting 
that anyone with an SUD diagnosis is beyond the ability of hospitals  and providers to manage or 
help coordinat e their care and recovery  to prevent readmission . 
 
Additionally, the  bill’s directive “ That, no later than 30 days after the effective date of this resolve, 
the Department of Health and  Human Services shall amend the MaineCare benefits rules 
regarding exce ptions…”  is not operationally feasible . This bill would require state rulemaking for 
MaineCare Benefits Manual , Chapters  II and III, Section 45 - Hospital Services, as well as  changes 
to the Medicaid State Plan . 
 
Given these concerns, we are opposed to the bill. We wanted you to be aware of the above 
information as you consider this bill going forward. If you have any further questions, please feel 
free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

