 
 
 
 
Testimony of Eliza Townsend, Maine Conservation Policy Director  
In opposition to 
LD 1685, An Act to Increase Acreage Eligibility and Change Requirements for Filing Plans Under the 
Maine Tree Growth Tax Law 
May 10, 2023 
 
Senator Grohoski, representative Perry and distinguished member of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation, the Appalachian Mountain Club opposes LD 1685, An Act to Increase Acreage Eligibility and 
Change Requirements for Filing Plans Under the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law. 
 
AMC is the nation’s oldest conservation, recreation and education organization, with the mission to 
foster the protection, enjoyment and understanding of the outdoors. We have 6,600 members in Maine 
and own 100,000 acres of forestland in Piscataquis County which we manage for multiple use, including 
sustainable forestry, backcountry recreation, and environmental education. Our Maine land holdings are 
enrolled in the Tree Growth tax program.  
 
Since 1971, the Tree Growth Tax Law has been in place to encourage forestland owners to retain and 
improve their holdings of forestlands and to promote better forest management. This policy promotes 
stability and predictability, and we believe that changes to the program should be limited, if any. We do 
not object to the provision of the bill requiring that a copy of the required forest management and 
harvest plan be filed with the assessor, provided those plans remain confidential.  
 
More than 50 years ago, lawmakers determined “It is declared to be the public policy of this State that 
the public interest would be best served by encouraging forest landowners to retain and improve their 
holdings of forest lands upon the tax rolls of the State and to promote better forest management by 
appropriate tax measures in order to protect this unique economic and recreational resource.” 
 
In the 52 years since Tree Growth was first implemented, the need to protect forests and their many 
benefits has become even more important. Climate change and biodiversity loss affect our lives and our 
economy and threaten the very future of our planet. We live with the daily impact of climate change, 
from shorter, milder winters to extreme floods such as last week’s, to drought. Since 1970, the world 
has lost a staggering percentage of its biodiversity, the variety of plants, animals and fungi that form 
ecosystems and support all life. Here in the U.S., 34% of plants and 40% of animals are at risk of 
extinction.i North America has lost nearly 3 billion birds since 1970.ii We must act. 
 
Forests are a critical part of the solution because they absorb carbon pollution and provide vital habitat 
while cleaning and cooling air and water. Recognizing that smaller landowners have an important role to 
play in keeping Maine’s forests as forests, Governor Mills convened a task force to develop incentives to 
increase carbon storage on woodland parcels ranging from 10 to 10,000 acres. Fifteen task force 
members representing a variety of viewpoints collaborated to identify strategies to conserve Maine’s 
forestlands, particularly the smaller parcels.  
 
 
LD 1685 runs counter to that objective.  Increasing the acreage eligible for the program from 10 to 25 
acres would remove an incentive to keep smaller parcels forested. Maine loses an estimated 10,000 
acres of forestland per year, a figure that dates to before the pandemic-driven real estate boom. Many 
smaller forestland owners are located in southern Maine, where development pressures have been 
rising for some time, leading to higher property values and taxes. The combined effect of real estate 
demand and higher property taxes is a powerful incentive to sell forested parcels for development, and 
we believe that, if passed, LD 1685 would result in many more acres of forestland permanently lost. This 
is the wrong direction for Maine to move in when climate change and biodiversity loss demand action.  
 
Please do your part to help Maine keep its valuable forest. Please vote LD 1685 Ought Not to Pass. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i https://www.natureserve.org/news-releases/over-one-third-biodiversity-united-states-risk-
disappearing#:~:text=In%20the%20first%20report%20of,risk%20of%20range%2Dwide%20collapse. 
ii https://www.birds.cornell.edu/home/bring-birds-back/  
 
 
