TESTIMONY OF 
JOHN SAGASER, TAX POLICY COUNSEL, MAINE REVENUE SERVICES 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: 5/11/23 
LD I 685 — An Act to Increase Acreage Eligibility and Change Requirements for 
Filing Plans Under the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is John Sagaser, Tax Policy Counsel for the 
Ofﬁce of Tax Policy, Maine Revenue Services. I am testifying at the request of the 
Administration Neither For Nor Against LD I 685 — An Act to Increase Acreage 
Eligibility and Change Requirements for Filing Plans Under the Maine Tree 
Growth Tax Law. 
This bill amends the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law by increasing the acreage 
eligibility requirement from l0 to 25 acres of forested land beginning April 1, 
2025. The bill authorizes municipal assessors and the State Tax Assessor to retain 
copies of required forest management and harvest plans and with assistance from 
the Director of the Bureau of Forestry within the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry (DACF) to determine the sufficiency of a plan to meet 
the requirements of the law. Forest management and harvest plans retained bya 
municipal assessor or the State Tax Assessor are conﬁdential and not public 
records. 
My comments here are directed to various points of clariﬁcation of the bill’s 
intent and other technical wording comments. As our comments are limited to tax 
administration and technical issues, We defer to DACF regarding any policy 
matters.
1
First, the language should be clariﬁed regarding withdrawal from the tree 
growth program and application of penalties. Next, We recommend the ﬁrst 
sentence in section 575-A be amended to explain that the Director of the Bureau of 
Forestry is the person required to comply with requests within six months. 
Section 3 of the bill repeals the assessor ’s ability to request a copy of the 
forest management and harvest plan, and the requirement for landowners to ﬁle 
copies of the forest management and harvest plans will be implemented gradually 
as plans are updated or when new applicants enter the program. This may createa 
gap in an assessor ’s ability to access forest management and harvest plans. To 
avoid this, MRS recommends leaving the language in section 3 and amending it to 
reference forest management and harvest plans that have not yet been ﬁled with the 
EISSGSSOT. 
Regarding the requirement that local assessors retain copies of confidential 
forest management plans, note that assessors are not ordinarily equipped to retain 
conﬁdential material and requiring them to do so with these documents would 
create a mandated expense, 90% of which the State must reimburse pursuant to the 
Maine Constitution, Article IX, Section 21. 
Note also that affected taxpayers with tree growth parcels smaller than 25 
acres may be subject to a significant property tax increase despite being compliant 
with existing law. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
2
