May 5 , 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
 
RE: LD 1685  - An Act to Increase Acreage Eligibility and Change Requirements for 
Filing Plans Under the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law  
 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry , and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I am the Government Relations Director  for 
The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate this opportunity to submit written 
comments  in opposition to LD 1685  – An Act to Increase Acreag e Eligibility and 
Change Requirements for Filing Plans Under the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law . 
 
The N ature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners.  The Nature 
Conservancy has  been leading conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest la ndowner in  the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres.  We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our changin g climate.  
 
The Nature Conservancy strongly supports the Tree Growth Tax Law program and 
advocates for maintaining it. We believe this bill makes unnecessary and harmful 
changes to this important program. LD 1685 would increase the acreage eligibility 
requirement from 10 to 25 acres of forested land starting in 2025. TNC is strongly 
opposed to increas ing the acreage eligibility for this program. The bill also authorizes 
municipal assessors and the State Tax Assess or to retain co pies of forest management  
and harvest plans. We have no issues with tha t aspect of this bill .  
 
Since its inception , the Tree Growth Tax Law program  has become one of Maine’s most 
important tools to encourage sustainable forestry and has served to enhance 
recreational opportunities and to protect wildlife habitat. The program fits a wide 
variety of needs and uses – from small landowners managing their wood lots to large 
landowners managing hundreds of thousands of acres . Increasing the acreage 
eligibility will  force many landowners who own parcels between 10 -25 acres out of the 
program and  open those lands up  to other uses.   
 
The impact of t his shift would  be dramatic – it would decrease the wood supply, open  
areas to development and lik ely encourage sprawl , change the character of many 
communities , and unfairly allow certain landowners to unenroll from the prog ram 
without a penalty.  Land s and landowners currently enrolled in the program provide 
public benefits by keeping their lands undeveloped and in forest production, but also 
receive  benefits in the form of paying a cur rent use tax instead of being taxed at the 
highest and best use. Forcing them out of the program and  waiving the withdrawal  
penalty reneges on the deal struck to balance  the public benefits and  incentive to 
landowners.  At its worst, this bill would allow certain landowners to  double dip by 
capitalizing on years of paying lower taxes, then being able to sell  or develop the 
property at significant financial gain  without the back tax penalty . Breaking the  
commitments  of the existing Tree Growth Tax Program is unfair and would unde rmine 
the integrity of the whole program.   
 
In 2018,  the Maine Legislature convened a Study Group to review the Tree Growth 
program based on a set of comprehensive questions from the Taxation Committee. 
The Study Group, led by the University of Maine’s School of Forest Resources, 
examined nearly every aspect of the Tree Growth program. Its membership included 
the Maine Woodland Ow ners Association, the Maine Municipal Association, the Maine 
Forest Products Council, The Nature Conservancy, the Maine Farm Bureau,  and the 
Association of Consulting Foresters. (The Bureau of Forestry was also appointed by the 
Taxation Committee but declin ed to participate at the time) The group  met nine times 
and held a public listening session in the summer and fall of 2017 to review 
information, seek feedback and identify actions to improve implementation of the Tree 
Growth Tax Law.    
  
The report and recommendations examined compliance issues, minimum lot size, 
penalties, the role of the Bureau, the role of local assessors, and technical assistance 
opportunities. In the end, the Study Group  did not suggest any legislative changes, but 
focus ed more on increasing education and outreach.    
 
For these reasons, we urge the Committee to oppose LD 1685. Thank you again for this 
opportunity to comm ent, and TNC is happy to answer questions at any time.  
