MAINE MUNICIPAL 
ASSOCIATION smcswsts 
60 Community Drive I Augusto, ME 04330-91:86 
1 soc-asz-mas (in state) | (r)2o1-622-aaza 
(0 zorezl-~oi29 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Support of 
LD 1685, An Act to Increase Acreage Eligibility and Change Requirements for Filing Plans 
Under the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law 
May 11, 2023 
name is Kate Dufour, and I am offering testimony in support of LD 1650 on behalf of the 70 
municipal leaders who were elected by their peers to serve on the Association ’s Legislative 
Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal interest, 
First and foremost, I want to extend the Association ’s gratitude to Rep. Matlack for 
agreeing to sponsor LD 1685 on behalf of MMA and the assessing community. The changes 
proposed are being advanced by the municipal ofﬁcials trained by the state and entrusted to 
oversee not only the assessment of property taxes, but also to ensure compliance with the state’s 
current use programs. This responsibility is of great importance, as these programs provide 
generous property tax beneﬁts, in return for advancing state policy priorities associated with the 
management of natural resources. Every property tax dollar saved, or not assessed against 
property enrolled in a current use program, must be raised by the remaining property taxpayers. 
To that end, the assessors are asking the Committee to consider modiﬁcations to the 
program. To ensure that the beneﬁts provided under the Tree Growth program are targeted for 
the intended purpose, the bill increases from 10 to 25 the minimum number acres necessary to 
enroll in the program. From the perspective of assessors, this change will ensure that the beneﬁts 
are provided to larger scale operations and help avoid the temptation associated with sheltering 
smaller lots from full taxation. 
Second, the bill enables assessors to retain a copy of the forest management plan that 
guides the proper management of the forested lands as required under the program. While 
currently assessors are allowed to review plans in the process of determining eligibility, those 
documents must be returned to the owner once the review has been completed. To ensure 
ongoing compliance with the conditions found in the plan, municipal ofﬁcials believe it makes 
sense to provide ready access to supporting documents. 
In a nutshell, LD 1685 supports local level efforts to protect the interests of all property 
owners in the administration of the Tree Growth program. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
