Maine Legislature  
Taxation Committee  
2 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
May 11, 2023  
Re: LD 1685, An Act to Increase Acreage Eligibility and Change Requirements for Filing Plans Under the 
Maine Tree Growth Tax Law  
Chairpersons Grohoski  and Perry, and honorable members of the Taxation Committee:  
My name is Kerry Leichtman. I am a Certified Maine Assessor serving the jurisdictions of Camden, 
Rockport and Rockland. Thank you for the opportunity to address you on this bill.  
I’m sorry I coul d not be here  today to speak in favor of Rep. Matlack’s LD 1685, An Act to Increase 
Acreage E ligibility and Change Requirements for Filing Plans Under the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law, as 
I am out -of-state today attending to personal matters.  
The Tree Growth current use program is important to the Maine forestry products industry. Many 
businesses and workers depend on the raw materials supplied by trees, as do those  who work the woods 
harvesting trees. As we all know, trees grow slowly. Because of this, w ithou t the tax break allowed under 
the Tree Growth statutes, tree- growing landowners  would , over time, pay far more in property taxes than 
they could ever recoup by harvesting. The result of that would be less acreage devoted to producing 
harvestable trees.  
The Tree Growth tax break is substantial. The base rate  for back land  in my towns is $5,000/acre. An acre 
enrolled in TG is valued at $313 for softwoods, $251 for hardwoods and $ 385 for mixed  woods . On 
average that is a 94% discount.  The values are set on a county  by county  basis by Maine Revenue 
Services .  
Because this is a valuation issue, assessors are charged with administering the program and enforcing 
compliance.  We are, by statute, the only officials who must be shown the Forest Management and Harvest 
Plans when we request it. Even though we are responsible for enforcing compliance we cannot keep Plan s 
on file , we must return them to the owner or shred them. This is akin to tying one hand behind our backs.  
A Forest Management and Harvest Plan covers  a ten -year period. There is no way anyone could 
remember a Plan  and know that a harvest should have taken place during  a particular span of time.  When 
a Plan  is being updated and renewed, the applicant has to sign a statement saying they are following the 
Plan. A forester has to co -sign the application.  
The problem is these attestations are not always accurate. What I do is enforce retroactively. I ask to see 
the Plan . Sometimes the property owner has no idea where the Plan  is. It makes you wonder how they are 
following the Plan  if they don’t know where it is . I have, at times, contacted the Maine Forest Service for 
assistance in determining if a Plan  has been followed. The Forest Service has been very cooperative each 
time I have called.  They have  also been working with foresters to make sure they are taking the 
attestations seriously.  
The process for administering co mpliance is time consuming and could easily be streamlined which 
would make enforcement less onerous. First, LD 1685 would allow assessors to keep Forest Management 
and Harvest Plans on file. Most Plan s don’t need to be considered confidential, but for those that are 
assessors are accustomed to handling confidential  information  and can keep them in a locked file drawer 
along with veteran exemption applications, which are also considered to be confidential, or file them as 
pdf’s in a password protected folder.  
LD 1685 also contains a provision for rejecting Plan s in consultation with the Maine Forest Service. Plan s 
contai n narratives that usually describe the relative health of stands of trees. It is common to read that a 
particular stand has matured and is in danger of becoming overcrowded. When overcrowded, trees 
compet e for sunlight and nutrients in the soil. Trees will  die off and rot. Diseases can set in. When these 
events happen, the harvestable wood loses value.  
Yet the Plan ’s list of recommendations will often not mention an immediate need to harvest, and might 
not mention a need to harvest at all. There have been m any times I would have returned the Plan  to the 
forester requesting that the recommendations do a better job reflecting the Plan ’s narrative.  
And finally, LD 1685 would increase the minimum acreage for admittance into the program to 25 acres 
from 10. I’ve spoken with landowners who have told me they can’t get a forester to come to their land 
because harvesting a small lot is not worth their time. An increased minimum lot size would remove these 
too small lots from the program. The bill allows them to exit t he program  penalty free for the first year 
after it is enacted. Also, many of these lots would most likely be eligible for admission into the Open 
Space current use program.  
Every tax break given to one landowner shifts the burden to other landowners to ma ke up the difference. 
A 94% value deduction is quite generous, but well deserved for those whose participation in the program 
is produc ing raw materials for the wood products industry. Representative Matlack’s bill would continue 
to reward these landowners  while reinforcing the program’s integrity by providing assessors with the 
tools we need to carry out our responsibilities.  
I’m sorry I cannot be present to answer your questions , but m y absence today is unavoidable. Thank you 
for reading and considering m y testimony.  
