 
 
 
Testimony in Opposition to  LD 1685,  
An Act to Increase Acreage Eligibility and Change Requirements for Filing Plans Under the 
Maine Tree Growth Tax Law  
 
May 1 1, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Committee on Taxation , I am Melanie 
Sturm, the Forests and Wildlife Director at the Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM) . I appreciate 
the opportunity to provide testimony in opposition to  LD 1685 . 
 
The Tree Growth Tax Law is one of the few incentives in Maine for landowners to maintain their forests. 
It is one of Maine’s “current use” property tax programs , along with the Farmland Program and Open 
Space  Program,  that lowers property taxes for qualifying landowners . Since 1972, the Tree Growth Tax 
Law has helped Maine landowners keep  their property as working forests, preserving many values  of 
forest land , including their recreational and scenic qualities, economic benefi ts to the forest products 
sector , and use as wildlife habitat. Maine Won’t Wait , the state’s four -year climate action plan, 
recognized the importance of forests in capturing and storing carbon  as well. To date, the Tree Growth 
Tax P rogram has succeeded at  preventing development in inappropriate places . 
 
NRCM has concerns with the provision in LD 1685  that would increase the acreage eligibility 
requirement from 10 to 25 acres of forested land beginning April 1, 2025. We have no issues with the 
other provisi on of the bill related to the State Tax Assessor retain ing copies of required fores t 
management and harvest plans . Increasing the minimum acreage for enrollment in the Tree Growth Tax 
Program to 25 acres would result in less land being  enrolled in the program . This could significantly 
reduce the beneficial effects  of the Tree Growth program , lead ing to more development on  large l ots 
and creating undesirable sprawl and subdivision s. When considering this bill, it would be helpful to know  
the number and locations of parcels between 10 and 25 acres that would fall out of Tree Growth if this 
bill were enacted.  We are fairly certain that such information  would reveal that forested land located 
near municipalities  would suddenly become vu lnera ble to development .  
 
NRCM believes that protections for Maine’s forests  should be strengthened not weakened , and that 
tampering with the Tree Growth Tax Law would be counterproductive to the state’s other interests in 
sustaining a strong forest products industry, protecting wildlife habitat, and enhancing nature -based 
climate solutions through forest carbon sequestration and storage .  
 
I respectfully urge the Committee to oppose the portion of LD 1685  that would change the eligibility 
threshold for the Tree Growth program from 10 to 25 acres . Thank you for your time and consideration 
of this issue, and I would be glad to answer any questions you may have.  
