Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony in Opposition to  LD 1685 
 
“An Act to Increase Acreage Eligibility and Change Requirements for 
Filing Plans Under the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law ” 
 
May 11, 2023 
 
Pat Strauch, Executive Director  
 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry  and members of the Committee on  
Taxation , my name is Patrick Strauch,  and I am submitting  testimony on behalf of the 
Maine forest Products Council in opposition to LD 1 685, “ An Act to Increase Acreage 
Eligibility and Change Requirements for Filing Plans Under the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law .”  
 The Tree Growth Tax Law (TGTL) was established as a tool to support a  healthy forest -
based economy by encouraging active forest management  on forested lots that ar e 10 
acres in size and greater . Since 1971, the statutory description of TGTL has said, “ It is 
declared to be the public policy of this State that the public interest would be best served by 
encouraging forest landowners to retain and improve their holding s of forest lands  upon 
the tax rolls of the State and to promote better forest management by appropriate tax 
measures in order to protect this unique economic and recreational resource .” 
 
The Maine Forest Products Council opposes LD 1685 because it runs counter to the goals set in 
statute more than 50 years ago by arbitrarily limiting participation and proposing other changes 
that are harmful to the program.   
As drafted, every section of LD 1685 is designed to disqualify program participation. 
Specifically, it would:  
 
• Increase the acreage eligibility requirement from 10 to 25 acres beginning April 1, 2025  
(this change disqualifies roughly 99,000 acres from the program)  
• Authorize municipal assessors and the State Tax Assessor to retain copies of forest 
management and harvest plans  (these plans contain proprietary information)  
• Authorize municipal assessors and the State Tax Assessor to determine if a management 
plan is suf ficient to meet the law (this is currently done by licensed foresters with a background 
in forest management)  
By and large, the TGTL has stood the test of time . One important goal  of this program  was to 
provide continuity of forest management, especially on smaller wood lots that comprise a  
  
2 
 significant portion of Maine’s timber supply . This  has become especially important in recent years , specifically  in the 
central and southern parts of our state  where the real estate market has  taken off. Because of the way it is structured, the 
TGTL has helped maintain wood supply for Maine mills, and it has helped educate new generations of landowners about 
the benefits of managing wood lots of all sizes. With this new trend in the real estate market, now is decidedly not the time 
to entertain changes that would disqualify a large number of landowners from participating in the program.  
 
In addition to making changes that run counter to the intent of the program, this bill will set a dangerous precedent by 
disqualifying landowners who are legitimately enrolled in the program. Section 4 of the bill is intended to protect 
landowners who are disqualified from penalties , but the Maine Constitution dictates otherwise. This places  small 
wood land owners holding  nearly 100,000 acres of forestland at risk of facing significant financial harm should this bill 
come to pass.  Considering these lots are between 10 -24 acres in size, the impact would be significant.  It would not be fair 
to penalize program participants who have land enrolled in the program because the rules changed after the fact.  
 
Over the last 52 years, the TGTL has been studied time and time again . Most recently, the Maine Forest 
Products Council participated in  a committee commissioned by this committee that was  chaired by the head of 
the School of Forest Resources at the University of Maine to study the program. The resulting report , titled 
“Review of the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law,” was presented to this committee during the 128th Legislature. 
None of the proposals included in this bill were recommended. For these reasons, please vote ‘Ought not to 
pass’ on LD 1685. 
 Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions the committee may have. 
 
 
