Board of Directors 
Doug Baston 
President 
Tom Allen 
2nd Vice-President 
Jeff Williams 
Secretary 
Seth Sprague 
Treasurer 
Hannah Carter 
Jim Clair 
Terri Coolong 
Jennifer Dann 
Mark Doty 
Chris Jackson 
John Meirose 
Richard Nass 
Paul Sampson 
Chapter Leaders 
Si Balch 
Larry Beauregard 
Ernest Carle 
Joe Dembeck 
Jim Ferrante 
Randy Lagasse 
Lauren Ouellette 
Merle Ring 
Andy Shultz 
Andrew Smart 
Jeff Williams 
8Mulliken Court PO Box 836 e Augusta, ME 04332-0836 Telephone: 207-6260005 Email: info@mainewoodlandowners.org e Website:wwwmainewoodlandowners org DlC§JV/@l\IEl{S 
COMMUNITY ADVOCACY KNOWLEDGE LEGACY 
Testimony of Tom Doak 
Executive Director 
Maine Woodland Owners 
In Opposition to 
LD 1685 
“An Act to Increase Acreage Eligibility and Change Requirements for Filing Plans 
Under the Maine Tree Growth Tax LaW” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Joint- 
Standing Committee on Taxation, my name is Tom Doak, I am the Executive Director 
of Maine Woodland Owners speaking today in opposition to LD 1685, “An Act to 
Increase Acreage Eligibility and Change Requirements for Filing Plans Under the 
Maine Tree Growth Tax LaW.” 
Maine Woodland Owners has long been an advocate for the Tree Growth Tax Law 
program. This bill seeks to change the rules for every landowner currently enrolled in 
the Tree Growth Tax Law program and we believe these changes would be harmful to 
the program. 
In Section 1, this bill seeks to change the minimum acreage in the Tree Growth Tax 
Law program from l0 to 25 acres beginning on April l, 2025. It is unclear why the 
change from l0 to 25 acres is necessary. In 2018, this Committee convened a study 
commission to conduct an analysis of the Tree Growth Tax Law program to determine 
whether any changes should be made. The commission was chaired by the head of the 
School of Forest Resources at the University of Maine and consisted of many 
stakeholders including Maine Woodland Owners, the Maine Forest Products Council, 
The Nature Conservancy, the Maine Farm Bureau, the Maine Association of 
Consulting Foresters, and the Maine Municipal Association. The commission ’s 
report, titled “Review of the Maine Tree Growth Tax Law,” was presented to the l28‘h 
Legislature ’s Committee on Taxation. In the report, the commission was speciﬁcally 
asked to advise the Committee on the question of whether the lot size of 10 acres for 
new enrollments should be modiﬁed. The commission determined that no changes 
were necessary. We agree with the commission ’s conclusion and believe that no 
changes to the acreage are necessary. 
Also in Section 1, the bill would require landowners to ﬁle a copy of their forest 
management and harvest plan with the municipal assessor or State Tax Assessor every 
l0 years. The assessor already has the ability to ask a landowner for a copy of their 
A Nonproﬁt Corporation ~ IRC 501(c)(3)
forest management and harvest plan at any time and the landowner is required to provide it. The 
assessor may retain the plan as long as needed to ensure compliance, but must then return it to 
the landowner. There is an additional requirement on the landowner. Currently, under section 
574-B of the Tree Growth Tax Law, the landowner must comply with the forest management and 
harvest plan and must submit every 10 years a statement from a Maine licensed professional 
forester that the plan meets the statutory requirements and the landowner is managing the parcel 
according to the plan. 
It is unclear why municipalities would need to keep a management plan for an indetenninate 
amount of time. It is particularly concerning because these documents are designated as 
conﬁdential and not a public record and extra care would be required by the municipality to 
ensure that no one other than the assessor has access to the documents. There was a period of 
time when plans were required to be ﬁled and held by the assessor, but that requirement was 
repealed. I believe that was because it proved to be unnecessary, and the difﬁculty of keeping so 
many documents with potentially propriety information conﬁdential. We do not feel it is 
necessary or appropriate for landowners to have to ﬁle their forest management and harvest plan 
with the assessor. 
Finally, Section 4 seeks to forgo a penalty against those parcels withdrawn ﬁom the Tree Growth 
Tax Law program after the change in acreage would take effect in 2025. Based on the 2018 
report to this Committee that would involve just under 99,000 acres. However, the Maine 
Constitution requires a penalty for any land withdrawn from the Tree Growth Tax Law program. 
So landowners who are fully in compliance with the program who happen to have a parcel less 
than 25 acres (it is not uncommon for a landowner to own multiple parcels) would pay a penalty 
only because the rules were changed after they enrolled their land. This is simply not fair or 
right. 
For these reasons, Maine Woodland Owners is in opposition to LD 1685 and urges this 
Cormnittee to vote Ought Not to Pass.
