 
 
    
 
 
Communities working together to build shared and sustainable prosperity  
970 Baxter Boulevard, Suite 201 ● Portland, Maine, 04103 ● Telephone (207) 774 -9891 ● www.gpcog.org  
March 2 8, 2023  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Transportation  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: Support of LD 259, An Act Making Unified Allocations from the Highway Fund  
 
Dear Sen. Chipman, Rep. Williams, and Committee members , 
 
Please accept this letter as the testimony of the Greater Portland Council of Governments 
(GPCOG) in support of An Act Making Unified Allocations from the Highway Fund . 
Transportation funding is critical to our member municipalities and our entir e region,  and we 
welcome all that this budget seeks to accomplish.  
 
GPCOG serves 25 municipal members in Cumberland County, from Sebago Lake to Casco Bay, 
as well as Saco, Biddeford, Arundel, and Old Orchard Beach through the Portland Area 
Comprehensive Tr ansportation System (PACTS). We deliver transportation, land use, 
sustainability, and economic development services to our members and their communities.  
 
As we support PACTS, we see firsthand how disruptive the pandemic has been for our public 
transportat ion providers. Although federal relief funding (CARES and ARPA) helped transit 
agencies “weather the storm” of the pandemic, ridership has not returned to pre -pandemic 
levels, which is particularly challenging for bus transit operators, who serve vulnerabl e 
populations dependent on bus service for work, wellness, and life’s necessities. The depressed 
ridership, coupled with rising costs, could signal the beginning of a fiscal cliff, which will 
disproportionately hurt vulnerable people and will also reduce o ur region’s future capacity to 
build well -located growth and development in tandem with robust transit services.  
 
In their letter to you of March 6, 2023, the Maine Transit Association (MTA) outlined the 
persistent loss of ridership experienced by all our bus transit agencies , and the looming end of 
federal pandemic relief funding . Without expanded state funding for bus transit, agencies will 
be forced to reduce services at a time when we need them to do more than ever.  
 
MTA has asked this Committee to  increase funding to all bus transit agencies in Maine for 
operations and maintenance to $6.78 million dollars in FY 24 -25. We join MTA in urging you to 
do so in this budget, thereby assuring the continued operation of all bus transit services in our 
region, and in the state.  
 
As a regional council, GPCOG  work s with our communities on many related challenges including 
economic development, climate action, and the housing crisis that continues to make all types 
of housing less and less affordable  for fa r too many people.   
 
From our perspective, we envision a more robust transit system that includes bus transit 
agencies providing two essential services. First, transit services must continue to provide critical 
mobility services which support all members o f our community .  
 
Second, they must  enable and accompany new growth and development, including expanded 
housing following new state policies, all well -located in places that reduce congestion, climate 
impacts, and sprawl  while still supporting new jobs, i nvestment, and workforce growth.  
 
For more information, please refer to our Transit Together  report 
(https://www.transi ttogether.org ), as well as our long -range regional transportation plan 
Connect 45  (https://www.conne ct2045.org ).  
 
You can see in both documents the central role that transit will play in our region’s future 
development, but only if its current capacities are sufficiently funded.  
 
For all these reasons we support LD 25 9, and as you shape the transportation budget, we urge 
you to expand bus agencies’ operational funding as outlined by the MTA so those agencies can 
continue to provide their vital service today, and in the future.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share ou r views, and please let me know if I can provide 
anything more to support your work on LD 259, and more broadly, on transportation’s central 
role in the future of our region’s development.  
 
 
Sincerely , 
 
Kristina Egan  
Executive Director  
Greater Portland Council of Governments  

