 
 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against LD 259, An Act Making Unified Allocations from the 
Highway Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government and Changing 
Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State Government for 
the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025  
 
To the Committee on Transportation  
by Josh Caldwell , Climate and Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator  
March 27, 2023  
 
Senator Chipman , Representative Williams , and members of the Committee on Transportation , 
my name is J osh Caldwell . I am the Climate and Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator  at the 
Natural Resources Council of Maine. NRCM has been working for more than 60 years to 
protect, restore, and conserve Mai ne’s environment, on behalf of our 25,000 members and 
supporters. I’m here today to testify neither for nor against  LD 259, An Act Making Unified 
Allocations from the Highway Fund and Other Funds for the Expenditures of State Government 
and Changing Certain Provisions of the Law Necessary to the Proper Operations of State 
Government for the Fiscal Years Ending June 30, 2023, June 30, 2024 and June 30, 2025 . 
 
The recommended Unified Highway Fund Budget for fiscal years 2024 -2025 proposes a 
continuation of the state’s regular contribution to transit operations at $1.2 million. This number 
hasn’t changed in five years despite s ignificant shocks to transit agencies across the state over 
that period . To maintain the current level of service fo r wheeled transit operations  and avoid 
cutbacks for transit users in Maine, this level of funding must be increased.  
Federal funding through the American Rescue Plan has supported transit operating costs in 
Maine for the past two years, but that funding wi ll come to an end this year. With the  Federal 
Transit A dministration  providing  fifty percent  of Maine’s transit operating funds, state and local 
government s will be forced to come up with the other half , or make significant cuts . Transit 
agencies are already woefully under funded , and th e current budget proposal is insufficient to 
meet their expressed need , especially after the pandemic significantly reduced transit ridership .1 
An increase in state contribution to transit operating funds will be critical to ensure continuance 
of existing routes and service, let alone expansion of that service.  
 
1 https://www.bangordailynews.com/2022/03/18/politics/the -pandemic -slashed -maine -bus-and-train -ridership -it-
has-not-recovered -joam40zk0w/  

A sustainable climate future for Maine features a thriving public transit system that me ets the 
needs of all Mainers, and we cannot hope to achieve that vision without first ensuring that transit 
operators have the resources to maintain baseline service.  
Maine’s bipartisan Climate Action Plan identifies  reducing emissions from the transportation 
sector as “Plan A,” citing that 54 percent of greenhouse gas emissions  come from cars and trucks 
in Maine.2 The Clean Transportation Roadmap , commissioned in 2021 to establish a pathwa y for 
reducing emissions fr om the transportation sector , identifies transit expansion and transit -
oriented development as key recommendations to reduce vehicle miles traveled and diversify 
Maine’s transportation system.3  
The 2021 Transit Cooperative Research Report found that riding a mile by bus in this country, 
on average, contributes 30% less to climate change than riding in a gas car alone . Further, robust 
transit infrastructure en ables  dense r development  and reduces car dependence , and these changes 
to our communities can reduce vehicle travel by 5 -12 times as much as the benefits from directly 
replaced car trips.4  
The Maine Transit Association has proposed a substantial step toward establishing  reasonable 
funding equity in the state’s support for public trans it operations. They have asked for an 
increase in state contribution to public transit operating funds (not including rail and state 
operated ferry systems) to $6,780,960 per year, a modest request that would represent significant 
relief for tra nsit agencies across the state. Further, we hope that the $20 million in the current 
budget for multimodal capital expenses be used to support  wheeled  transit capital needs.  
LR 1777 , An Act to Strategically Advance the State's Public Transit Infrastructure by 
Reinvigorating the Public Transit Advisory Council and Increasing Funding, has not yet been 
printed, but will also include an ask for increased state funding for transit operations in align ment 
with MTA’s request.  We are supportive of this legislation.  
We urge the Committee to include the recommendations of the Maine Transit Association in this 
budget and would welcome any questions you have.  
 
2 https://www.maine.gov/climateplan/  
3 https:// www.maine.gov/future/initiatives/climate/cleantransportation  
4 https://nap.nationalacademies.org/catalog/26103/an -update -on-public -transportations -impacts -on-greenhouse -
gas-emissions  
