POSlTlON STATEMENT IN SUPPORT 
LD 1236: An Act to Increase the Provision of Children's Behavioral Health Services in Rural 
Areas and to Provide Support for Families of Children Receiving Services 
Presented to Maine's Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
As the state's largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMl Maine supports the 
unanimous passage of LD 1236 to increase access and support for children's behavioral health services 
in Maine's rural communities. 
Maine is the most rural state when measured by the high proportion of our citizens living outside an 
urban area. The delivery of services of almost any form faces the challenges of increased distances, 
fewer senrice centers, a reduced provider base and extremely limited public transportation. This may be 
especially true in behavioral health services and deeply impacts access to care for youth in a time of 
escalated needs. The prevalence of mental health concerns does not differ markedly between urban and 
rural regions, but those living in rural locations receive mental health treatment less frequently and 
often with providers with less specialized training, when compared to those residing in 
metropolitan locations. The primary reasons for this disparate treatment include less access to 
care, fewer providers, especially psychiatry and in specialized treatment modalities and limited 
care coordination between regional hospitals and local treatment providers. Adding to the 
challenge is an increased stigma associated with engagement with the child welfare system anda 
culture ofstoicism inhibiting help-seeking. Rural citizens die by suicide at twice the rate than those 
in urban settings. 
LD1236 provides for recognition ofthe rural barriers resulting in a disparity ofcare and seeks to 
provide remedies to some ofthe systemic ones. Increased Mainecare rates for rural service 
delivery will support increased provider base by allowing an improved wage for providers. It will 
also fund travel for the greater distances to connect families with services and to support family 
and provider team meetings for better coordination of services. it may provide a greater level of 
service delivery to support increased family reunification and professional services during a time of 
great stress and need for children and their families. We urge passage ofthis bill at a time of 
documented increased need and scarcity ofproviders. 
ABOUT NAM! MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the Nationa/Alliance on Mental illness, Maine Chapter (NAM! Maine) 
is the state's largest grassroots mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the 
agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAM! Maine 
engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state's mental health system through 
collaboration and education. 
LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Director of Community POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
Programs www.namimaineorg/advocacy 
(207)622-5767 O HannahL@namimaine.org
