295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 1236  
" An Act to Increase the Provision of Children's Behavioral Health 
Services in Rural Areas and to Provide Support for Families of 
Children Receiving Services " 
Sponsored by Representative Madigan  
April 10, 2023  
 
Good morning  Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and esteemed  members of the 
Health and Human Services  Committee.   My name is  Malory Shaughnessy and I am the 
Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance 
is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine’s community based 
mental health and substance use treatment providers , providing services to over 80,000 
Maine men, women, and children . The Alliance advocates for the implementation of 
sound policies and evidence -based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.  
 
We support LD 1236  and thank Representative Madigan  and the cosponsors for br inging 
this legislation forward. This proposal would add several different ways to expand access 
to treatment services  to children in rural areas of Maine .  
 
First, LD 1236 would establish reimbursement  rates for providers of behavioral health 
services to children in families in rural areas  involved in the child welfare system. The 
rural reimbursement rate would  be sufficient to  allow for the additional travel time 
required to serve children in rural areas.  
 
Secondly, t his proposal would offer grants or other incentives to children's behavioral 
health  providers to expand programs into rural areas and serve children in families 
involved in the  child welfare system.  
 
And third, it would not only direct the department to establish a method of reimbursing 
providers of services  to families involved in the child welfare system to meet together 
and coordinate services for each family.  It would  also mandate that the Department shall 
fully implement the family team meetings plan that is established in the Maine Family  
First Prevention Services State Plan. The department is directed  to develop training for 
child  welfare staff to act as neutral facilitators. The department is directed to ensure that 
all providers of  services to families involved in the child welfare system participate in 
family team  meetings.  
 
One of the reasons that home and community services are so hard to access in rural 
areas is that provider travel is not a billable  activity.  In order to make the reimbursement 
rate w ork economically to sustain a program, agencies are forced to limit the distance 
that a clinician or Behavioral Health Professional travels to provide services. This has left 
many  of our rural areas without access to these home and community -based services .  
 
I would be happy to answer any questions you have for me and to bring any other 
information you need for the work session on this bill.   
 
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

