Janet T. Mills Maine l)epartment of Health and Human Services 
Governor 4 s Comrnissionc ﬂs Olilice 
5“ l l State House Station 
A _ , ‘ _ . ,- 
. 109 (mpmn Street “’ I h'D' 
Augusta, it-"lziine 04333-00] l 
' 
Tel: (207) 287-3707; Fax: (207) 2876005 
'l"l‘\’: Dial 7ll (lvlziiire Relay) 
Testimony of the Office of Child and Family Services 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
In opposition to LD 1236, An Act to Increase the Provision of Children ’s Behavioral Health Services in 
Rural Areas and to Provide Support for Families of Children Receiving Services 
Hearing Date: April IO, 2023 
Senator Balclacci, Representative Meyer and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, I am Todd Landry, Director of the Office of Child and Family Services 
(OCFS). I am here today to provide information and express opposition to sections of LD 1236, An Act 
to Increase the Provision of Children ’s Behavioral Health Services in Rural Areas and to Provide 
Support for Families of Children Receiving Services. 
LD 1236 would codify policy regarding Family Team Meetings (FTMs) and require the Department to 
expand children ’s behavioral health services for children in families involved in the child welfare system 
in rural areas. It requires the Department to amend the MaineCare Beneﬁts Manual, Sections 28 and 65 
to establish a rural reimbursement rate that “is sufficient to allow for the additional travel time” for 
providers in rural areas to provide services. The bill also requires the Department to offer grants or other 
incentives to existing providers to expand services into rural areas. It would require the Department to 
reimburse providers of services to families to meet together and coordinate services for each family. The 
bill further requires the Department to “fully implement the family team meetings plan ﬁ'om the State’s 
Family First Prevention Services State Plan and train child welfare staff as neutral facilitators for 
FTMs.” 
This bill is complex and touches on several different topics. For clarity, I will provide the Depar'tment ’s 
response to each section of the bill. 
Section One: OCFS is opposed to codifying FTM policy in statute. Legislating practice does not allow 
the agency to be nimble in adapting practice to meet evolving needs or incorporate new best practices 
from the child welfare ﬁeld. Furthermore, this bill would require that a FTM be held prior to the ﬁling of 
a Preliminary Protection Order (PPO). OCF S (pursuant to the existing FTM policy) seeks to convene an 
FTM prior to any initial filing in a case but there are emergent situations where convening a FTM is not 
possible due to imminent child safety concerns, lack of availability of parents, other key members of the 
team, etc. 
Section Two: OCFS supports the desire to ensure the accessibility of services for children in state care. 
OCFS does not have any programmatic concems with to the portion of section two that provides grants 
or incentives to providers, though this initiative would require general fund outside the Governor ’s 
proposed budget. Were the Committee to endorse this section, we would recommend that you consider 
expanding the initiative to include services for both children and adults involved in the child welfare
system. When a child is removed from the care of their parents due to safety concerns, those concerns 
are generally centered around the parents, with the most common risk factors including substance use, 
mental health concerns, and domestic violence. 
OCF S does not support the portion of that would require the Department to establish a reimbursement 
process for providers of services to meet and coordinate services for the family. To be clear, there is 
great value when providers work together to coordinate care but the language insection two is very 
broad and does not specify that the Department be involved in these meetings or that the Department 
weigh-in on the topics, the necessity of the meeting, etc. This would make the Department financially 
responsible for meetings that may not be relevant to the case. 
The bill also requires the Department to establish reimbursement rates that allow for additional travel 
time required to serve members in rural areas. While the Department recognizes the concern regarding 
increased travel-related costs for rural areas, MaineCare has indicated that more studies would be 
required to determine whether these relatively higher costs may be offset by other costs that may be 
lower in rural areas (e. g. wages, rental costs, etc.) If the Department found travel costs to be higher and 
not offset elsewhere, another concern would be extending this special treatment for a single category of 
services without considering the precedent it would set for other services across the MaineCare Beneﬁts 
Manual. The complexity and potential for precedent is why MaineCare plans to bring the issue of 
geographically tiered rates to the Technical Advisory Panel established pursuant to P.L. 2021, Ch. 639. 
This will allow for a comprehensive (rather than piecemeal, service-by-service) approach to determining 
cost appropriateness and ramiﬁcations of implementation can be developed. 
Section Three: OCFS has already implemented the F TM plan speciﬁed in the Family First Prevention 
Services State Plan as it has been fully incorporated into FTM policy. OCFS has concerns with child 
welfare caseworkers and/or supervisors serving as neutral facilitators. OCF S does not believe that 
parents would view an OCFS staff person as neutral, even if designated as such. Section three also 
would require the Department to “ensure all providers of services to families involved in the child 
welfare system participate in family team meetings. ” OCFS certainly can and does invite providers to 
FTMs, but we cannot currently compel them to engage in an FTM. If OCFS were to attempt to compel 
providers to engage in FTMs, it could have a potentially significant chilling effect on the number of 
providers willing to take on clients involved with the child protective services system. OCFS ﬁnds that 
most providers are already good partners in -work with families towards rehabilitation and reuniﬁcation 
and regularly invite providers to the FTM, but OCF S believes the language of this bill is overly broad in 
requiring “all providers of services ” to participate. This language could also be interpreted to be broader 
than intended, such as including transportation services or teachers at the cl1ild’s school to medical 
providers (even for a child without complex medical needs). This could lead to a very large team at the 
meeting that may not lead to productive meetings. 
OCF S also questions whether sections one and three of the bill are in conﬂict. Section one would create 
a statutory requirement of a FTM prior to the ﬁling of a PPO but section three would require that all 
providers of services be involved in F TMs. The time it would take to gather every provider serving a 
family, coordinate multiple schedules, before a PPO could be ﬁled could create serious safety concems 
for children where there is an imminent risk of serious harm (which is a foundational requirement fora 
PPO). 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have and to 
make myself available for questions at the work session.
