 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
 
Neither For Nor Against  to   
LD 202, An Act To Clarify the Requirements for Off- Premise s Sales by Cannabis Store 
Licensees.  
 
January 30, 2023  
 
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica  and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Lambert , and I am providing testimony neither for nor against  
LD 202, on behalf of  MMA’s Legislative Policy Committee  (LPC).  
Municipal officials across the state have worked tirelessly  and spent countless hours 
developing and perfecting ordinances and regulations , since the legalization of cannabis for adult 
use. Possessing the ability for a municipality to opt -in to allow adult use cannabis sales in their 
communities,  underscores the importance of home rule in reflecting the wants and needs of 
residents.  
Support for the sale of adult use cannabis within municipal boundaries is not  uniformly 
support ed by communities across Maine , which gives some local leaders pause when the laws 
are amended to expand the availably of adult use cannabis and related products . However , 
because the exiting off- premises statute preserves  local decision -making authority and that LD 
202 does not amend those provisions local leaders do not oppose the bill.  Should the municipal 
authority be amended throughout the course of the process, it is likely MMA would reassess its position on this bill.  
Additionally, there is concern from officials regarding the enforceability of off premises 
cannabis sales, particularly when facing edibles and the challenges associated with making sure 
underaged individuals do not have access to them after purchasing the products at these type of 
sales events.  Members of the policy committee also a ppreciate that LD 202 seeks to clarify 
definitions and set parameters around current law for off -premises  sales of cannabis  at specified 
events . The LPC recognizes and appreciates that municipal approval is required for such event s 
to occur and supports me asures to eliminated confusion and maintain clarity w henever 
applicable.  
For these reasons, the MMA LPC is neither for nor against LD 202. Thank you for 
considering the municipal perspective on this issue.  
 

 
