TESTIMONY OF MATT DUNLAP, CIA 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST 
LD 664, Resolve, Directing the State Auditor to Audit All State Agencies 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Govemrnent, my name is Matt Dunlap, and I live in Old Town, 
and am privileged to serve as State Auditor. 
While We are testifying Neither For nor Against, to be fair, we are in Opposition to this bill as 
written. We support the general premise behind it, although in reality this legislation would have 
to be considerably redrafted —beyond the parameters of the parliamentary precedent —for us to 
support it. The language of the legislation does not actually call for an audit of agency activities, 
but rather a compendium of staffmg levels, a tracking of personnel level growth, the growth of 
agency budgets over time, and an analysis of completed versus non-completed projects over 
time. This is a similar approach to the one that was presented to you recently under the auspices 
of LD 514, Resolve, Directing the Oﬁice of the State Auditor to Report on Taxpayer Money 
Funding Maine Nonproﬁts which our ofﬁce opposed. As we discussed at that hearing, much of 
the information described in this Resolve can be found in detail in both the Annual 
Comprehensive Financial Report and the Single Audit Report. 
Under Generally Accepted Auditing Standards for government audits and the Single Audit Act, 
our ofﬁce conducts audits of various Federal programs and funds. Taken together, these audits 
cover over 80% of state expenditures. Further, under the mantle of our Work to audit the state’s 
ﬁnancial statements, every state agency is subject to that audit. 
We believe that in order for the title of this bill to actually cover both ﬁnancial and compliance 
audits of all state agencies, it would need to be an Act, and not a Resolve, and as you well know, 
Resolves cannot be amended to become Acts. Further, it would require a substantial ﬁscal note 
that we have not estimated in order to provide the necessary resources to achieve the end 
described in the title as we understand it. 
I am happy to answer any questions of the committee at this time at the pleasure of the chair.
