Casey Cole
Portland
LD 688
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Committee on 
Labor and Housing,
I'm Dr. Casey Cole, I'm an emergency veterinarian and I am writing in support of LD 688. 
Non-compete agreements have plagued the veterinary industry and pet owners for years and 
do not make sense in a medical industry. I've been excluded from practicing in large areas of 
the state due to non-competes and so have several of my colleagues. In a time when we are 
facing a veterinarian shortage, non-competes are harming the state of Maine. 
My first experience in dealing with non-competes was in 2018. I was working 
between two practices for a small corporation. When I was hired, I had signed a 
non-compete for a 15 mile radius within the one specific practice that I was originally 
hired to work at.  The non-compete would last for 2 years after my employment 
ended. During my employment, I ended up working between two of the corporation's 
practices. When I gave my notice that I was quitting to the management, I was 
informed that they would enforce the non-compete for both clinics, increasing the 
area that I could not practice to two 15 miles radiuses. Even though my contract had 
named only one clinic for the non-compete, I elected to not fight the additional 
non-compete because I could not afford to. I ended up leaving the area completely.
My second experience was with a job offer at a clinic owned by a different 
corporation. At the time, I was working in an emergency clinic, but a general practice 
had reached out to me with a job offer. Part of the contract they sent me to review 
included a non-compete that had an area large enough to  prevent me from returning 
to the emergency clinic I was working at if I decided I wanted to leave the general 
practice. I was told by management that they would not enforce the non-compete if I 
wished to return to the emergency clinic as it was not actually competing with their 
business. I ultimately declined the job offer and a colleague of mine decided to work 
at that clinic. She was also told that she could return to the emergency clinic if she 
wished. She ended up leaving that practice and the corporation immediately 
threatened her with the non-compete if she went back to work at the emergency clinic.
She also decided not to fight the non-compete and didn't practice within that area 
again.
Non-competes are used solely for corporate interests and do not benefit the people of 
Maine. Even when the non-competes are potentially unenforceable, just the threat of a
legal battle will scare veterinarians out of areas that need them. LD 688 is essential to 
helping increase access to veterinary care in Maine and may even attract more 
veterinarians to this state. 
Casey Cole BVM
