5 ast
I 
3%,. _., 
it-; 
4‘ . HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HQUSE STATIQN 
Jessica L. Fay AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
141 Spiller Hill Road (207) 287-14()() 
Raymond, ME 04071 MAINE RELAY 711 
Phone: (207) 655-5020 
Jessica.Fav@legislaturemainegov 
March 23, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Jessica Fay Presenting 
LD 688, An Act to Protect Access to Veterinary Care by Prohibiting Noncompete 
Agreements 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Good afternoon, Sen. Tipping, Rep. Roeder and members of the LBHS Committee, I am Jessica 
Fay, and I represent House District 86 which includes Casco, Frye Island, my home town of 
Raymond and part of Poland. Thank you for the opportunity to present LD 688, An Act to 
Protect Access to Veterinary Care by Prohibiting Noncompete Agreements. 
The bill summary reads: 
“This bill prohibits an employer from requiring or permitting an employee who is a licensed 
veterinarian to enter into a noncompete agreement unless the employee has an ownership interest 
in the practice and provides that a court may not enforce such a noncompete agreement entered 
into prior to the effective date of this legislation. ” 
I am here today because veterinary care, particularly in rural Maine, is often not readily 
accessible and limiting the options for where veterinarians practice can have an impact on 
Mainers across the state who love, own and care for animals, be they livestock, working animals 
or pets. 
As I’ve engaged with veterinarians on the workforce issue for the last few years, I have heard 
many stories‘ about how lack of access to care has impacted both people and the animals they 
care for, as well as veterinarians themselves?A 
A couple of weeks ago, a story was shared with me by someone in central Maine about a dog 
they had bred living in northern Maine. A family’s two-year-old Labrador had a tick bite and 
then came up lame. They cou1dn’t get a vet appointment nearby for over a month. The dog’s 
health declined and he became very sick. The family ﬁnally reached out to the breeder and they 
were able to be seen at a practice several hours away from their home. It was too late and their 
beautiful yellow Lab died of Lyme nephritis. When caught early, Lyme disease is treatable with 
antibiotics. Access to care could have saved the dog’s life. 
I 
lzttps:/Kwwwbanaordaiit/ncws.comfZOZ l[0352Sincxvsipeisare-dvin2-bocausemmaino-doesnt-l2ave~enough~veterinanans 
2 itli§>SI/_f££!ii2l\fS ‘\‘€i€1'i!l2lI"§ ’l)Ll$iH055.COm§ilO!l~COII1;3<Jl§3;§'8._l ”Q—Q1.ii(lLl ‘£€£i§ 
District 86: Casco, Frye Island, Raymond and Part of Poland
Noncompete agreements aren’t the only cause of the shortage in Maine’s veterinary workforce, 
but they have the potential to exacerbate it. 
Last session, I worked with bipartisan members of the IDEAB Committee to increase the amount 
and number of FAME loans available to rural emergency and agricultural veterinarians. A logical 
next step is to make sure that those vets can practice wherever they choose. 
In the states where these agreements are allowed, corporate practices are moving in and placing 
limits on the areas that fonner employees can practice. Given the relatively small number of 
practices and the high cost of practicing in Maine, it is possible that a noncompete agreement 
could create hardship for those needing veterinary care. With a rise in out-of-state-owned 
corporate veterinary practices who use geographic noncompetes, access to care for Maine’s 
animals could be even further impacted. 
As this committee well knows, workforce shortage issues are complex and there are seldom 
simple answers. This holds tiue for the veterinary workforce as well. The discussion of the 
impacts of noncompete agreements in this ﬁeld is a nuanced and subtle one. I can certainly give 
you some big picture concerns to think about, but I will defer to those who brought this issue and 
their concerns to my attention to let them help you address their concems. 
Thank you for your time and for the opportunity to bring this issue to your attention. I encourage 
you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 688. 
I have included some links you may want to explore during your deliberations on this bill: 
https:ffwww.avma.org/ ’newsfshifting-landscape-noncompete-agreements 
httpsz!/wwwbangordailynews.coma/202 l!03f2Sfnewsfpets-are~dying-because-maine-doesnt-have- 
enough-veterinarians;" 
https://wwwxavma.org;/resources-toolsfavma-policies/principles-veterinary-medical-ethics-avma 
httpszfltodaysveterinaiybusiness.coin/non-competes-are-outdated/ ‘I 
https:5/vetidealist.comfnon-compete-clauses-veterinarians-ethical/ ’ 
httpszf/www.wisfarmer.com/storv/news/202lI05I26/alarmin2-suicide-rates-re ﬂective-stresses-felt 
-veterinarians!736l l 93002!
