Kate  Domenico
South Portland
LD 688
 Written testimony for Dr Kate Domenico: 
As a licensed Veterinarian in Maine, I have been personally affected by a 
non-compete clause associated with an employment contract for a veterinary hospital 
owned by a corporate practice consolidator (Practice C).  
After much consideration and enduring a toxic work environment for 3 months, the 
relationship between myself and Practice C was severed. 
I was able to secure employment with a private veterinary practice (Practice A) 
shortly after departing Practice C, which was located 5.9 miles from the practice C.  
My geographical non-compete clause in the contract for Practice C stated that I was 
not able to work in a practice within 7 miles of said practice for 2 years.   I hired an 
attorney for an exorbitant amount of money and was able to get an email from 
Practice C’s attorney stating that they would not enforce the non-compete clause in 
the contract.   If I had not fought this contractual obligation, I would have been forced
to relocate to work within my field of practice.  
Most practice's employment contracts (69%) for associate veterinarians include a 
geographic non-compete clause.  
The FTC is currently drafting the Workforce mobility act of 2023. This federal entity believes 
that non-compete clauses are widespread and often exploitative practice that suppresses 
wages, hampers innovation and blocks entrepreneurship 
As in my experience, these clauses can trap associates in toxic work situations and 
hamper the ability to advocate for better pay and workplace improvements. Toxic 
work environments can lead to considerable risk to veterinarian's mental health - a 
career which already has one of the highest suicide rates. Moreover, these 
non-compete clauses are exacerbating veterinarian shortages in Maine by keeping 
practitioners out of the market. We already have significantly underserved areas in 
northern Maine with many pets not receiving adequate or even basic veterinary care.
In addition, non-compete clauses are also against public interest by preventing a former 
veterinary associate from working in a region, thereby restricting the ability of clients to 
choose their veterinarian. These contractual obligations only benefit the employer, not the 
Veterinarian. By stifling the competition, it only benefits the former employer at the expense of
the economic health of the Veterinary industry here in Maine. It is being used as a 
professional "handcuff". Corporate veterinary practice consolidators may ban employees from
working at all practices across multiple states with non-compete clauses. Over 50% of 
Practices here in Maine are owned by Corporate practice consolidators, and that number is 
growing very quickly. And these large companies have deep pockets, which is intimidating for
employees that want to challenge a non-compete clause. 
Since Covid hit Maine, we have been overloaded by the number of Veterinary patients in 
need of care. There are inadequate numbers of Veterinarians in our state and we need to 
remove any barriers, including non-compete clauses, to encourage Veterinarians to apply for 
job opportunities here. 
Dr. Kate S. Domenico

