Michael Gahagan
Caribou
LD 1457
Statement in Support of L.D. 1457
An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for a Jail in Caribou
Submitted by Chief Michael W. Gahagan
April 25, 2023
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and distinguished Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. My name is Michael 
W. Gahagan, and I am the Chief of Police of the Caribou Police Department.  I am 
submitting testimony on L.D. 1457.
Caribou is the second largest city in Aroostook County, a community of 8,189 located
at the heart of rural Northern Maine, approximately twenty minutes from the 
Canadian border. Caribou is in the geographical center of Aroostook County and is 
the hub of spokes serving the area.
The Police Department currently has (14) full-time employees and (6) part-time 
(reserve) employees. There is potential for growth in both types and numbers of 
employees .
Caribou Police currently operate from a small space in the basement of the current 
City Hall that was built in 1937. The working space represents approximately three 
thousand square feet. At our current location we have (3) adults’ cells and (1) Juvenile
holding cell with a small processing room. The Department is a 72-hr. holding 
facility.
The Caribou Police Department is the only holding facility in Northern Aroostook 
besides the Aroostook County Jail that is in Houlton.  The County Jail  is 55 miles 
away from us and over 100 miles from the Town of Fort Kent.  Due to the expansive 
area of the County,  Law Enforcement are not able to transport a prisoner from the 
northern reaches of the County all the way to Houlton and must use the holding 
facility at Caribou.  Caribou Police Department is an asset and most specifically, their
holding cells for prisoners, office space, interview rooms, prisoner booking areas, 
garage space, room for evidence processing and whatever is needed.
The Aroostook District and Superior Court are also located in the City of Caribou 
and must utilize the holding facility when subjects are sentence to jail.
Law Enforcement agencies in northern Aroostook County depend on the 72-hour 
holding facility.  Utilizing the facility saves those communities time and money by 
not transporting prisoners to the Aroostook County Jail.  The pandemic has 
compounded the problem of agencies not bringing prisoners to the County Jail. 
Because of several outbreaks of COVID, the County jail in Houlton had been 
temporarily closed on several occasions. This closure left no place for those under 
arrest, the City of Caribou and its Police Department readily made available for all 
law enforcement agencies in the County, if not these agencies would be driving a 
prisoner as far south as Portland. The Caribou holding facility saved these agencies a 
significant amount of money and time. When a prisoner transport occurs, it takes two 
officers out of their community. This not only jeopardized the officers but the safety 
of their community.
The Caribou Police holding facility, on an average yearly will hold about 350 
prisoners, and in 2022 at the height of COVID the facility held 477 prisoners.  Not 
only does the facility hold the prisoners but now through ZOOM we have court 
arraignment where the prisoners can speak to an attorney and then to the Judge.
The new Caribou Police Station is planned to have (4) four holding cells and (2) 
Juvenile/flex holding cells for a total of (6) cells.  This area is about 2684 sq feet and 
that would also include a secure media room for prisoner arraignment.
I hope that you will vote in favor of LD 1457. On behalf of the Caribou Police 
Department and the Citizens of Caribou and Aroostook, I want to thank you for your 
work on this Committee.

