 
 
 
April 24 , 2023 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
Senator Margaret Rotundo , Chair  
Representative Melanie Sachs , Chair  
C/O Office  of Fiscal and Program Review  
5 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Re: Letter of Support for LD 1 457, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for a Jail in Caribou  
 
Dear Senator Rotundo and Representative Sachs and d istinguished committee members:  
 
In Caribou , our citizens  are known to  be good neighbors  who answer the call to  help those in 
need. As a municipality, we strive to be trustworthy  stewards of taxpayer funds to provide the 
most cost -effective level of public services  in our community.  An example of a department 
who has perfected the delicate balance o f those two  objectives  would be  the men and women 
of the Caribou Police Department.   
 The Caribou Police D epartment is 60 miles north of the Aroost ook County Jail in Hou lton and 
has the only other holding facility in Aroostook County . Area departments bring their prisoners 
to Caribou to await trans port to Houlton. During COVID -19 response , the County needed to 
have the ability to arraign those in custody remotely. Caribou PD  used the booking room to 
double as a video conferencing suite to accommodate . Also, during the pandemic, the County 
Jail was often closed , and the Caribou holding facility answered the call  to keep the County 
safe by housing prisoners . Additionally, d espite the cramped working conditions, the 
department has a dedicated office for federal, state and county law enforcement personnel to 
work on their cases, make calls and do paperwork  because these office rs serve a large 
territory and Caribou is a central location.  
 
In June 2022, Caribou voters supported a ballot question to design and build  a new police 
station to replace the current one housed  in the basement of the municipal building  which 
was construc ted in 1939 and remodeled in 1978. Replacing the holding  facility as part of th is 
construction project aligns with state object ives for increasing local resiliency  so that 
communities are better able to withstand future disruptions like th ose caused by the recent 
pandemic. With th e funds provided by this bond issue, the updated  holding facility within  the 
new police station  can continue to be used by neighboring departments.  Our community 
thanks Sen ator Jackson  and co -sponsors Representative s Guerrette,  Albert , Babin  and 
Theriault and Senator Stewart  for recognizing that  this bond issue is a s mart investment for 
the State of Main e and bringin g it forward  to this committee . 
 
I thank you for your consideration of this general fund bond issue. Please reach out anytime 
with questions: (207) 493 – 5961 (my direc t number) or pthompson@cariboumaine.org . 
 Sincerely,  
 
Penny Thompson, City Manager  CITY OF CARIBOU, MAINE               Phone:   (207) 493 -5961 
                 Fax:   (207) 498-3954 
 
   Office of the City Manager  Municipal Building  
25 High Street  
Caribou, M e 04736  
