.~"-Ya 
»a 
rise‘ ~» 
-' ‘~ 
;;§~.21 ,_.:_5;~,' 
Troy D. Jackson THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
President of the Senate 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony in Support of LD 1457 
An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for a [ail in Caribou 
Presented to the joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
April 25, 2023 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and esteemed members of the Legislature's Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs, my name is Troy Jackson. l represent northern 
Aroostook County and sen/e as President of the Maine Senate. It's an honor to be here today to 
introduce LD 1457, ”An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond issue for a Jail in Caribou. 
The current jail within the Caribou Police Station is one of only a few in Aroostook County. In recent 
years, the facility has experienced increased use by local law enforcement across the region. But much 
like the rest of the station, the 80-year-old building lacks the space to serve all the municipalities that 
rely on the facility and is plagued with structural issues, including leaky faucets and mold. The jail’s 
central location in the northern part of the state's largest county has led to increased use by local law 
enforcement and state troopers to conduct interviews, process evidence, write reports, and temporarily 
hold individuals. 
The bill before you today — LD 1457 —— would support the construction ofa new jail in Caribou to better 
meet the needs of residents and local law enforcement agencies throughout northern Aroostook 
County. 
Plans are already underway for the construction of a new Caribou Police Station with voters recently 
approving $10 million for the project. However, an expanded regional jail was not initially included in 
the proposal approved by the voters. Funding from the Legislature would cover the additional costs ofa 
jail which is estimated to be $1-3 million. 
To be clear, this new Caribou jail would serve as a secondary facility to the Aroostook County Jail in 
Houlton —— sixty miles away. 
The construction of a new jail in Caribou has the support of the Aroostook County Sheriff, Maine State 
Police’ Commanding Officer for the Maine Troop F (which covers Aroostook County), and the Police 
Chiefs in Ashland, Washburn, Fort Fairfield, and Presque Isle. 
State House (207) 287-1500 * Cell (207) 436-0763 * Fax (207) 287-5862 * T0lIFree I-800-423-6900 * TTY 711 
Se11al0rJacks0nl@gmail.c0m * Web Site: legisla1 ‘zu'e.maine.g0v/senate
A new jail will better support local law enforcement in northern Aroostook County and ensure that 
justice can be served. Chief Gahagan and his colleagues have put together such a thoughtful plan that 
deserves state support. 
Thank you for your time. I hope you will join me in supporting this proposal. I'd be happy to answer any 
questions.A
