 
 
Testimony of Jennifer Putnam  
MACSP Board Member, Executive Director, Waypoint  
 
In Suppo rt of LD 907  
  An Act to Meet the Needs of individuals with Severe Behavioral Health Diagnoses  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Hearing Dat e 3.29.2023  
Written Testimony Date 4.4.2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and Human Services Committee.  
 
My name is Jennifer Putnam, I am the Executive Director of Waypoint  (formerly Waban) .  We are located in 
southern Maine and provide services for children and adults with intellectual and developmental disabilities 
(IDD), including a Pre- K through Grade 5 school, case management and residential services, as well as BCBA 
services for children and adults.  I am also a longstanding member of the Maine Association for Community 
Service Providers (MACSP) Board of Directors .  
 
MACSP is the statewide association of 85 individual, mission-driven agencies providing person centered and 
individualized education al, vocational, residential and community supports, as well as specialized services and 
care to several thousand of Maine’s children and adults who have either intellectual disabilities, autism 
spectrum disorder, or brain injuries, so that they may live fu ll and meaningful lives in the community.  
 
MACSP is in strong support of this bill once amended to include individuals with intellectual or developmental 
disabilities and autism who are experiencing a behavioral health crisis.  
 
Adults with IDD who have com plex high behavioral needs and are receiving services under MaineCare Sections 
21 or 29 would benefit from the services outlined in this concept draft. For too long, their need for supportive 
crisis services, including prevention, have gone unmet in Maine.   
 
Without adequate resources to address the behaviors constructively with in the person -centered  team with 
evidence based interventions, individuals will continue to experience behavioral crises unnecessarily and 
further, will experience the downstream effects of this lack of support, including the inability to fully participate 
in their communities. It goes without saying t hat when residential placements are jeopardized or lost , both 
individual and their families suffer; in addition, an undue burden is placed on emergency rooms and other 
service providers.  
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
  
Respectfully Submitted,  
Jennifer Putnam 
JPutnam@waypointmaine.org 
 
MACSP | P.O. Box 149, Hallowell, ME 04336 | (207) 623-5005 | Laura.Cordes@meacsp.org   

