"' 
Officers" 
Dave Mccluskey, President 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1" Vice-President 
Day One 
Bob Descoteaux, 2"“ Vice- 
President 
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health 
Kara Hay, Secretary 
Penquis CAP inc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
Aroostook Mental Health Center 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 
" Board Members "' 
Adcare Educational Institute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, Inc. 
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare 
Assistance Plus 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co~occurring Collaborative 
Sewing Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties 
Community Caring Collaborative 
Community Health & Counseling 
COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine, 
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
Milestone Recovery 
NFI North, Inc. 
Northern Light/Acadia 
Portland Recovery Community 
Center 
Pathways of MaineV 
Rumford Group Homes 
Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities' 
Sweetser . 
TriCounty Mental Health Services 
Wellspring, lnc.u 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Services Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The uniﬁed voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
. 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
i 
Testimony in Support of LD 907 
"An Act to Meet the Needs of Individuals with Severe Behavioral 
_ -Health Diagnoses" _ 
Sponsored by Representative Holly Stover 
March 29, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the 
Health and Human Services Committees. My name is Malory Shaughnessy and l am 
the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The 
Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine's 
community based mental health and substance use treatment providers, providing 
services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance advocates 
for the implementation of sound policies and evidence-based practices that serve to 
enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care system. 
On behalf of the Alliance, l am here today to speak in support of LD 907, "An Act to 
Meet the Needs of individuals with Severe Behavioral Health Diagnoses." 
This bill would appropriate funding to allow the department to provide the 
additional support and wrap around services that some individual clients, both adult 
and child, need to meet their safety and therapeutic needs. Our reading of the 
concept draft is that this funding would be available for special stafﬁng and added 
services provided both in a client's home or within residential facilities in which they 
may be residing. This is critically needed funding. 
Since the state began the policy of "no eject, no reject" within adult mental health 
residential services, we have had a struggle to seek and receive funding for the 
appropriate add on level of staffing and services some clients need to be safe and 
supported, and to assure the safety of all residents within a facility. Facilities are not 
allowed to reject a referral without the approval of the department, yet sometimes 
the referral both places staff and other residents in danger, and the service needs of 
the referred cannot be met. And the additional funding to make the placement , 
more successful is not forthcoming. 
Please vote oughtto pass on the creation of this fund to be used to meet the more< 
complex needs of some children and adults with severe behavioral health diagnoses 
whose needs are not being met by current state programs. 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 "' 
Fax 207.621.8362 " theAllianceMaine.org »
