l\/laineH caltli 
Local Health Systems 
Fnmldiii Community 
I‘I('11ltll N~:t\vork 
Ll1lCOll1I"It ‘-;\lI'l1 
M'.1ineHczxlth Care At Horne 
Maine Belr.-\\- ’io1'al l-Iealtlicnrc 
Mcinoriul Hospital 
l\" .i'-ll|lL ‘ l\’lcclic11l Center 
Mid Coasr—P~.nlcvicw I lcaltli 
NorD.\' 
Pen Bay l\"]c<licx.1l Center 
Southern l\’lainu Health Cure 
\"Val<lo County General Hospital 
\-Vcstcrn i\-'lainc Ilcalth 
Part of the 
l\/IaincI"Icalth Family 
i\’lai1\cl-icultli ./\ccountul)|c 
Care ()1'ga11i2.'.itio11 
l\’IaineI-lealth r\ﬂ"IIIt\(€S 
i\/l'.iine(}c-nernl Health 
New Eiiglziml Reliabilitation 
Hospital ot‘I’o1‘tla11(l 
St. ;\"l:iry' s Health Systcnl l\/Iainel-Iealth 
Testimony of Sarah Calder, MaineHealth 
In Support of LD 907, “An Act to Meet the Needs of 
Individuals with Severe Behavioral Health Diagnoses ” 
Wednesday, March 29,- 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, I am Sarah Calder, 
Senior Government Affairs Director at MaineHealth, and I am here to 
testify in strong support of LD 907, “An Act to Meet the Needs of 
Individuals with Severe Behavioral Health Diagnoses. ” 
MaineHealth is an integrated non-proﬁt health care system that provides a 
continuum of health care services to communities throughout Maine and 
New Hampshire. Every day, our over 22,000 care team members support 
our vision of “Working Together so Our Communities are the Healthiest 
in America” by providing a range of services from primary and specialty 
physician services to a continuum of behavioral health care services, 
community and tertiary hospital care, home health care and a lab. 
This session you have heard a number of bills that seek to address gaps in 
Maine’s behavioral health system, in particular the dearth of services 
available to children and adolescents. These bills were introduced based 
on the shortfalls we experience as providers, but, more importantly and 
tragically, based on the experiences of the patients and their families who 
are not able to access the appropriate services they need to live productive 
lives in the community. 
As you heard earlier, to ensure individuals have timely access to 
appropriate care, providers need adequate resources to safely provide care. 
There are times when an individual ’s needs can be very challenging and 
additional supports may be needed — beyond what is provided for in the 
MaineCare Beneﬁts Manual. In those instances, the Department should 
have the ability and ﬂexibility to respond to a provider ’s reasonable 
request for additional supports, like additional stafﬁng. LD 907 seeks to 
provide that ﬂexibility. 
And this is not a new solution. In fact, it is our understanding that in the 
past, the Department had access to funding that allowed for this ﬂexibility. 
It is unclear why this practice appears to have ended. 
In addition to the providers you will hear from today, we have also made 
requests to the Department for additional supports and our requests have 
been denied. For example, Spring Harbor Hospital recently cared for an 
110 Free Street ' 
Porrlzmd, HIE 0-"I101 Plmnc: 207—(»(»l-7(l(ll F'.!XI2(.I7-(K11-7029 mainehc ilrh org
adolescent who Was hospitalized for almost two years. We made multiple requests to the 
Department for additional stafﬁng supports for residential care providers and for in-home 
supports, so that We could safely discharge the adolescent, but our requests were repeatedly 
denied. » 
Without adequate resources, providers are often left with no option but to discharge a patient 
because they can’t safely accommodate their behaviors — these are the patients who are 
discharged and then end up in our Emergency Departments as a last resort. The legislation before 
you today is one solution that will help to avoid that situation. 
Thank you for your time and consideration and I would be happy to answer any questions you 
may have.
