 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recyc led paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1291  
H.P. 877  House of Representatives, April 9, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Promote Food Self -sufficiency for the People of the State  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative HICKMAN of Winthrop.  
Cosponsored by Senator SAVIELLO of Franklin and  
Representatives: DUNPHY of Old  Town, GROHMAN of Biddeford, JORGENSEN of 
Portland, MAREAN of Hollis, SAUCIER of Presque Isle, SHERMAN of Hodgdon, Senators: 
LANGLEY of Hancock, WHITTEMORE of Somerset.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1769(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  7 MRSA ยง219 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง219.  Food self -sufficiency  3 
1.  Farm labor link network.   The department shall maintain an agricultural jobs 4 
network linking farms and facilities proces sing agricultural products grown in the State 5 
with available workers who wish to work on a farm or in a local food industry.  An 6 
available worker under this subsection may include a person involved in raising, 7 
processing, preparing or preserving food or wh o is required to perform community 8 
service as a low -income recipient of state supplemental income benefits or under a court 9 
order. The department shall coordinate with the University of Maine Cooperative 10 
Extension to identify farms and food processing faci lities willing to participate in the 11 
network and coordinate with the Department of Labor, the Department of Health and 12 
Human Services, the Department of Economic and Community Development, the 13 
Department of Corrections and the Judicial Department in identi fying available workers 14 
willing to participate in the network.  If a worker participating in the network wishes to 15 
pursue additional training or a career in agriculture or food production, the department 16 
shall refer the person to available resources or pro grams that train workers or develop 17 
skills or business practices in farming, food production or food processing. A worker may 18 
meet the requirements for community service obligations under a state supplemental 19 
income benefits program, judicial order or alte rnative sentencing program by performing 20 
work on a farm or food processing facility through participation in the network under this 21 
subsection.  22 
2.  Educational marketing campaign.   The department shall coordinate with the 23 
University of Maine Cooperative Ex tension, the Maine Community College System, the 24 
Department of Labor, the Department of Education, the Department of Health and 25 
Human Services and the Department of Economic and Community Development to 26 
conduct an educational marketing campaign to promote food self -sufficiency by 27 
encouraging the public to grow gardens, raise farm animals, preserve garden -grown food 28 
and engage in other local food cultivation initiatives through the use of multiple media 29 
including social media, radio advertising, posters, bro chures and publicly accessible 30 
department websites.  31 
3.  Local purchases for food programs.   If the department, as part of a public - 32 
private partnership, purchases food for an emergency or supplemental food program for 33 
elderly or low -income persons, the depa rtment to the extent practicable shall purchase 34 
food that is grown, harvested, prepared, processed or produced in the State.  35 
4.  Regulation of local food by ordinance.  Notwithstanding any provision of law to 36 
the contrary, pursuant to home rule granted by the Constitution of Maine, Article VIII, 37 
Part Second and the provisions of Title 30 -A, section 3001 and in accordance with the 38 
policies of the State encouraging food self -sufficiency as described in Title 7 -A, section 39 
201-A, a municipality may regulate by ordinance the direct producer -to-customer 40 
exchange of all food grown, harvested, prepared, processed or produced in the 41 
municipality.  42 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1769(01) -1 
 5.  Existing resources.   The department shall use existing programs and resources to 1 
the extent possible in carrying out t he purposes of this section.  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill directs the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, in 4 
coordination with various state agencies, to develop and administer an agricultural jobs 5 
network linking farms and facilities that process a gricultural products grown in the State 6 
with available workers who are involved in farming or a local food industry or who are 7 
required to perform community service and to develop an educational marketing 8 
campaign to promote food self -sufficiency by encour aging the public to grow gardens, to 9 
raise farm animals and to preserve garden -grown food. This bill also requires the 10 
department, to the extent practicable, to purchase food grown, harvested, prepared, 11 
processed or produced in the State when purchasing fo od for an emergency or 12 
supplemental food program for elderly or low -income persons.  13 
 
