 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 964  
H.P. 663  House of Representatives, March 17, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Provide Access to Private Apartment Complexes for 
Political Candidates  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative VACHON of Scarborough.  
Cosponsored by Senator VALENTINO of York and  
Representatives: AUSTIN of Gray, HARLOW of Portland, MALABY of Hancock, PARRY of 
Arundel, REED of Carmel, RUSSELL of Portland, SIROCKI of Scarborough, Senator: LIBBY 
of Androscoggin.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0612(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA ยง8 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง8.  Access by candidates to multiple -unit dwellings  3 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 4 
following te rms have the following meanings.  5 
A.  "Candidate" means a candidate under this Title or a candidate for county or 6 
municipal office under Title 30 -A.  "Candidate" includes one or more volunteers who 7 
accompany the candidate.  8 
B.  "Multiple -unit dwelling" means  the common area of an apartment building, 9 
dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, condominium building, nursing home, 10 
assisted living facility or other multiple -unit facility used as a residence or an area in 11 
which 2 or more dwellings are located on priv ate grounds or a private roadway.  12 
2.  Access by a candidate.  A person, either directly or indirectly, may not deny 13 
access to a multiple -unit dwelling to a candidate if:  14 
A.  The multiple -unit dwelling is located within the candidate's district;  15 
B.  Access is sought exclusively for the purpose of campaigning for the office for 16 
which the candidate is running; and  17 
C.  The election in which the candidate is running is the next general election or 18 
special election for the office for which the candidate is runnin g. 19 
3.  Limitations of access.  A candidate who accesses a multiple -unit dwelling under 20 
subsection 2 may:  21 
A.  Knock on a resident's door, ring a resident's doorbell or otherwise attempt to 22 
speak to a resident of the multiple -unit dwelling;  23 
B.  Speak to a re sident if the resident is willing to speak to the candidate; or  24 
C.  Leave campaign materials for a resident at the resident's door, except that a 25 
nursing home or assisted living facility may direct that campaign materials be left in a 26 
central location with in the home or facility.  27 
If the multiple -unit dwelling contains multiple buildings, access must be permitted to 28 
every building, but a candidate may access only one building at a time.  29 
4.  Exceptions.  Subsection 2 does not prohibit:  30 
A.  Denial of admittanc e into a particular apartment, condominium, single -family 31 
house or building, room or other personal residential unit;  32 
B.  Requiring the candidate to provide proper identification;  33 
C.  For a nursing home or assisted living facility, denial of access to all or a portion 34 
of the multiple -unit dwelling for valid health reasons;  35 
D.  Limiting the number of volunteers accompanying the candidate;  36 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0612(01) -1 
 E.  Setting reasonable hours for the access to the multiple -unit dwelling;  1 
F.  Requiring an appointment for accessing the  multiple -unit dwelling; or  2 
G.  Denial of access to or expulsion from the multiple -unit dwelling for good cause.  3 
5.  Alternate access.  A person does not violate subsection 2 if the person hosts a 4 
candidate forum and all residents of the dwelling are notif ied of the forum within a 5 
reasonable time before the forum and the candidate is allowed to leave campaign 6 
materials for a resident who does not attend the forum.  7 
SUMMARY  8 
This bill allows candidates for office and their accompanying volunteers to access 9 
common areas of multiple -unit dwellings such as apartment or condominium buildings, 10 
dormitories, fraternity or sorority houses, nursing homes, assisted living facilities or other 11 
multiple -unit facilities for the specific purpose of campaigning for that office  and leaving 12 
campaign materials, subject to certain limitations.  This bill does not prohibit denying the 13 
candidate access to specific residential units, setting reasonable hours of access, limiting 14 
the number of volunteers, requiring an appointment, denyi ng access to a nursing home or 15 
assisted living facility for valid health reasons or denying access to or expulsion from a 16 
multiple -unit dwelling for good cause.  This bill allows an alternative to access if the 17 
multiple -unit dwelling hosts a candidate foru m and all residents receive prior notice of 18 
the forum.  19 
 
