 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1143  
H.P. 781  House of Representatives, March 31, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Promote Protection of Intertidal Rockweed Habitat  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Marine Resources suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative TUELL of East Machias.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, BATTLE of South Portland, CHAPMAN 
of Brooksville, DANA of the Passamaquoddy Tribe, KRUGER of Thomaston, MAKER of 
Calais, Senator: BAKER of Sagadahoc.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1635(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to enact measures to protect intertidal rockweed habitat by closing 5 
conserved lands, including b ut not limited to national parks and wildlife refuges and state 6 
parks, to commercial rockweed harvesting.  7 
This bill further proposes to enact measures to protect intertidal rockweed habitat that 8 
would allow a landowner to close certain lands for commercial  rockweed harvest at that 9 
landowner's discretion. A landowner would be permitted to close the following lands to 10 
commercial rockweed harvest: land with use restrictions arising from a recorded 11 
conservation easement; land owned by a land trust or other nong overnmental 12 
conservation organization held for conservation purposes; municipal parks; land held by a 13 
nonprofit entity with a research or educational mission, such as a coastal field station; and 14 
wildlife management areas as defined by the Maine Revised St atutes, Title 12, section 15 
10001, subsection 74.  16 
This bill further proposes to enact measures to protect intertidal rockweed habitat that 17 
would allow a municipality to close areas to commercial rockweed harvest upon approval 18 
of the majority of voters in a m unicipal referendum.  19 
 
