 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 663  
H.P. 444  House of Representatives, March 3, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Require That the Department of Health and Human 
Services Determine Whether Testing for Krabbe Disease Should Be 
Required for Newborns  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative WARD of Dedham.  
Cosponsored by Senator BRAKEY of Androscoggin and  
Representatives: BURSTEIN of Lincolnville, FECTEAU of Biddeford, MAKER of Calais, 
MALABY of Hancock, STETKIS of Canaan, VACHON of Scarborough, WHITE of 
Washburn.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0652(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Study regarding testing for Krabbe disease.  Resolved:  That the 1 
Department of Health and Human Services shall examine the benefits, harms and issues 2 
of requiring testing of newborn infants for the lysosomal storage disorder known as 3 
Krabbe diseas e as part of the screening of infants for detection of causes of cognitive 4 
disabilities and congenital, genetic and metabolic disorders.  The department shall report 5 
the results of its examination and its recommendation based on the findings to the Joint 6 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services no later than December 15, 2015.  7 
The joint standing committee may submit legislation to the Second Regular Session of 8 
the 127th Legislature regarding the department's findings and recommendation.  9 
SUMMARY  10 
This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to conduct a 11 
study to determine whether newborn infants should be tested for Krabbe disease as part of 12 
the screening process for detection of causes of cognitive disabilities and congenital, 13 
genetic and metabolic disorders.  The department is required to submit its findings and a 14 
recommendation to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, which 15 
is authorized to submit legislation to the Second Regular Session of the 127th Legisla ture 16 
regarding the findings and recommendation.  17 
 
