 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 142  
H.P. 100  House of Representatives, January 22, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Expand Deer Hunting Opportunities for Junior Hunters  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative HILLIARD of Belgrade.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: DANA of the Passamaquoddy Tribe, HOBART of 
Bowdoinham, LYFORD of  Eddington, POULIOT of Augusta, STEARNS of Guilford.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0593(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  12 MRSA ยง11152, sub -ยง5-A is enacted to read:  2 
5-A.  Transfer to a junior hunter.  An antlerless deer permit holder who is 18 years 3 
of age or older may transfer the antlerless deer permit  to a person who holds a junior 4 
hunting license and takes an antlerless deer while in the presence or under the supervision 5 
of the antlerless deer permit holder.  The antlerless deer permit holder must possess the 6 
antlerless deer permit at the time of the taking of the antlerless deer and transfer the 7 
permit to the junior hunting license holder by identifying the name and address of the 8 
transferee on the permit as well as any other information reasonably requested by the 9 
commissioner and then return the per mit to the department as soon as practical after the 10 
taking of the antlerless deer.  Once the antlerless deer permit is transferred, the former 11 
antlerless deer permit holder loses the right to take an antlerless deer under that permit.  12 
SUMMARY  13 
This bill al lows an adult holder of an antlerless deer permit to transfer that permit to a 14 
holder of a junior hunting license if the holder of the junior hunting license takes an 15 
antlerless deer while in the presence or under the supervision of the antlerless deer per mit 16 
holder.  Once the permit is transferred, the adult antlerless deer permit holder loses the 17 
right to take an antlerless deer under that permit.  18 
 
