 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled pap er  
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1169  
S.P. 416  In Senate, March 31, 2015  
 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine To Permit 25 Acres or Less To Be Withdrawn from Taxation 
as Timberland and Woodland without Penalty  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Taxation suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator DAVIS of Piscataquis.  
Cosponsored by Representative SKOLFIELD of Weld and  
Senators: BRAKEY of Androscoggin, BURNS of Washington, Representatives: CHACE of 
Durham, CRAFTS of Lisbon, WOOD of Sabattus.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0374(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IX, §8, sub -§2, last ¶  is amended to read:  4 
In implementing paragraphs A, B, C and D, the Legislature shall provide that any 5 
change of use higher than those set forth in paragraphs A, B, C and D, except when the 6 
change is occasioned by a transfer resulting from the exercise or threatened exercise of 7 
the power of eminent domain or, in the case of timberland and woodland described in 8 
paragraph A, when the change of use is to 25 acres or less , shall result in the imposition 9 
of a minimum penalty equal to the tax which would have been imposed over the 5 years 10 
preceding that change of use had that real estate been assessed at its highest and best use, 11 
less all taxes paid on that real estate over the preceding 5 years, and interest, upon such 12 
reasonable and equitable basis as the Legislature shall determine.  Any statutory or 13 
constitutio nal penalty imposed as a result of a change of use, whether imposed before or 14 
after the approval of this subsection, shall be determined without regard to the presence 15 
of minerals, provided that, when payment of the penalty is made or demanded, whichever 16 
occurs first, there is in effect a state excise tax which applies or would apply to the 17 
mining of those minerals.  18 
; and be it further  19 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 20 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State  shall notify the inhabitants of their 21 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 22 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 23 
following the passage of this resolution, to vo te upon the ratification of the amendment 24 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  25 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to authorize the 26 
withdrawal of 25 acres or less of timberland and woodland from current 27 
use valuat ion for purposes of property taxation without payment of a 28 
penalty?"  29 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 30 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 31 
square below t he word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 32 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 33 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 34 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 35 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 36 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 37 
further 38 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 39 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 40 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  41 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR037 4(01) -1 
 SUM MARY  1 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to permit a person to 2 
withdraw 25 acres or less of timberland and woodland from current use valuation without 3 
incurring a penalty.  4 
 
