 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 263  
H.P. 181  House of Representatives, February 5, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Provide a Minor with a Defense to Prosecution in a 
Situation That Involves Risk of Alcohol Overdose  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative MAKER of Calais.  
Cosponsored by Senator BRAKEY of Androscoggin and  
Representatives: DAUGHTRY of Brunswick, DION of Portland, EDGECOMB of Fort 
Fairfield, POULIOT of Augusta, TIPPING -SPITZ of Orono, WHITE of Washburn, Senators: 
BAKER of Sagadahoc, MASON of Androscoggin.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0268(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  28-A MRSA ยง2051, sub -ยง6 is enacted to read:  2 
6.  Defense.  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 1 that a minor in a 3 
situation that involved risk to the minor or to another per son of overdose from the 4 
consumption of alcohol, including but not limited to extreme physical illness, decreased 5 
level of consciousness, respiratory depression, coma, mania or death from the 6 
consumption of alcohol, in good faith sought medical or emergenc y treatment or 7 
assistance for the minor or the other person or that the minor was the person for whom 8 
medical or emergency treatment or assistance was sought and the evidence of the 9 
violation of this section is obtained as a result of the minor contacting emergency medical 10 
services or law enforcement.  This subsection does not provide a defense to a charge of 11 
operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol.  12 
Sec. 2.  28-A MRSA ยง2087, sub -ยง3 is enacted to read:  13 
3.  Defense.  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 1 that a minor in a 14 
situation that involved risk to the minor or to another person of overdose from the 15 
consumption of alcohol, including but not limited to extreme physical illness, decreased 16 
level of consciousness, respirator y depression, coma, mania or death from the 17 
consumption of alcohol, in good faith sought medical or emergency treatment or 18 
assistance for the minor or the other person or that the minor was the person for whom 19 
medical or emergency treatment or assistance w as sought and the evidence of the 20 
violation of this section is obtained as a result of the minor contacting emergency medical 21 
services or law enforcement.  This subsection does not provide a defense to a charge of 22 
operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol.  23 
SUMMARY  24 
This bill provides a defense to prosecution for a crime related to the consumption of 25 
alcohol by a person under 21 years of age or refusal to provide proper identification for a 26 
minor who, in a situation that involved risk to the minor or another person of overdose 27 
from the consumption of alcohol, in good faith sought medical or emergency treatment or 28 
assistance for the minor or the other person or that the minor was the person for whom 29 
treatment or assistance was sought and th e evidence of the crime is obtained as a result of 30 
the minor contacting emergency medical services or law enforcement.  This bill does not 31 
provide a defense to a charge of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of 32 
alcohol.  33 
 
