 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 192  
S.P. 67  In Senate, January 27, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Clarify the Law Governing the Collection of Unpaid 
Sanitary District Charges  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator SAVIELLO of Franklin.  
Cosponsored by Senators: DAVIS of Piscataquis, KATZ of Kennebec, MIRAMANT of Knox, 
Representatives: BLACK of Wilton, BUCKLAND of Farmington.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0756(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  38 MRSA §1208, 2nd ¶, as amended by PL 2011, c. 104, §3, is further 2 
amended to read:  3 
The treasurer of the district has full and complete authority and power to collect the 4 
rates, tolls,  rents and other charges established under section 1202 and the rate, toll, rent 5 
or other charge must be committed to the treasurer .  The treasurer may, after demand for 6 
payment, sue in the name of the district in a civil action for any rate, toll, rent or  other 7 
charge remaining unpaid in any court of competent jurisdiction.  In addition to other 8 
methods established by law for the collection of rates, tolls, rents and other charges, and 9 
without waiver of the right to sue for the rate, toll, rent or other ch arge, the lien created 10 
may be enforced in the following manner.  The treasurer , when a rate, toll, rent or other 11 
charge has been committed to the treasurer for collection,  may, after the expiration of 3 12 
months and within one year after the date when the ra te, toll, rent or other charge became 13 
due and payable, give to the owner of the real estate served, or leave at the owner's last 14 
and usual place of abode, or send by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the 15 
owner's last known address, a notice in w riting signed by the treasurer or bearing the 16 
treasurer's facsimile signature, stating the amount of that rate, toll, rent or other charge, 17 
describing the real estate upon which the lien is claimed and stating that a lien is claimed 18 
on the real estate to s ecure the payment of the rate, toll, rent or other charge and 19 
demanding the payment of the rate, toll, rent or other charge within 30 days after service 20 
or mailing, with $1 for the treasurer for mailing the notice together with the certified 21 
mail, return r eceipt requested, fee.  The notice must contain a statement that the district is 22 
willing to arrange installment payments of the outstanding debt.  For the purpose of this 23 
section, a mobile home is defined as real estate.  After the expiration of a period o f 30 24 
days and within one year thereafter, the treasurer shall record in the registry of deeds of 25 
the county in which the property of such person is located a certificate signed by the 26 
treasurer or bearing the treasurer's facsimile signature setting forth t he amount of such 27 
rate, toll, rent or other charge, describing the real estate on which the lien is claimed, and 28 
stating that a lien is claimed on the real estate to secure payment of the rate, toll, rent or 29 
other charge and that a notice and demand for pa yment of the rate, toll, rent or other 30 
charge has been given or made in accordance with this section and stating further that 31 
such rate, toll, rent or other charge remains unpaid.  At the time of the recording of any 32 
such certificate in the registry of dee ds as provided, the treasurer shall file in the office of 33 
the district a true copy of such certificate and shall mail a true copy of the certificate by 34 
certified mail, return receipt requested, to each record holder of any mortgage on the real 35 
estate and t o an owner of record not receiving a notice , addressed to such record holder or 36 
owner  at the record holder's or owner's  last and usual place of abode.  37 
Sec. 2.  38 MRSA §1208, 3rd ¶, as amended by PL 2011, c. 104, §4, is further 38 
amended to read:  39 
The filing of the certificate in the registry of deeds creates a mortgage on the 40 
underlying real estate to the district that has priority over all other mortgages, liens, 41 
attachments and encumbrances of any nature, except liens, attachments and claims for 42 
taxes, and gives to the district all the rights usually possessed by mortgagees, except that 43 
the district as mortgagee does not have any right to possession of the real estate until the 44 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0756(01) -1 
 right of redemption has expired.  If the mortgage, together with interest and cos ts, has not 1 
been paid within 18 months after the date of filing of the certificate in the registry of 2 
deeds, the mortgage is deemed to be foreclosed and the right of redemption to have 3 
expired.  The filing of the certificate in the registry of deeds is suf ficient notice of the 4 
existence of the mortgage created in this paragraph.  If the rate, toll, rent or other charge, 5 
with interest and costs, is paid within the period of redemption, the treasurer of the 6 
district shall discharge the mortgage in the same ma nner as for the discharge of tax lien 7 
mortgages pursuant to Title 36, section 943.  After the expiration of the 18 -month period 8 
of redemption, in the event a copy of the certificate has not been provided to a mortgage 9 
holder of record or an owner of record  who did not receive a notice, the mortgage holder 10 
of record or the owner of record who did not receive a notice has the right to redeem the 11 
real estate within 3 months after receiving actual knowledge of the recording of the lien 12 
certificate by payment or  tender of the amount of the sewer lien mortgage, together with 13 
interest and costs, and to have the lien discharged.  14 
SUMMARY  15 
This bill makes 3 changes to the section of the Maine Sanitary District Enabling Act 16 
governing the administration of liens on real estate to enforce the collection of unpaid 17 
sanitary district charges.  The bill removes language regarding committing a rate, toll, 18 
rent or other charge to the treasurer of a sewer district.  The bill requires that a district 19 
provide to an owner of record a copy of a sewer lien certificate if the owner did not 20 
receive a demand notice.  The bill also changes the law so that a mortgage holder of 21 
record or an owner of record who did not receive a required copy of the lien certificate 22 
has an additional 3 months  to pay in full before the lien automatically forecloses.  23 
 
