 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 573  
H.P. 397  House of Representatives, February 26, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Provide for Annulment of Certain Arrest Records and 
Expungement  of Certain Confidential Criminal History Record 
Information  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative DeCHANT of Bath.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: BECK of Waterville, FOWLE of Vassalboro, McCREIGHT 
of Harpswell.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1533(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  16 MRSA ยง711 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง711.  Annulment of arrest record; expungement of confidential criminal history 3 
record information  4 
The Department of Public Safety, State Bureau of Iden tification shall establish a 5 
process for the annulment of the arrest record and expungement of confidential criminal 6 
history record information, referred to in this section as "information," pertaining to the 7 
arrest of a person whose information is describ ed as confidential under section 703, 8 
subsection 2, paragraphs A to H.  The process must provide for annulment of the arrest 9 
record and expungement of the information upon application by or on behalf of a person 10 
to whom the information pertains.  The proce ss must provide notice to all persons who 11 
are included in the information as victims and to all law enforcement agencies that are 12 
included in the information.  The process must provide for a decision in favor of 13 
annulment of the arrest record and expungeme nt of the information by the commanding 14 
officer of the State Bureau of Identification upon a finding that annulment of the arrest 15 
record and expungement of the information is in the best interests of the person to whom 16 
the information pertains and is not d etrimental to the public interest or to the protection of 17 
society.  The State Bureau of Identification shall adopt rules to implement this section.  18 
Rules adopted pursuant to this section are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, 19 
chapter 375, subc hapter 2 -A. 20 
SUMMARY  21 
This bill directs the Department of Public Safety, State Bureau of Identification to 22 
establish a process for the annulment of a person's arrest record and expungement of the 23 
person's confidential criminal history record information.  Th e process must apply to 24 
certain arrests and information that is described as confidential under the Maine Revised 25 
Statutes, Title 16, section 703, subsection 2, paragraphs A to H.  The bill requires the 26 
process to include notice to all persons who are incl uded in the information as victims 27 
and to all law enforcement agencies that are included in the information.  The bill 28 
requires the process to include a decision in favor of annulment of the arrest record and 29 
expungement of the information by the commandin g officer of the State Bureau of 30 
Identification upon a finding that annulment of the arrest record and expungement of the 31 
information is in the best interests of the person to whom the information pertains and is 32 
not detrimental to the public interest or t o the protection of society.  The bill directs the 33 
State Bureau of Identification to adopt routine technical rules to implement the law.  34 
 
