 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled pap er  
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 247  
H.P. 179  House of Representatives, February 3, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Create Corridor Districts for the Purpose of Funding 
Transportation and Transit Services  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Transportation suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative CHIPMAN of Portland.  
Cosponsored by Senator ROSEN of Hancock and  
Representatives: FARRIN of Norridgewock, GILLWAY of Searsport, GOLDEN of Lewiston, 
HEAD of Bethel, HOBART of Bowdoinham, McLEAN of Gorham, PARRY of Arundel, 
Senator: DIAMOND of Cumberland.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1505(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to provide for a more predictable and stable environment to fund 5 
transit and mobility needs, inc luding passenger rail, ferries and bus, bike and pedestrian 6 
routes, by allowing the creation of multimunicipal, multijurisdictional transportation 7 
districts along defined transportation corridors and to form service sharing and revenue 8 
partnerships.  The c orridor districts will have the authority to bond infrastructure; raise 9 
funds for operations, capital investment and maintenance of facilities; purchase, own and 10 
lease real estate, including station and station area infrastructure financing; and support 11 
downtown infrastructure financing strategies, transit corridor infrastructure financing 12 
strategies and regional transportation initiatives.  13 
A local referendum will be required in each municipality desiring to participate in a 14 
transit partnership.  District m embership will be identified by criteria specific to a defined 15 
transportation corridor.  The districts will provide inducements for expanding, retaining 16 
businesses and attracting new investments and provide adequate revenues to support 17 
critical state and l ocal transportation services.  18 
 
