 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 134  
H.P. 92  House of Representatives, January 22, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Study the Impact of Winter Ticks on the State's Moose 
Population  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative MARTIN of Sinclair.  
Cosponsored by Senator EDGECOMB of Aroostook and  
Representative: MARTIN of Eagle Lake.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0105(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to study impact of 1 
winter ticks on the State's moose population.  Resolved:  That the Department of 2 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife shall conduct a study of the impact of winter ticks on the 3 
State's moose population, including identifying any problems for the moose population 4 
created by the ticks and recommending possible courses of action, if any, to address those 5 
problems; and be it further  6 
Sec. 2.  Reporting date established.  Resolved:  That the Departm ent of Inland 7 
Fisheries and Wildlife shall report the findings of its study under section 1, including 8 
recommendations to address problems of the State's moose population caused by winter 9 
ticks, to the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildl ife by January 4, 10 
2016.  The committee may report out legislation based upon the report to the Second 11 
Regular Session of the 127th Legislature.  12 
SUMMARY  13 
This resolve directs the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to conduct a 14 
study of the impact of  winter ticks on the State's moose population, including identifying 15 
any problems for the moose population created by the ticks and recommending possible 16 
courses of action, if any, to address those problems.  17 
 
