 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 851  
H.P. 582  House of Representatives, March 10, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Portions of Chapter 2:  
Standards for Qualifications of Assigned Counsel, a Late -filed 
Major Substantive Rule of the Maine Commission on Indigent Legal 
Services  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reported by Representative HOBBINS of Saco for the Maine Commission on Indigent 
Legal Services pursuant to the Maine  Revised Statutes, Title 5, section 8072 and approved for 
introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council.  
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed pursuant to Joint 
Rule 218.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1888(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A requires 3 
legislative aut horization before major substantive agency rules may be finally adopted by 4 
the agency; and  5 
Whereas, the above -named major substantive rule has been submitted to the 6 
Legislature outside the legislative rule acceptance period; and  7 
Whereas, immediate enactmen t of this resolve is necessary to record the 8 
Legislature's position on final adoption of the rule; and  9 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 10 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following le gislation as 11 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 12 
therefore, be it  13 
Sec. 1.  Adoption.  Resolved:  That final adoption of portions of Chapter 2:  14 
Standards for Qualifications of Assigned Counsel, a provisio nally adopted major 15 
substantive rule of the Maine Commission on Indigent Legal Services that has been 16 
submitted to the Legislature for review pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, 17 
chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A outside the legislative rule acceptan ce period, is authorized.  18 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 19 
legislation takes effect when approved.  20 
SUMMARY  21 
This resolve provides for legislative review of portions of Chapter 2:  Standards for 22 
Qualifications of Assign ed Counsel, a major substantive rule of the Maine Commission 23 
on Indigent Legal Services that was filed outside the legislative rule acceptance period.  24 
 
