 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 714  
H.P. 490  House of Representatives, March 5, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services 
To Study Providing  Medical Assistance to Maine's Inhabited Islands  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative COOPER of Yarmouth.  
Cosponsored by Senator LANGLEY of Hancock and  
Representatives: DEVIN of Newcastle, KRUGER of Thomaston, KUMIEGA of Deer Isle, 
Senators: GRATWICK of Penobscot, MIRAMANT of Knox.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1340(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Medical assistance for island residents study.  Resolved:  That the 1 
Department of Health and Human Services shall study the feasibility of, need for and cost 2 
of providing nonemergency medical care for residents and visitors on all the year -round 3 
inhabited islands in the State via telemedicine as defined in the Maine Revised Statutes, 4 
Title 24 -A, section 4316, subsection 1.  The study must consider a program that uses a 5 
means of telemedicine transmission that ensures the confidentiality of patients'  medical 6 
information as required by state and federal laws and the training of at least one person on 7 
each island in the use of telemedicine tools.  The study must also consider the cost to the 8 
State if telemedicine services to island resident MaineCare pa tients are reimbursed by the 9 
MaineCare program; and be it further  10 
Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human Services 11 
shall report its findings under section 1, along with any suggested legislation, to the Joint 12 
Standing Committee  on Health and Human Services no later than January 15, 2016.  The 13 
joint standing committee may report out a bill to the Second Regular Session of the 127th 14 
Legislature related to the report.  15 
SUMMARY  16 
This resolve requires the Department of Health and Huma n Services to study the 17 
feasibility of, need for and cost of providing telemedicine medical assistance for residents 18 
and visitors on all the year -round inhabited islands in the State and to report to the Joint 19 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Service s no later than January 15, 2016.  20 
 
