 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 301  
S.P. 116  In Senate, February 10, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Improve Insurance Coverage for First Responders 
Answering a Call to Duty  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic Development 
suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator JOHNSON of Lincoln.  
Cosponsored by Representative HERBIG of Belfast and  
Senators: BURNS of Washington, DUTREMBLE of York, MIRAMANT of Knox, PATRICK 
of Oxford, Representatives: DOORE of Augusta, EVANGELOS of Friendship, LONG of 
Sherman, MAKER of Calais.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0137(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  39-A MRSA ยง201, sub -ยง7 is enacted to read:  2 
7.  Injury to firefighter or emergency medical services person.  There is a 3 
rebuttable presumption that a personal injury to a paid or volunte er firefighter or a paid or 4 
volunteer emergency medical services person considered an employee within the 5 
meaning of this Act is considered to arise out of and in the course of employment and is 6 
compensable under this Act if the personal injury occurs at a ny time after the firefighter 7 
or emergency medical services person receives notice of a fire or emergency and is in the 8 
process of responding.  An employer providing self -insurance or an insurer providing 9 
workers' compensation insurance may not seek to lim it benefits under this Act to a 10 
firefighter or emergency medical services person to a personal injury that occurs only 11 
after the firefighter or emergency medical services person begins traveling on a public 12 
way.  13 
SUMMARY  14 
This bill creates a rebuttable presu mption that a personal injury to a paid or volunteer 15 
firefighter or a paid or volunteer emergency medical services person considered an 16 
employee within the meaning of the Maine Workers' Compensation Act of 1992 is 17 
considered to arise out of and in the cour se of employment and is compensable under the 18 
Act if the personal injury occurs at any time after the firefighter or emergency medical 19 
services person receives notice of a fire or emergency and is in the process of responding.  20 
 
