 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper  
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2015 
 
Legislative Document  No. 12  
S.P. 13  In Senate, January 13, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Limit the Liability of Landowners Who Allow 
Recreational Climbing on Their Land  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed. 
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST 
 Secretary of the Senate 
 
Presented by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot. 
Cosponsored by Representative STANLEY of Medway and 
Senators: DILL of Penobscot, EDGECOMB of Aroostook, HASKELL of Cumberland, 
MILLETT of Cumberland, MIRAMANT of Knox, Representatives: HICKMAN of Winthrop, 
HOBBINS of Saco, MASTRACCIO of Sanford. 
 
 

 
 Page 1  - 127LR0085(01)-1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows: 1 
Sec. 1.  14 MRSA §159-A, sub-§1, ¶B, as amended by PL 2009, c. 156, §1, is 2 
further amended to read: 3 
B.  "Recreational or harvesting activities" means recreational activities conducted 4 
out-of-doors, including, but not limited to, hunting, fishing, trapping, camping, 5 
environmental education and research, hiking, rock climbing, ice climbing, 6 
bouldering, rappelling, recreational caving, sight-seeing, operating snow-traveling 7 
and all-terrain vehicles, skiing, hang-gliding, noncommercial aviation activities, dog 8 
sledding, equine activities, boating, sailing, canoeing, rafting, biking, picnicking, 9 
swimming or activities involving the harvesting or gathering of forest, field or marine 10 
products. It includes entry of, volunteer maintenance and improvement of, use of and 11 
passage over premises in order to pursue these activities.  "Recreational or harvesting 12 
activities" does not include commercial agricultural or timber harvesting. 13 
SUMMARY 14 
Current law limits the liability of landowners who allow certain recreational or 15 
harvesting activities on their land.  This bill provides that recreational climbing is 16 
included in these activities. 17 
 
