 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 978  
H.P. 675  House of Representatives, March 18, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Promote Patient Choice and Access to Health Care  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Insurance and Financial Services suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative DOORE of Augusta.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: BECK of Waterville, BROOKS of Lewiston, CAMPBELL 
of Orrington, FOWLE of Vassalboro, MELARAGNO of Auburn, Senators: GERZOFSKY of 
Cumberland, KATZ of Kennebec, MASON of Androscoggin.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1673(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง4303, sub -ยง20 is enacted to read:  2 
20.  Reimbursement of a provider.  A carrier may not refuse to reimburse a 3 
provider for providing a health care service or procedure covered  under a health plan as 4 
long as the provider is acting within the lawful scope of that provider's license, 5 
registration or certification in the delivery of the covered service or procedure.  A carrier 6 
may not circumvent the requirements of this subsection:  7 
A.  By creating or using a provider -specific billing code or policy not listed in a 8 
nationally recognized coding system otherwise used by the carrier; or  9 
B.  By discriminating through benefit design or implementation of its benefit design 10 
in any manner to  discourage enrollment in a health plan or to shift greater costs to an 11 
enrollee when an enrollee seeks treatment from a licensed, registered or certified 12 
provider.  13 
SUMMARY  14 
This bill prohibits a health insurance carrier from refusing to reimburse a provide r for 15 
providing a health care service or procedure covered under a health plan as long as the 16 
provider is acting within the lawful scope of that provider's license, registration or 17 
certification in the delivery of the covered service or procedure. The bill  also prohibits a 18 
carrier from creating or using a provider -specific billing code or policy not listed in a 19 
nationally recognized coding system or from discriminating in its benefit design to 20 
circumvent the requirement.  21 
 
