 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 599  
H.P. 412  House of Representatives, March 3, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Direct the Department of Public Safety To Establish a 
Public Safety Answering Point for the Passamaquoddy Indian 
Reservation at Indian Township  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative DANA of the Passamaquoddy Tribe.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: BEAR of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, MAKER of 
Calais, Senator: BURNS of Washington.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1289(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  25 MRSA §2926, sub -§2, ¶C, as enacted by PL 1993, c. 566, §9, is 2 
amended to read:  3 
C.    After consultation with the affected public and private safety agency officials, 4 
identification o f appropriate public safety answering point sites based on 5 
consideration of the existing dispatching capabilities of public and private safety 6 
agencies, the expressed preferences of municipalities throughout the State and overall 7 
system cost , except that t he bureau shall particularly identify and establish a public 8 
safety answering point within the Passamaquoddy Indian Reservation at Indian 9 
Township to serve persons located within Indian Township ; 10 
SUMMARY  11 
This bill directs the Public Utilities Commission, E mergency Services 12 
Communications Bureau to identify and establish a public safety answering point within 13 
the Passamaquoddy Indian Reservation at Indian Township to serve persons located 14 
within Indian Township.  15 
 
