 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 261  
S.P. 99  In Senate, February 3, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Initiate the Procedures To Request the United States 
Congress's Joint Committee on  the Library To Replace a Statue in 
the National Statuary Hall Collection  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator MASON of Androscoggin.  
Cosponsored by Senators: BAKER of Sagadahoc, GERZOFSKY of Cumberland, WILLETTE 
of Aroostook, Representatives: DAUGHTRY of Brunswick, MARTIN of Sinclair, 
McCREIGHT of Harpswell.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0748(01) -1 
 Preamble. Whereas, the statues of 2 great citizens of Maine, William King, 1 
Maine's first governor, and Hannibal Hamlin, the 15th Vice President of the United 2 
States, are part of the National Statuary Hall Collection in the United States Capitol; and  3 
Wherea s, this legislation seeks to put a statue of Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain in 4 
the place of the statue of William King in the collection; and  5 
Whereas, Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain, a president of Bowdoin College, a 6 
brigadier general in the Union Army, a hero o f the Battle of Gettysburg, a Medal of 7 
Honor recipient and the 32nd Governor of Maine, is a great citizen of Maine whose statue 8 
would help educate visitors to the United States Capitol about his life and about a great 9 
state; now, therefore, be it  10 
Sec. 1.  Commission established.  Resolved:  That the Commission to Install a 11 
Statue of Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain in the National Statuary Hall Collection, referred 12 
to in this resolve as "the commission," is established; and be it further  13 
Sec. 2.  Commission memb ership.  Resolved:  That the commission consists of 14 
11 members appointed as follows:  15 
1.  Two members of the Senate appointed by the President of the Senate, including a 16 
member from each of the 2 parties holding the largest number of seats in the Legislatur e; 17 
2.  Four members of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the 18 
House of Representatives, including members from each of the 2 parties holding the 19 
largest number of seats in the Legislature;  20 
3.  A member representing the Maine Arts Comm ission appointed by the Governor;  21 
4.  A member representing the Maine Historic Preservation Commission appointed 22 
by the Governor;  23 
5.  A member representing the Maine State Museum Commission appointed by the 24 
Governor;  25 
6.  A member of the public appointed by  the President of the Senate; and  26 
7.  A member of the public appointed by the Speaker of the House of 27 
Representatives; and be it further  28 
Sec. 3.  Chairs.  Resolved:  That the first -named Senate member is the Senate 29 
chair and the first -named House of Repres entatives member is the House chair of the 30 
commission; and be it further  31 
Sec. 4.  Appointments; convening of commission.  Resolved:  That all 32 
appointments must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 33 
resolve.  The appointing auth orities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 34 
Council once all appointments have been completed.  After appointment of all members, 35 
the chairs shall call and convene the first meeting of the commission.  If 30 days or more 36 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0748(01) -1 
 after the effect ive date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been 1 
made, the chairs may request authority and the Legislative Council may grant authority 2 
for the commission to meet and conduct its business; and be it further  3 
Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolv ed:  That the commission shall:  4 
1.  Select a sculptor to sculpt the statue of Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain;  5 
2.  Devise a method to raise and collect outside funds necessary to carry out the intent 6 
of this resolve;  7 
3.  Represent the State in its dealings wit h the United States Congress's Joint 8 
Committee on the Library, which has oversight of the National Statuary Hall Collection, 9 
and the Architect of the Capitol, who is responsible for the reception, placement and care 10 
of the statue in the collection;  11 
4.  Dir ect the expenditure of money to pay for the sculptor chosen to carve or cast the 12 
statue, a pedestal and any desired inscription, transporting the statue and pedestal to the 13 
United States Capitol, removing and transporting the replaced statue, temporarily e recting 14 
the new statue in the Rotunda of the Capitol for the unveiling ceremony, the unveiling 15 
ceremony and any other expenses the commission considers necessary; and  16 
5.  Take any further actions incidental to carrying out the intent of this resolve; and b e 17 
it further  18 
Sec. 6.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:  That the Maine Arts Commission, the 19 
Maine Historic Preservation Commission and the Maine State Museum Commission shall 20 
provide necessary staffing services to the commission; and be it further  21 
Sec. 7.  Rep ort.  Resolved:  That the commission shall submit a report that 22 
includes a summary of the commission's progress in carrying out the intent of this resolve 23 
and any recommendations, including suggested legislation, for presentation to the Second 24 
Regular Sess ion of the 127th Legislature; and be it further  25 
Sec. 8.  Outside funding.  Resolved:  That the commission shall seek funding 26 
contributions to fully fund the costs associated with carrying out the intent of this resolve.  27 
SUMMARY  28 
This resolve establishes the  Commission to Install a Statue of Joshua Lawrence 29 
Chamberlain in the National Statuary Hall Collection.  The commission is directed to take 30 
steps necessary to result in the placement of a statue of Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain in 31 
the National Statuary Hall  Collection in the United States Capitol.  This statue will 32 
replace that of William King, Maine's first governor, the ownership of which may be 33 
transferred to the State, subject to the approval of the United States Congress's Joint 34 
Committee on the Library .  The commission is directed to seek outside funding to fully 35 
fund the costs associated with carrying out the intent of the resolve.  36 
 
