 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 43  
H.P. 37  House of Representatives, January 14, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Make False Claims of Military Service a Crime  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative FARRIN of Norridgewock.  
Cosponsored by Senator CYRWAY of Kennebec and  
Representatives: DUNPHY of Embden, HANINGTON of Lincoln, LONGSTAFF of 
Waterville, NADEAU of Winslow, O'CONNOR of Berwick, SIROCKI of Scarborough, 
SKOLFIELD of Weld, TURNER of Burlington.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0683(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  17-A MRSA ยง910 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง910.  False claims of military service status  3 
1.  A person is guilty of a false claim of military service status if, with the intent to 4 
solicit aid, sell or attempt to sell property or otherwise solicit an amount of more than 5 
$10, the person:  6 
A.  Falsely claims to be a veteran or member of the Armed Forces of the United 7 
States or a state military force;  8 
B.  Falsely claims to have served in any war or c onflict in which the United States 9 
was engaged; or  10 
C.  Orally, in writing or by wearing a military decoration or rank, falsely claims to 11 
have been awarded the military decoration or rank.  12 
2.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates,  "military 13 
decoration" means any decoration or medal awarded by the Armed Forces of the United 14 
States or a state military force, including a service medal, ribbon, button or badge or a 15 
rosette of a service medal, ribbon, button or badge or a colorable imit ation of a service 16 
medal, ribbon, button, badge or rosette.  17 
3.  A false claim of military service status is a Class E crime.  18 
SUMMARY  19 
This bill creates the criminal offense of false claims of military service status, which 20 
is a Class E crime.  A person is g uilty of a false claim of military service status if, with 21 
the intent to solicit aid, sell or attempt to sell property or otherwise solicit an amount of 22 
more than $10, the person falsely claims to be a veteran or member of the Armed Forces 23 
of the United St ates or a state military force, falsely claims to have served in any war or 24 
conflict in which the United States was engaged or orally, in writing or by wearing a 25 
military decoration or rank, falsely claims to have been awarded the military decoration 26 
or rank. 27 
 
