 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1194  
S.P. 421  In Senate, April 1, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Allow Municipalities To Contract with and Dispose of 
Waste, including Residue, in State -owned Solid Waste Disposal 
Facilities, as Allowed under a Facility License, To Ensure 
Compliance with the Solid Waste Management Hierarchy  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHE R J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator CUSHING of Penobscot.  
Cosponsored by Senators: GRATWICK of Penobscot, LANGLEY of Hancock, SAVIELLO of 
Franklin, Representatives: DAVITT of Hampden, GILLWAY of Searsport, REED of Carmel, 
TUCKER of  Brunswick.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1823(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  38 MRSA ยง2184, sub -ยง4 is enacted to read:  2 
4.  State -owned facilities.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the 3 
contrary, a municipality or regional association may enter into a contract or agreement 4 
with the owner or operator of a state -owned solid waste disposal facility to utilize the 5 
facility for managing solid waste generated within the State, including for the disposal of 6 
residue from a solid waste processing facility.  7 
Sec. 2.  38 MRSA ยง2185 is enacted to read:  8 
ยง2185.  Contracts or agreements involving state -owned facilities  9 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the owner or operator of 10 
a state -owned solid waste disposal facility may not enter into, im plement or enforce a 11 
contract or agreement with any person that prohibits, directly or indirectly, a municipality 12 
or regional association from entering into a contract or agreement with the owner or 13 
operator of the facility to utilize the facility for mana ging solid waste generated within the 14 
State, including for the disposal of residue from a solid waste processing facility.  15 
SUMMARY  16 
This bill ensures compliance with the solid waste management hierarchy established 17 
in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38, s ection 2101 by authorizing a municipality or 18 
regional association to enter into a contract or agreement with the owner or operator of a 19 
state-owned solid waste disposal facility in order to utilize the facility for managing solid 20 
waste generated within the  State, including for the disposal of residue from a solid waste 21 
processing facility.  This bill also prohibits the owner or operator of a state -owned solid 22 
waste disposal facility from entering into, implementing or enforcing a contract or 23 
agreement with any person to prohibit, directly or indirectly, a municipality or regional 24 
association from entering into a contract or agreement with the owner or operator of the 25 
facility to utilize the facility for managing solid waste generated within the State, 26 
includ ing for the disposal of residue from a solid waste processing facility.  27 
 
