 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 834  
H.P. 568  House of Representatives, March 10, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Clarify the Use of "M.D." To Represent Achievement of 
a Graduate Degree by an Individual Not Licensed To Practice 
Medicine in Maine  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic Development 
suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative HYMANSON of York.  
Cosponsored by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot and  
Representatives: BROOKS of Lewiston, SANBORN of Gorham, WINSOR of Norway.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1326(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  32 MRSA §3270, 2nd ¶, as amended by PL 1993, c. 600, Pt. A, §204, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
Whoever, not being duly licensed by the board, practices medicine or surgery or a 4 
branch of  medicine or surgery, or purports to practice medicine or surgery or a branch of 5 
medicine or surgery in a way cited in this section, or who uses the title "Doctor" or the 6 
letters "Dr." or the letters "M.D." in connection with that individual's name, contra ry to 7 
this section, commits a Class E crime.  The prefixing of the title "Doctor" or the letters 8 
"Dr." or the appending of the letters "M.D." by an individual to that individual's name or 9 
the use of the title of doctor or physician in any way by an individ ual not licensed as 10 
described is prima facie evidence that that individual is purporting to practice medicine or 11 
surgery contrary to this section, except that nothing   Nothing  contained in this section 12 
prevents an individual who has received the doctor's d egree from a reputable college or 13 
university , other than the degree of "Doctor of Medicine"  from prefixing the letters "Dr." 14 
to that individual's name, if that individual is not engaged, and does not engage, in the 15 
practice of medicine or surgery or the tr eatment of a disease or human ailment. Nothing 16 
in this chapter may be construed as to affect or prevent the practice of the religious tenets 17 
of a church in the ministration to the sick or suffering by mental or spiritual means.  18 
SUMMARY  19 
The bill enables an individual who has earned the graduate degree Doctor of 20 
Medicine to use the letters "Dr." or "M.D." prefixed or appended to that individual's 21 
name, so long as the individual is not representing to the public that the individual is 22 
licensed and authorized t o practice medicine in the State.  23 
 
