 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1231  
S.P. 436  In Senate, April 7, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Create the Southwest Harbor Water and Sewer District  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator LANGLEY of Hancock.  
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1311(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  Territorial limits and corporate name and purposes.   The 2 
inhabitants and territory of the Town of Southwest Harbor constitute a quasi -municipal 3 
corporation under the name of the Southwe st Harbor Water and Sewer District, referred 4 
to in this Act as "the district," for the purpose of supplying the inhabitants of the district 5 
with potable water for domestic, commercial, sanitary and municipal purposes and for the 6 
purpose of providing in the  district a system of public sewerage and drainage for the 7 
comfort, convenience and health of the inhabitants of the district.  8 
Sec. 2.  Powers of the Southwest Harbor Water and Sewer District.   The 9 
district is authorized to take, hold, divert, use and dist ribute water from any source within 10 
the territory of the district, including but not limited to Long Pond in the Town of 11 
Southwest Harbor.  The district is also authorized, for the purposes of its incorporation, to 12 
locate, construct and maintain pipes, dam s, wells, reservoirs, pumping stations, treatment 13 
plants and other necessary structures and equipment and to do all things necessary to 14 
furnish water, sewerage and drainage for those purposes and for the public health, safety, 15 
comfort and convenience of th e inhabitants of the district.  16 
Sec. 3.  Authorized to lay mains, pipes, conduits and other water 17 
conveyances through public ways and across private lands.   The district is 18 
authorized to lay, maintain, repair and replace pipes, mains and other fixtures and 19 
appurtenances in, along and through the streets, roads, ways, highways, bridges, ponds 20 
and watercourses and in, along and through private lands of any person or corporation 21 
within the district.  When the district lays, maintains, repairs or replaces pipes,  mains and 22 
any fixtures or appurtenances in any street, road, way or highway, it shall do so with as 23 
little obstruction as practicable to public travel and shall at its own expense and without 24 
unnecessary delay replace in proper condition the earth and pav ement removed by it.  25 
The district is authorized to lay, maintain, repair and replace pipes, mains and other 26 
fixtures and appurtenances to or into any drain or sewer now or hereafter built that 27 
empties into watercourses or treatment works, the discharge to be at such point or points 28 
consistent with the requirements of public health and as convenient and reasonable for the 29 
district and consistent with the requirements of applicable federal, state and local laws 30 
and the flow of existing watercourses.  31 
1.  Sewer  extensions.  Sewer extensions are governed by the Maine Revised Statutes, 32 
Title 38, section 1042.  33 
2.  Coordination with municipal planning.  The trustees of the district shall 34 
cooperate with municipal officials in the development of municipal growth manag ement 35 
and other land use plans and ordinances.  36 
Municipal officers shall cooperate with the trustees of the district during the consideration 37 
of development applications that may affect the operations of the sewer district.  38 
3.  Abutting owners have right to  enter.  The district shall permit the owners of 39 
premises abutting upon its lines of pipes and conduits to enter the same with all proper 40 
sewerage and to connect the same for potable water, if the owners of such premises 41 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1311(01) -1 
 conform to the rules and regulation s of the district and pay the established rates, tolls, 1 
rents and other lawful charges.  2 
4.  Inspection of sewers.  The officers or agents of the district have free access to all 3 
premises served by the district's sewers, at all reasonable hours, for inspect ion of 4 
plumbing and sewage fixtures, to ascertain the quality and quantity of sewage discharged 5 
and the manner of discharge and to enforce the provisions of this Act and the rules 6 
prescribed by the trustees of the district.  7 
5.  Injury to the property of th e district.  A person may not place, discharge or 8 
leave any offensive or injurious matter or material on or in the conduits, catch basins or 9 
receptacles of the district contrary to its regulations or knowingly injure any conduit, 10 
pipe, reservoir, flush tan k, catch basin, manhole, outlet, engine, pump or other property 11 
held, owned or used by the district.  12 
A person who violates this subsection is liable to pay twice the amount of the damages to 13 
the district to be recovered in any proper action and is subject to a civil penalty not to 14 
exceed $2,500 for each violation, payable to the district. The civil penalty is recoverable 15 
in a civil action.  16 
6.  Required connection.   Upon receiving a request from the district to connect a 17 
building located in the territory of the district that is accessible to a sewer or drain of the 18 
district and that is intended for human habitation or occupancy or that has facilities for 19 
discharge or disposal of waste water or commercial or industrial waste, the owner of that 20 
building shall a rrange to have the building connected through a sanitary sewer or 21 
drainage system to the district's accessible sewer or drain in the most direct manner 22 
possible. If feasible, each building requiring connection must have its own separate 23 
connection.  The co nnection must be completed within 90 days of the receipt by the 24 
owner of the request, or within any extended period requested by the owner and agreed to 25 
by the trustees. For purposes of this subsection, "owner" includes the owners of record or 26 
any person a gainst whom property taxes on the building are assessed.  27 
A person who receives a notice in accordance with this subsection to connect to a 28 
building and fails to connect to the building in accordance with this subsection is subject 29 
to a civil penalty not to  exceed $2,500, payable to the district. This penalty is recoverable 30 
in a civil action.  31 
7.  Connections not required.   An existing building that is already served by a 32 
private sewer system is not required to connect with a sewer or drain of the district as  33 
long as the private sewer or drainage system functions in a satisfactory and sanitary 34 
manner and does not violate applicable law or ordinance applicable to the connection 35 
with a sewer or drain or the district or any applicable requirements of the state pl umbing 36 
code, as determined by the municipal plumbing inspector or the municipal plumbing 37 
inspector's alternate, or, in the event that both are trustees or employees of the sewer 38 
district, the Department of Health and Human Services, Division of Health Engi neering.  39 
8.  Permissive connection.   A person not otherwise required to connect a private 40 
sewer into a sewer of the district may connect to the district's sewer if that person obtains 41 
a permit from the district and pays any charges required by this section . The clerk of the 42 
district shall record the permit in the records of the district.  43 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR1311(01) -1 
 A.  If construction of the district's sewer is complete at the proposed point of entry of 1 
the private sewer and the district has established an entrance charge for entry at  that 2 
location, the person seeking to connect the private sewer at that location shall pay the 3 
entrance charge before the connection is undertaken.  4 
B.  If the district's sewer is under construction and not completed at the point of the 5 
proposed entry of th e private sewer, the person seeking to connect the private sewer 6 
at that location shall connect to the sewer upon completion after the entrance fee is 7 
paid.  8 
Sec. 4.  Authority to acquire property; right of eminent domain 9 
conferred; procedures in exercising  eminent domain.   The district is authorized 10 
and empowered to acquire and hold real and personal property necessary or convenient 11 
for its purposes.  The district is granted the right of eminent domain as specified in the 12 
Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38, s ection 1040 with respect to its sewer functions and is 13 
granted the right of eminent domain as specified in Title 35 -A, section 6408 with respect 14 
to its water functions.  15 
1.  Procedures as to the exercise of right of eminent domain for sewer.  With 16 
respect t o the sewer functions of the district, the procedures for the exercise of eminent 17 
domain must conform to Title 38, section 1040.  18 
2.  Procedures as to the exercise of right of eminent domain for water.  With 19 
respect to the water functions of the district, t he procedures for the exercise of eminent 20 
domain must conform to Title 35 -A, section 6409.  21 
Sec. 5.  Crossing property of other public utilities and railroad 22 
corporations.   If the district, in constructing, maintaining or replacing any of its 23 
facilities, mu st cross property of another public utility or railroad corporation, the district 24 
shall obtain the consent of the other public utility or railroad corporation and undertake 25 
the work in accordance with conditions established by agreement. If, within 30 days  after 26 
requesting consent, the district fails to reach an agreement with the public utility or 27 
railroad corporation, the district may petition as follows.  28 
1.  Public utility.   In the case of crossing property of a public utility, the district may 29 
petition the Public Utilities Commission to determine the time, place and manner of 30 
crossing.  All work done on the property of the public utility must be done under the 31 
supervision and to the satisfaction of the public utility or as prescribed by the Public 32 
Utilit ies Commission.  33 
2.  Railroad corporation.   In the case of crossing the property of a railroad 34 
corporation, the district may petition the Department of Transportation to determine the 35 
time, place and manner of crossing.  All work done on the property of the  railroad 36 
corporation must be done under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the railroad 37 
corporation or as prescribed by the Department of Transportation.  38 
Sec. 6.  Trustees, appointment; tenure of office; vacancies; first meeting 39 
and organization o f board; annual report; transition provisions.   All the affairs 40 
of the district are managed by a board of 3 trustees, residents of the Town of Southwest 41 
 
 Page 4 - 127LR1311(01) -1 
 Harbor who are appointed by the Board of Selectmen.  No member of the Board of 1 
Selectmen may, during th e term for which the member is elected, be appointed as a 2 
trustee of the district.  The trustees hold office for terms of 3 years and until their 3 
respective successors are appointed and qualified.  The terms of the first board are 4 
governed by the Maine Rev ised Statutes, Title 35 -A, section 6410.  5 
As soon as convenient after the Act becomes effective, the trustees shall meet and 6 
elect from among their members a president and clerk, adopt a corporate seal and elect a 7 
treasurer, who may or may not be a trustee,  and any other officers and agents as needed, 8 
who with the treasurer serve at the pleasure of the trustees.  The treasurer shall furnish a 9 
bond in the sum and with sureties approved by the trustees.  The district shall pay the cost 10 
of the bond.  Members of  the board of trustees may hold any office under the board, but 11 
may not receive any compensation, except as trustees, unless authorized by a vote of the 12 
Board of Selectmen of the Town of Southwest Harbor.  13 
The trustees of the district shall receive compensa tion as recommended by the 14 
trustees and approved by majority vote of the municipal officers representing a majority 15 
of the population within the district, including compensation for any duties they perform 16 
as officers as well as for their duties as trustee s.  Certification of the vote must be 17 
recorded with the Secretary of State and recorded in the bylaws. Compensation for duties 18 
as trustees must be based on an amount specified in the bylaws for each meeting actually 19 
attended plus reimbursement for travel a nd expenses, with the total not to exceed a 20 
specific amount as specified in the bylaws.  21 
Whenever the term of office of a trustee expires, the Board of Selectmen of the Town 22 
of Southwest Harbor shall appoint a successor to serve the full term of 3 years. If  any 23 
other vacancy arises from any cause it must be filled in like manner for the unexpired 24 
term.  All trustees are eligible for reappointment.  Trustees must be sworn to the faithful 25 
performances of their duties by the clerk of the Town of Southwest Harbo r.  When any 26 
trustee ceases to be a resident of the Town of Southwest Harbor, that trustee vacates the 27 
office of trustee.  The trustees may adopt and establish bylaws consistent with the laws of 28 
the State and necessary for the convenience and the proper ma nagement of the affairs of 29 
the district and perform other acts within the powers delegated by law to the trustees.  30 
The trustees shall publish an annual financial report.  31 
A person who has not been a trustee of a sewer district prior to January 1, 1987 and 32 
who is not a full -time employee is not eligible to become a member of the Maine Public 33 
Employees Retirement System as a result of the person's selection as a trustee.  34 
1.  Trustee removed.  A trustee may be removed under the following provisions.  35 
A.  A trus tee may be removed from the board of trustees with a majority vote of the 36 
municipal Board of Selectmen of the Town of Southwest Harbor for misfeasance, 37 
malfeasance or nonfeasance in office.  The selectmen must state at a regularly 38 
scheduled meeting of the Board of Selectmen the reason for which removal is sought.  39 
B.  Within 30 days after the vote by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to paragraph A, 40 
the trustee may appeal the decision to the Board of Appeals of the Town of 41 
Southwest Harbor.  42 
 
 Page 5 - 127LR1311(01) -1 
 C.  Further appeals  may be made to the Maine Superior Court under Rule 80B of the 1 
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure once all municipal procedures have been followed.  2 
Sec. 7.  Authorized to make and assume contracts.   The district, through its 3 
trustees, in order to carry out the  purposes of its incorporation, may contract with a 4 
person, standard district, utility or corporation or with a municipality, the State or other 5 
governmental entity whether located inside or outside the boundaries of the district.  6 
Sec. 8.  Authorized to ac quire water utility property and franchises of the 7 
Town of Southwest Harbor.  The Town of Southwest Harbor is authorized to sell to 8 
the district and the district is authorized and empowered to acquire by purchase or by the 9 
exercise of the right of eminent domain the entire water utility plant, property, franchise, 10 
property rights, privileges and assets owned by the Town of Southwest Harbor, including 11 
all land, waters, water rights, reservoirs, pipes, machinery, fixtures, hydrants, tools and all 12 
apparatus an d appliances used or usable in supplying water facilities and drainage in the 13 
territory served by the municipal water department.  Upon transfer by the Town of 14 
Southwest Harbor to the district of its plant, property, franchise, property rights, 15 
privileges and assets, the district assumes all the outstanding debts and liabilities of the 16 
municipal water department, including, without limitation, any outstanding bonds, notes 17 
or other evidence of indebtedness of the municipal water department that are due on or  18 
after the date of transfer.  19 
The sale and transfer by the Town of Southwest Harbor of its water utility plant, 20 
property, franchise, property rights, privileges and assets; the assumption by the district 21 
of all the outstanding debts and liabilities of the m unicipal water department and the 22 
department assets; and all other water utility activities are subject to the approval of the 23 
Public Utilities Commission as may be required by the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 24 
35-A. 25 
Sec. 9.  Authorized to acquire sewer -related property and franchises of 26 
the Town of Southwest Harbor.   The Town of Southwest Harbor is authorized to sell 27 
to the district and the district is authorized and empowered to acquire by purchase or by 28 
the exercise of the right of eminent domain the ent ire sewer plant, property, franchise, 29 
property rights, privileges and assets owned by the Town of Southwest Harbor, including 30 
all land, easements, mains, conduits, fixtures, pumping stations, basins, treatment 31 
facilities and outlets used or usable in provi ding a public system of public sewerage and 32 
drainage in the territory served by the municipal sewer department.  Upon transfer by the 33 
Town of Southwest Harbor to the district of its plant, property, franchise, property rights, 34 
privileges and assets, the di strict assumes all the outstanding debts and liabilities of the 35 
municipal sewer department, including, without limitation, any outstanding bonds, notes 36 
or other evidence of indebtedness of the municipal sewer department that are due on or 37 
after the date of  transfer.  38 
Sec. 10.  Completion of transfer.   Promptly after completion of the transfer and 39 
assumption of assets and liabilities pursuant to sections 8 and 9, the Town of Southwest 40 
Harbor shall cause to be filed with the Secretary of State certificates of dissolution 41 
certifying that all sewer and water assets of the municipality and all debts and liabilities 42 
of water and sewer departments of the Town of Southwest Harbor have been transferred 43 
 
 Page 6 - 127LR1311(01) -1 
 to the district.  The certificates of dissolution must be signed b y the chair of the Board of 1 
Selectmen of the Town of Southwest Harbor and by the municipal clerk.  Upon the 2 
respective filing dates of the certificates of dissolution of the Southwest Harbor water and 3 
sewer departments, the existence of those departments c eases.  4 
Sec. 11.  Authorized to borrow money; to issue bonds and notes.   For 5 
accomplishing the purposes of this Act, the district, by vote of its board of trustees, is 6 
authorized to borrow money temporarily and to issue for the borrowing of money its 7 
negoti able notes.  8 
The district, by vote of its board of trustees, is authorized to issue bonds, notes or 9 
other evidences of indebtedness of the district, bearing interest at a rate or rates and 10 
having terms and provisions as the trustees determine.  All notes an d bonds with a 11 
maturity of more than one year and issued in connection with the water system only must 12 
first be approved by the Public Utilities Commission.  13 
All bonds, notes and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the district must have 14 
inscribed upo n their face the corporate name of the district and be signed by the treasurer 15 
and countersigned by the president of the board of trustees of the district.  16 
All bonds, notes and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the district are legal 17 
obligations of  the district, which is declared to be a quasi -municipal corporation within 18 
the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 30 -A, section 5701.  All bonds, notes and other 19 
evidences of indebtedness issued by the district are legal investments for savings banks 20 
and are e xempt from state income tax.  21 
Sec. 12.  Property tax exempt.   The property of the district is exempt from all 22 
taxation in the Town of Southwest Harbor.  23 
Sec. 13.  Sewer rates payable; adoption of new rates; application of 24 
revenue; collection of unpaid rates;  authority to disconnect water for 25 
nonpayment of sewer service.   Notwithstanding the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38, 26 
section 1048, this section governs the sewer rates of the district.  27 
An individual, firm or corporation, whether public, private or munici pal, shall pay to 28 
the treasurer the rates, tolls, rents, entrance charges and other lawful charges established 29 
by the trustees for the sewer or drainage service used or available with respect to its real 30 
estate, including rates for the district's readiness  to serve, that are charged against owners 31 
of real estate abutting on or accessible to sewers or drains of the district, but not actually 32 
connected thereto, whether or not such real estate is improved.  In this Act, "other lawful 33 
charges" and "other charge s" include, but are not limited to, interest on delinquent 34 
accounts at a rate not to exceed the highest lawful rate set by the Treasurer of State for 35 
municipal taxes.  36 
Rates, tolls, rents and entrance charges must be uniform within the district whenever 37 
the cost to the district of installation and maintenance of sewers or their appurtenances 38 
and the cost of service is substantially uniform, but nothing precludes the district from 39 
establishing a higher rate, toll, rent or entrance charge than the regular rate s, tolls, rents 40 
and entrance charges in sections where, for any reason, the cost to the district of 41 
 
 Page 7 - 127LR1311(01) -1 
 construction and maintenance, or the cost of service, exceeds the average, but such higher 1 
rates, tolls, rents and entrance charges must be uniform througho ut the sections where 2 
they apply.  3 
Prior to the adoption of a new rate schedule, the trustees shall hold a public hearing 4 
regarding the proposed rate schedule.  The trustees shall publish the proposed rates and 5 
notice of the hearing at least once in a newsp aper of general circulation in the district not 6 
less than 7 days prior to the hearing.  The district shall mail to each ratepayer a notice of 7 
the public hearing and the proposed new rate at least 14 days prior to the hearing.  8 
Notwithstanding any other prov ision of law, if the district shares, supplies or 9 
contracts for services with another sewer or sanitary district, the district shall establish 10 
rates, tolls, rents and entrance charges mutually agreeable to the trustees of each 11 
participating district.  12 
The s ewer rates, tolls, rents, entrance charges, assessments and other lawful charges 13 
established by the board of trustees in accordance with this Act must be fixed and 14 
adjusted to produce, in the aggregate, revenue at least sufficient, with any other funds 15 
available for the purpose, to:  16 
1.  Current operating expenses.   Pay the current expenses of operating and 17 
maintaining the sewerage, drainage and treatment system of the district including the cost 18 
of depreciation;  19 
2.  Payment of interest and principal.   Pay t he principal of, premium, if any, and 20 
interest on all bonds and notes issued by the district under this Act as the bonds and notes 21 
become due and payable;  22 
3.  Sinking fund for retirement of obligations.   Create and maintain such reserves 23 
as may be required  by any trust agreement or resolution securing bonds and notes;  24 
4.  Repairs, replacements and renewals.   Provide funds for paying the cost of all 25 
necessary repairs, replacements and renewals of the sewerage, drainage and treatment 26 
systems of the district; and 27 
5.  Payment of obligations.   Pay or provide for all amounts that the district may be 28 
obliged to pay or provide for by law including any resolution with or for the benefit of the 29 
holders of its bonds and notes.  30 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law , in the event a user of the district's sewer 31 
system fails within a reasonable time to pay the district's rates, fees or charges for sewer 32 
service, the district may disconnect water service to the user, as long as the disconnection 33 
is accomplished in accor dance with procedures established in applicable law or rules 34 
governing disconnection of utility services and terms and conditions approved by the 35 
Public Utilities Commission.  36 
The district may become a qualified sewer district for purposes of Title 38, sect ion 37 
1050 in accordance with subsection 4 of that section.  38 
 
 Page 8 - 127LR1311(01) -1 
 Sec. 14.  Water rates; application of revenue; sinking fund.   An individual, 1 
firm or corporation, whether public, private or municipal, shall pay to the treasurer of the 2 
district the rates and other  lawful charges established by the trustees for the water used or 3 
made available to it.  All water rates and other lawful charges of the district are governed 4 
by the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 35 -A, chapter 61.  5 
The water rates and other lawful charges a re established to provide revenue for the 6 
following purposes:  7 
1.  Current operating expenses.   To pay the current expenses for operating and 8 
maintaining the water system including depreciation;  9 
2.  Payment of interest.   To provide for the payment of intere st on the indebtedness 10 
created by the district for the benefit of its water system; and  11 
3.  Sinking fund.   To provide each year a sum equal to not less than 1% nor more 12 
than 5% of the entire indebtedness created by the district for the benefit of its water  13 
system, which sum must be turned into a sinking fund to provide for the extinguishment 14 
of the indebtedness.  The money set aside for the sinking fund must be devoted to the 15 
retirement of the obligations of the district or invested in such securities as sa vings banks 16 
are allowed to hold.  The trustees may, in their discretion and in lieu of the establishment 17 
of a sinking fund, issue bonds of the district so that not less than 1% of the amount of the 18 
bonds so issued mature and are retired each year.  19 
There ma y be a lien issued on real estate served by the district to secure the payment 20 
of unpaid water rates and other lawful charges.  The water lien takes precedence over all 21 
other claims on the real estate, except claims for taxes and sewer rates.  The procedur es of 22 
obtaining, enforcing and receiving payment on the water lien are governed by Title 35 -A, 23 
section 6111 -A. 24 
Sec. 15.  Incidental powers granted.   All incidental powers, rights and privileges 25 
necessary to the accomplishment of the objectives set forth in  the Act are granted to the 26 
district.  27 
Sec. 16.  Debt responsibility of Town of Southwest Harbor.   The Town of 28 
Southwest Harbor is responsible to pay all debt service incurred on or after May 4, 2010 29 
by the district for capital expenditures and infrastructu re expenditures.  All debt service 30 
existing prior to May 4, 2010, as well as any debt service incurred on or after May 4, 31 
2010 for purposes other than capital expenditures and infrastructure expenditures must be 32 
financed through respective water and sewer service charges of the district.  33 
For purposes of this section, "capital expenditures" means an outlay of funds for the 34 
acquisition or improvement of a fixed asset with an expected useful life of at least 20 35 
years that extends the life or increases the prod uctivity of the asset and that is generally 36 
capitalized and depreciated over the estimated useful life of the asset.  For purposes of 37 
this section, "infrastructure expenditures" means an outlay of funds for the basic facilities, 38 
equipment, installations an d appurtenances, such as distribution lines, needed for the 39 
function of the district and having an expected useful life of at least 20 years.  40 
 
 Page 9 - 127LR1311(01) -1 
 Sec. 17.  Replacement of equipment; road openings.   Upon the reconstruction 1 
of any public roadway by the Town of S outhwest Harbor, the district shall coordinate the 2 
replacement of any sewer or water lines, equipment, valves or hydrants that have reached 3 
their maximum useful life.  A rebuilt or resurfaced road may not be opened or excavated 4 
by the district except under  emergency conditions, within 5 years of reconstruction or 5 
repavement of the road.  6 
Sec. 18.  Referendum; effective date.  This Act takes effect when approved only 7 
for the purpose of permitting its submission to the legal voters within the Town of 8 
Southwest  Harbor at a referendum called for that purpose and held within 2 years of the 9 
effective date of this Act.  The election must be called by the Board of Selectmen of the 10 
Town of Southwest Harbor and must be held at the regular voting place. The referendum 11 
must be called, advertised and conducted according to the law relating to municipal 12 
elections.  The registrars shall make a complete list of all the eligible voters of the 13 
proposed district as described in this Act. The list prepared by the registrars gover ns the 14 
eligibility of a voter.  For the purpose of registration of voters, the registrars of voters 15 
must be in session the regular workday preceding the referendum.  The subject matter of 16 
this Act is reduced to the following question:  17 
"Do you favor merging  the Southwest Harbor water department and the 18 
Southwest Harbor sewer department to create the Southwest Harbor 19 
Water and Sewer District and transferring all municipal water and sewer 20 
assets to the Southwest Harbor Water and Sewer District?"  21 
The voters sha ll indicate by a cross or check mark placed against the word "Yes" or 22 
"No" their opinion of the same.  23 
The results must be declared by the Board of Selectmen of the Town of Southwest 24 
Harbor and due certificate of the results filed by the clerk with the Secr etary of State.  25 
This Act takes effect for all other purposes immediately upon its approval by a 26 
majority of the legal voters of the Town of Southwest Harbor voting at the election.  27 
Failure to achieve the necessary approval in any referendum does not prohi bit subsequent 28 
referenda consistent with this section as long as the referenda are held within 2 years after 29 
the effective date of this Act.  30 
SUMMARY  31 
This bill provides for the creation of the Southwest Harbor Water and Sewer District 32 
and the transfer of al l water and sewer assets of the Town of Southwest Harbor to the new 33 
district.  34 
 
