 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1030  
H.P. 713  House of Representatives, March 24, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Better Coordinate the Work of Mental Health Crisis 
Agencies with Law Enforcement Agencies  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative DION of Portland.  
Cosponsored by Senator GERZOFSKY of Cumberland and  
Representatives: GATTINE of Westbrook, GILBERT of Jay, MALABY of Hancock, 
STUCKEY of Portland, Senator: BREEN of Cumberland.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1652(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  34-B MRSA c. 3, sub -c. 3, art. 3 is enacted to read:  2 
ARTICLE 3  3 
CRISIS INTERVENTION COORDINATION  4 
ยง3641.  Crisis intervention coordination  5 
The department shall provide assistance to crisi s intervention teams, agencies and law 6 
enforcement agencies to enable them to coordinate crisis intervention services and to 7 
fulfill the terms of the memorandum of understanding required under subsection 2.  8 
1.  Definitions.   As used in this section, unless  the context otherwise indicates, the 9 
following terms have the following meanings.  10 
A.  "Agency" means a person, firm, association or corporation that provides mental 11 
health services through one or more contracts with the department for the purposes of 12 
providing crisis services, but does not include the individual or corporate professional 13 
practice of one or more psychologists or psychiatrists.  14 
B.  "Crisis intervention team" means a crisis intervention team established under 15 
section 3622.  16 
C.  "Law enforcemen t agency" means the State Police, a sheriff's department or a 17 
municipal police department.  18 
D.  "Law enforcement officer" means a person who by virtue of public employment 19 
is vested by law with the power to make arrests for crime or serve criminal process.  20 
E.  "Person in need of mental health crisis services" means a person who appears to a 21 
law enforcement officer to be experiencing a mental health crisis or to have an 22 
untreated mental illness that compromises the ability of the person to function safely 23 
in the community.  24 
2.  Memorandum of understanding.   By July 1, 2016, a crisis intervention team or 25 
agency shall enter into and sign a memorandum of understanding with each law 26 
enforcement agency that provides law enforcement services in the area of the State served 27 
by the crisis intervention team or agency.  The memorandum of understanding must be 28 
effective for 3 years and must be renewed for a 3 -year period upon expiration. The 29 
memorandum of understanding must include the following:  30 
A.  A description of the p rocess that the law enforcement agency uses to identify a 31 
person in need of mental health crisis services with whom the law enforcement 32 
officer has contact in the course of performing official duties, regardless of the 33 
custodial standing of the person;  34 
B.  A description of the protocol that the law enforcement agency uses, within 24 35 
hours of contact with a person in need of mental health crisis services, to share a 36 
contact report with a crisis intervention team or agency;  37 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1652(01) -1 
 C.  A description of the process th e crisis intervention team or agency uses to receive 1 
the report provided under paragraph B;  2 
D.  A description of the protocol the crisis intervention team or agency uses to 3 
communicate with the person in need of mental health crisis services or the guardia n 4 
or family members of that person; and  5 
E.  A description of the procedures that will be used to convene on a quarterly basis 6 
multidisciplinary team meetings between the crisis intervention team or agency and 7 
the law enforcement agency to review the experi ences of the parties to the 8 
memorandum of understanding and to discuss opportunities for improvement in the 9 
provision of services to persons in need of mental health crisis services.  10 
SUMMARY  11 
This bill requires the Department of Health and Human Services to  provide assistance 12 
to crisis intervention teams and agencies that provide mental health crisis services and to 13 
law enforcement agencies to enable them to coordinate mental health crisis services.  The 14 
bill sets July 1, 2016 as the date by which a crisis i ntervention team or agency must enter 15 
into and sign a memorandum of understanding with each law enforcement agency that 16 
provides law enforcement services in the area of the State served by the crisis 17 
intervention team or agency.  The bill requires the memo randum of understanding to be 18 
effective for 3 years and to be renewed for a 3 -year period upon expiration. The 19 
memorandum of understanding must include descriptions of the following: the internal 20 
processes that the law enforcement agency uses to identify a  person in need of mental 21 
health crisis services; the protocol that the law enforcement agency uses to share a contact 22 
report with a crisis intervention team or agency; the process the crisis intervention team 23 
or agency uses to receive the report; the prot ocol that the crisis intervention team or 24 
agency uses to communicate with a person in need of mental health services or the 25 
guardian or family members of that person; and the procedures to be used to convene on a 26 
quarterly basis multidisciplinary team meet ings to review experiences and discuss 27 
opportunities for improvement.  28 
 
