 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 742  
S.P. 272  In Senate, March 5, 2015  
 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine To Require That 5 Percent of Signatures on a Direct 
Initiative of Legislation Come from Each County  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator SAVIELLO of Franklin.  
Cosponsored by Senators: COLLINS of York, LANGLEY of Hancock.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1029(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง18, sub -ยง2 is amended to read:  4 
2.  Referral to electors u nless enacted by the Legislature without change; 5 
number of signatures necessary on direct initiative petitions; dating 6 
signatures on petitions; competing measures.  For any measure thus proposed by 7 
electors, the number of signatures shall not be less than 10% of the total vote for 8 
Governor cast in the last gubernatorial election preceding the filing of such petition.  At 9 
least 5% of the required number of signatures must be of electors registered to vote in 10 
each county.   The date each signature was made sha ll be written next to the signature on 11 
the petition.  A signature is not valid if it is dated more than one year prior to the date that 12 
the petition was filed in the office of the Secretary of State.  The measure thus proposed, 13 
unless enacted without chang e by the Legislature at the session at which it is presented, 14 
shall be submitted to the electors together with any amended form, substitute, or 15 
recommendation of the Legislature, and in such manner that the people can choose 16 
between the competing measures or reject both.  When there are competing bills and 17 
neither receives a majority of the votes given for or against both, the one receiving the 18 
most votes shall at the next statewide election to be held not less than 60 days after the 19 
first vote thereon be s ubmitted by itself if it receives more than 1/3 of the votes given for 20 
and against both.  If the measure initiated is enacted by the Legislature without change, it 21 
shall not go to a referendum vote unless in pursuance of a demand made in accordance 22 
with th e preceding section.  The Legislature may order a special election on any measure 23 
that is subject to a vote of the people.  24 
; and be it further  25 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 26 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of  this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 27 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 28 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 29 
following the passage of this resolu tion, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 30 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  31 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to require signatures 32 
on direct initiative petitions from voters registered to vote in all counties 33 
of this State?"  34 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 35 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 36 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must  be received, sorted, counted and 37 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 38 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 39 
review the returns.  If it appears that a major ity of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 40 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 41 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 42 
further  43 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR 1029(01) -1 
 Secretary of State shall prepare b allots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 1 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 2 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  3 
SUMMARY  4 
This resolution proposes to amend t he Constitution of Maine to require that at least 5 
5% of the number of signatures required on a petition to directly initiate legislation be of 6 
electors registered to vote in each of the 16 counties.  7 
 
