 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 857  
S.P. 301  In Senate, March 11, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Prohibit Public Endorsement of Candidates for Office by 
County Employees and Elected Officials  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator BAKER of Sagadahoc.  
Cosponsored by Representative PIERCE of Dresden and  
Senators:  MASON of Androscoggin, ROSEN of Hancock, VOLK of Cumberland, 
WOODSOME of York, Representative: HAWKE of Boothbay Harbor.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1223(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  30-A MRSA ยง5 -A is enacted to read:  2 
ยง5-A.  Endorsement of candidates for political office  3 
A county officer or a county official may not advocate expressly for the election or 4 
defeat of a  candidate for a federal or constitutional office or of a candidate for a partisan 5 
elective municipal, county or state office, including leadership positions in the Senate and 6 
the House of Representatives, or solicit contributions reportable under Title 21 -A, chapter 7 
13.  For purposes of this section, "county officer" and "county official" do not include 8 
appointed county officers or appointed county officials.  9 
Sec. 2.  30-A MRSA ยง505 is enacted to read:  10 
ยง505.  Political activity  11 
1.  Political activity.  A county employee may not engage in political activity:  12 
A.  When the employee is on duty;  13 
B.  In county -owned or county -leased work space while the employee is occupied in 14 
the discharge of official duties or by using the facilities or services of the county; or 15 
C.  When wearing a uniform or official insignia identifying the office or position of 16 
the employee or while using a vehicle owned or leased by the county or its agencies.  17 
As used in this subsection, "political activity" means to advocate expressly for t he 18 
election or defeat of a candidate for a federal or constitutional office or of a candidate for 19 
partisan elective municipal, county or state office, including leadership positions in the 20 
Senate and the House of Representatives, or to solicit contribution s reportable under Title 21 
21-A, chapter 13.  22 
SUMMARY  23 
This bill prohibits elected county officers, elected county officials and county 24 
employees from advocating expressly for the election or defeat of a candidate for a 25 
federal or constitutional office or of a  candidate for partisan elective municipal, county or 26 
state office. The bill also prohibits elected county officers, elected county officials and 27 
county employees from soliciting contributions for a political campaign.  28 
 
