 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1481  
S.P. 579  In Senate, December 18, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Protect Maine's Natural Resources Jobs by Exempting 
from Sales Tax Petroleum Products Used in Commercial Farming, 
Fishing and Forestry  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
203. 
Received by the Secretary of the Senate on December 18, 2015.  Referred to the Committee 
on Taxation  pursuant to Joint Rule 308.2 and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator DAVIS of Piscataquis.  
Cosponsored by Representative BLACK of Wilton and  
Senators: DIAMOND of Cumberland, KATZ of Kennebec, WHITTEMORE of Somerset, 
Representatives: LOCKMAN of Amherst, McCABE of Skowhegan, SIROCKI of 
Scarborough, TIMBERLAKE of Turner, VACHON of Scarborough.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2215(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  36 MRSA §2013, as corrected by RR 2011, c. 2, §41 and amended by PL 2 
2011, c. 657, Pt. N, §2 and affected by §3, is further amended to read:  3 
§2013.  Refund of sales tax on depreciable ma chinery and equipment purchases and 4 
petroleum products  5 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 6 
following words have the following meanings.  7 
A.  "Commercial agricultural production" means commercial production o f crops, 8 
plants, trees, compost and livestock.  9 
A-1.    "Commercial aquacultural production" means the commercial production of 10 
cultured fish, shellfish, seaweed or other marine plants for human and animal 11 
consumption, including:  12 
 (1)  All cultivating activ ities occurring at hatcheries or nurseries, from the egg, 13 
larval or spore stages to the transfer of the product to a growing site; and  14 
 (2)  All cultivating activities occurring on water, from the receipt of fish, 15 
shellfish, seaweed or other marine plants from onshore facilities to the delivery of 16 
harvested products to onshore facilities for processing.  17 
B.    "Commercial fishing" means attempting to catch fish or any other marine 18 
animals or organisms with the intent of disposing of them for profit or trade in 19 
commercial channels and does not include subsistence fishing for personal use, sport 20 
fishing or charter boat fishing where the vessel is used for carrying sport anglers to 21 
available fishing grounds.  22 
B-1.  "Commercial wood harvesting" means the commercia l severance and yarding of 23 
trees for sale or for processing into logs, pulpwood, bolt wood, wood chips, stud 24 
wood, poles, pilings, biomass or fuel wood or other products commonly known as 25 
forest products.  26 
C.  "Depreciable  machinery and equipment" means, e xcept as otherwise provided by 27 
this paragraph, that part of the following machinery and equipment for which 28 
depreciation is allowable under the Code and repair parts for that machinery and 29 
equipment:  30 
(1)  New or used machinery and equipment for use directl y and primarily in 31 
commercial agricultural production, including self -propelled vehicles; 32 
attachments and equipment for the production of field and orchard crops; new or 33 
used machinery and equipment for use directly and primarily in production of 34 
milk, ani mal husbandry and production of livestock, including poultry; new or 35 
used machinery and equipment used in the removal and storage of manure; and 36 
new or used machinery and equipment not used directly and primarily in 37 
commercial agricultural production, but used to transport potatoes from a truck 38 
into a storage location;  39 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR2215(01) -1 
 (2)  New or used watercraft, nets, traps, cables, tackle and related equipment 1 
necessary to and used directly and primarily in commercial fishing;  2 
(3)  New or used watercraft, machinery or e quipment used directly and primarily 3 
for commercial aquacultural production, including, but not limited to: nets; ropes; 4 
cables; anchors and anchor weights; shackles and other hardware; buoys; fish 5 
tanks; fish totes; oxygen tanks; pumping systems; generato rs; water -heating 6 
systems; boilers and related pumping systems; diving equipment; feeders and 7 
related equipment; power -generating equipment; tank water -level sensors; 8 
aboveground piping; water -oxygenating systems; fish -grading equipment; safety 9 
equipment; and sea cage systems, including walkways and frames, lights, netting, 10 
buoys, shackles, ropes, cables, anchors and anchor weights; and  11 
(4)  New or used machinery and equipment for use directly and primarily in 12 
commercial wood harvesting, including, but not limited to, chain saws, skidders, 13 
delimbers, forwarders, slashers, feller bunchers and wood chippers.  14 
"Depreciable machinery and equipment" does not include a motor vehicle as defined 15 
in section 1752, subsection 7 or a trailer as defined in section 1752, s ubsection 19 -A. 16 
D.  "Petroleum products" means any substance or combination of substances that is 17 
intended to be or is capable of being used for the purpose of propelling or running by 18 
combustion any internal combustion engine that is sold or used for that  purpose and 19 
includes fuel and any lubricating oil or other lubricant that is classified for use in an 20 
internal combustion engine or the transmission, gear box, hydraulic system, 21 
compressor or differential for a motor vehicle or vessel, including but not l imited to 22 
natural, synthetic and rerefined motor oils, whether or not in retail containers.  23 
2.  Refund authorized.   Any person, association of persons, firm or corporation that 24 
purchases electricity, or that purchases or leases depreciable machinery or equ ipment, or 25 
that purchases petroleum products,  for use in commercial agricultural production, 26 
commercial fishing, commercial aquacultural production or commercial wood harvesting 27 
or that purchases fuel for use in a commercial fishing vessel  must be refunded  the amount 28 
of sales tax paid upon presenting to the State Tax Assessor evidence that the purchase is 29 
eligible for refund under this section.  30 
Evidence required by the assessor may include a copy or copies of that portion of the 31 
purchaser's or lessee's most  recent filing under the United States Internal Revenue Code 32 
that indicates that the purchaser or lessee is engaged in commercial agricultural 33 
production, commercial fishing, commercial aquacultural production or commercial 34 
wood harvesting and that the pur chased machinery or equipment is depreciable for those 35 
purposes or would be depreciable for those purposes if owned by the lessee.  36 
In the event that any piece of machinery or equipment is only partially depreciable under 37 
the United States Internal Revenue Code, any reimbursement of the sales tax must be 38 
prorated accordingly.  In the event that electricity or fuel for a commercial fishing vessel  39 
petroleum products  is used in qualifying and nonqualifying activities, any reimbursement 40 
of the sales tax must be prorated accordingly.  41 
Application for refunds must be filed with the assessor within 36 months of the date of 42 
purchase or execution of the lease.  43 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR2215(01) -1 
 3.  Purchases made free of tax with certificate.   Sales tax need not be paid on the 1 
purchase of electricity, fuel for a commercial fishing vessel or  a single item of machinery 2 
or equipment or petroleum products  if the purchaser has obtained a certificate from the 3 
assessor stating that the purchaser is engaged in commercial agricultural production, 4 
commercial fishi ng, commercial aquacultural production or commercial wood harvesting 5 
and authorizing the purchaser to purchase electricity, fuel for a commercial fishing vessel  6 
petroleum products  or depreciable machinery and equipment without paying Maine sales 7 
tax.  The seller is required to obtain a copy of the certificate together with an affidavit as 8 
prescribed by the assessor, to be maintained in the seller's records, attesting to the 9 
qualification of the purchase for exemption pursuant to this section.  In order to q ualify 10 
for this exemption, the electricity, fuel for a commercial fishing vessel  petroleum 11 
products  or depreciable machinery or equipment must be used directly in commercial 12 
agricultural production, commercial fishing, commercial aquacultural production or  13 
commercial wood harvesting.  In order to qualify for this exemption, the electricity or 14 
fuel for a commercial fishing vessel  petroleum products  must be used in qualifying 15 
activities, including support operations.  16 
4.  Information on processes for refunds a nd appeals.  The assessor shall post 17 
information describing the process for requesting a refund under this section on the 18 
bureau’s publicly accessible website along with a description of the process to appeal a 19 
denial of refund request.  20 
SUMMARY  21 
Current law  exempts from sales tax depreciable machinery or equipment used in 22 
commercial agricultural production, commercial fishing, commercial aquacultural 23 
production or commercial wood harvesting; fuel used in commercial fishing is also 24 
exempt from sales tax.  A p erson seeking the exemption may apply for a refund of the 25 
sales tax paid or obtain an exemption at the point of sale.  26 
This bill exempts from sales tax all petroleum products used in commercial 27 
agricultural production, commercial fishing, commercial aquacul tural production or 28 
commercial wood harvesting.  "Petroleum products" is defined as any substance or 29 
combination of substances that is intended to be or is capable of being used for the 30 
purpose of propelling or running by combustion any internal combustion  engine that is 31 
sold or used for that purpose and includes fuel and any lubricating oil or other lubricant 32 
that is classified for use in an internal combustion engine or the transmission, gear box, 33 
hydraulic system, compressor or differential for a motor v ehicle or vessel.  34 
 
