 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1547  
H.P. 1054  House of Representatives, January 12, 2016  
 
 
An Act To Provide Access to Affordable Naloxone Hydrochloride 
for First Responders  
 
 
 
Submitted by the Department of the Attorney General pursuant to Joint Rule 203.  
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative GIDEON of Freeport.  
Cosponsored by Senator BREEN of Cumberland and  
Representatives: BURSTEIN of Lincolnville, MALABY of Hancock, MARTIN of Sinclair, 
NADEAU of Winslow, VACHON of Scarborough, Senators: DILL of Penobscot, KATZ of 
Kennebec, SAVIELLO of Franklin.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2469(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง2353, sub -ยง5 is enacted to read:  2 
5.  Attorney General authority; municipal naloxone hydrochloride purchases; 3 
fund.  The Attorney General may negotiate bulk purchases of, purcha se or receive by gift 4 
and dispense naloxone hydrochloride and associated materials and agents for use in the 5 
prevention of opioid -related drug overdose deaths.  The Office of the Attorney General 6 
shall provide and distribute naloxone hydrochloride and asso ciated materials and agents 7 
throughout the State when necessary to protect the public health.  Municipalities may 8 
purchase naloxone hydrochloride from the Office of the Attorney General pursuant to this 9 
subsection for municipal first responder agencies and  law enforcement officers and 10 
firefighters as described in subsection 3.  11 
A.  The Naloxone Bulk Purchase Fund, referred to in this subsection as "the fund," is 12 
established as a nonlapsing fund to carry out the purposes of this subsection.  The 13 
Office of the  Attorney General shall administer the fund.  14 
B.  The fund consists of the following:  15 
(1)  Payments made by participating municipalities for the purchase of naloxone 16 
hydrochloride pursuant to this subsection;  17 
(2)  Money appropriated or allocated by the Legi slature and specifically 18 
designated to be credited to the fund; and  19 
(3)  Funds from public or private sources, including, but not limited to, gifts, 20 
grants, donations, rebates and settlements received by the State that are 21 
specifically designated to be cre dited to the fund.  22 
Funds received under subparagraphs (2) and (3) must be apportioned in a manner 23 
determined by the Office of the Attorney General and must be applied to provide 24 
price reductions for municipalities purchasing naloxone hydrochloride pursuant  to 25 
this subsection.  26 
C.  Amounts credited to the fund may not be appropriated or allocated except as set 27 
out in this subsection, and money remaining in the fund at the end of a fiscal year 28 
does not lapse to the General Fund but must be carried forward and used for the 29 
purposes of this subsection.  30 
D.  The Attorney General shall report annually by October 1st to the joint standing 31 
committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services 32 
matters on the fund's activity.  The report must i nclude, but not be limited to, revenue 33 
received by the fund, revenue and expenditure projections for the forthcoming fiscal 34 
year and details of all expenditures from the fund, the municipalities participating, the 35 
amount of naloxone hydrochloride purchased  by each municipality and the discount 36 
procured through bulk purchasing.  37 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR2469(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This bill establishes the Naloxone Bulk Purchase Fund administered by the Office of 2 
the Attorney General for the purpose of providing funding to the Office of the Attorney 3 
General to make bulk purchases of naloxone hydrochloride that may be purchased by 4 
municipalities for use by first responders.  5 
 
