 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
1(cfos 
2 Date: "3..-. I'S"' -{ b L.D. 1286 
(Filing No. S-3iG) 
3 Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Secretary of the Senate . 
. 4 STATE OF MAINE 
5 SENATE 
6 127TH LEGISLATURE 
7 SECOND REGULAR SESSION 
8 SENATE AMENDMENT "A "to COMMITTEE AMENDMENT "A" to S.P. 461, 
9 L.D. 1286, Bill, "An Act To Ensure the Use of Environmentally Responsible Insulation 
10 Materials in Taxpayer-funded Building Projects" 
11 Amend the amendment by striking out all of the first paragraph after the title (page 1, 
12 lines 12 and 13 in amendment) 
13 Amend the amendment by striking out all of the mandate preamble (page 1, lines 14 
14 to 18 in amendment) 
15 Amend the amendment by inserting at the end before the summary the following: 
16 'Amend the bill in section 1 in ยง 1762-B by inserting after subsection 2 the following: 
17 '3. Exemption. Notwithstanding subsection 2, this section does not apply to a 
18 school administrative unit, the University of Maine System, the Maine Community 
19 College System or the Maine Maritime Academy if that entity can demonstrate that the 
20 use of insulation with a global-warming potential of 10 or less will significantly increase 
21 the cost of the state-funded new construction or substantial renovations.'' 
22 SUMMARY 
23 This amendment removes the mandate preamble and exempts a school administrative 
24 unit, the University of Maine System, the Maine Community College System and the 
25 Maine Maritime Academy from the requirement of using insulation with a global-
26 warming potential of 10 or less if it is demonstrated that use of such materials will 
27 significantly increase the cost of the state-funded_ new construction or substantial 
28 renovations. 
29 
30 
31 SPONSORED BY: v'l'lf\1l~t-b- r ';.>q[~.,.;;J,. ~-
COUNTY: Lincoln 
Page I -127LR0774(04)-1 
SENATE AMENDMENT 
Approved: 03/15/16 feac. 
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD 1286 LR 774(04) 
An Act To Ensure the Use of Environmentally Responsible Insulation Materials in Taxpayer-funded 
Building Projects 
Fiscal Note for Senate Amendment ''.A' to Committee Amendment "A" (s-3" G, j 
Sponsor: Sen. Johnson of Lincoln 
State Mandates Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
Removes mandate preamble 
Potential State Mandate -Unfunded 
Required Activity Unit Affected Local Cost 
Requires local school administrative units (SAU's) to install, or fund the installation School Not Significant 
of, insulation with a global-wanning potential of 10 or less in state-funded new statewide 
construction or substantial renovation projects that begin on or after October 1, 
2017 unless SAU's can demonstrate that the use of such materials will significantly 
increase the cost of the projects. 
The required local activities in this bill may represent a state mandate pursuant to the Constitution of Maine. If the 
bill does require a local unit of government to expand or modify its activities so as to necessitate additional 
expenditures from local revenue, the state mandate provisions of the Constitution of Maine require either: (1) 
General Fund appropriations be provided to fund at least 90% of any additional necessitated local costs of the 
mandate; or (2) a Mandate Preamble be added to the bill and two-thirds of the members of each House vote to 
exempt the mandate from the funding requirement. If the bill does represent a state mandate and neither one of these 
actions occurs, the local units of government will not be required to implement the mandated activities. 
Fiscal Detail and Notes 
This amendment removes the mandate preamble and now allows SAU's, the University of Maine, the Maine 
Community College System and the Maine Maritime Academy to be exempt from the new requirement only if they 
can demonstrate that the use of such materials will significantly increase the cost of a project. No definition of 
significant is made. The significant standard will not apply to the Maine State Housing Authority, the Efficiency 
Maine Trust and the State of Maine, which will all be required to use the new materials regardless of any cost 
differential. The eventual cost differential of using low global-warming potential materials instead of more traditional 
materials cannot be determined at this time and will depend on the availability and competitiveness of such products 
in the marketplace. 
LR0774(04) -Fiscal Note -Page 1 of 1 
