 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 660  
H.P. 441  House of Representatives, March 3, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Protect Homeowners from Damage in the Event of a 
Failure of Public Water Systems  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative DeCHANT of Bath.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: CHENETTE of Saco, DOORE of Augusta, KUMIEGA of 
Deer Isle, TIPPING -SPITZ of Orono.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1551(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  35-A MRSA ยง6113 -A is enacted to read:  2 
ยง6113 -A.  Homeowner protection fund  3 
The commission shall adopt rules that allow a consumer -owned water utility to 4 
establish a homeowner protection fund, referred to in this section as "the fund," to 5 
reimburse a homeowner in the event of a water system failure that causes damage to the 6 
homeowner's property.  The commission's rules must establish the maximum amount that 7 
may be credited to or accumulate d in the fund, the treatment of the fund for rate -making 8 
purposes, the manner in which disbursements from the fund may be made to reimburse 9 
homeowners and any other requirements or limitations the commission determines 10 
necessary or appropriate to protect r atepayers.  A consumer -owned water utility that has 11 
accumulated money in its fund may remove money from the fund and return that money 12 
to the unappropriated retained earnings account if the utility determines that the removal 13 
would be in the best interest of the utility's ratepayers.  Rules adopted by the commission 14 
pursuant to this section are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, 15 
subchapter 2 -A. 16 
SUMMARY  17 
This bill allows a consumer -owned water utility to establish a homeowner protecti on 18 
fund to reimburse a homeowner in the event of a water system failure that causes damage 19 
to the homeowner's property.  The Public Utilities Commission is required to adopt rules 20 
governing the creation and use of such a fund.  21 
 
