 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 357  
H.P. 244  House of Representatives, February 12, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Study Options for a State Demand Response Program  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative DUNPHY of Embden.  
Cosponsored by Representative HOBBINS of Saco, Senator WHITTEMORE of Somerset and  
Representatives: BEAVERS of South Berwick, CHIPMAN of Portland, FREDETTE of 
Newport, GROHMAN of Biddeford, HIGGINS of Dover -Foxcroft, O'CONNOR of Berwick, 
RYKERSON of Kittery, Senator: WOODSOME of York.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1581(01) -1 
 Preamble. Whereas, there is significant value to individual consumers of 1 
electricity who participate in demand response programs that provide incentives to induce 2 
lower electricity use at times of high wholesale market prices or when system reliability 3 
is jeopardized and to consumers who benefit from reduced peak electricity pricing and 4 
increased electrical grid stability; and  5 
Whereas, such consumer and grid benefits are best obtained through formal demand 6 
response programs designed to encourage consumer pa rticipation; and  7 
Whereas, the State's consumers and economy are being harmed by increased energy 8 
costs due to natural gas pipeline constraints and this harm may be reduced through 9 
participation in a state demand response program; and  10 
Whereas, the United St ates Supreme Court is currently considering whether demand 11 
response programs are within the federal jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory 12 
Commission or are reserved to state jurisdiction and the resulting uncertainty has reduced 13 
participation in ex isting demand response programs; and  14 
Whereas, it is important to the State's electrical consumers and economy that the 15 
State be prepared to implement a demand response program, if necessary, for either 16 
Maine alone or in conjunction with the other New Engla nd states; now, therefore, be it  17 
Sec. 1.  Study of options for a state demand response program.  Resolved:  18 
That the Efficiency Maine Trust shall, using existing resources, study options for a state 19 
demand response program that will produce electricity con sumer and electrical grid 20 
benefits.  In conducting its study, the trust shall consult with the Governor's Energy 21 
Office, the Public Utilities Commission and ISO -New England and shall survey other 22 
states in New England regarding their interest in demand res ponse programs at the state 23 
or regional level.  The trust shall solicit the involvement of energy consumers in the State 24 
and determine consumer preferences for demand response program elements and rules.  25 
The trust shall issue a draft report and accept com ments from the public and other 26 
interested parties.  The trust shall submit a report of its study and conclusions, including 27 
recommended legislation, by February 1, 2016 to the Joint Standing Committee on 28 
Energy, Utilities and Technology.  29 
SUMMARY  30 
This reso lve directs the Efficiency Maine Trust to conduct a study of options for a 31 
state demand response program that will produce electricity consumer and electric grid 32 
benefits and to report to the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and 33 
Technology by February 1, 2016.  34 
 
