 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 893  
H.P. 612  House of Representatives, March 12, 2015  
 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to Article X of the 
Constitution of Maine Regarding the Publication of Maine Indian 
Treaty Obligations  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative BEAR of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians.  
Cosponsored by Senator WILLETTE of Aroostook and  
Representatives: DANA of the Passamaquoddy Tribe, MITCHELL of the Penobscot Nation.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0631(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. X, ยง7 is amended to read:  4 
Section 7.  Original sections 1 and 2 of Articl e X not to be printed.   5 
Sections 1 , and 2 and 5 , of Article X of the Constitution, shall hereafter be omitted in any 6 
printed copies thereof prefixed to the laws of the State; but this shall not impair the 7 
validity of acts under those sections ; and said sec tion 5 shall remain in full force, as part 8 
of the Constitution, according to the stipulations of said section, with the same effect as if 9 
contained in said printed copies . 10 
; and be it further  11 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective  date. 12 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 13 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 14 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 15 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 16 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  17 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to require that the 18 
text of Article X, Section 5 of the Constitution be included in any printed 19 
copies of the Constitution included with the laws of the State?"  20 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 21 
and designate their choice by a cross or chec k mark placed within the corresponding 22 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 23 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 24 
State in the same manner as votes for me mbers of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 25 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 26 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 27 
becomes part of the Constitution o f Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 28 
further  29 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 30 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 31 
of this resolution necess ary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  32 
SUMMARY  33 
This resolution proposes an amendment to the Constitution of Maine to require that 34 
the text of Article X, Section 5 of the Constitution be included in any printed copies of 35 
the Constitution included  with the laws of the State.  36 
 
