 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 525  
S.P. 194  In Senate, February 26, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Direct the Department of Health and Human Services 
To Report on Efforts To Reach  in Rural Areas Persons Who Are 
Elderly, Disabled or Mentally Ill  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator DAVIS of Piscataquis.  
Cosponsored by Representative HIGGINS of Dover -Foxcroft and  
Senators: BURNS of Washington, SAVIELLO of Franklin, Representative: STEARNS of 
Guilford.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0945(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services to report on efforts to 1 
reach in rural areas persons who are elderly, disabled or mentally ill.  2 
Resolved:   That the Department of Health and Human Services shall report on its efforts 3 
to reach in rural area s persons who are elderly, disabled or mentally ill.  The department 4 
shall particularly focus on elderly, disabled and mentally ill persons who are not able to 5 
use or who have no access to the Internet or other electronic forms of communication 6 
technology or who have limited contact with the department.  In developing this report, 7 
the department shall hold at least one public meeting in Piscataquis County to which 8 
persons, parties and organizations interested in the health and well -being of persons who 9 
are elderly, disabled or mentally ill may attend to inform the department of the 10 
effectiveness of department efforts and any shortcomings in efforts to reach in rural areas 11 
persons who are elderly, disabled or mentally ill and the ability of those populations to 12 
access department services and personnel.  The department shall submit its report to the 13 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services by January 1, 2016.  14 
SUMMARY  15 
This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to report on 16 
department efforts to reach in rural areas persons who are elderly, disabled or mentally ill.  17 
This resolve requires the department, in developing its report, to have at least one public 18 
meeting in Piscataquis County and to particularly focus on elderly, disa bled and mentally 19 
ill persons who are not able to use or who have no access to the Internet and other 20 
electronic forms of communication technology or who have limited contact with the 21 
department.  22 
 
