 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 790  
H.P. 539  House of Representatives, March 10, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Make Political Advertising Accountable and Transparent  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative ESPLING of New Gloucester.  
Cosponsored by Representative BLACK of Wilton and  
Representatives: GUERIN of Glenburn, REED of  Carmel, WOOD of Sabattus, Senator: 
CUSHING of Penobscot.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1089(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA ยง1055 -A, sub -ยง3 is enacted to read:  2 
3.  Communications depicting wildlife management.  Whenever a person makes an 3 
expenditure for a communication described in subsection 1 tha t includes a message 4 
regarding wildlife management practices, the communication must clearly and 5 
conspicuously state whether the wildlife management practice included or depicted in the 6 
message is a lawful practice in the State.  If the communication inclu des an image or 7 
video of a wildlife management practice, the communication must clearly and 8 
conspicuously state the location where the image or video was created and the date on 9 
which it was made.  10 
SUMMARY  11 
This bill requires a communication that is intended  to influence a ballot question 12 
election and that depicts a wildlife management practice to include information about any 13 
image or video used in the communication whether or not the practice is legal in the 14 
State.  It also requires that if a communication includes an image or video of a wildlife 15 
management practice the communication must state the location where the image or 16 
video was created and the date on which it was made.  17 
 
