 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 422  
H.P. 289  House of Representatives, February 12, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Improve Access to Treatments for Lyme Disease  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic Development 
suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative SANDERSON of Chelsea.  
Cosponsored by Senator JOHNSON of Lincoln and  
Representatives: AUSTIN of Gray, MAKER of Calais, O'CONNOR of Berwick, PARRY of 
Arundel, POULIOT of Augusta, PRESCOTT of Waterboro, SIROCKI of Scarborough, 
Senator: BURNS of Washington.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0906(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  32 MRSA ยง3282 -B is enacted to read:  2 
ยง3282 -B.  Lyme disease treatment  3 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 4 
following terms have the foll owing meanings.  5 
A.  "Clinical diagnosis" means a diagnosis that is based on knowledge obtained 6 
through medical history and physical examination of a patient alone or in conjunction 7 
with testing that provides supportive data for the diagnosis.  8 
B.  "Long -term antibiotic therapy" means the prolonged administration of oral, 9 
intramuscular or intravenous antibiotics for a period greater than 28 days.  10 
C.  "Lyme disease" is a condition caused by an infection of the bacterium Borrelia 11 
burgdorferi transmitted to huma ns through the bite of infected blacklegged ticks.  12 
2.  Lyme disease treatment.  The board may not suspend or revoke a license or 13 
discipline a licensee under this chapter because the licensee prescribed, administered or 14 
dispensed long -term antibiotic therap y pursuant to a treatment plan for a patient clinically 15 
diagnosed with acute, persistent or chronic Lyme disease if:  16 
A.  The clinical diagnosis and treatment plan were made considering the patient's 17 
individual circumstance and pursuant to a treatment guide line recommended by the 18 
United States Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease 19 
Control and Prevention; or  20 
B.  The licensee used the licensee's best judgment with respect to the particular 21 
patient or special clinical situation in the pre scription, administration and 22 
dispensation of the long -term antibiotic therapy.  23 
SUMMARY  24 
This bill prohibits the Board of Licensure in Medicine from disciplining a physician 25 
or revoking or suspending a physician's license for prescribing, administering or 26 
dispensing long -term antibiotic therapy to a patient with acute, persistent or chronic 27 
Lyme disease if the therapy was pursuant to a treatment plan recommended by the United 28 
States Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and 29 
Prevention that considered the patient's individual circumstance or was in the best 30 
judgment of the physician with respect to the particular patient or special clinical 31 
situation.  32 
 
