 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1172  
H.P. 803  House of Representatives, March 31, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Rules for Permitting 
Overlimit  Commercial Motor Vehicles of Specified Configurations 
To Travel Designated Routes, a Late -filed Major Substantive Rule 
of the Department of Transportation  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reported by Representative McLEAN of Gorham for the Department of Transportation 
pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, section 8072 and approved for introduction by 
a majority of the Legislative Council.  
Reference to the Committee on Transportation suggested and ordered printed pursuant to 
Joint Rule 218.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1956(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A requires 3 
legislative auth orization before major substantive agency rules may be finally adopted by 4 
the agency; and  5 
Whereas, the above -named major substantive rule has been submitted to the 6 
Legislature outside the legislative rule acceptance period; and  7 
Whereas, immediate enactment  of this resolve is necessary to record the 8 
Legislature's position on final adoption of the rule; and  9 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 10 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following leg islation as 11 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 12 
therefore, be it  13 
Sec. 1.  Adoption.  Resolved:  That final adoption of Rules for Permitting 14 
Overlimit Commercial Motor Vehicles of Specified Configurations To Travel Designated 15 
Routes, a provisionally adopted major substantive rule of the Department of 16 
Transportation that has been submitted to the Legislature for review pursuant to the 17 
Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A outside the l egislative rule 18 
acceptance period, is authorized.  19 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 20 
legislation takes effect when approved.  21 
SUMMARY  22 
This resolve provides for legislative review of Rules for Permitting Overlimit 23 
Commerc ial Motor Vehicles of Specified Configurations To Travel Designated Routes, a 24 
major substantive rule of the Department of Transportation that was filed outside the 25 
legislative rule acceptance period.  26 
 
