 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 584  
H.P. 408  House of Representatives, February 26, 2015  
 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine To Prohibit the Denial of Equal Rights Based on the Sex of 
an Individual  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative RUSSELL of Portland.  
Cosponsored by Senator VALENTINO of York and 
Representatives: BROOKS of Lewiston, BURSTEIN of Lincolnville, COOPER of Yarmouth, 
GRANT of Gardiner, MASTRACCIO of Sanford, MELARAGNO of Auburn, ROTUNDO of 
Lewiston, SANBORN of Gorham.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0088(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved:  Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. I, ยง25 is enacted to read:  4 
Section 25.  Equality of rights.   Equality of  rights under the law may not be 5 
denied or abridged based on the sex of an individual.  6 
; and be it further  7 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 8 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabita nts of their 9 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 10 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 11 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification o f the amendment 12 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  13 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to prohibit the denial 14 
of equal rights based on sex?"  15 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballo t on this question 16 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 17 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 18 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns m ade to the Secretary of 19 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 20 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 21 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact wi thout delay and the amendment 22 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 23 
further  24 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 25 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plan tation all ballots, returns and copies 26 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  27 
SUMMARY  28 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to prohibit the denial of 29 
equal rights based on the sex of an individual.  30 
 
