 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 444  
S.P. 173  In Senate, February 24, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Allow a Motor Vehicle Excise Tax Credit for a Vehicle 
No Longer in Use  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Taxation suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by President THIBODEAU of Waldo.  
Cosponsored by Representative GILLWAY of Searsport and  
Senators: COLLINS of York, CUSHING of Penobscot, HAMPER of Oxford, HASKELL of 
Cumberland, McCORMICK of Kennebec, WHITTEMORE of Somerset, Representatives: 
GOODE of Bangor, TIMBERLAKE of Turner.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1557(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  36 MRSA ยง1482, sub -ยง5, as amended by PL 2011, c. 240, ยง13, is further 2 
amended to read:  3 
5.  Credits.   An owner or lessee who has paid the excise or property tax for a vehicle 4 
the ownersh ip or registration of which is transferred, or that is subsequently totally lost by 5 
fire, theft or accident or totally junked or abandoned, in the same registration year,  is 6 
entitled to a credit up to the maximum amount of the tax previously paid in that 7 
registration year for any one vehicle toward the tax for any number of vehicles, regardless 8 
of the number of transfers that may be required of the owner or lessee in that registration 9 
year.  The credit is available only if the vehicle's ownership is transfe rred, the vehicle is 10 
totally lost by fire, theft or accident, the vehicle is totally junked or abandoned, the use of 11 
the vehicle is totally discontinued or, in the case of a leased vehicle, the registration is 12 
transferred.  13 
A.  The credit must be given in a ny place in which the excise tax is payable.  14 
B.  For each transfer made in the same registration year, the owner shall pay $3 to the 15 
place in which the excise tax is payable.  16 
C.  During the last 4 months of the registration year, the credit may not exceed 1/2 of 17 
the maximum amount of the tax previously paid in that registration year for any one 18 
vehicle.  19 
D.  If the credit available under this subsection exceeds the amount transferred to 20 
another vehicle, a municipality may choose, but is not required to refun d the excess 21 
amount.  If a municipality chooses to refund excess amounts it must do so in all 22 
instances where there is an excess amount.  23 
E.  For the purposes of this subsection, "owner" includes the surviving spouse of the 24 
owner.  25 
G.  For the purposes of th is subsection, "totally discontinued" means that the owner 26 
has permanently discontinued all use of the vehicle except for selling, transferring 27 
ownership of, junking or abandoning that vehicle.  The owner of the vehicle must 28 
provide a signed statement atte sting that use of the vehicle from which the credit is 29 
being transferred is totally discontinued.  If the owner who has totally discontinued 30 
use of a vehicle later seeks to register that vehicle, no excise tax credits may be 31 
applied with respect to the reg istration of that vehicle or any subsequent transfer of 32 
that vehicle's registration.  33 
SUMMARY  34 
Current law provides for a motor vehicle excise tax credit for the owner of a vehicle 35 
that is totally lost by fire, theft or accident or is totally junked or aband oned.  This bill 36 
clarifies that the motor vehicle excise tax credit is available only if the vehicle's 37 
ownership is transferred, the vehicle is totally lost by fire, theft or accident, the vehicle is 38 
totally junked or abandoned or the use of the vehicle is  totally discontinued.  In the case 39 
of a leased vehicle, the credit is available only if the registration is transferred.  This bill 40 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1557(01) -1 
 requires the owner of the vehicle to provide a signed statement attesting that the vehicle 1 
from which the credit is being t ransferred is totally discontinued and states that if the 2 
owner who has totally discontinued use of a vehicle later seeks to register that vehicle, no 3 
excise tax credits may be applied with respect to the registration of that vehicle or any 4 
subsequent tran sfer of that vehicle's registration.  5 
 
