 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1391  
H.P. 941  House of Representatives, May 6, 2015  
 
 
An Act Regarding the Treatment of Forensic Patients  
 
(AFTER DEADLINE)  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
205. 
Reference to the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative MALABY of Hancock.  
Cosponsored by Senator KATZ of Kennebec and  
Representatives: HARLOW of Portland, HEAD of Bethel, SANDERSON of Chelsea, 
VACHON of Scarborough, Senator: BRAKEY of Androscoggin.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1977(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  15 MRSA §§106 and 107 are enacted to read:  2 
§106.  Involuntary medication of incompetent defendant  3 
1.  Definition.  As used in this section, "commissioner" means the Commissioner of 4 
Heal th and Human Services or the commissioner's designee.  5 
2.  Notice required; contents.  At any time after a defendant has been found 6 
incompetent to proceed and has been committed to the custody of the commissioner 7 
under section 101 -D, subsection 5, the commi ssioner shall notify the court, prosecuting 8 
attorney and attorney for the defendant if the commissioner has determined that the 9 
defendant is not consenting to or responding to treatment and is unlikely to be restored to 10 
competency without the administratio n of antipsychotic medication over the defendant's 11 
objection.  The commissioner shall provide this notice only if there is no basis for 12 
involuntarily medicating the defendant other than to restore the defendant's competency.  13 
The commissioner shall state i n the notice whether the commissioner believes that:  14 
A.  Medication is necessary to render the defendant competent;  15 
B.  Medication is substantially likely to render the defendant competent;  16 
C.  Medication is substantially unlikely to produce side effects t hat would 17 
significantly interfere with the defendant's ability to assist in the defendant's defense;  18 
D.  No less intrusive means of treatment are available; and  19 
E.  Medication is medically appropriate and is in the defendant's best medical interest 20 
in ligh t of the defendant's medical condition.  21 
The commissioner shall also state in the notice whether less intrusive means of treatment 22 
have been attempted to render the defendant competent.  23 
3.  Court authorization.  The following provisions govern court authori zation for 24 
the involuntary medication of a defendant under this section.  25 
A.  Upon receipt of the notice under subsection 2, the prosecuting attorney shall 26 
assess whether important state interests are at stake in restoring the defendant's 27 
competency and sha ll promptly notify the commissioner of the result of that 28 
assessment.  If the prosecuting attorney determines that important state interests are at 29 
stake, the prosecuting attorney shall file a motion seeking court authorization for 30 
involuntary medication o f the defendant, and the court shall conduct a hearing within 31 
30 days of the filing of the motion, unless the court extends the time for good cause.  32 
B.  The court, in determining whether a defendant should be medicated over the 33 
defendant's objection, shall  consider whether:  34 
(1)  Important state interests are at stake in restoring the defendant's competency;  35 
(2)  Involuntary medication will significantly further important state interests, in 36 
that the medication proposed:  37 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1977(01) -1 
 (a)  Is substantially likely to rende r the defendant competent to stand trial; 1 
and 2 
(b)  Is substantially unlikely to produce side effects that would significantly 3 
interfere with the defendant's ability to assist the defense counsel in 4 
conducting the defendant's defense;  5 
(3)  Involuntary medic ation is necessary to further important state interests;  6 
(4)  Any alternate less intrusive treatments are likely to achieve substantially the 7 
same results; and  8 
(5)  The administration of the proposed medication is medically appropriate, as it 9 
is in the def endant's best medical interest in light of the defendant's medical 10 
condition.  11 
4.  Potential penalty not relevant.  In determining under subsection 2 or 3 whether 12 
the proposed treatment is medically appropriate and is in the defendant's best medical 13 
interes t, the potential penalty to which the defendant may be subject if the defendant is 14 
convicted of any charged offense is not a relevant consideration.  15 
5.  Findings; order.  If the court finds by clear and convincing evidence that the 16 
involuntary administrati on of antipsychotic medication to a defendant under this section 17 
is necessary and appropriate, it shall make findings addressing each of the factors in 18 
subsection 3, paragraph B and shall issue an order authorizing the administration of 19 
antipsychotic medic ation to the defendant over the defendant's objection in order to 20 
restore the defendant to competency.  When issuing the order, the court may order that 21 
medication may be administered by more intrusive methods only if the defendant has 22 
refused administrati on by less intrusive methods.  The court may order that the 23 
commissioner report to the court within a reasonable period following entry of the order 24 
as to whether the authorized treatment remains appropriate.  25 
6.  Application.  This section applies only if the prosecuting attorney seeks an order 26 
of involuntary medication for the purpose of rendering a defendant competent to proceed.  27 
§107.  Involuntary medication of patient  28 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the  29 
following terms have the following meanings.  30 
A.  "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Health and Human Services.  31 
B.  "Department" means the Department of Health and Human Services.  32 
C.  "Gravely disabled" means unable to provide for basic needs for foo d, clothing or 33 
shelter because of a mental illness or disorder.  34 
D.  "Patient" means a person held in a hospital under section 101 -D or 103.  35 
E.  "Psychiatrist" includes a physician assistant working under the supervision of a 36 
psychiatrist and a psychiatric nurse practitioner.  37 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR1977(01) -1 
 2.  Administration of psychiatric medication over objection prohibited; 1 
exceptions.  A patient may not be administered psychiatric medication over the objection 2 
of the patient except:  3 
A.  As ordered by the court under section 106;  4 
B.  In accordance with an advance health care directive;  5 
C.  For a patient under guardianship, as authorized by the guardian; or  6 
D.  For a patient who is not under guardianship, for whom no advance health care 7 
directive is known to be in effect and for whom no administration of medication 8 
under section 106 has been ordered, as provided in subsection 3.  9 
3.  Involuntary medication on nonemergency basis.  A hospital may seek to initiate 10 
involuntary medication of a patient under this section on a nonemergency basis only if all 11 
of the following conditions have been met:  12 
A.  A psychiatrist has determined that the patient has a mental illness or disorder;  13 
B.  A psychiatrist has determined that, as a result of the patient's mental illness or 14 
disorder, the patient is grav ely disabled and lacks the capacity to consent to or refuse 15 
treatment with psychiatric medication or the patient is a danger to self or others;  16 
C.  A psychiatrist has determined that the patient should be treated with psychiatric 17 
medication and has prescri bed one or more psychiatric medications for the treatment 18 
of the patient's mental illness or disorder, has considered the risks and benefits of and 19 
treatment alternatives to involuntary medication and has determined that the need for 20 
treatment outweighs th e risks and side effects;  21 
D.  The patient has been advised of the risks and benefits of and treatment 22 
alternatives to the psychiatric medication and refuses or is unable to consent to the 23 
administration of the medication;  24 
E.  The patient is provided a hear ing before a hearing officer.  The hearing must be 25 
held not more than 14 days after the filing of the notice by the hospital pursuant to 26 
paragraph G with the department's office of administrative hearings, unless counsel 27 
for the patient agrees to extend th e date of the hearing;  28 
F.  The patient is provided counsel at the department's expense at least 7 days prior to 29 
the hearing under paragraph E;  30 
G.  The patient and counsel are provided with written notice of the hearing under 31 
paragraph E by the hospital at least 7 days prior to the hearing. The written notice 32 
must:  33 
(1)  Set forth the patient's diagnosis, the factual basis for the diagnosis, the basis 34 
upon which psychiatric medication is recommended, the expected benefits, 35 
potential side effects and risks of the medication to the patient and treatment 36 
alternatives to medication, if any;  37 
(2)  Advise the patient of the right to be present at the hearing, the right to be 38 
represented by counsel, the right to present evidence and the right to cross - 39 
 
 Page 4 - 127LR1977(01) -1 
 examine witnesse s.  Counsel for the patient must have access to all medical 1 
records and files of the patient; and  2 
(3)  Inform the patient of the patient's right to file an appeal in Superior Court of 3 
a decision of the commissioner authorizing involuntary treatment.  4 
Failur e of the hospital to provide timely or adequate notice pursuant to this paragraph 5 
may be excused only upon a showing of good cause and the absence of prejudice to 6 
the patient. In making this determination, the hearing officer may consider factors 7 
including , but not limited to, the ability of the patient's counsel to prepare the case 8 
adequately and to confer with the patient, the continuity of care and, if applicable, the 9 
need for protection of the patient or institutional staff that would be compromised by 10 
a procedural default;  11 
H.  The hearing officer at the hearing under paragraph E determines by clear and 12 
convincing evidence that:  13 
(1)  The patient has a mental illness or disorder;  14 
(2)  As a result of that illness or disorder the patient is gravely disabled  and lacks 15 
the capacity to consent to or refuse treatment with psychiatric medication or the 16 
patient is a danger to self or others if not medicated;  17 
(3)  There is no less intrusive alternative to involuntary medication; and  18 
(4)  The need for treatment outw eighs the risks and side effects;  19 
I.  The hearing officer at the hearing under paragraph E recommends to the 20 
commissioner that an order authorizing administration of involuntary medication be 21 
issued;  22 
J.  The commissioner issues an order authorizing adminis tration of involuntary 23 
medication.  The decision whether to issue an order authorizing administration of 24 
involuntary medication rests with the commissioner.  An order authorizing 25 
administration of involuntary medication provides authority to undertake proc edures 26 
and administer medication to monitor and manage side effects, all consistent with 27 
medical standards of care; and  28 
K.  The historical course of the patient's mental illness or disorder, as determined by 29 
available relevant information about the course of the patient's mental illness or 30 
disorder, is considered when it has direct bearing on the determination of whether the 31 
patient, as the result of a mental illness or disorder, is a danger to self or others or is 32 
gravely disabled and lacks the capacity to  consent to or refuse treatment.  33 
4.  Emergency action.  Nothing in this section prohibits a physician from taking 34 
appropriate action in an emergency, as defined by the department in rules adopted 35 
pursuant to Title 34 -B, section 3003 and in accordance with procedures contained in 36 
those rules.  37 
5.  Effective date and expiration of order.  An order authorizing involuntary 38 
medication pursuant to subsection 3 is effective 24 hours after it is issued and expires one 39 
year after the date of the order, unless a new a uthorization is given pursuant to the 40 
procedures set forth in subsection 7 or authorization is terminated early based on a 41 
 
 Page 5 - 127LR1977(01) -1 
 significant change to the patient's medical condition such that the need for treatment no 1 
longer outweighs the risks and side effects  pursuant to the procedures set forth in 2 
subsection 8.  3 
6.  Effect of subsequent consent.  A patient's subsequent informed consent does not 4 
abrogate an order authorizing involuntary medication under this section.  5 
7.  Extension.  To extend an authorization t hat is in effect allowing involuntary 6 
medication under this section, the hospital shall, no later than 21 days prior to the 7 
expiration of the authorization, file with the department's office of administrative hearings 8 
and provide the patient and the patien t's counsel with a written notice indicating the 9 
hospital's intent to extend the authorization under the existing decision.  10 
A.  A patient who is the subject of a filing under this subsection must be given the 11 
same due process protections as specified in su bsection 3.  The hearing on any 12 
request to extend an order for involuntary medication must be conducted prior to the 13 
expiration of the authorization that is in effect.  If the hospital wishes to add a basis to 14 
an existing decision authorizing involuntary m edication, the notice required by 15 
subsection 3, paragraph G must also specify the additional basis and the conduct 16 
within the past year that supports that additional basis.  The hospital must prove the 17 
additional basis and conduct at the hearing as specifi ed in subsection 3, paragraph H. 18 
If the hearing officer determines that the requirements for the extension of an 19 
authorization described in paragraph B have been met, the hearing officer must 20 
recommend an extension of the authorization to the commissioner.   While the hearing 21 
officer may consider evidence of behavior during the period of involuntary 22 
medication, no new acts need be alleged or proven in order to support an extension of 23 
the authorization that is in effect.  24 
B.  The commissioner may order an exte nsion of an authorization under this 25 
subsection.  An order extending an authorization that is in effect must be granted 26 
based on clear and convincing evidence that the patient has a mental illness or 27 
disorder that requires treatment with psychiatric medica tion and that, but for the 28 
medication, the patient would revert to the behavior that was the basis for the prior 29 
order authorizing involuntary medication, coupled with evidence that it is unlikely 30 
that the patient would be able or willing to manage the pat ient's own medication and 31 
treatment regimen.  32 
C.  An extension under this subsection is valid for one year after the date of the 33 
hearing under paragraph A.  34 
8.  Early termination.  To request early termination of an authorization allowing 35 
involuntary medicat ion, the patient or the patient's designated representative shall file a 36 
request with the department's office of administrative hearings, along with copies of 37 
documents from the patient's hospital record, or from another medical source, 38 
demonstrating that there has been a significant change to the patient's medical condition.  39 
The hearing officer shall determine within 14 days whether the documents are sufficient 40 
to show such a change, and, if so, shall schedule a hearing to determine whether the 41 
change in medical condition is such that the benefits of the authorized treatment no longer 42 
outweigh the risks and side effects.  43 
 
 Page 6 - 127LR1977(01) -1 
 A.  A hearing under this subsection must be held no more than 14 days after the 1 
hearing officer's determination, unless the patient or th e patient's designated 2 
representative agrees to extend the date of the hearing.  The authorization remains in 3 
effect unless it is terminated following the hearing.  4 
B.  The patient, the patient's designated representative, if any, and the hospital must 5 
be provided with written notice of the hearing under this subsection at least 7 days 6 
prior to the hearing. The written notice must:  7 
(1)  Advise the patient of the right to be present at the hearing, the right to present 8 
evidence and the right to present and ex amine witnesses; and  9 
(2)  Inform the patient of the patient's right to file an appeal in Superior Court of 10 
a decision of the commissioner determining that the benefits of the authorized 11 
treatment continue to outweigh the risks and side effects.  12 
C.  For pur poses of a request for early termination of an authorization under this 13 
subsection, the patient may name as the patient's designated representative a lay 14 
advisor provided by the hospital, a lawyer provided by the patient at the patient's own 15 
expense or ano ther representative who is selected by the patient and who is willing 16 
and able to assist in the proceeding.  17 
D.  If, following a hearing under this subsection, the hearing officer determines by 18 
clear and convincing evidence that the benefits of authorized t reatment no longer 19 
outweigh the risks and side effects, the hearing officer must recommend termination 20 
of the authorization to the commissioner.  The commissioner may order termination 21 
of the authorization.  22 
9.  Final agency action.  An order issued by the commissioner under subsection 3, 23 
paragraph J, subsection 7, paragraph B or subsection 8, paragraph D is a final agency 24 
action.  25 
10.  Rules.  The department may adopt rules to implement this section.  Rules 26 
adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine te chnical rules as described in Title 5, 27 
chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. 28 
SUMMARY  29 
This bill allows the Commissioner of Health and Human Services to administer 30 
medication to a defendant who has been found incompetent to proceed without the 31 
defendant's consent if a court finds that certain standards have been met.  It allows the 32 
commissioner to authorize a hospital to administer medication to a defendant who has 33 
been found incompetent to proceed or to a person who has been committed to the custody 34 
of the commission er following acceptance of a negotiated insanity plea or following a 35 
verdict or finding of insanity without that defendant's or person's consent if certain 36 
standards are met, subject to appeal to the court.  37 
 
