 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 181  
H.P. 139  House of Representatives, January 27, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Create Efficiencies in Court Process  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative MONAGHAN of Cape Elizabeth.  
Cosponsored by Senator BURNS of Washington and  
Representatives: FREDETTE of Newport, MOONEN of Portland, SHERMAN of Hodgdon, 
Senators: KATZ of Kennebec, VALENTINO of York.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1108(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  4 MRSA §1, 3rd ¶, as amended by PL 2009, c. 213, Pt. QQ, §1, is further 2 
amended to read:  3 
The Supreme Judicial Court has general administrative and supervisory authority 4 
over the judicia l branch and shall make and promulgate rules, regulations and orders 5 
governing the administration of the judicial branch.  Notwithstanding any other provision 6 
of law, the Supreme Judicial Court may adopt rules or issue orders to permit or require 7 
the use o f electronic or digital forms, filings, records, e -mail and electronic signatures 8 
whenever paper forms, filings, records, written notice, postal mail and written signatures 9 
are required for judicial, legal, law enforcement or any other court processes unde r the 10 
Maine Revised Statutes.  11 
Sec. 2.  Notification to Legislature.   The Supreme Judicial Court shall notify the 12 
joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over judiciary matters of 13 
any rules adopted or orders issued pursuant to the Ma ine Revised Statutes, Title 4, section 14 
1 to permit or require the use of electronic or digital forms, filings, records, e -mail and 15 
electronic signatures whenever paper forms, filings, records, written notice, postal mail 16 
and written signatures are required  for judicial, legal, law enforcement or any other court 17 
processes and recommend to the committee by February 15, 2017 any changes in law 18 
necessary to implement or promote the electronic case management and filing system 19 
implemented by the judicial branch.  20 
SUMMARY  21 
This bill authorizes the Supreme Judicial Court to adopt any rules or issue any orders 22 
necessary to implement its electronic case management and filing system.  The bill 23 
requires the court to notify the Legislature of any such rules or orders and to recommend 24 
any changes in law needed to implement or promote the system.  25 
 
