 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 289  
S.P. 103  In Senate, February 5, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Amend the Health Plan Improvement Law Regarding 
Prescription Drug Step Therapy  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Insurance and Financial Services suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator ROSEN of Hancock.  
Cosponsored by Senator: SAVIELLO of Franklin, Representative: DION of Portland.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1723(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง4304, sub -ยง1-A is enacted to read:  2 
1-A.  Prescription drug step therapy.  The clinical review criteria used by a carrier 3 
in approving prescription drugs:  4 
A.  Must adhere to f ederal Food and Drug Administration prescription drug labeling; 5 
and 6 
B.  May not require failure on the same medication on more than one occasion for 7 
patients continuously enrolled in a health plan offered by the carrier.  8 
Nothing in this subsection may be c onstrued to prevent a health care practitioner from 9 
prescribing a medication for an off -label use or from prescribing a medication on more 10 
than one occasion when the health care practitioner determines it is medically 11 
appropriate.  12 
A carrier that requires f ailure on one or more drugs as a condition of prior authorization 13 
for a nonpreferred drug may not collect a copayment greater than the lowest cost 14 
preferred drug copayment in the same drug class from an enrollee having satisfied the 15 
prior authorization req uirements, as judged by the prescribing health care practitioner.  16 
Nothing in this subsection may be construed to prevent a carrier from collecting tiered 17 
copayments from enrollees not subject to the prior authorization requirements set forth in 18 
this subse ction.  19 
SUMMARY  20 
This bill establishes certain standards for prescription drug step therapy policies 21 
under the health plan improvement law.  22 
 
