 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1408  
H.P. 957  House of Representatives, May 12, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Portions of Chapter 21: 
Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting and Related Activities 
in Shoreland Areas, a Late -filed Major Substantive Rule of the 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Bureau of 
Forestry  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reported by Representative HICKMAN of Winthrop f or the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry, Bureau of Forestry pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, 
section 8072 and approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council.  
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture,  Conservation and Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed pursuant to Joint Rule 218.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2013(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A requires 3 
legislative aut horization before major substantive agency rules may be finally adopted by 4 
the agency; and  5 
Whereas, the above -named major substantive rule has been submitted to the 6 
Legislature outside the legislative rule acceptance period; and  7 
Whereas, immediate enactmen t of this resolve is necessary to record the 8 
Legislature's position on final adoption of the rule; and  9 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 10 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following le gislation as 11 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 12 
therefore, be it  13 
Sec. 1.  Adoption.  Resolved:  That final adoption of portions of Chapter 21:  14 
Statewide Standards for Timber Harvesting and Related Activ ities in Shoreland Areas, a 15 
provisionally adopted major substantive rule of the Department of Agriculture, 16 
Conservation and Forestry, Bureau of Forestry that has been submitted to the Legislature 17 
for review pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A 18 
outside the legislative rule acceptance period, is authorized.  19 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 20 
legislation takes effect when approved.  21 
SUMMARY  22 
This resolve provides for legislative review of portions of Chapter 21:  Statewide 23 
Standards for Timber Harvesting and Related Activities in Shoreland Areas, a major 24 
substantive rule of the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Bureau of 25 
Forestry that was filed outside the legislative  rule acceptance period.  26 
 
