 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 837  
H.P. 571  House of Representatives, March 10, 2015  
 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine To Limit the Application of a Citizen Initiative Concerning 
Wildlife Matters to Counties in Which It Is Approved  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative SHAW of  Standish.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: CRAFTS of Lisbon, SHORT of Pittsfield.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0249(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง19 is amended to read:  4 
Section 19.  Effective date of mea sures approved by people; measure 5 
concerning wildlife matters; veto power limited.  Any measure referred to the 6 
people and approved by a majority of the votes given thereon shall, unless a later date is 7 
specified in said measure, take effect and become a l aw in 30 days after the Governor has 8 
made public proclamation of the result of the vote on said measure, which the Governor 9 
shall do within 10 days after the vote thereon has been canvassed and determined; 10 
provided, however, that any such measure which ent ails expenditure in an amount in 11 
excess of available and unappropriated state funds shall remain inoperative until 45 days 12 
after the next convening of the Legislature in regular session, unless the measure provides 13 
for raising new revenues adequate for its  operation.  A measure concerning wildlife 14 
matters that is approved by vote of the people applies only in counties in which a majority 15 
of the votes in those counties approved the measure.   The veto power of the Governor 16 
shall not extend to any measure appr oved by vote of the people, and any measure initiated 17 
by the people and passed by the Legislature without change, if vetoed by the Governor 18 
and if the veto is sustained by the Legislature shall be referred to the people to be voted 19 
on at the next general e lection.  The Legislature may enact measures expressly 20 
conditioned upon the people's ratification by a referendum vote.  21 
; and be it further  22 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 23 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of thi s State shall notify the inhabitants of their 24 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 25 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 26 
following the passage of this resolution , to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 27 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  28 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to provide that a 29 
citizen initiative concerning wildlife matters that is approved by vote o f 30 
the people applies only in counties in which a majority of the votes in 31 
those counties approved the initiative?"  32 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 33 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 34 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 35 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 36 
State in the same manner as votes for members o f the Legislature.  The Governor shall 37 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 38 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 39 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine  on the date of the proclamation; and be it 40 
further  41 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0249(01) -1 
 Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 1 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 2 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  3 
SUMMARY  4 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to provide that a citizen 5 
initiative concerning wildlife matters that is approved by vote of the people applies only 6 
in counties in which a major ity of the votes in those counties approved the initiative.  7 
 
