 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 517  
H.P. 356  House of Representatives, February 24, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Reconcile Conflicts between the Home and Community -
based Waiver Program for the Elderly and Adults with Disabilities 
and the Requirements of the Department of Health and Human 
Services and the Department of Public Safety  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered prin ted. 
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative FARNSWORTH of Portland.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: McCLELLAN of Raymond, PETERSON of Rumford, 
STUCKEY of Portland.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1106(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, this legislation must take effect before the expiration of the 90 -day period 3 
in order for the report of the stakeholder group, to be convened by the Commissioner of 4 
Health and Human Services and the Commissioner of Public Safety, to be timely filed; 5 
and 6 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 7 
the mean ing of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 8 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 9 
therefore, be it  10 
Sec. 1.  Stakeholder group.  Resolved:   That the Commissioner of Health and 11 
Human Services and the Commissioner of Public Safety shall jointly convene a 12 
stakeholder group to determine the most appropriate home -like, community -based 13 
residential settings for residents participating in the home and community -based waiver 14 
program for t he elderly and adults with disabilities that are consonant with ensuring their 15 
safety and maintaining the program's cost -effectiveness.  The stakeholder group must 16 
include representatives of the office of aging and disability services and the division of 17 
licensing and regulatory services within the Department of Health and Human Services, 18 
representatives of the Office of the State Fire Marshal within the Department of Public 19 
Safety and stakeholders in the community, including individuals with disabilities w ho 20 
participate in the home and community -based waiver program, their advocates and their 21 
providers of services.  The stakeholder group shall determine and develop a plan to 22 
address the licensing and regulatory requirements that adversely affect the program 's 23 
cost-effectiveness and that are not necessary for the health and safety of the residents; and 24 
be it further  25 
Sec. 2.  Report. Resolved:   That the stakeholder group under section 1 shall 26 
prepare and submit a report based on its determinations and includin g its plan to the 27 
Commissioner of Health and Human Services and the Commissioner of Public Safety by 28 
May 1, 2015.  The commissioners or their designees shall submit the report and any 29 
legislation necessary to implement the plan to the Joint Standing Commit tee on Health 30 
and Human Services by May 15, 2015.  The joint standing committee may report out a 31 
bill based on the report and plan to the First Regular Session of the 127th Legislature.  32 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, thi s 33 
legislation takes effect when approved.  34 
SUMMARY  35 
This resolve directs the Commissioner of Health and Human Services and the 36 
Commissioner of Public Safety to convene a stakeholder group to resolve ongoing issues 37 
between the home and community -based waiver program for the elderly and adults with 38 
disabilities and the requirements of the Department of Health and Human Services and 39 
the Department of Public Safety.  The stakeholder group is directed to report with a plan 40 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1106(01) -1 
 to resolve the issues to the commissioner s by May 1, 2015.  The commissioners are 1 
directed to submit by May 15, 2015 the report and any legislation necessary to implement 2 
the plan to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, which is 3 
authorized to submit a bill to the First Regul ar Session of the 127th Legislature.  4 
 
