 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 853  
H.P. 587  House of Representatives, March 11, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Allow Secondary Schools To Grant Certificates of 
Academic Proficiency  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative HUBBELL of Bar Harbor.  
Cosponsored by Senator LANGLEY of Hancock and  
Representatives: KORNFIELD of Bangor, MAKER of Calais, Senator: MILLETT of 
Cumberland.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0922(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง4722 -A, sub -ยง5 is enacted to read:  2 
5.  Certificates of content area proficiency.  A school administrative unit may 3 
award a certificate of content area proficiency to a studen t who has demonstrated 4 
proficiency in each content area of the system of learning results established under 5 
section 6209.  A certificate of content area proficiency may be included in the student's 6 
permanent academic transcript, and a student may use a cer tificate of content area 7 
proficiency as an official credential of academic achievement for the purposes of 8 
employment and postsecondary education.  A school administrative unit may report its 9 
issuance of certificates of content area proficiency to the depa rtment, and the department 10 
may collect and aggregate these data as evidence of intermediate progress towards high 11 
school graduation goals.  12 
SUMMARY  13 
This bill authorizes school administrative units to award certificates of content area 14 
proficiency to student s who demonstrate proficiency in each content area of the system of 15 
learning results.  16 
 
