 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 559  
H.P. 383  House of Representatives, February 26, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Notify Parents of a Complaint against a Child Care 
Facility or a Family Child Care Provider  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative GERRISH of Lebanon.  
Cosponsored by Senator COLLINS of York and  
Representatives: HAWKE of Boothbay Harbor, HEAD of Bethel, KINNEY of Limington, 
O'CONNOR of Berwick, PARRY of Arundel, SEAVEY of Kennebunkport, WARD of 
Dedham.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0286(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง8301 -A, sub -ยง4, as amended by PL 2005, c. 530, ยง7, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
4.  Complaints.   Upon receipt of a complaint about a licensed child care facility or a 4 
certified family child care provider and if the department has reasonable cause to suspect 5 
that a violation of the licensure or certification requirements has occurred, the department 6 
may investigate the complaint and enter the premises at any reasonable time for th e 7 
purposes of the investigation.  If the department investigates a complaint filed pursuant to 8 
this subsection, the department must notify in writing, within 5 days of commencement of 9 
the investigation, the parent or legal guardian of every child receiving  care at the licensed 10 
child care facility or from the certified family child care provider that a complaint was 11 
filed, the nature of that complaint and that the complaint is being investigated by the 12 
department.  13 
SUMMARY  14 
This bill requires the Department of  Health and Human Services to notify in writing 15 
the parents and legal guardians of children receiving care at a licensed child care facility 16 
or from a certified family child care provider of a complaint's being lodged against the 17 
facility or provider, of t he department's investigation and of the nature of the complaint.  18 
Notification must be sent within 5 days of the department's commencement of the 19 
investigation.  20 
 
