 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 706  
H.P. 482  House of Representatives, March 5, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Establish a Commission To Study Transportation 
Funding Reform  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Transportation suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative McLEAN of Gorham.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: BRYANT of Windham, GILLWAY of Searsport, GOLDEN 
of Lewiston, HOGAN of Old  Orchard Beach, NUTTING of Oakland, PARRY of Arundel, 
POWERS of Naples, TURNER of Burlington.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0674(01) -1 
 CONCEPT DRAFT  1 
SUMMARY  2 
This resolve is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  3 
This resolve proposes to establish a commission composed of Legislators, 4 
transportation professionals or other parties to study transportation funding reforms that 5 
will promo te equity and sustainability and that will yield the predictable funding levels 6 
needed to support a safe and reliable highway and bridge system that supports economic 7 
opportunity.  8 
Study topics may include, but are not limited to, a review of the funding le vels 9 
necessary to achieve the capital goals set forth in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 23, 10 
section 73, subsection 7, paragraphs A to D including anticipated shortfalls, a 10 -year 11 
capital funding plan to meet those goals, mechanisms to address the erosi on of Highway 12 
Fund receipts and the rising inequity among drivers caused by higher automobile fuel 13 
efficiency, methods to more equitably share the costs of the highway system between 14 
residents and visitors from outside the State, rolling back baseline fuel  tax rates and 15 
adding a wholesale tax component and the use of a portion of sales tax receipts from 16 
transportation -related sales for transportation needs.  17 
The commission shall submit a report of its findings, including suggested legislation, 18 
if any, to the  Joint Standing Committee on Transportation by December 15, 2015, which 19 
in turn may submit a bill for presentation to the Second Regular Session of the 127th 20 
Legislature relating to the subject matter of the report.  21 
 
