 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1362  
S.P. 495  In Senate, April 23, 2015  
 
 
An Act Concerning Membership on the Board of Directors of the 
Lewiston -Auburn Water Pollution Control Authority  
 
(AFTER DEADLINE)  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
205. 
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator BRAKEY of Androscoggin.  
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1999(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  P&SL 1967, c. 92, §14, first ¶, as amended by P&SL 2011, c. 27, §1, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
Sec. 14.  Lewiston -Auburn Water Pollution Control Board.  The authority is 4 
under the mana gement and direction of a board of directors, which is known as the 5 
Lewiston -Auburn Water Pollution Control Board, also referred to as "the board" or "the 6 
board of the authority."  The board consists of 7 members.  The director of the Lewiston 7 
Department o f Public Works, the City Administrator or acting City Administrator of the 8 
City of Lewiston or another employee of the City of Lewiston designated by the City 9 
Administrator, the superintendent and the president of the Auburn Sewerage District and 10 
the City Manager or acting City Manager of the City of Auburn or another employee of 11 
the City of Auburn designated by the City Manager are members of the board by virtue of 12 
their respective offices.  If the president of the Auburn Sewerage District Trustees 13 
decline s to serve or resigns as a member of the board of the authority, the president  14 
Auburn Sewerage District Trustees  shall select another trustee or resident of Auburn  to 15 
serve for the remainder of the term.  Notice of the appointment must be given in writing 16 
by the clerk of the Auburn Sewerage District to the board of the authority.  The Mayor of 17 
Lewiston shall appoint, subject to confirmation of the city council, a qualified voter of the 18 
City of Lewiston to serve for a 2 -year term on the board of the authorit y and thereafter 19 
until a successor takes office.  In the event that either the Lewiston resident so selected or 20 
the appointee of the president of  the Auburn Sewerage District Trustees  ceases to be a 21 
resident of that person's respective city, or dies, becom es incapacitated, or otherwise 22 
ceases to be a member of the Auburn Sewerage District Trustees, or if the president of the 23 
Auburn Sewerage District dies or becomes incapacitated while serving on the board of 24 
the authority, a successor must be elected to ser ve out the remainder of the term by the 25 
Mayor and City Council of Lewiston or the Auburn Sewerage District Trustees, as the 26 
case may be.  27 
SUMMARY  28 
This bill changes the charter of the Lewiston -Auburn Water Pollution Control 29 
Authority in order to allow the Au burn Sewerage District Trustees to appoint a trustee or 30 
resident of Auburn to replace the president of the Auburn Sewerage District Trustees on 31 
the board of directors of the authority should the president decline to serve or resign as a 32 
member of the board .  In current law, the president appoints a successor, who must be a 33 
trustee.  34 
 
