 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 513  
H.P. 352  House of Representatives, February 24, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Clarify the Protections of Court Appointed Special 
Advocate Workers  under State Law  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative HYMANSON of York.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: CHENETTE of Saco, HOBBINS of Saco, WARREN of 
Hallowell.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1708(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  4 MRSA ยง1506, as amended by PL 2001, c. 253, ยง2, is further amended to 2 
read:  3 
ยง1506.  Immunity from civil liability; legal representation; medical and other costs  4 
A person serving as a c ourt appointed special advocate for the Judicial Department or 5 
as Director, deputy director or regional volunteer coordinator of the Court Appointed 6 
Special Advocate Program is immune from any civil liability, as are employees of 7 
governmental entities, und er the Maine Tort Claims Act, Title 14, chapter 741, for acts 8 
performed within the scope of that person's administrative duties, and is entitled to quasi - 9 
judicial immunity for acts performed within the scope of the person's duties as a guardian 10 
ad litem.  11 
The State shall, with the consent of the person serving as a court appointed special 12 
advocate, assume the defense of and shall indemnify the person against a claim that arises 13 
out of an act or omission occurring within the course and scope of that person's duties as 14 
a guardian ad litem.  Except as otherwise provided, in lieu of assuming the defense of a 15 
person, the State may pay the reasonable attorney's fees and court costs of the person.  If 16 
the defense of the person creates a conflict of interest between the State and the person, 17 
the State shall pay the reasonable attorney's fees and court costs of the person.  18 
The State shall reimburse a person serving as a court appointed special advocate for 19 
out-of-pocket medical costs not otherwise reimbursed or for out -of-pocket costs not 20 
otherwise reimbursed for the repair or replacement of personal property, such as broken 21 
eyeglasses, if the injury or damage that led to the costs occurs during the person's 22 
performance of services and within the person's scope of the d uties as a court appointed 23 
special advocate.  24 
SUMMARY  25 
This bill amends the laws applicable to individuals who volunteer to serve as court 26 
appointed special advocates.  Current law provides quasi -judicial immunity for acts 27 
performed within the scope of the v olunteer's duties as a guardian ad litem.  This bill 28 
requires the State, with the consent of the volunteer, to assume the defense of the 29 
volunteer and indemnify the volunteer against a claim that arises out of the volunteer's 30 
work as a court appointed spec ial advocate.  In addition, this bill requires the State to 31 
reimburse out -of-pocket medical costs and costs to repair or replace personal property, 32 
such as broken eyeglasses, if the injury or damage occurs during the person's performance 33 
of services and wi thin the person's scope of the duties of the court appointed special 34 
advocate.  35 
 
