 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 715  
H.P. 491  House of Representatives, March 5, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services 
To Hire Health Inspectors  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative COOPER of Yarmouth.  
Cosponsored by Senator HASKELL of Cumberland and  
Representatives: BROOKS of Lewiston, MORRISON of South Portland.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1077(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services to hire health 1 
inspectors.  Resolved:   That the Department of Health and Human Services shall hire a 2 
sufficient number of state -certified health inspectors to inspect each restaurant in this 3 
State at least o nce a year.  The Department of Health and Human Services shall report to 4 
the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services on the number of health 5 
inspectors hired by the department pursuant to this resolve and the cost of those health 6 
inspectors n o later than December 2, 2015.  The Joint Standing Committee on Health and 7 
Human Services may report out a bill to the Second Regular Session of the 127th 8 
Legislature related to health inspections for restaurants.  9 
SUMMARY  10 
This resolve directs the Departmen t of Health and Human Services to hire a sufficient 11 
number of state -certified health inspectors to inspect each restaurant in this State at least 12 
once a year.  The Department of Health and Human Services is required to report to the 13 
Joint Standing Committe e on Health and Human Services on the number of health 14 
inspectors hired by the department pursuant to this resolve and the cost of those health 15 
inspectors no later than December 2, 2015.  The Joint Standing Committee on Health and 16 
Human Services is authori zed to report out a bill to the Second Regular Session of the 17 
127th Legislature related to health inspections for restaurants.  18 
 
