 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 695  
H.P. 471  House of Representatives, March 5, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Empower Parents in the Education of Their Children by 
Allowing an Opt-out from Standardized Assessments  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative GIDEON of Freeport.  
Cosponsored by Senator LIBBY of Androscoggin and 
Representatives: DAUGHTRY of Brunswick, DUNPHY of Old Town, ESPLING of New 
Gloucester, POWERS of Naples, SAUCIER of Presque Isle, Senators: BRAKEY of 
Androscoggin, GERZOFSKY of Cumberland, MASON of Androscoggin.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1011(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง6214 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง6214.  Opt -out 3 
1.  Parent or guardian's right to opt out.  If a student's parent or guardian submits a 4 
written request to a school administrative un it to excuse the student from a standardized 5 
assessment administered pursuant to this chapter, the school administrative unit shall 6 
comply with the request and excuse the student in conformance with the request.  7 
2.  School administrative unit.  A school ad ministrative unit may not penalize a 8 
student for being excused from an assessment pursuant to subsection 1 and shall:  9 
A.  Inform parents and guardians of the option to excuse a student from an 10 
assessment;  11 
B.  Provide a student excused from an assessment wi th an educational activity while 12 
the assessment is being administered; and  13 
C.  Post the form created by the department under subsection 3, paragraph A on the 14 
school administrative unit's publicly accessible website.  15 
3.  Department.  The department may not penalize a school for excusing a student 16 
from an assessment pursuant to subsection 1 and shall:  17 
A.  Create a form a parent or guardian can use to request that a student be excused 18 
from an assessment and shall post the form on the department's publicly acce ssible 19 
website; and  20 
B.  Notify parents and guardians of the option to excuse a student from an assessment 21 
by posting notice on the department's publicly accessible website.  22 
4.  Teachers.  A teacher may inform a parent or guardian of the option to excuse a 23 
student from an assessment pursuant to subsection 1.  24 
SUMMARY  25 
This bill requires a school administrative unit to excuse a student from standardized 26 
assessments at the written request of the student's parent or guardian and establishes 27 
requirements for schoo l administrative units and the Department of Education related to 28 
excusing a student.  29 
 
