 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 763  
H.P. 516  House of Representatives, March 5, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Change the Budget Approval Process for Alternative 
Organizational Structures  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative TUELL of East Machias.  
Cosponsored by Senator BURNS of Washington and  
Representatives: ALLEY  of Beals, HUBBELL of Bar Harbor, MAKER of Calais, Senator: 
LANGLEY of Hancock.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0708(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA §1461 -B, sub -§3, ¶D, as enacted by PL 2011, c. 485, §2, is 2 
amended to read:  3 
D.  The governing body of an alternative organizational structure, by majority vote, 4 
may authorize a change in the alternative organizational structure budget approval 5 
procedures in paragraph C to require a budget approval by the governing body of the 6 
alternative organizational structure instead of a meeting of the voters of all of the 7 
member entities o f the alternative organizational structure.  The change in procedure 8 
must be authorized by a majority of the total number of voters of all of the member 9 
entities in the alternative organizational structure at the next statewide election  a 10 
special meeting o f the voters authorized by a majority vote of the governing body of 11 
the alternative organizational structure .  The article to be voted upon  on at the special 12 
meeting  must be in substantially the following form:  13 
"Article:  Do you favor changing the (name of  alternative organizational 14 
structure) budget approval procedure from a meeting of the voters to a vote by 15 
the governing body of the alternative organizational structure?  16 
Yes No"  17 
If approved by the voters, the budget approval procedure changes to a majorit y vote 18 
of the governing body of the alternative organizational structure at a budget meeting.  19 
This procedure must remain in effect for at least 3 budget years before the alternative 20 
organizational structure may return to the requirement that a budget be a pproved at a 21 
meeting of the voters of all of the member entities of the alternative organizational 22 
structure.  23 
An article to consider reinstatement of the budget approval procedure in which the 24 
budget is approved at a meeting of the voters of all of the mem ber entities may be 25 
placed on a warrant for referendum vote by either a majority vote of the governing 26 
body of the alternative organizational structure or by a written petition to the 27 
governing body of the alternative organizational structure signed by a n umber of 28 
voters of member entities of the alternative organizational structure equal to at least 29 
10% of the voters who voted in the last gubernatorial election in the member entities 30 
of the alternative organizational structure. The governing body of the al ternative 31 
organizational structure shall place the article on the next scheduled warrant or an 32 
earlier one if determined appropriate by the governing body of the alternative 33 
organizational structure. The article to be voted upon must be in substantially th e 34 
following form:  35 
"Article:  Do you favor changing the (name of alternative organizational 36 
structure) budget approval procedure from a vote by the governing body of the 37 
alternative organizational structure to a meeting of the voters?  38 
Yes No"  39 
If approved by  a majority of the total number of voters of all of the member entities 40 
in the alternative organizational structure, the budget approval procedure changes to a 41 
meeting of the voters of all of the member entities of the alternative organizational 42 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0708(01) -1 
 structure beginning in the next budget year or the following budget year if the 1 
approval occurs less than 90 days before the start of the next budget year. Once 2 
approved by the voters, this procedure may not be changed for at least 3 budget years.  3 
SUMMARY  4 
This bill changes the school budget approval process for alternative organizational 5 
structures.  Current law requires that a change in who approves a budget must be 6 
approved at the next statewide election.  The bill requires that such a determination of 7 
who approves  a budget must be approved at a special meeting authorized by a majority of 8 
the governing body of the alternative organizational structure rather than at the next 9 
statewide election.  10 
 
