 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 783  
H.P. 532  House of Representatives, March 10, 2015  
 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine To Establish a Right to Food  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative HICKMAN of Winthrop.  
Cosponsored by Senator LANGLEY of Hancock and  
Representatives: BLACK of Wilton, BUCKLAND of Farmington, CHIPMAN of Portland, 
DUNPHY of Old Town, PETERSON of Rumford, WARD of Dedham, WARREN of 
Hallowell, Senator: BRAKEY of Androscoggin.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1765(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved:  Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. I, ยง25 is enacted to read:  4 
Section 25.  Right to food.  Every individual  has a natural and unalienable right to 5 
food and to acquire food for that individual's own nourishment and sustenance by 6 
hunting, gathering, foraging, farming, fishing or gardening or by barter, trade or purchase 7 
from sources of that individual's own choos ing, and every individual is fully responsible 8 
for the exercise of this right, which may not be infringed.  9 
; and be it further  10 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 11 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall  notify the inhabitants of their 12 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 13 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 14 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upo n the ratification of the amendment 15 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  16 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to declare that every 17 
individual has a natural and unalienable right to food?"  18 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 19 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 20 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 21 
declared in open war d, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 22 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 23 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 24 
amendm ent, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 25 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 26 
further  27 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 28 
shall pr epare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 29 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  30 
SUMMARY  31 
This resolution proposes a constitutional amendment to provide that every individual 32 
has a natural and unalienable right to food.  33 
 
