 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 258  
S.P. 96  In Senate, February 3, 2015  
 
 
An Act Regarding Posting of Legal Notices and Legal Advertising  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee  on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator DAVIS of Piscataquis.  
Cosponsored by Representative FREDETTE of Newport and  
Senator: MIRAMANT of Knox, Representatives: CRAFTS of Lisbon, HIGGINS of Dover -
Foxcroft, STEARNS of Guilford, WALLACE of Dexter.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0946(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  1 MRSA §601, first ¶, as amended by PL 2013, c. 368, Pt. YYYY, §1, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
To be qualified as a medium for the publication of legal notices, legal advertising and 4 
other matter required by law to be published in a newspaper, a newspaper, unless 5 
otherwise ordered by the court in the proceedings, must be printed in the English 6 
language; must be entered as 2nd class postal matter in the United States mails; and must 7 
have general circulation in the vicinity where the notice is required to be published ; and 8 
may be offered to the public either for free or for a fee .  Any legal notice, legal 9 
advertising or other matter required by law to be published in a newspaper must appear  in 10 
all editions of that newspaper and must appear on any publicly accessible website that the 11 
newspaper maintains in accordance with the requirements of section 603.  12 
SUMMARY  13 
This bill clarifies that legal notices may be placed in newspapers offered to the  public 14 
for free as long as all other requirements for an eligible newspaper are met.  15 
 
