 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 743  
S.P. 273  In Senate, March 5, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Protect the Environment and Assist Municipalities with 
the Recycling, Reuse and Processing of Solid Waste  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator ROSEN of Hancock.  
Cosponsored by Senators: DAVIS of Piscataquis, KATZ of Kennebec, Representatives: 
CAMPBELL of Orrington, DUCHESNE of Hudson, PICCHIOTTI of Fairfield, STANLEY of 
Medway.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1280(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to enact measures to support the State's solid waste management 5 
hierarchy and provide for the ef fective and efficient management of solid waste 6 
throughout the State by encouraging the conversion of municipal solid waste to electrical 7 
energy as a means to minimize the amount of municipal solid waste that is disposed of 8 
and stored in landfills.  9 
The bil l encourages materials management and conversion of municipal solid waste 10 
into electrical energy through the establishment of a net electrical billing process that will 11 
have the effect of reducing energy costs to municipalities who are the primary disposer s 12 
of the waste.  The net electrical billing process will also serve to encourage the reduction, 13 
recycling and effective management of municipal solid waste; preserve many existing 14 
well-paying jobs; enhance the diversification of the State's energy resource  mix; stabilize 15 
the State's energy supply infrastructure; and result in a net environmental benefit to the 16 
State and its citizens.  17 
1.  The bill would establish a waste management net electrical billing program in 18 
accordance with the following provisions.  19 
A.  An eligible participating waste -to-energy facility in the State would be authorized 20 
to develop and offer a contract for the converting of municipal solid waste to 21 
electricity that provides net electrical billing credits based upon the number of 22 
metered kilowatt -hours produced by the incineration of the municipal solid waste that 23 
is originated with each eligible governmental entity customer that enters into a 24 
contract.  No contract would be authorized unless it is certified by the Department of 25 
Environmen tal Protection.  26 
B.  There would be 2 types of metering in the program:  27 
(1)  Generation meters registering the flow of electricity produced through the 28 
incineration of municipal solid waste at each eligible participating waste -to- 29 
energy facility; and  30 
(2)  C onsumption meters registering the consumption of electricity by the eligible 31 
governmental entity customer.  32 
C.  Each eligible participating waste -to-energy facility would annually calculate the 33 
annual electrical crediting ratio by taking the total metered e lectrical power generated 34 
and dividing it by the total number of tons of municipal solid waste processed during 35 
the reporting year.  The annual electrical crediting calculation would be certified and 36 
provided by each eligible participating waste -to-energy facility to the Department of 37 
Environmental Protection and the Public Utilities Commission on or before a date 38 
determined by the Department of Environmental Protection.  39 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1280(01) -1 
 D.  Based on net electrical crediting calculations, the Department of Environmental 1 
Protection, in cooperation with the Public Utilities Commission, would set the annual 2 
ratio at which net electrical billing credits will be determined by each eligible 3 
participating waste -to-energy facility during the next program administrative year.  4 
E.  Eac h eligible participating waste -to-energy facility would provide monthly data 5 
on the number of electrical billing credits each participating eligible governmental 6 
entity customer has earned during the preceding 30 -day period to the electrical utility 7 
that p rovides service to each participating eligible governmental entity customer.  8 
Copies of the report would be provided monthly to the participating eligible 9 
governmental entity customer.  Contracts supporting the net electrical billing process 10 
would be devel oped between eligible participating waste -to-energy facilities and 11 
utilities, as well as the utilities and the eligible governmental entity customers 12 
participating in the program.  A contract would not be used unless it is certified by 13 
the Department of En vironmental Protection and the Public Utilities Commission.  14 
F.  Each electrical utility would apply the reported net electrical billing credits for 15 
each participating eligible governmental entity customer on its next electrical service 16 
billing.  Any credit s not used on a given monthly electrical billing for a participating 17 
eligible governmental entity customer would be carried over and applied to a future 18 
monthly electrical service bill for that customer.  19 
G.  The program would be administered by the Departm ent of Environmental 20 
Protection in consultation with the Public Utilities Commission.  21 
H.  The Board of Environmental Protection would adopt routine technical rules 22 
necessary for the operation and administration of the program.  23 
2.  The bill would establish definitions necessary to implement the waste 24 
management net electrical billing program, including:  25 
A.  Defining "eligible governmental entity customer" as a governmental entity 26 
organized and existing pursuant to the laws of the State that provides an annua l 27 
written certification that it operates an established program of solid waste reduction, 28 
recycling and composting relative to the solid waste it collects before it sends that 29 
solid waste to an eligible participating waste -to-energy facility for processing  and 30 
conversion into electricity;  31 
B.  Defining "eligible participating waste -to-energy facility" as a facility licensed 32 
pursuant to the provisions of the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38 that converts 33 
municipal solid waste to electricity through an inciner ation process that is licensed by 34 
the Department of Environmental Protection, reduces the volume of the municipal 35 
solid waste it processes by at least 80% and the weight by at least 65% and is not a 36 
party to a power purchase agreement;  37 
C.  Defining "munici pal solid waste" as solid waste that has been collected by a 38 
participating eligible governmental entity customer other than waste that the 39 
customer has diverted through reduction, recycling and composting before it is sent to 40 
an eligible participating wast e-to-energy facility for processing and conversion into 41 
electricity; and  42 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR1280(01) -1 
 D.  Defining "net electrical billing credits" as the monetary credits that are applied by 1 
an electrical utility to the monthly bill of an eligible governmental entity customer 2 
that ha s earned those credits by sending municipal solid waste that it has collected to 3 
an eligible participating waste -to-energy facility for conversion into electricity.  4 
 
