 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 317  
H.P. 211  House of Representatives, February 10, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Recognize and Provide for the Right of Access for 
Members of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians To Certain 
Public Lands in Aroostook County for Traditional Uses  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative BEAR of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians.  
Cosponsored by Senator LIBBY of Androscoggin and  
Representatives: AUSTIN of Gray, CAMPBELL of Orrington, DANA of the Passamaquoddy 
Tribe, FARNSWORTH of Portland, MITCHELL of the Penobscot Nation.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0238(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  12 MRSA c. 219 is enacted to read:  2 
CHAPTER 219  3 
ACCESS BY HOULTON BA ND OF MALISEET INDIA NS ON CERTAIN LANDS 4 
FOR WOOD HARVESTING  5 
ยง1771.  Authority to harvest wood in Aroostook County  6 
Notw ithstanding any other provision of law and in accordance with rules adopted by 7 
the Commissioner of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, referred to in this section as 8 
"the commissioner," a member of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians who is a resident  9 
of the State, referred to in this section as "an eligible tribal member," may collect or 10 
harvest wood or wood fiber in Aroostook County on lands owned by the State and on 11 
uninhabited lands in the unorganized and deorganized areas of Aroostook County witho ut 12 
fee or cost for the purpose of using the wood or wood fiber for fuel, personal shelter 13 
construction or traditional woodcraft production.  14 
1.  Rules.  The commissioner shall adopt rules governing the collection and 15 
harvesting of wood or wood fiber, in acc ordance with the following:  16 
A.  The rules must ensure a sufficient amount of wood or wood fiber is available to 17 
satisfy the harvesting needs of eligible tribal members;  18 
B.  Throughout the rule -making process, the commissioner shall seek input from the 19 
Houl ton Band of Maliseet Indians to ensure that the specific harvesting needs of 20 
eligible tribal members are met.  The commissioner shall ensure that:  21 
(1)  An adequate number of birch trees that have a radius of greater than 16 22 
inches and that are otherwise su itable for canoe making are accessible to eligible 23 
tribal members; and  24 
(2)  An adequate number of ash trees suitable for basket making are accessible to 25 
eligible tribal members;  26 
C.  The rules must maximize eligible tribal members' access to the desired woo d, 27 
while also ensuring that any harvesting activities are consistent with the use and 28 
purposes of the land on which the harvesting occurs; and  29 
D.  When adopting rules related to any land held by the Department of Inland 30 
Fisheries and Wildlife, the commissi oner shall consult with the Commissioner of 31 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.  32 
Rules adopted pursuant to this section are major substantive rules as defined in Title 5, 33 
chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. 34 
The commissioner shall review the rules periodically to ensure  compliance with the 35 
requirements of this subsection.  36 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0238(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This bill permits any member of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians who is a 2 
resident of the State to collect or harvest wood or wood fiber in Aroostook County on 3 
lands owned by the State and u ninhabited lands in the unorganized and deorganized areas 4 
of the county for the purpose of using the wood or wood fiber for fuel, personal shelter 5 
construction or traditional woodcraft production.  6 
The bill directs the Commissioner of Agriculture, Conservat ion and Forestry to adopt 7 
rules governing the collection and harvesting of wood or wood fiber by members of the 8 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians.  9 
 
