 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 432  
S.P. 161  In Senate, February 24, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Exempt Fuel Purchased for Off -road Use in Commercial 
Construction and Wood Harvesting Equipment from Sales and Use 
Tax 
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Taxation suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator BURNS of Washington.  
Cosponsored by Representative CAMPBELL of Orrington and  
Senators: DAVIS of Piscataquis, ROSEN of Hancock, WHITTEMORE of Somerset, 
Representatives: GUERIN of Glenburn, MAKER of Calais, MOONEN of Portland, SHORT of 
Pittsfield, TUELL of East Machias.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0759(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  36 MRSA §2013, sub -§§2 and 3, as amended by PL 2011, c. 657, Pt. N, 2 
§2 and affected by §3, are further amended to read:  3 
2.  Refund authorized.   Any person, association of persons, firm or corporation that 4 
purchases electricity, or that purchases or leases depreciable machinery or equipment, for 5 
use in commercial agricultural production, commercial fishing, commercial aquacultural 6 
production or commercial wood harvesting or that purchases  fuel for use in a commercial 7 
fishing vessel or fuel for off -road use in commercial wood harvesting or commercial 8 
construction equipment  must be refunded the amount of sales tax paid upon presenting to 9 
the State Tax Assessor evidence that the purchase is e ligible for refund under this section.  10 
Evidence required by the assessor may include a copy or copies of that portion of the 11 
purchaser's or lessee's most recent filing under the United States Internal Revenue Code 12 
that indicates that the purchaser or lesse e is engaged in commercial agricultural 13 
production, commercial fishing, commercial aquacultural production , commercial 14 
construction  or commercial wood harvesting and that the purchased machinery or 15 
equipment is depreciable for those purposes or would be de preciable for those purposes if 16 
owned by the lessee.  17 
In the event that any piece of machinery or equipment is only partially depreciable under 18 
the United States Internal Revenue Code, any reimbursement of the sales tax must be 19 
prorated accordingly.  In the  event that electricity or fuel for a commercial fishing vessel 20 
or for commercial wood harvesting or commercial construction equipment  is used in 21 
qualifying and nonqualifying activities, any reimbursement of the sales tax must be 22 
prorated accordingly.  23 
Appl ication for refunds must be filed with the assessor within 36 months of the date of 24 
purchase or execution of the lease.  25 
3.  Purchases made free of tax with certificate.   Sales tax need not be paid on the 26 
purchase of electricity, fuel for a commercial fishi ng vessel or for off -road use in 27 
commercial wood harvesting or commercial construction equipment  or a single item of 28 
machinery or equipment if the purchaser has obtained a certificate from the assessor 29 
stating that the purchaser is engaged in commercial ag ricultural production, commercial 30 
fishing, commercial aquacultural production , commercial construction  or commercial 31 
wood harvesting and authorizing the purchaser to purchase electricity, fuel for a 32 
commercial fishing vessel or for off -road use in commerci al wood harvesting or 33 
commercial construction equipment  or depreciable machinery and equipment without 34 
paying Maine sales tax.  The seller is required to obtain a copy of the certificate together 35 
with an affidavit as prescribed by the assessor, to be maint ained in the seller's records, 36 
attesting to the qualification of the purchase for exemption pursuant to this section.  In 37 
order to qualify for this exemption, the electricity, fuel for a commercial fishing vessel or 38 
for off -road use in commercial wood harv esting or commercial construction equipment  or 39 
depreciable machinery or equipment must be used directly in commercial agricultural 40 
production, commercial fishing, commercial aquacultural production , commercial 41 
construction  or commercial wood harvesting.  I n order to qualify for this exemption, the 42 
electricity or fuel for a commercial fishing vessel or for off -road use in commercial wood 43 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0759(01) -1 
 harvesting or commercial construction equipment  must be used in qualifying activities, 1 
including support operations.  2 
SUMMA RY 3 
This bill provides a sales and use tax refund or exemption for fuel purchased for off - 4 
road use in commercial wood harvesting or commercial construction equipment.  5 
 
