 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 796  
H.P. 545  House of Representatives, March 10, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Allow a Municipality To Choose Its Power Provider  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the  Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative PARRY of Arundel.  
Cosponsored by Senator COLLINS of York and  
Representatives: BABBIDGE of Kennebunk, BEAVERS of South Berwick, FARRIN of 
Norridgewock, FOLEY of Wells, O'CONNOR of Berwick, SEAVEY of Kennebunkport, 
Senators: DUTREMBLE of York, WOODSOME of York.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0613(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  35-A MRSA ยง2102, sub -ยง5 is enacted to read:  2 
5.  Vote required.   If 2 transmission and distribution utilities furnish service within a 3 
municipality, that municipality may hold a municipa l referendum to choose one of them 4 
to furnish service to the entire municipality.  5 
A.  The decision to hold a referendum must be made by a majority vote of the 6 
municipal officials.  7 
B.  A referendum to choose a transmission and distribution utility must tak e place 8 
during a gubernatorial or presidential election in November.  9 
C.  A referendum must be called, advertised and conducted according to the law 10 
relating to municipal elections.  The municipal clerk shall prepare the required 11 
ballots, which must contain  substantially the following question:  12 
"Do you favor [insert transmission and distribution utility name] furnishing 13 
service to the entire area of [insert name of municipality]?"  14 
D.  If the voters choose a transmission and distribution utility to furnish se rvice to the 15 
entire municipality, the municipal officers shall petition the commission to approve 16 
that utility to provide service in the areas served by the 2nd transmission and 17 
distribution utility.  The commission shall approve the petition if it finds t he 18 
following:  19 
(1)  The chosen transmission and distribution utility is willing to furnish service 20 
to the entire municipality;  21 
(2)  The chosen transmission and distribution utility has the financial ability to 22 
meet its obligations under this Title; and  23 
(3)  The chosen transmission and distribution utility is willing and able to pay a 24 
fair and reasonable price, as determined by the commission, for the assets of the 25 
2nd utility used to serve the municipality.  26 
If the commission approves the petition, it shall, pursuant to section 1101, order the 27 
2nd utility to sell its assets used to the serve the municipality to the chosen 28 
transmission and distribution utility.  29 
The commission may adopt rules to implement this subsection.  Rules adopted to 30 
implement this subsect ion are routine technical rules pursuant to Title 5, chapter 375, 31 
subchapter 2 -A. 32 
SUMMARY  33 
This bill provides a process to allow a municipality to choose a single transmission 34 
and distribution utility via a referendum when that municipality is served by mor e than 35 
one utility. The decision to hold a referendum must be made by a majority vote of the 36 
municipal officials. A referendum to choose a single utility must occur during a 37 
gubernatorial or presidential election in November and must be called, advertised and 38 
conducted according to the law relating to municipal elections.  39 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0613(01) -1 
 The bill also requires that the Public Utilities Commission approve a petition by the 1 
municipal officials to have only one utility furnishing service in the municipality. The 2 
Public Utilit ies Commission must approve a petition if it finds the chosen utility is willing 3 
to furnish service to the entire municipality, the chosen utility has the financial ability to 4 
meet its obligations under the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 35 -A and the chosen  utility is 5 
willing and able to pay a fair and reasonable price, as determined by the commission, for 6 
the assets of the 2nd utility needed to furnish service to the entire municipality. Upon 7 
approval, the Public Utilities Commission is directed to order th e 2nd utility to sell its 8 
assets used to serve the municipality to the chosen transmission and distribution utility.  9 
This bill also allows the Public Utilities Commission to adopt routine technical rules to 10 
implement these provisions.  11 
 
