 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1012  
S.P. 352  In Senate, March 19, 2015  
 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine To Increase the Length of Terms of Senators  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator VOLK of Cumberland.  
Cosponsored by Senators: ALFOND of Cumberland, BAKER of Sagadahoc, CUSHING of 
Penobscot, CYRWAY of Kennebec, DUTREMBLE of York, GERZOFSKY of Cumberland, 
GRATWICK of Penobscot, KATZ of Kennebec, LANGLEY of Hancock, ROSEN of 
Hancock, WHITTEMORE of Somerset, WOODSOME of York, Representatives: ALLEY of 
Beals, BE AR of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, BLUME of York, BURSTEIN of 
Lincolnville, DAUGHTRY of Brunswick, DEVIN of Newcastle, ESPLING of New 
Gloucester, EVANGELOS of Friendship, GINZLER of Bridgton, HOBBINS of Saco, 
KINNEY of Knox, KORNFIELD of Bangor, M AREAN of Hollis, McCABE of Skowhegan, 
MONAGHAN of Cape Elizabeth, POWERS of Naples, SAUCIER of Presque Isle, STUCKEY 
of Portland, VACHON of Scarborough, WARD of Dedham, WARREN of Hallowell.  
 

Printed on recycled paper   
 
 Page 1 - 127LR16 72(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved:  Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. II, ยง4 is amended to read:  4 
Section 4.  Time of state election; absentee voting.  The election of Senators 5 
and members of the House of  Representatives shall be on the Tuesday following the first 6 
Monday of November biennially forever and the , except as provided in this section.  7 
Beginning with the general election held in 2016, the election of Senators must be held on 8 
the Tuesday following the first Monday of November every 4 years except that, of the 9 
Senators elected in 2016, those Senators who are from odd -numbered districts serve until 10 
2018, and, beginning with the general ele ction held in 2018, the election of those 11 
Senators must be held on the Tuesday following the first Monday of November every 4 12 
years.  The  election of Governor shall be on the Tuesday following the first Monday of 13 
November every 4 years.  The Legislature un der proper enactment shall authorize and 14 
provide for voting by citizens of the State absent therefrom in the Armed Forces of the 15 
United States or of this State and for voting by other citizens absent or physically 16 
incapacitated for reasons deemed sufficien t. 17 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Second, ยง1 is amended to read:  18 
Section 1.  Number of Senators.  The Senate shall consist of an odd number of 19 
Senators, not less than 31 nor more than 35, elected at the same time and for the same 20 
term as Representatives  for 4 -year terms  by the qualified electors of the districts into 21 
which the State shall be from time to time divided.  22 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Second, ยง5 is amended to read:  23 
Section 5.  Determination of Senators elected; procedure for filling 24 
vacancies.  The Se nate shall, on said first Wednesday of December, biennially 25 
determine who is elected by a plurality of votes to be Senator in each district in which an 26 
election was held .  All vacancies in the Senate arising from death, resignation, removal 27 
from the State or like causes, and also vacancies, if any, which may occur because of the 28 
failure of any district to elect by a plurality of votes the Senator to which said district 29 
shall be entitled shall be filled by an immediate election in the unrepresented district.   The 30 
Governor shall issue a proclamation therefor and therein fix the time of such election.  31 
Constitution, Art. X, ยง4 is amended to read:  32 
Section 4.  Amendments to Constitution.  The Legislature, whenever 2/3 of 33 
both Houses shall deem it necessary, may pr opose amendments to this Constitution; and 34 
when any amendments shall be so agreed upon, a resolution shall be passed and sent to 35 
the selectmen of the several towns, and the assessors of the several plantations, 36 
empowering and directing them to notify the i nhabitants of their respective towns and 37 
plantations, in the manner prescribed by law, at the next biennial meetings in the month 38 
of November, or to meet in the manner prescribed by law for calling and holding biennial 39 
meetings of said inhabitants for the election of Senators and  Representatives, on the 40 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1672(01) -1 
 Tuesday following the first Monday of November following the passage of said resolve, 1 
to give in their votes on the question, whether such amendment shall be made; and if it 2 
shall appear that a majority of t he inhabitants voting on the question are in favor of such 3 
amendment, it shall become a part of this Constitution.  4 
; and be it further  5 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 6 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this Sta te shall notify the inhabitants of their 7 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 8 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 9 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 10 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  11 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to change the term of 12 
office for State Senators from 2 years to 4 years, beginning with the 13 
Sena tors from even -numbered districts in 2016 and Senators from odd - 14 
numbered districts in 2018?"  15 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 16 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corr esponding 17 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 18 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 19 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  Th e Governor shall 20 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 21 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 22 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the pr oclamation; and be it 23 
further  24 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 25 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 26 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes  of this referendum.  27 
SUMMARY  28 
This constitutional resolution increases the length of the terms of State Senators from 29 
2 years to 4 years, beginning with the Senators elected in 2016 except that, in order to 30 
stagger the elections so that roughly half of the Senate is up for election every 2 years, 31 
Senators from odd -numbered districts will not begin serving a 4 -year term until the 2018 32 
election.  33 
 
