 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1573  
S.P. 624  In Senate, January 26, 2016  
 
 
An Act To Improve Hospital Governance by Clarifying the 
Requirement for a Certificate of Need for Intracorporation 
Transfers  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
203. 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretar y of the Senate  
 
Presented by President THIBODEAU of Waldo.  
Cosponsored by Representative GILLWAY of Searsport and  
Senator: BRAKEY of Androscoggin, Representatives: BURSTEIN of Lincolnville, GATTINE 
of Westbrook, HERBIG of Belfast, KINNEY of Knox, KRUGER of Thomaston.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2442(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง329, sub -ยง1, as enacted by PL 2001, c. 664, ยง2, is amended to 2 
read:  3 
1.  Transfer of ownership; acquisition by lease, donation, transfer; acquisition of 4 
control.   Any transfer o f ownership or acquisition under lease or comparable 5 
arrangement or through donation or any acquisition of control of a health care facility 6 
under lease, management agreement or comparable arrangement or through donation that 7 
would have required review if the transfer or acquisition had been by purchase, except in 8 
emergencies when that acquisition of control is at the direction of the department or 9 
except if the transfer of ownership or acquisition of control involves only entities or 10 
health care facilities  that are direct or indirect subsidiaries of the same parent corporation, 11 
is between a parent corporation and its direct or indirect subsidiaries or is between entities 12 
or health care facilities all under direct or indirect ownership of or ultimate control  by the 13 
same parent corporation immediately prior to the transfer or acquisition ; 14 
SUMMARY  15 
This bill clarifies that a certificate of need is not required when there is a change in 16 
ownership or acquisition of control in which the entities or health care faci lities involved 17 
are already in the same corporate family, such as when the entities or health care facilities 18 
involved are subsidiaries of the same parent corporation or the transaction involves a 19 
parent corporation and its subsidiary.  20 
 
