 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1602  
H.P. 1093  House of Representatives, February 23, 2016  
 
 
Resolve, To Implement the Recommendations of the Commission To 
Strengthen and Align the Services Provided to Maine's Veterans by 
Establishing a Pilot Project To Inform the Development of a Long -
term Transportation Policy To Assist Veterans  
 
 
 
 
Reported by Representative LUCHINI of Ellsworth for the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs pursuant to Resolve 2015, chapter 48.  
Reference to the Committee on Transportation suggested and ordered printed pursuant to 
Joint Rule 218.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2677(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Veterans transportation pilot project.  Resolved:  That the 1 
Department of Transportation, in conjunction with the Department of Defense, Veterans 2 
and Emergency Management, the Department of Health and Human Services and the 3 
Department of Labor, sh all develop and establish a pilot project in a location served by a 4 
regional transportation network to provide transportation for veterans; and be it further  5 
Sec. 2.  Pilot project purpose and limits.  Resolved:  That the purpose of the 6 
pilot project is to  improve access to essential programs and services for veterans, 7 
including, but not limited to, employment or employment -related services, medical 8 
appointments, mental health services, social services and community activities.  The 9 
Department of Transporta tion, in conjunction with the Department of Defense, Veterans 10 
and Emergency Management, the Department of Health and Human Services and the 11 
Department of Labor, shall conduct an analysis of the pilot project to inform potential 12 
future development of a long -term transportation policy designed to enable the delivery 13 
of cost -effective, sustainable and veteran -focused transportation services to meet the 14 
current and future needs of veterans in the State.  The pilot project must be limited to a 15 
finite number of v eterans determined by the Department of Defense, Veterans and 16 
Emergency Management, Bureau of Maine Veterans' Services and may last no longer 17 
than 2 years; and be it further  18 
Sec. 3.  Participants.  Resolved:  That the Department of Transportation shall 19 
invite the participation of various stakeholders in developing the pilot project, including, 20 
but not limited to, the Public Transit Advisory Council, established in the Maine Revised 21 
Statutes, Title 23, section 4209 -A; and be it further  22 
Sec. 4.  Reports.  Res olved:  That by February 1, 2017 the Department of 23 
Transportation shall submit an initial written report on the progress of the pilot project 24 
and by January 15, 2018 the Department of Transportation shall submit a final written 25 
report, including findings a nd recommendations, to the joint standing committees of the 26 
Legislature having jurisdiction over transportation, health and human services and labor 27 
matters and veterans and legal affairs.  The joint standing committees may each submit a 28 
bill to the Second  Regular Session of the 128th Legislature relating to the subject matter 29 
of the final report.  30 
SUMMARY  31 
This resolve is submitted pursuant to Resolve 2015, chapter 48 by the Joint Standing 32 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs to implement the recommendati ons of the 33 
Commission To Strengthen and Align the Services Provided to Maine's Veterans.  It 34 
requires the Department of Transportation, in conjunction with the Department of 35 
Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management, the Department of Health and Human 36 
Services and the Department of Labor, to develop and establish a pilot project to provide 37 
transportation for veterans in order to improve access to essential programs and services 38 
for veterans and to inform potential future development of a long -term transpor tation 39 
policy designed to enable the delivery of cost -effective, sustainable and veteran -focused 40 
transportation services to meet the current and future needs of veterans in the State.  41 
