 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1620  
S.P. 658  In Senate, March 1, 2016  
 
 
Resolve, Establishing a Stakeholder Group To Examine Methods of 
Protecting the Elderly and Persons with Disabilities from Financial 
Exploitation  
 
 
 
 
Reported by Senator BRAKEY of Androscoggin for the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services pursuant to Joint Order 2016, S.P. 639.  
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Servic es suggested and ordered printed 
pursuant to Joint Rule 218.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2705(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services; financial exploitation 1 
stakeholder group.  Resolved:  That the financial abuse specialist team in the 2 
Department of Health and Human Services' office of aging and disability services, 3 
referred to in this re solve as "the team," shall convene a stakeholder group to review the 4 
State's criminal laws, the Adult Protective Services Act in the Maine Revised Statutes, 5 
Title 22, chapter 958 -A and any other relevant state laws to identify potential statutory 6 
changes t o enable and support criminal prosecution of crimes against the elderly and 7 
persons with disabilities, including the enhancement of penalties for such crimes.  The 8 
team shall invite as participants in the stakeholder group, at a minimum, representatives 9 
from the Department of the Attorney General, including representatives of the health care 10 
crimes unit; the Maine Sheriffs' Association; the Maine Chiefs of Police Association; the 11 
Department of Public Safety, Bureau of State Police; the Maine Prosecutors' As sociation; 12 
the Maine Health Care Association; the long -term care ombudsman program described in 13 
Title 22, section 5107 -A; Maine Legal Services for the Elderly; and the Department of 14 
Professional and Financial Regulation, Office of Securities.  The team sha ll, by January 15 
15, 2017, submit a report to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having 16 
jurisdiction over health and human services matters detailing the stakeholder group's 17 
findings and any recommendations for legislation regarding changes to t he State's laws to 18 
enable and support criminal prosecution of crimes against the elderly and persons with 19 
disabilities.  After reviewing the report, the joint standing committee of the Legislature 20 
having jurisdiction over health and human services matters may report out legislation 21 
relating to the report to the First Regular Session of the 128th Legislature.  22 
SUMMARY  23 
This resolve, which is a recommendation of the Commission To Study Difficult -to- 24 
place Patients, directs the financial abuse specialist team in the Department of Health and 25 
Human Services' office of aging and disability services to convene a stakeholder group to 26 
review the State's criminal laws, the Adult Protective Services Act in the Maine Revised 27 
Statutes, Title 22, chapter 958 -A and any other relevant state laws to identify potential 28 
statutory changes to enable and support criminal prosecution of crimes against the elderly 29 
and persons with disabilities, including the enhancement of penalties for such crimes.  30 
The financial abuse specialist team  is directed to submit, by January 15, 2017, a report to 31 
the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human 32 
services matters detailing the stakeholder group's findings and any recommendations for 33 
legislation regarding  changes to the State's laws to enable and support criminal 34 
prosecution of crimes against the elderly and persons with disabilities and the committee 35 
may report out legislation relating to the report.  36 
 
