 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1186  
H.P. 819  House of Representatives, April 1, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Promote Professional Training and Security in Maine 
Courts  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative FREY of Bangor.  
Cosponsored by Senator KATZ of Kennebec and  
Representatives: DION of Portland, GUERIN of Glenburn, HOBBINS of Saco.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1087(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, this legislation needs to take effect before the expiration of the 90 -day 3 
period in order to provide support for critical court functions such as entry screening and 4 
security as soon as possible; and  5 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 6 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the follo wing legislation as 7 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 8 
therefore,  9 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  10 
Sec. 1.  4 MRSA ยง17 -D is enacted to read:  11 
ยง17-D.  Fees for training, securi ty and other expenses  12 
The State Court Administrator may establish fees on lawyers, guardians ad litem, 13 
interpreters, mediators and other professionals who routinely participate in court 14 
proceedings to cover the costs of training, orientation, continuing ed ucation, background 15 
investigations, entry screening and security provided to these professionals.  The State 16 
Court Administrator also may establish fees on 3rd parties to cover the costs of the use of 17 
court facilities for purposes not related to court func tions by those 3rd parties.  All fees 18 
collected under this section must be deposited in a nonlapsing Other Special Revenue 19 
Funds account to be used for these purposes only.  This account may receive money from 20 
grants, gifts, bequests and donations.  21 
Emergen cy clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 22 
legislation takes effect when approved.  23 
SUMMARY  24 
This bill authorizes the State Court Administrator to establish fees on lawyers, 25 
guardians ad litem, interpreters, mediators and other professi onals who routinely 26 
participate in court proceedings to cover the costs of training, orientation, continuing 27 
education, background investigations, entry screening and security provided to these 28 
professionals.  The State Court Administrator also may establi sh fees on 3rd parties to 29 
cover the costs of the use of court facilities for purposes not related to court functions by 30 
those 3rd parties.  All fees collected must be deposited in a nonlapsing Other Special 31 
Revenue Funds account to be used for these purpos es only.  This account may receive 32 
money from grants, gifts, bequests and donations.  33 
 
