 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1010  
S.P. 350  In Senate, March 19, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Afford Public Employers Flexibility To Achieve 
Efficiency and Quality in Management  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic Development 
suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator CUSHING of Penobscot.  
Cosponsored by Representative SIROCKI of Scarborough and  
Senators: BRAKEY of Androscoggin, MASON of Androscoggin, Representatives: 
BICKFORD of Auburn, WOOD of Sabattus.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1444(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  26 MRSA §965, sub -§1, ¶C, as amended by PL 2009, c. 107, §5, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
C.  To confer and negotiate in good faith with respect to wages, hours, working 4 
conditions and c ontract grievance arbitration, except that by such obligation neither 5 
party may be compelled to agree to a proposal or be required to make a concession 6 
nor may either party negotiate regarding a public employer's use of private 7 
contractors to perform servi ces or the elimination of employment positions resulting 8 
from the use of private contractors  and except that public employers of teachers shall 9 
meet and consult but not negotiate with respect to educational policies; for the 10 
purpose of this paragraph, educ ational policies may not include wages, hours, 11 
working conditions or contract grievance arbitration;  12 
SUMMARY  13 
This bill provides that the use of private contractors by a public employer to perform 14 
services for the public employer is not subject to negotiati on in collective bargaining.  15 
 
