 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1419  
H.P. 966  House of Representatives, May 19, 2015  
 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine To Change the Selection Process for the Treasurer of State  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative STETKIS of Canaan.  (GOVERNOR'S BILL)  
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2023(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. V, Pt. Third, ยง1 is amended to read:  4 
Section 1.  Election.   The Governor shall nominate and, subject to the same 5 
confirmation procedure as required by this Constitution for Justices of the Supreme 6 
Judicial Court, appoint the  Treasurer shall be chosen biennially, at the first session of the 7 
Legislature, by joint ballot of the Se nators, and Representatives in convention . 8 
Constitution, Art. V, Pt. Third, ยง1 -A is amended to read:  9 
Section 1 -A.  Succession to the office of Treasurer.   If a vacancy occurs in the 10 
office of Treasurer of State, the deputy treasurer of state shall act as t he Treasurer of State 11 
until a Treasurer of State is elected by the Legislature during the current session if in 12 
session, or at the next regular or special session  nominated, confirmed and appointed in 13 
accordance with Article V, Part Third, Section 1 . 14 
; and  be it further  15 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 16 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 17 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by l aw for 18 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 19 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 20 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  21 
"Do you f avor amending the Constitution of Maine to change the process 22 
for selection of the Treasurer of State, requiring the Governor to 23 
nominate and appoint the Treasurer of State, subject to confirmation by 24 
the Senate, which is the same selection process used fo r Justices of the 25 
Supreme Judicial Court?"  26 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 27 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 28 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  Th e ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 29 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 30 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 31 
review the returns.  If it appear s that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 32 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 33 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 34 
further  35 
Secretary of State s hall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 36 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 37 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  38 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR2023(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This resolution propo ses to amend the Constitution of Maine to change the selection 2 
process for the Treasurer of State.  Currently, the Treasurer of State is selected by the 3 
Legislature.  This resolution proposes that the Governor nominate and appoint the 4 
Treasurer of State, s ubject to confirmation by the Senate.  5 
 
