 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 307  
S.P. 122  In Senate, February 10, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Amend the Shoreland Zoning Laws To Exempt Certain 
Walkways and Trails from Setback  Requirements  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator DUTREMBLE of York.  
Cosponsored by Representative FECTEAU of Biddeford and 
Senators: PATRICK of Oxford, VALENTINO of York, Representatives: CHENETTE of Saco, 
GROHMAN of Biddeford, HOBBINS of Saco, SEAVEY of Kennebunkport.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1399(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  38 MRSA ยง439 -A, sub -ยง4-C is enacted to read:  2 
4-C.  Exemption from setback requirements for walkways and trails within a 3 
downtown revitalization project.  In accordance with the provisio ns of this subsection, 4 
a municipality may adopt an ordinance that exempts pedestrian walkways and trails from 5 
the water and wetland setback requirements otherwise applicable under this section.  6 
A.  Notwithstanding subsection 4, a municipality may adopt an ordinance pursuant to 7 
this subsection that exempts a pedestrian walkway or trail from the otherwise 8 
applicable water or wetland setbacks if the following requirements are met:  9 
(1)  The walkway or trail is adjacent to a segment of a river that is located wi thin 10 
the boundaries of a downtown revitalization project;  11 
(2)  If cantilevered over a segment of river, the walkway or trail does not extend 12 
over the river more than 10 feet from the normal high -water line;  13 
(3)  If cantilevered over a segment of river, the  walkway or trail is attached to a 14 
structure that was constructed prior to 1971 and is located within a downtown 15 
revitalization project;  16 
(4)  If the walkway or trail is cantilevered over a segment of river, the municipal 17 
planning board has determined there  is no other practical means to construct the 18 
walkway or trail without cantilevering over that segment of the river.  If there are 19 
no other practical means to construct the walkway or trail, approaches to the 20 
cantilevered walkway or trail may also cantilev er off adjacent retaining walls but 21 
no more than is necessary to access the cantilevered walkway or trail; and  22 
(5)  The walkway or trail is publicly owned and maintained as evidenced by a 23 
legally recorded deed or easement.  24 
B.  A downtown revitalization pro ject under this subsection must be defined in a 25 
project plan approved by the legislative body of the municipality and may include the 26 
revitalization of buildings formerly used as mills that do not meet the water or 27 
wetland setback requirements in subsectio n 4. 28 
C.  Except for the water and wetland setback requirements in subsection 4, a 29 
walkway or trail that meets the requirements of this subsection must meet all other 30 
state and local permit requirements and comply with all other applicable rules.  31 
SUMMARY  32 
This bill exempts the construction of a walkway or trail from certain water and 33 
wetland setback requirements if the walkway or trail will be adjacent to a segment of a 34 
river located within a downtown revitalization project and the walkway or trail meets 35 
other specified requirements.  36 
 
