 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 90  
H.P. 73  House of Representatives, January 16, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Ensure Appropriate Personal Needs Allowances for 
Persons Residing in  Long -term Care Facilities  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative STUCKEY of Portland.  
Cosponsored by Senator BURNS of Washington and  
Representatives: FARNSWORTH of Portland, MAKER of Calais, TURNER of Burlington, 
Senators: BREEN of Cumberland, SAVIELLO of Franklin.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0430(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, the people of the State need and deserve a variety of well -planned and 3 
financially stable long-term care services in home -based and community -based care 4 
settings and in nursing facilities in their communities; and  5 
Whereas, recent closures of nursing facilities, in particular in rural and underserved 6 
areas of the State, have had a significant im pact on Maine families and communities; and  7 
Whereas, in order to provide high -quality care to elderly and disabled persons and 8 
to maintain access to services across the State, the Legislature must take immediate action 9 
to continue a thoughtful and thorough  planning process; and  10 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 11 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 12 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, hea lth and safety; now, 13 
therefore, be it  14 
Sec. 1.  Personal needs allowance for residents of nursing facilities.  15 
Resolved:  That, by October 1, 2015, the Department of Health and Human Services 16 
shall amend the rules for the MaineCare program to increase the p ersonal needs 17 
allowance for persons residing in nursing facilities.  The rules must provide for an 18 
increase in the personal needs allowance from $40 per month to $50 per month.  Rules 19 
adopted pursuant to this section are routine technical rules as defined in the Maine 20 
Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A; and be it further  21 
Sec. 2.  Personal needs allowance for residents of residential care 22 
facilities.  Resolved:  That, by October 1, 2015, the Department of Health and Human 23 
Services shall a mend the rules for the MaineCare program to increase the personal needs 24 
allowance for persons residing in residential care facilities.  The rules must provide for an 25 
increase in the personal needs allowance from $70 per month to $90 per month.  Rules 26 
adopt ed pursuant to this section are routine technical rules as defined in the Maine 27 
Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. 28 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 29 
legislation takes effect when approved.  30 
SUMMARY  31 
This resolve directs the Department of Health and Human Services to amend its rules 32 
to provide for increases in the personal needs allowances of residents in nursing facilities 33 
and residential care facilities.  The rules are designated as routine technical  rules.  34 
 
