 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 321  
H.P. 215  House of Representatives, February 10, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Protect Consumers against Residential Real Estate Title 
Defects  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative POULIOT of Augusta.  
Cosponsored by Senator HASKELL of Cumberland and  
Representatives: BECK of Waterville, FREDETTE of Newport, HOBBINS of Saco, 
MOONEN of Portland, WARREN of Hallowell, WINSOR of Norway, Senators: BURNS of 
Washington, WHITTEMORE of Somerset.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1156(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  33 MRSA ยง508 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง508.  Nominee mortgagees  3 
1.  Authority presumed.  A person or entity that is appointed the nominee 4 
mortgagee by the person or entity that holds legal t itle to a mortgage is presumed to have 5 
the authority to execute an assignment, partial release, discharge or other instrument that 6 
affects the title to the mortgaged property unless the person or entity making the 7 
appointment:  8 
A.  Explicitly negates such a uthority within the instrument in which the appointment 9 
is made; or  10 
B.  Executes a separate instrument that explicitly negates such authority and that is 11 
recorded in the registry of deeds within the county or district in which the mortgaged 12 
property is loc ated.  13 
2.  Instrument valid.  An assignment, partial release, discharge or other instrument 14 
affecting the title to mortgaged property or any interest in the property that is otherwise 15 
valid and that is executed by a nominee mortgagee with authority as provi ded in 16 
subsection 1 is valid even if the assignment, partial release, discharge or other instrument 17 
does not state the authority of the nominee mortgagee to take the action.  18 
3.  Statement not a limitation of authority.  A statement in an instrument describ ed 19 
in this section to the effect that, for purposes of recording, the nominee mortgagee is the 20 
mortgagee of record, or any statement of similar meaning, may not be considered to be a 21 
limitation upon the authority of the nominee mortgagee.  22 
SUMMARY  23 
The purpo se of this bill is to protect consumers against defects in titles to real estate 24 
in which Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc., appears in the chain of title.  25 
Under current Maine law, according to Bank of America v. Greenleaf , 2014 ME 89, 102 26 
A.3d 774, any action by Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc., other than the 27 
recording of a mortgage, is invalid and of no force or effect.  A large proportion of Maine 28 
residential real estate transactions include Mortgage Electronic Registration S ystems, 29 
Inc., in the chain of title, putting consumers at risk of a defect in the title to their property.  30 
This bill amends Maine law to eliminate that risk by establishing the presumption that 31 
a nominee mortgagee has the authority to assign or otherwise a ffect the mortgage even if 32 
the instrument assigning authority to the nominee mortgagee does not specifically so 33 
state.  The authority is not presumed if the instrument explicitly negates the authority or if 34 
a separate written instrument negates the authori ty and that instrument is recorded in the 35 
appropriate registry of deeds.  36 
 
