 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 344  
S.P. 127  In Senate, February 10, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Amend the Laws Governing the Confidentiality of 
Library Records  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by President THIBODEAU of Waldo.  
Cosponsored by Representative WELSH of Rockport and  
Senators: BURNS of Washington, CUSHING of Penobscot, GRATWICK of Penobscot, 
KATZ of Kennebec, LANGLEY of Hancock, LIBBY of Androscoggin, SAVIELLO of 
Franklin, Representatives: JORGENSEN of Portland, MAKER of Calais, NADEAU of 
Winslow, POWERS of Naples.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0887(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  27 MRSA §121, as amended by PL 2013, c. 82, §12, is repealed and the 2 
following enacted in its place:  3 
§121.  Confidentiality of library records  4 
1.  Confidentiality.   A record maintained by any public library, as defined in section 5 
110, subsection 10, the Maine State Library, the Law and Legislative Reference Library 6 
or a library of the University of Maine System, the Maine Community College System or 7 
the Maine Maritime Academy is confiden tial if the record contains:  8 
A.  A library patron’s personally identifying information, including but not limited to 9 
the library patron's name, address, phone number and e -mail address; or  10 
B.  Information that identifies a library patron as having requeste d, obtained or used 11 
books or other materials in any medium at the library or provided by the library.  12 
2.  Permitted release.   A record designated confidential by subsection 1 may be 13 
released only with the express written permission of the library patron in volved; to 14 
officers, employees, volunteers and agents of the library to the extent necessary for 15 
library administrative purposes; or as the result of a court order.  16 
3.  Public record.   A library may publish and release as a public record aggregated 17 
and sta tistical information pertaining to library patronage, circulation activities and use of 18 
any service or consultation the library provides as long as the release of the information 19 
does not jeopardize the confidentiality of a library patron's personally iden tifying 20 
information.  21 
SUMMARY  22 
Current law designates as confidential library records that identify the books or 23 
materials a patron uses at a public library, the Maine State Library, the Law and 24 
Legislative Reference Library and the libraries of the Universi ty of Maine System, the 25 
Maine Community College System and the Maine Maritime Academy.  This bill retains 26 
that designation of confidentiality and also designates as confidential personally 27 
identifying information about the library patron.  The bill also re tains the provision that 28 
the confidential information may be released with the written permission of the library 29 
patron or pursuant to a court order but adds language permitting the confidential 30 
information to be released to officers, employees, volunteers  and agents of the library for 31 
administrative purposes.  The bill clarifies that a library may publish and release as a 32 
public record aggregated and statistical information about library use if the confidentiality 33 
of a library patron's personally identifyi ng information is not jeopardized.  34 
 
