 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1009  
S.P. 349  In Senate, March 19, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Benefit the Education of Denturism Students  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Labor,  Commerce, Research and Economic Development 
suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator CUSHING of Penobscot.  
Cosponsored by Representative WARD of Dedham and  
Senators: LANGLEY of Hancock, MASON of Androscoggin, ROSEN of Hancock, VOLK of 
Cumberland, Representatives: AUSTIN of Gray, CAMPBELL of Newfield, LOCKMAN of 
Amherst, STETKIS of Canaan.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1519(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  32 MRSA ยง1100 -E-2 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง1100 -E-2.  Permits for internship  3 
The board has the authority to issue a permit to a bona fide denturist student of a 4 
school or university accepta ble to the board, after the denturist student has completed 5 
satisfactory training, to perform limited denturist services in private practice or 6 
institutional and public health service programs within the State commensurate with the 7 
student's level of educa tion and training and conducted under the supervision of a 8 
licensed dentist or denturist or instructional facility acceptable to the board.  Prior to the 9 
issuance of a permit under this paragraph, the board and the student's school or university 10 
shall dete rmine the scope of denturist services that the student may perform, including the 11 
assigned number of internship hours and the appropriate supervision based upon the 12 
denturist services allowed.  A permit issued under this paragraph may expire either after 13 
the completion of an assigned number of internship hours or after one year.  A permit 14 
issued under this paragraph may be renewed either under the permit's initial terms or 15 
upon new terms as the board determines appropriate.  For purposes of this paragraph, 16 
"denturist services" means services provided through the practice of denturism.  17 
SUMMARY  18 
This bill allows the Board of Dental Examiners to issue a permit to a denturist student 19 
to perform limited denturist services similar to the board's current authority t o issue a 20 
permit to a dental student.  21 
 
