 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1414  
H.P. 961  House of Representatives, May 14, 2015  
 
 
An Act Regarding the Disposition of Certain Funds Received by the 
Attorney General Pursuant to a Court Order or Settlement  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative FREDETTE of Newport.  (GOVERNOR'S BILL)  
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1932(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, the people of this State acting through their elected representatives in the 3 
Legislature s hould have the authority to decide how to spend money that accrues to the 4 
State due to certain court orders and settlements; and  5 
Whereas, the provisions in this legislation for the Attorney General to apply for 6 
reimbursement of costs incurred by the Attorn ey General in connection with these court 7 
orders and settlements must take effect as soon as possible; and  8 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 9 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the followi ng legislation as 10 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 11 
therefore,  12 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  13 
Sec. 1.  5 MRSA ยง203 -A, as enacted by PL 1991, c. 532, ยง1 and affected by ยง2,  is 14 
amended to read:  15 
ยง203 -A.  Accounts established due to court orders or other settlements  16 
Unless specifically ordered by the court to do otherwise, the Attorney General shall 17 
work with the Treasurer of State to deposit any revenue or money received as a result of 18 
any court order, court settlement or other agreement into an other special revenue account 19 
of the State and all interest must be credited to the General Fund.  When, pursuant to a 20 
court order or settlement, the Attorney General receives money on behalf of the State  that 21 
is specifically designated for antitrust enforcement or for enforcement of the Maine 22 
Unfair Trade Practices Act, the Attorney General is authorized to expend such funds for 23 
expert witness fees, copying of documents, transcripts and  any other purpose in 24 
accordance with the court order  may make a request to the State Budget Officer for 25 
reimbursement for costs incurred by the Attorney General in connection with that court 26 
order or settlement.  These costs are strictly limited to expend itures for expert witness 27 
fees, copying of documents and transcripts .  Any interest on such funds, unless otherwise 28 
ordered by the court, must be credited to the General Fund.  The Attorney General shall 29 
provide an accounting of such funds to the Legislatu re in a form and as determined by the 30 
Office of Fiscal and Program Review.  31 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 32 
legislation takes effect when approved.  33 
SUMMARY  34 
This bill provides that when, pursuant to a court order or se ttlement, the Attorney 35 
General receives money on behalf of the State that is specifically designated for antitrust 36 
enforcement or for enforcement of the Maine Unfair Trade Practices Act, the Attorney 37 
General may make a request to the State Budget Officer f or reimbursement for costs 38 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1932(01) -1 
 incurred by the Attorney General in connection with that court order or settlement.  These 1 
costs are strictly limited to expenditures for expert witness fees, copying of documents 2 
and transcripts.  Current law provides that when,  pursuant to a court order or settlement, 3 
the Attorney General receives money that is specifically designated for antitrust 4 
enforcement or for enforcement of the Maine Unfair Trade Practices Act, the Attorney 5 
General is authorized to expend these funds for  expert witness fees, copying of 6 
documents and transcripts and any other purpose in accordance with the court order.  7 
 
