 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 578  
H.P. 402  House of Representatives, February 26, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Redefine the Method by Which the Department of 
Education Determines  Cost Sharing for School Construction and 
Renovation Projects for Municipalities within a School 
Administrative Unit  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative GINZLER of Bridgton.  
Cosponsored by Senator HAMPER of Oxford and  
Representatives: GUERIN of Glenburn, MAKER of Calais.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0875(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to amend the current education statutes pertaining to the methods 5 
by which the Department of Edu cation determines how the costs for school construction 6 
and renovation projects are shared among the member municipalities of a school 7 
administrative unit.  The bill would implement:  8 
1.  An alternative method for determining the sharing of costs for a scho ol 9 
construction or renovation project among member municipalities of a school 10 
administrative unit comparable to the methods established under the Maine Revised 11 
Statutes, Title 20 -A, section 1481 -A, subsection 3; and  12 
2.  An amendment to the provisions of th e Essential Programs and Services Funding 13 
Act regarding the sharing of debt service costs related to school construction and 14 
renovation projects in order to more equitably distribute the local share of school 15 
construction and renovation project costs among  the member municipalities of a school 16 
administrative unit by including the number of resident pupils in each municipality and 17 
the property fiscal capacity of each municipality as the basis for sharing the debt service 18 
costs related to school construction and renovation projects.  19 
 
