 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1257  
H.P. 857  House of Representatives, April 7, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Make Home Heat Pumps Affordable  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative FREDETTE of Newport.  
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1574(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, efficient electric heat pumps have proven to be a cost -effective and highly 3 
efficient meth od for heating homes; and  4 
Whereas, the initial cost of installing electric heat pumps can be a barrier to 5 
consumer adoption of this important technology and this barrier can be reduced by 6 
offering special discounted electric rates or other assistance to co nsumers who install and 7 
operate heat pumps in their primary residences; and  8 
Whereas, use of efficient electric heat pumps results in a more efficient use of the 9 
transmission and distribution system; and  10 
Whereas, waiting until the end of the 90 -day period i s not enough time to carry out 11 
the purposes of this resolve before the next heating season; and  12 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 13 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislati on as 14 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 15 
therefore, be it  16 
Sec. 1.  Public Utilities Commission may authorize heat pump assistance 17 
program.  Resolved:   That, upon application and in an adjudicatory procee ding, the 18 
Public Utilities Commission may authorize a transmission and distribution utility to 19 
purchase heat pumps for consumer use and offer special discounted electric rates or other 20 
assistance to make heat pumps more accessible to residents of the State . 21 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 22 
legislation takes effect when approved.  23 
SUMMARY  24 
This resolve allows the Public Utilities Commission to authorize a transmission and 25 
distribution utility to purchase heat pumps for co nsumer use and offer special discounted 26 
electric rates or other assistance to make heat pumps more accessible to residents of the 27 
State.  28 
 
