 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1420  
S.P. 531  In Senate, May 19, 2015  
 
 
An Act Regarding Participation by Private School Students in 
Extracurricular and Interscholastic  Activities at Public Schools  
 
(AFTER DEADLINE)  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
205. 
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator MIRAMANT of Knox.  
Cosponsored by Representative KRUGER of Thomaston and  
Senators: LANGLEY of Hancock, LIBBY of Androscoggin, MILLETT of Cumberland, 
PATRICK of Oxford, Representatives: KORN FIELD of Bangor, TIPPING -SPITZ of Orono.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1955(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, this legislation affects the eligibility of certain students for sports teams 3 
and other ex tracurricular and interscholastic activities; and  4 
Whereas, this 90 -day period may not expire until after schools set their calendar for 5 
those activities for the fall; and  6 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 7 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 8 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 9 
therefore,  10 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  11 
Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA §5021 -A, sub -§2, as amended by PL 2013, c. 428, §§4 and 12 
5, is further amended to read:  13 
2.  Participation in extracurricular and interscholastic activities.  A student 14 
enrolled in an equivalent instruction program in a private school that is recognized  or 15 
approved as an equivalent instruction alternative under section 5001 -A, subsection 3, 16 
paragraph A, subparagraph (1), division (a) or (b)  is eligible to try out for extracurricular 17 
and interscholastic activities sponsored by the local school unit as lon g as the following 18 
requirements are satisfied.  19 
A.  The student applies for and receives written approval from the principal of the 20 
school or the principal's designee, who may withhold such approval only if the school 21 
does not have the capacity to provide t he student with the opportunity to participate 22 
in the extracurricular or interscholastic activity.  If approval is withheld, the principal 23 
or the principal's designee must provide a written explanation to the student or the 24 
student's parent or guardian sta ting the reason or reasons for the decision to withhold 25 
approval.  26 
B.  The student agrees to abide by rules of participation equivalent to those applicable 27 
to regularly enrolled students participating in the activity and provides evidence that 28 
the rules of participation are being met.  29 
C.  The student complies with the same physical examination, immunization, 30 
insurance, age and semester eligibility requirements as regularly enrolled students 31 
participating in the activity.  All required documentation must be m ade available 32 
upon request by the local school unit.  33 
D.  The student meets academic standards equivalent to those established for 34 
regularly enrolled students participating in the activity and provides evidence that the 35 
academic standards are being met.  36 
E.  The student abides by the same transportation policy as regularly enrolled 37 
students participating in the activity.  38 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1955(01) -1 
 F.  The private school the student attends does not provide the same extracurricular or 1 
interscholastic activity.  2 
Emergency clause.  In view  of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 3 
legislation takes effect when approved.  4 
SUMMARY  5 
Current law allows a student at a private school that is recognized by the Department 6 
of Education as providing an equivalent instruction alternative to try out f or 7 
extracurricular or interscholastic activities at a public school if the private school the 8 
student attends does not offer the same extracurricular or interscholastic activities, the 9 
principal of the public school approves and the student agrees to abide  by other 10 
conditions.  11 
This bill extends the same privilege to a student enrolled in an equivalent instruction 12 
program at a private school that is approved for attendance purposes by the Department 13 
of Education.  Private schools that are approved by the dep artment must meet standards 14 
for hygiene, health and safety and either be accredited by the New England Association 15 
of Schools and Colleges or meet applicable requirements of Maine law pertaining to 16 
private schools and the department's requirements for appr oval for attendance purposes.  17 
 
