 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 902  
H.P. 621  House of Representatives, March 12, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Establish the Commission To Study Parking for Persons 
with Physical Disabilities  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Transportation suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative CRAFTS of Lisbon.  
Cosponsored by Senator MASON of Androscoggin and  
Representatives: AUSTIN of Gray, BLACK of Wilton, LONG of Sherman, MALABY of 
Hancock, PETERSON of Rumford, POULIOT of Augusta, REED of Carmel, TIMBERLAKE 
of Turner.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1163(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Commission established.  Resolved:  That the Commission To Study 1 
Parking for Persons with Physical Disabilities, referred to in this resolve as "the 2 
commission," is established; and be it further  3 
Sec. 2.  Commission membership.  Resolved:  That th e commission consists of 4 
9 members appointed as follows:  5 
1.  Two members of the Senate with expertise in the subject matter of the study 6 
appointed by the President of the Senate;  7 
2.  Three members of the House of Representatives with expertise in the subje ct 8 
matter of the study appointed by the Speaker of the House;  9 
3.  One member of the Maine Statewide Independent Living Council appointed by 10 
the President of the Senate;  11 
4.  One member who has knowledge and expertise in the federal Americans with 12 
Disabilit ies Act appointed by the Speaker of the House;  13 
5.  One representative of the Department of the Secretary of State, Bureau of Motor 14 
Vehicles appointed by the Governor.  The Governor shall consider any recommendations 15 
submitted within 20 days of the effectiv e date of this section by the Secretary of State 16 
regarding persons who have expertise in the subject matter of the study; and  17 
6.  One representative of the Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency 18 
Management, Bureau of Maine Veterans' Services appoint ed by the Governor.  The 19 
Governor shall consider any recommendations submitted within 20 days of the effective 20 
date of this section by the Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management 21 
regarding persons who have expertise  in the subject matter of the study; and be it further  22 
Sec. 3.  Chairs.  Resolved:  That the first -named Senate member is the Senate 23 
chair and the first -named House of Representatives member is the House chair of the 24 
commission; and be it further  25 
Sec. 4.  Appointments; convening  of commission.  Resolved:  That all 26 
appointments must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 27 
resolve.  The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 28 
Council once all appointments have been co mpleted.  After appointment of all members, 29 
the chairs shall call and convene the first meeting of the commission.  If 30 days or more 30 
after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been 31 
made, the chairs may request au thority and the Legislative Council may grant authority 32 
for the commission to meet and conduct its business; and be it further  33 
Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the commission shall study parking issues that 34 
exist for persons with physical disabilities in this State and make recommendations for 35 
changes to current law to improve accessibility and convenience.  The commission shall, 36 
at a minimum, review the laws and rules in other states that may work successfully in this 37 
State concerning on -street and off -street parking for persons with physical disabilities.  38 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1163(01) -1 
 The commission shall also consult with businesses and experts in traffic management and 1 
parking design; and be it further  2 
Sec. 6.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:  That the Legislative Council shall provid e 3 
necessary staffing services to the commission; and be it further  4 
Sec. 7.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than December 2, 2015, the commission 5 
shall submit a report that includes its findings and recommendations, including suggested 6 
legislation, for presentation to the Second Regular Session of the 127th Legislature.  7 
SUMMARY  8 
This resolve establishes the Commission To Study Parking for Persons with Physical 9 
Disabilities.  10 
 
