 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1193  
S.P. 420  In Senate, April 1, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Encourage Good Nutrition and Healthy Choices in the 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance  Program  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator JOHNSON of Lincoln.  
Cosponsored by Representative GATTINE of Westbrook and  
Senators: BREEN of Cumberland, DIAMOND of Cumberland, DUTREMBLE of York, 
HASKELL of Cumberland, KATZ of Kennebec, LIBBY of Androscoggin, MIRAMANT of 
Knox, VALENTINO of York.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0874(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง3109 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง3109.  Healthy Local Foods Initiative Program  3 
1.  Healthy Local Foods Initiative Program.   The Healthy Local Foods Initiative 4 
Program, referred to in this section as "the program," is established within the department 5 
to engage in efforts to seek out and support, sustain or assist eligible applicants in 6 
submitting proposals for federal grants or funding to establish pilot projects designed to 7 
improve th e diets of low -income persons enrolled in a statewide food supplement 8 
program administered as part of the federal supplemental nutrition assistance program 9 
under section 3104, referred to in this section as "project participants." For the purpose of 10 
this s ection, "eligible applicant" means an applicant that meets the eligibility standards of 11 
the United States Department of Agriculture for accepting federal grants and funding 12 
through the federal supplemental nutrition assistance program under section 3104.  13 
2.  Working group.   The department shall convene a working group of 9 members, 14 
referred to in this section as "the working group," to assist the department in carrying out 15 
the purposes of the program. The commissioner shall appoint the members of the workin g 16 
group, which must include:  17 
A.  A representative of the department;  18 
B.  A representative of Healthy Maine Partnerships;  19 
C.  A representative from a local food access network administered by a statewide 20 
land trust organization that works to protect farmlan d; 21 
D.  A food retailer;  22 
E.  A person with expertise in nutrition policy;  23 
F.  A person with an advanced degree and expertise in food policy;  24 
G.  A person engaged in the production and sale of local fruits or vegetables;  25 
H.  An anti -hunger advocate; and  26 
I.  A participant in the program.  27 
The department's staff shall support the working group. The working group shall make 28 
recommendations to the department regarding the best practices and criteria for 29 
evaluating proposals and ensuring qualification for federal g rants or funding for pilot 30 
projects under subsection 3 and to assist the department in identifying one or more 31 
applicants that the working group determines are eligible applicants and are qualified to 32 
conduct a pilot project.  33 
3.  Pilot project criteria.   Evaluation criteria developed by the working group must 34 
provide for objective assessment of the extent to which a proposed pilot project by an 35 
eligible applicant under subsection 1 will improve the diets of project participants and 36 
households, reduce obesit y and support farmers and businesses in the State by increasing 37 
purchases of fruits and vegetables by project participants and promoting effective and 38 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0874(01) -1 
 efficient use of program benefits.  Criteria must provide a basis for weighing the extent to 1 
which a pilo t project explores ways to make locally produced fruits and vegetables 2 
without added sugars, fats or oils more affordable at the point of purchase and provide 3 
incentives to enable households of participants enrolled in a project to obtain additional 4 
fruits  and vegetables when purchasing such produce at a local retail store or farmers' 5 
market or through a community supported agriculture or fisheries enterprise. Any 6 
application seeking department support must ensure that a project participant be informed 7 
of any educational services provided by the statewide food supplement program under 8 
section 3104 available in the participant's area promoting healthy food choices and related 9 
practical food preparation techniques for a person living within a limited budget.  10 
4.  Department support; assistance.   The department shall consider working group 11 
criteria and recommendations in determining which pilot project applications to support 12 
for federal approval. The department may support more than one proposal for a pilot 13 
project under subsection 3 to implement the program. Upon determining proposals 14 
receiving support of the department, the department shall assist an eligible applicant 15 
receiving support in obtaining funding from the United States Department of Agriculture, 16 
Food  Insecurity Nutrition Incentive Grant Program or another appropriate funding source 17 
and contribute, within the limits of available funds, the matching funds required of the 18 
eligible applicant for obtaining funding pursuant to subsection 5. The department m ay 19 
require that an eligible applicant receiving a grant match a contribution provided by the 20 
department to the extent the applicant is able.  21 
5.  Healthy Local Foods Incentive Fund.   The Healthy Local Foods Incentive Fund, 22 
referred to in this subsection as "the fund," is a revolving, nonlapsing fund administered 23 
by the department to carry out the purposes of the program.  The fund includes:  24 
A.  At least 50% of any funds received in any fiscal year from the United States 25 
Department of Agriculture as a bonus p ayment for the performance of the department 26 
in administering the statewide food supplement program under section 3104 that are 27 
allowed by federal law to be used for the purposes of this section;  28 
B.  At least 50% of any funds received in any fiscal year fr om the United States 29 
Department of Agriculture as a bonus payment for the performance of the department 30 
in administering the statewide food supplement program under section 3104 that are 31 
not allowed by federal law to be used for the purposes of this sectio n to the extent 32 
that the funds may be substituted for General Fund expenditures for the statewide 33 
food supplement program with the effect of making the General Fund funds 34 
available;  35 
C.  Notwithstanding section 3104, subsection 11, 50% of the State's portio n of funds 36 
recouped from the collection of overpayment claims received in fiscal year 2014 37 
under section 3104, subsection 11; and  38 
D.  Funds received from a hospital organization in the State pursuant to the 39 
implementation strategy to meet the community's h ealth needs identified through a 40 
community health needs assessment under Section 501(r) of the United States 41 
Internal Revenue Code of 1985, as amended.  42 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR0874(01) -1 
 6.  Promotion by department.   The department shall inform hospital organizations 1 
in the State of the opp ortunity to meet federal requirements pursuant to subsection 5, 2 
paragraph D by providing funds to the fund and promote this opportunity.  3 
7.  Rules.   The department may adopt routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, 4 
chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A to ensu re compliance with federal and state requirements 5 
associated with any grant funds, to ensure fairness and accountability in the award and 6 
expenditure of a grant under this section and to carry out the purposes of the program.  7 
SUMMARY  8 
This bill creates the Healthy Local Foods Initiative Program to engage in efforts to 9 
seek out and support, sustain or assist eligible applicants in submitting proposals for 10 
federal grants or funding for pilot projects to improve the diets of low -income persons 11 
enrolled in a sta tewide food supplement program administered as part of the federal 12 
supplemental nutrition assistance program.  The bill directs the Department of Health and 13 
Human Services to create a working group of various interested parties to make 14 
recommendations conc erning best practices and criteria for evaluation of proposals for 15 
federal grants or funding to conduct pilot projects designed to provide incentives to 16 
participants of the federal supplemental nutrition assistance program to improve their 17 
diets, reduce ob esity and support farmers and businesses in the State.  The bill directs the 18 
department to provide the matching funds required of a chosen applicant in order to 19 
receive a federal grant to the extent funds are available in the Healthy Local Foods 20 
Incentive Fund.  Contributions to the fund are derived from a portion of bonus payments 21 
received from the United States Department of Agriculture for the performance of the 22 
Department of Health and Human Services in administering the statewide food 23 
supplement progra m under the federal supplemental nutrition assistance program, from 24 
the State's portion of funds recouped from the collection of overpayment claims from 25 
program recipients and from other sources. Contributions to the fund may also be 26 
received from hospital  organizations fulfilling United States Internal Revenue Service 27 
requirements to meet community health needs.  28 
 
