 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 111  
H.P. 83  House of Representatives, January 22, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Ensure That Defendants Receive Proper Notification in 
Foreclosure Proceedings  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative DAUGHTRY of Brunswick.  
Cosponsored by Senator MILLETT of Cumberland and  
Representatives: DeCHANT of Bath, EVANGELOS of Friendship, JORGENSEN of Portland, 
KRUGER of Thomaston, MOONEN of Portland, TUCKER of Brunswick.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0306(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  14 MRSA §6111, sub -§3, as amended by PL 1997, c. 579, §2, is further 2 
amended to read:  3 
3.  Notice procedure.   A mortgagee shall provide notice to a mortgagor and any 4 
cosigner under this section to the last known addresses of the mortgagor and cosigner by:  5 
A.  Certified mail, return receipt requested.  For the purposes of this paragraph, the 6 
time when the notice is given to the mortgagor or cosigner is the date the mortgagor 7 
or cosigner si gns the receipt or, if the notice is undeliverable, the date the post office 8 
last attempts to deliver it ; or. 9 
B.  Ordinary first class mail, postage prepaid.  For the purposes of this paragraph, the 10 
time when the notice is given to the mortgagor or cosigne r is the date when the 11 
mortgagor or cosigner receives that notice.  A post office department certificate of 12 
mailing to the mortgagor or cosigner is conclusive proof of receipt on the 3rd 13 
calendar day after mailing.  14 
Sec. 2.  14 MRSA §6321, 3rd ¶, as amended  by PL 2009, c. 476, Pt. B, §5 and 15 
affected by §9, is further amended to read:  16 
The foreclosure must be commenced in accordance with the Maine Rules of Civil 17 
Procedure, and the mortgagee shall within 60 days of commencing the foreclosure also 18 
record a copy of the complaint or a clerk's certificate of the filing of the complaint in each 19 
registry of deeds in which the mortgage deed is or by law ought to be recorded and such a 20 
recording thereafter constitutes record notice of commencement of foreclosure.  The 21 
mortgagee shall further certify and provide evidence that all steps mandated by law to 22 
provide notice to the mortgagor pursuant to section 6111 were strictly performed.  All 23 
notices and correspondence sent by the mortgagee to the mortgagor must be by certif ied 24 
mail.   The mortgagee shall certify proof of ownership of the mortgage note and produce 25 
evidence of the mortgage note, mortgage and all assignments and endorsements of the 26 
mortgage note and mortgage.  The complaint must allege with specificity the plain tiff's 27 
claim by mortgage on such real estate, describe the mortgaged premises intelligibly, 28 
including the street address of the mortgaged premises, if any, which must be 29 
prominently stated on the first page of the complaint, state the book and page number of 30 
the mortgage, if any, state the existence of public utility easements, if any, that were 31 
recorded subsequent to the mortgage and prior to the commencement of the foreclosure 32 
proceeding and without mortgagee consent, state the amount due on the mortgage,  state 33 
the condition broken and by reason of such breach demand a foreclosure and sale.  If a 34 
clerk's certificate of the filing of the complaint is presented for recording pursuant to this 35 
section, the clerk’s certificate must bear the title "Clerk's Certi ficate of Foreclosure" and 36 
prominently state, immediately after the title, the street address of the mortgaged 37 
premises, if any, and the book and page number of the mortgage, if any.  Service of 38 
process on all parties in interest and all proceedings must b e in accordance with the 39 
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure. "Parties in interest" includes mortgagors, holders of fee 40 
interest, mortgagees, lessees pursuant to recorded leases or memoranda thereof, lienors 41 
and attaching creditors all as reflected by the indic es in the registry of deeds and the 42 
documents referred to therein affecting the mortgaged premises, through the time of the 43 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0306(01) -1 
 recording of the complaint or the clerk's certificate. Failure to join any party in interest 1 
does not invalidate the action nor any subsequent proceedings as to those joined.  Failure 2 
of the mortgagee to join, as a party in interest, the holder of any public utility easement 3 
recorded subsequent to the mortgage and prior to commencement of foreclosure 4 
proceedings is deemed consent by th e mortgagee to that easement.  Any other party 5 
having a claim to the real estate whose claim is not recorded in the registry of deeds as of 6 
the time of recording of the copy of the complaint or the clerk's certificate need not be 7 
joined in the foreclosure action, and any such party has no claim against the real estate 8 
after completion of the foreclosure sale, except that any such party may move to 9 
intervene in the action for the purpose of being added as a party in interest at any time 10 
prior to the entry of  judgment.  Within 10 days of submitting the complaint for filing with 11 
the court, the mortgagee shall provide a copy of the complaint or of the clerk's certificate 12 
as submitted to the court that prominently states, immediately after the title, the street 13 
address of the mortgaged premises, if any, and the book and page number of the 14 
mortgage, if any, to the municipal tax assessor of the municipality in which the property 15 
is located and, if the mortgaged premises is manufactured housing as defined in Title 10 , 16 
section 9002, subsection 7, to the owner of any land leased by the mortgagor.  The failure 17 
to provide the notice required by this section does not affect the validity of the 18 
foreclosure sale.  19 
SUMMARY  20 
This bill requires that the notice of right to cure an d all other notices and 21 
correspondence sent by a mortgagee to the mortgagor in a foreclosure action must be sent 22 
by certified mail.  23 
 
