 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 780  
S.P. 278  In Senate, March 10, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, Authorizing the Director of the Bureau of Parks and Lands 
To Convey the Parcel of Land  in Kittery Known as John Paul Jones 
Memorial Park to the Town of Kittery  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator HILL of York.  
Cosponsored by Representative RYKERSON of Kittery and  
Representative: BEAVERS of South Berwick.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1424(01) -1 
 Preamble.  The Constitution of Maine, Article IX, Section 23 requires that real 1 
estate held by the State for conservation or recreation purposes may not be reduced or its 2 
uses substantially altered except on the vote of 2/3 of all members elected to each H ouse.  3 
Whereas, certain real estate authorized for conveyance by this resolve is under the 4 
designations described in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 12, section 598 -A; and  5 
Whereas, the Director of the Bureau of Parks and Lands within the Department of 6 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry may sell or exchange lands with the approval of 7 
the Legislature in accordance with the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 12, section 1814 and 8 
section 1851, subsections 1 and 2; now, therefore, be it  9 
Sec. 1.  Director of the Bureau of Parks and Lands is authorized, but not 10 
directed, to convey certain land known as John Paul Jones Memorial Park in 11 
Kittery. Resolved:  That the Director of the Bureau of Parks and Lands within the 12 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forest ry may gift by quitclaim deed 13 
without covenant, and on such other terms and conditions as the director may direct, the 14 
interests of the State in the property known as John Paul Jones Memorial Park, referred to 15 
in this resolve as "the property," situated be tween Hunter Avenue and Newmarch Street 16 
and between Water Street and Government Street in the Town of Kittery, County of 17 
York, with the buildings and improvements, together with all appurtenant rights and 18 
easements located on that property, to the Town of Kittery; and be it further  19 
Sec. 2.  Restrictions. Resolved:  That the instrument transferring the interests of 20 
the State in the property must include the following terms and restrictions:  21 
1.  The property is to be used for public noncommercial governmental  purposes only. 22 
If the property is used otherwise, title to the property must automatically revert to the 23 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, but only on those terms and 24 
conditions as the Director of the Bureau of Parks and Lands within t he department may 25 
direct;  26 
2.  In the event the Town of Kittery proposes to transfer an interest in the property, in 27 
whole or in part, to a 3rd party not affiliated with the Town of Kittery, the department has 28 
a right of first refusal to take back the prope rty at no cost and upon those terms and 29 
conditions as the director may direct; and  30 
3.  Notwithstanding any decision by the department not to exercise its right of first 31 
refusal, the department shall continue to hold the right of first refusal in perpetuity , and 32 
such right is a servitude on the property and runs with the land and is binding upon the 33 
Town of Kittery, its successors and assigns forever.  34 
SUMMARY  35 
This resolve authorizes the Director of the Bureau of Parks and Lands within the 36 
Department of Agric ulture, Conservation and Forestry to gift the state property known as 37 
John Paul Jones Memorial Park to the Town of Kittery. It restricts the use of the property 38 
to public noncommercial governmental purposes, and the property reverts to the 39 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1424(01) -1 
 Department of Ag riculture, Conservation and Forestry if used otherwise. The resolve also 1 
gives the department right of first refusal in perpetuity to take the property back if the 2 
Town of Kittery proposes to transfer the property to a 3rd party not affiliated with the 3 
town. 4 
 
