 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 802  
H.P. 551  House of Representatives, March 10, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Allow the Breach or Removal of Beaver Dams That 
Obstruct Passage of Anadromous or Migratory Fish  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative TUCKER of Brunswick.  
Cosponsored by Senator BAKER of Sagadahoc and  
Representative: PIERCE of Dresden.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1007(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  12 MRSA §12760, as amended by PL 2011, c. 612, §1, is further amended 2 
to read:  3 
§12760.  Fishways in dams and other artificial obstructions and in beaver dams  4 
1.  Commissioners' authorit y.  In order to conserve, develop or restore anadromous 5 
or migratory fish resources, the commissioner and the Commissioner of Marine 6 
Resources jointly may require within inland waters frequented by alewives, shad, salmon, 7 
sturgeon or other anadromous or mi gratory fish species  a fishway to be erected, 8 
maintained, repaired or altered by the owners, lessors or other persons in control of any 9 
dam or other artificial obstruction within inland waters frequented by alewives, shad, 10 
salmon, sturgeon or other anadrom ous or migratory fish species  or of property on which a 11 
beaver dam exists or by which a beaver dam may be accessed or may order such persons 12 
to remove a beaver dam . 13 
The commissioners may not require or authorize a fishway or fish bypass structure at a 14 
dam on the outlet of Sebec Lake in the Town of Sebec or at a dam on the Sebec River in 15 
the Town of Milo or at a dam on the outlet of Schoodic Lake in Lake View Plantation or 16 
at a dam on the outlet of Seboeis Lake in Township 4, Range 9 NWP that would allow 17 
the upstream passage of an invasive fish species known to be present downstream in the 18 
Piscataquis River or Penobscot River drainage. For the purposes of this section, “invasive 19 
fish species” means those invasive fish species identified in the action plan for  managing 20 
invasive aquatic species developed pursuant to Title 38, section 1872.  21 
2.  Examination of dams.  The commissioner and the Commissioner of Marine 22 
Resources shall periodically examine all dams and other artificial obstructions to fish 23 
passage withi n the inland waters and may examine beaver dams  in order to determine 24 
whether fishways are necessary, sufficient or suitable for the passage of anadromous or 25 
migratory fish.  26 
3.  Monitoring program.  The commissioner and the Commissioner of Marine 27 
Resources  shall establish a program to ensure fishways are functioning properly and 28 
remain sufficient or suitable for the passage of anadromous or migratory fish.  The 29 
commissioners have sole authority to take corrective action at fishways as prescribed 30 
under this section.  31 
4.  Initiation of fishway proceedings.  The commissioner and the Commissioner of 32 
Marine Resources shall initiate proceedings to consider construction, repair or alteration 33 
of fishways in existing dams or other artificial obstructions or beaver dam s or to consider 34 
the removal of a beaver dam  whenever the commissioners determine that one or more of 35 
the following conditions may exist:  36 
A.  Fish passage at the dam , beaver dam  or obstruction in issue, whether alone or in 37 
conjunction with fish passage at other upriver barriers, will improve access to 38 
sufficient and suitable habitat anywhere in the watershed to support a substantial 39 
commercial or recreational fishery for one or more species of anadromous or 40 
migratory fish; or  41 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1007(01) -1 
 B.  Fish passage at the dam , beaver dam  or obstruction in issue is necessary to protect 1 
or enhance rare, threatened or endangered fish species.  2 
5.  Adjudicatory proceedings.  A beaver dam removal or  fishway proceeding must 3 
conform to the following requirements.  4 
A.  A beaver dam removal or fishway proceeding must be an adjudicatory proceeding 5 
under Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 4, but a hearing is not required unless 6 
requested in accordance with paragraph B. Notice of the proceeding must be given in 7 
accordance with Title 5, section 905 2 and the following requirements:  8 
(1)  Personal notice must be given to the dam owner, lessee or other person in 9 
control of the dam or artificial obstruction or of property on which a beaver dam 10 
exists or by which a beaver dam may be accessed , informing th at person that a 11 
proceeding has been undertaken and informing that person of that person's right 12 
to request a hearing; and  13 
(2)  Notice to the public, in newspapers of general circulation in the areas 14 
affected, must be given notifying the public of the init iation of the proceedings 15 
and of the public's opportunity to request a hearing.  16 
B.  If any interested person requests a public hearing, the commissioner and the 17 
Commissioner of Marine Resources shall, within 30 days, either notify the petitioners 18 
in writin g of the commissioners' denial, stating the reasons for the denial, or schedule 19 
a public hearing.  The commissioners shall hold a public hearing whenever:  20 
(1)  The commissioners are petitioned by 50 or more residents of the State; or  21 
(2)  The owner, lessee  or other person in control of the dam or artificial 22 
obstruction or of property on which a beaver dam exists or by which a beaver 23 
dam may be accessed  requests a hearing.  24 
C.  The commissioner and the Commissioner of Marine Resources shall accept 25 
testimony f rom the owner, lessee or other person in control of the dam or artificial 26 
obstruction or of property on which a beaver dam exists or by which a beaver dam 27 
may be accessed  on alternate fishway designs to those proposed by the 28 
commissioners for that dam or, artificial obstruction or beaver dam or on alternatives 29 
to the removal of a beaver dam . 30 
6.  Decision.  In the event that the commissioner and the Commissioner of Marine 31 
Resources decide that a fishway should be constructed, repaired, altered or maintained 32 
pursuant to this section or that a beaver dam should be removed , the commissioners shall 33 
issue final orders with specific plans and descriptions of the fishway construction, 34 
alteration, repair or maintenance requirements or of the removal of the beaver dam , the 35 
conditions of the use of the a fishway and the time and manner required for fishway 36 
operation.  The commissioners may issue a decision requiring the owners, lessees or other 37 
persons in control of the dam or obstruction or of property on which a beave r dam exists 38 
or by which a beaver dam may be accessed  to construct, repair, alter or maintain a 39 
fishway or to remove a beaver dam .  Such a decision must be supported by a finding 40 
based on evidence submitted to the commissioners that either of the following  conditions 41 
exist:  42 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR1007(01) -1 
 A.  One or more species of anadromous or migratory fish can be restored in 1 
substantial numbers to the watershed by the removal of a beaver dam or  by 2 
construction, alteration, repair or maintenance of a fishway and habitat anywhere in 3 
the watershed above the dam , beaver dam  or obstruction is sufficient and suitable to 4 
support a substantial commercial or recreational fishery for one or more species of 5 
anadromous or migratory fish; or  6 
B.  The construction, alteration, repair or maintenance o f a fishway or the removal of 7 
a beaver dam  is necessary to protect or enhance rare, threatened or endangered fish 8 
species.  9 
In With regard to a dam or other artificial obstruction, in  the event that the commissioners 10 
decide that a fishway should not be cons tructed, the commissioners shall specify in that 11 
decision a period not to exceed 5 years subsequent to that decision during which a 12 
fishway may not be required to be constructed.  13 
7.  Compliance.  The owner, lessee or other person in control of a dam or oth er 14 
artificial obstruction or of property on which a beaver dam exists or by which a beaver 15 
dam may be accessed  is jointly and severally liable for the costs of fishway design, 16 
construction, repair, alteration or maintenance , or of the removal of a beaver d am and for 17 
full compliance with a decision issued pursuant to subsection 6.  18 
A.  If the owner, lessee or other person in control of a dam or other artificial 19 
obstruction or of property on which a beaver dam exists or by which a beaver dam 20 
may be accessed  refuses to comply or does not fully comply with the decision issued 21 
pursuant to subsection 6, the commissioner and the Commissioner of Marine 22 
Resources shall initiate a civil action to enjoin the owner, lessee or person in control 23 
of the dam or of property o n which a beaver dam exists or by which a beaver dam 24 
may be accessed  to comply fully with the commissioners' order or to restrain the 25 
violation of an order.  In the proceeding, the court may not review the legality of the 26 
commissioners' order, except when the owner, lessee or person in control of the dam 27 
or artificial obstruction or of property on which a beaver dam exists or by which a 28 
beaver dam may be accessed  has brought a timely petition for judicial review 29 
pursuant to Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 7. 30 
B.  The court may render judgment against and order the sale of the dam or other 31 
artificial obstruction, the land on which it stands and a right -of-way to the dam or 32 
artificial obstruction or of the property on which a beaver dam exists or by which a 33 
beaver dam may be accessed , in order to secure the costs of fishway construction, 34 
repair, alteration or maintenance or of removal of the beaver dam , the costs of the 35 
court -ordered sale and the costs incurred by the department for any fishway design.  36 
The pur chaser of the dam or other obstruction or of the property on which a beaver 37 
dam exists or by which a beaver dam may be accessed  is subject to the decision 38 
issued pursuant to subsection 6.  39 
8.  Privileged entry.  The commissioner and the Commissioner of Mari ne Resources, 40 
the commissioners' agents or subcontractors may enter upon any private land in order to 41 
examine, at least annually, fishways in dams or other artificial obstructions and beaver 42 
dams  and dams and beaver dams  as provided in subsection 2.  The c ommissioners shall 43 
notify the landowner  owner , lessee or other person in control of the dam or of the 44 
 
 Page 4 - 127LR1007(01) -1 
 property on which a beaver dam exists or by which a beaver dam may be accessed  when 1 
the examination will take place and the time required to complete the examination.  The 2 
commissioners shall make every effort to preserve private land and shall restore 3 
surrounding lands to the grade and condition existing prior to entry, if economically 4 
feasible.  5 
9.  Certain lakes, rivers and streams; fishways prohibited.  Notwithstanding any 6 
other provision of law to the contrary, the owners, lessors or other persons in control of a 7 
dam on the outlet of Sebec Lake in the Town of Sebec, of Schoodic Lake in Lake View 8 
Plantation or of Seboeis Lake or a dam on the Sebec River i n the Town of Milo may not 9 
construct or authorize the construction of a fishway or fish bypass structure that would 10 
allow the upstream passage of an invasive fish species known to be present downstream 11 
in the Piscataquis River or Penobscot River drainage.  12 
A.  A person who violates this subsection commits a civil violation for which a fine 13 
of not less than $500 or more than $1,000 may be adjudged.  14 
B.  A person who violates this subsection after having been adjudicated as having 15 
committed 3 or more civil viol ations under this Part within the previous 5 -year period 16 
commits a Class E crime.  17 
SUMMARY  18 
This bill gives the Commissioner of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife and the 19 
Commissioner of Marine Resources explicit authority to require fishways to be installed 20 
and maintained through beaver dams by the owners, lessees or other persons in control of 21 
the property on which a beaver dam exists or by which a beaver dam may be accessed or 22 
to require a beaver dam to be removed in order to conserve, develop or restore 23 
anadro mous or migratory fish resources.  24 
 
