 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1470  
S.P. 568  In Senate, December 18, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Amend Maine's Death Certificate Disclosure Law  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a  majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
203. 
Received by the Secretary of the Senate on December 18, 2015.  Referred to the Committee 
on Health and Human Services pursuant to Joint Rule 308.2 and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIE ST 
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator LIBBY of Androscoggin.  
Cosponsored by Representative MAREAN of Hollis and  
Senator: President THIBODEAU of Waldo, Representative: McCREIGHT of Harpswell.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2263(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง2706, sub -ยง5, as amended by PL 2011, c. 58, ยง1, is further 2 
amended to read:  3 
5.  Records disclosed.   Certified or noncertified copies of vital records of a person 4 
must be made a vailable at any reasonable time upon that person's request or the request of 5 
that person's spouse, registered domestic partner, descendant, parent or guardian, 6 
grandparent, sibling, stepparent, stepchild, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, mother -in-law, 7 
father -in-law, personal representative or that person's duly designated attorney or agent or 8 
attorney for an agent designated by that person or by a court having jurisdiction over that 9 
person whether the request be made in person, by mail, by telephone or otherwis e, if the 10 
state registrar is satisfied as to the identity of the requester and, if an attorney or agent, if 11 
the state registrar is satisfied as to the attorney's or agent's authority to act as that person's 12 
agent or attorney.  If the agent or attorney has been appointed by a court of competent 13 
jurisdiction, or the attorney's or agent's appearance for the person is entered therein, the 14 
state registrar shall upon request so ascertain by telephone call to the register, clerk or 15 
recorder of the court, and this must be deemed sufficient justification to compel 16 
compliance with the request for the record.  A certified or noncertified copy of a death 17 
certificate of a minor's parent must be made available at any reasonable time upon the 18 
request of that minor's sole l iving parent if the state registrar is satisfied as to the identity 19 
of the requester.   The state registrar shall, as soon as possible, designate persons in the 20 
Office of Data, Research and Vital Statistics who may act in the state registrar's absence 21 
or, in case of the state registrar's disqualification, to carry out the intent of this subsection. 22 
A record of birth, death, fetal death, marriage, divorce or domestic partner registration 23 
may be disclosed as necessary for the department to carry out its respon sibilities.  24 
SUMMARY  25 
This bill allows the sole living parent of a minor to obtain a certified or noncertified 26 
copy of the death certificate of the minor's deceased parent.  27 
 
