 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1251  
H.P. 851  House of Representatives, April 7, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Safeguard Students' Personal and Private Information  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative SAWICKI of Auburn.  
Cosponsored by Senator MIRAMANT of Knox and  
Representatives: ESPLING of New Gloucester, FARRIN of Norridgewock, GUERIN of 
Glenburn, SANDERSON of Chelsea, SIROCKI of Scarborough, Senator: GERZOFSKY of 
Cumberland.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0839(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA c. 221, sub -c. 1-A is enacted to read:  2 
SUBCHAPTER 1 -A 3 
PROTECTION OF STUDEN TS' PERSONAL AND PRI VATE DATA  4 
ยง6011.  Definitions  5 
As used in this subchapter, unless the context othe rwise indicates, the following 6 
terms have the following meanings.  7 
1.  Disclosure.   "Disclosure" means to permit access to or the release, transfer or 8 
other communication of personally identifiable information contained in education 9 
records by any means, in cluding oral, written or electronic means, to any party except the 10 
party identified as the party that provided or created the record.  11 
2.  Education record.   "Education record" means a record directly related to a 12 
student and maintained by the department or  a school administrative unit or by a party 13 
acting for the department or a school administrative unit.  14 
3.  Eligible student.   "Eligible student" means a student who has reached 18 years of 15 
age. 16 
4.  Party.   "Party" means an individual, agency, institution o r organization.  17 
5.  Personally identifiable information.   "Personally identifiable information" 18 
includes but is not limited to:  19 
A.  The student's name;  20 
B.  The name of the student's parent or other family members;  21 
C.  The address of the student or student' s family;  22 
D.  A personal identifier, such as the student's social security number, student number 23 
or biometric record;  24 
E.  Other indirect identifiers, such as the student's date of birth, place of birth and 25 
mother's maiden name;  26 
F.  Other information that,  alone or in combination, may be or is linked to a specific 27 
student that would allow a reasonable person in the school community, who does not 28 
have personal knowledge of any relevant circumstances, to identify the student with 29 
reasonable certainty; and  30 
G.  An education record requested by a person who the department or a school 31 
administrative unit reasonably believes knows the identity of the student to whom the 32 
education record relates.  33 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0839(01) -1 
 6.  Record.   "Record" means any information recorded in any way, inclu ding, but not 1 
limited to, by handwriting, print, computer media, videotape or audio tape, film, 2 
microfilm and microfiche.  3 
7.  Student.   "Student" means an individual who is or has been in attendance at a 4 
school within this State and regarding whom the depa rtment or a school administrative 5 
unit maintains education records.  6 
8.  Student database.   "Student database" means any computer system that houses or 7 
maintains data on students in prekindergarten to grade 12.  8 
9.  Written consent.   "Written consent" means consent that is signed by an eligible 9 
student or a parent, is dated on the day it was signed, is signed within 6 months before a 10 
disclosure, identifies the recipient and the purpose of the disclosure and states that the 11 
information will be used only for th at purpose and will not be used or disclosed for any 12 
other purpose.  13 
ยง6012.  Restrictions on maintenance and disclosure  14 
1.  Disclosure prohibited.   The department or a school administrative unit may not 15 
directly or through contracts with outside parties mai ntain personally identifiable 16 
information from education records without the written consent of eligible students or 17 
parents unless maintenance of the information is:  18 
A.  Explicitly mandated in federal or state statute;  19 
B.  Administratively required for th e proper performance of the department's or the 20 
school administrative unit's duties under the law and is relevant to and necessary for 21 
delivery of services; or  22 
C.  Designed to support a study of students or former students, as long as no 23 
personally identif iable information is retained on former students for more than 5 24 
years after the date of their last enrollment at a school.  25 
2.  Data collection, entry and maintenance prohibited.   The following information 26 
may not be collected, entered into any student dat abase or maintained as education 27 
records by the department or a school administrative unit:  28 
A.  DNA, fingerprints or retina or iris pattern information or any information about 29 
the psychological characteristics of a student;  30 
B.  Student or family religious  affiliation, beliefs or practices;  31 
C.  Student or family political affiliation, beliefs or practices;  32 
D.  Student or family member sexual orientation or beliefs about sexual orientation; 33 
or 34 
E.  Student or family gun ownership or usage.  35 
3.  Prohibited gran ts.  The department or a school administrative unit may not 36 
pursue or accept a grant, whether governmental or private, that would require the 37 
collection or reporting of any student information contained in subsection 2.  38 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR0839(01) -1 
 4.  Disclosure and notification conc erning maintenance of personally identifiable 1 
information.   The department and school administrative units shall publicly and 2 
conspicuously disclose on their publicly accessible websites and through annual 3 
electronic notification to the joint standing comm ittee of the Legislature having 4 
jurisdiction over education matters the existence and nature of any personally identifiable 5 
information from education records that they, directly or through contracts with outside 6 
parties, maintain.  Such disclosure and not ifications must include:  7 
A.  The name and location of the student database where the information is 8 
maintained;  9 
B.  The legal authority that authorizes the establishment and existence of the student 10 
database;  11 
C.  The principal purpose or purposes for which  the information is intended to be 12 
used;  13 
D.  The categories of individuals on whom records are maintained in the student 14 
database;  15 
E.  The categories of records maintained in the student database;  16 
F.  Each expected disclosure of the records contained in th e student database, 17 
including the categories of recipients and the purpose of the disclosure;  18 
G.  The policies and practices of the department and school administrative units 19 
regarding storage, retrievability, access controls, retention and disposal of the  20 
records;  21 
H.  The title and business address of the department or school administrative unit 22 
official who is responsible for the student database, and the name and business 23 
address of any contractor or other outside party maintaining the student database f or 24 
or on behalf of the department or a school administrative unit;  25 
I.  The procedure whereby an eligible student or a parent can be notified upon request 26 
if the student database contains a record pertaining to the student or the parent's child;  27 
J.  The pro cedure whereby an eligible student or a parent can be notified upon request 28 
regarding how to gain access to a record pertaining to the student or the parent's child 29 
contained in the student database, and how the student or parent can contest the 30 
record's c ontent; and  31 
K.  The categories of sources of records in the student database.  32 
5.  Access to personally identifiable information restricted.   Except as otherwise 33 
authorized by this section, access to personally identifiable information in the student 34 
databa se is restricted to the authorized representatives of the department and the school 35 
administrative unit who require such access to perform their assigned duties.  The 36 
department and the school administrative unit shall designate only parties that are under  37 
their direct control to act as their authorized representatives to conduct an audit or 38 
evaluation, or any compliance or enforcement activity in connection with legal 39 
requirements that relate to state -supported or unit -supported educational programs, when 40 
the audit, evaluation or activity requires or is used as the basis for granting access to 41 
personally identifiable information.  42 
 
 Page 4 - 127LR0839(01) -1 
 6.  Disclosure without written consent restricted.   The department or a school 1 
administrative unit may not disclose personally id entifiable information from education 2 
records of students without the written consent of eligible students or parents to a 3 
contractor, consultant or other party to whom the department or the school administrative 4 
unit has outsourced institutional services or functions unless the contractor, consultant or 5 
other party:  6 
A.  Performs an institutional service or function for which the department or the 7 
school administrative unit would otherwise use its own employees;  8 
B.  Is under the direct control of the depart ment or the school administrative unit with 9 
respect to the use and maintenance of education records;  10 
C.  Limits internal access to education records to those individuals who are 11 
determined to have legitimate educational interests;  12 
D.  Does not use the educ ation records for any purposes other than those explicitly 13 
authorized in the party's contract;  14 
E.  Does not disclose any personally identifiable information to any other party;  15 
F.  Maintains reasonable administrative, technical and physical safeguards to p rotect 16 
the security, confidentiality and integrity of personally identifiable information in its 17 
custody;  18 
G.  With respect to personally identifiable information stored in a student database 19 
that is accessed over the Internet or other public network, prote cts such data through a 20 
secure encrypted protocol.  Access through a web browser must use at a minimum 21 
Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure, while access through other means must use the 22 
industry standard encryption technologies applicable to the most sensit ive component 23 
of the record.  With respect to records concerning a student's physical, mental or 24 
psychological health, "industry standard" means a technology or methodology 25 
specified by the Secretary of the United States Department of Health and Human 26 
Services in guidance issued under Section 13402(h)(2) of the American Recovery and 27 
Reinvestment Act, Public Law 111 -5; 28 
H.  With respect to data that is in motion or in the party's custody, protects such data 29 
from unauthorized disclosure using industry standard  encryption technologies 30 
applicable to the most sensitive component of the data in its custody.  With respect to 31 
records concerning a student's physical, mental or psychological health, "industry 32 
standard" means a technology or methodology specified by the  Secretary of the 33 
United States Department of Health and Human Services in guidance issued under 34 
Section 13402(h)(2) of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, Public Law 35 
111-5; 36 
I.  Has sufficient administrative and technical procedures to monitor cont inuously the 37 
security of personally identifiable information in the party's custody;  38 
J.  Conducts a security audit annually and provides the results of that audit to the 39 
department and each school administrative unit and school that provided education 40 
records to the party;  41 
 
 Page 5 - 127LR0839(01) -1 
 K.  Provides the department or the school administrative unit with a breach - 1 
remediation plan acceptable to the department or the school administrative unit 2 
before initial receipt of education records;  3 
L.  Reports all suspected or actual s ecurity breaches to the department or the school 4 
administrative unit that provided education records to the party as soon as possible 5 
but not later than 48 hours after a suspected or actual breach is known or would have 6 
been known by exercising reasonable diligence;  7 
M.  In the event of a security breach or unauthorized disclosure of personally 8 
identifiable information, pays all costs and liabilities incurred by the department or 9 
the school administrative unit related to the security breach or unauthorized 10 
disclosure, including but not limited to the costs of responding to inquiries about the 11 
security breach or unauthorized disclosure, of notifying subjects of personally 12 
identifiable information about the security breach or unauthorized disclosure, of 13 
mitigat ing the effects of the security breach or unauthorized disclosure for the 14 
subjects of personally identifiable information and of investigating the cause and 15 
consequences of the security breach or unauthorized disclosure; and  16 
N.  Destroys or returns to the department or the school administrative unit all 17 
personally identifiable information in the party's custody upon request or at the 18 
termination of the contract, whichever occurs first.  19 
7.  Disclosure without consent for studies.  The department or a school 20 
administrative unit may disclose personally identifiable information from an education 21 
record of a student without the consent of the eligible student or parent to a party 22 
conducting studies for or on behalf of the department or the school administrative u nit to:  23 
A.  Develop, validate or administer predictive tests; or  24 
B.  Administer student -aid programs if the outside party conducting the study meets 25 
all of the requirements for contractors set forth in subsection 6.  26 
8.  Disclosure and notification before a uthorized nonconsensual disclosure.   27 
Before any nonconsensual disclosures authorized by subsections 6 and 7, the department 28 
or a school administrative unit shall publicly and conspicuously disclose on their publicly 29 
accessible websites and through electron ic notification to the joint standing committee of 30 
the Legislature having jurisdiction over education matters the existence and nature of any 31 
contracts or agreements pursuant to which the department or school administrative unit 32 
intends to disclose persona lly identifiable information from education records to a 33 
contractor, outsourcing entity or 3rd party conducting a study.  The disclosure and 34 
notification must include:  35 
A.  The name and location of the student database where any personally identifiable 36 
information would be maintained by a contractor, outsourcing entity or 3rd party;  37 
B.  The principal purpose or purposes for which the personally identifiable 38 
information is intended to be used;  39 
C.  The categories of individuals whose records would be disclosed  to the contractor, 40 
outsourcing entity or 3rd party;  41 
 
 Page 6 - 127LR0839(01) -1 
 D.  The categories of records maintained by the contractor, outsourcing entity or 3rd 1 
party;  2 
E.  Expected uses of the records disclosed to the contractor, outsourcing entity or 3rd 3 
party;  4 
F.  The policie s and practices of the contractor, outsourcing entity or 3rd party 5 
regarding storage, retrievability, access controls, retention and disposal of the 6 
records;  7 
G.  The title and business address of the department or school administrative unit 8 
official who is  responsible for the contract or agreement, and the name and business 9 
address of the contractor, outsourcing entity or 3rd party directly responsible for 10 
education records maintained pursuant to a contract or agreement;  11 
H.  The procedure whereby an eligibl e student or a parent can be notified upon 12 
request regarding how to gain access to any record pertaining to the student or the 13 
parent's child maintained by the contractor, outsourcing entity or 3rd party and how 14 
the student or the parent can contest the re cord's contents; and  15 
I.  The categories of sources of records in the student database containing education 16 
records.  17 
9.  Collection or disclosure for commercial use prohibited.   The department or a 18 
school administrative unit may not, without the written con sent of eligible students or 19 
parents, facilitate, arrange, contract for or authorize a 3rd party to collect personally 20 
identifiable information of students or disclose personally identifiable information from 21 
education records to any party for a commercial  use, including but not limited to 22 
marketing products or services, or creation of individual, household or group profiles; nor 23 
may such disclosure be made for provision of services other than contracting, studies and 24 
audits or evaluations as authorized and  limited by subsections 6 and 7.  25 
10.  Disclosure to noneducation government agency prohibited.   The department 26 
or a school administrative unit may not disclose personally identifiable information from 27 
education records to any noneducation government agency , including but not limited to 28 
the Department of Labor, whether within or outside the State, or to any party that intends 29 
to use or disclose the personally identifiable information for the purpose of workforce - 30 
development or economic planning without the w ritten consent of eligible students or 31 
parents.  32 
11.  Disclosure to governmental or private entity outside this State restricted.   33 
Subject to the provisions of this subsection, the department or a school administrative unit 34 
may not disclose personally ident ifiable information from education records to any 35 
governmental or private entity outside this State without the written consent of eligible 36 
students or parents, except that the department or the school administrative unit may 37 
disclose personally identifiab le information in the following circumstances:  38 
A.  When a student has transferred to a school out of state;  39 
B.  When a student voluntarily participates in an out -of-state program and the data 40 
transfer is a condition or requirement of participation; or  41 
 
 Page 7 - 127LR0839(01) -1 
 C.  When a student is classified as a "migrant" for federal reporting purposes.  1 
12.  Disclosure to United States Department of Education restricted.   The 2 
department or a school administrative unit may not disclose to the United States 3 
Department of Education a ny student -level information, whether or not personally 4 
identifiable, from education records without the prior notification of the joint standing 5 
committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over education matters.  6 
13.  Data match practices restricted.   The department or a school administrative 7 
unit may not append education records with personally identifiable information obtained 8 
from other federal or state agencies through data matches without the written consent of 9 
eligible students or parents unless  the data matches are:  10 
A.  Explicitly mandated by federal or state statute; or  11 
B.  Administratively required for the proper performance of the department's or the 12 
school administrative unit's duties under the law and are relevant to and necessary for 13 
deliv ery of services.  14 
14.  Administrative use.   Nothing in this section limits the administrative use of 15 
education records by a person acting exclusively in the person's capacity as an employee 16 
of the department or a school administrative unit.  17 
ยง6013.  Violatio ns 18 
1.  Civil penalty; disqualification.   A violation of this subchapter by a contractor, 19 
consultant or other party that has entered into a contract or other agreement with the 20 
department or a school administrative unit and is subject to the provisions of t his 21 
subchapter is punishable by a civil penalty of up to $5,000 and may result in permanent 22 
disqualification by the department or the school administrative unit from access to 23 
education records.  Each violation involving a different individual student is c onsidered a 24 
separate violation for purposes of civil penalties under this subsection.  25 
2.  Enforcement by Attorney General.   The Attorney General has the authority to 26 
enforce compliance with this subchapter.  27 
3.  No private right of action against department  or school administrative unit.   28 
Nothing in this subchapter may be construed as creating a private right of action against 29 
the department or a school administrative unit.  30 
ยง6014.  Effective date; application  31 
This subchapter takes effect July 1, 2016 and app lies to school years beginning with 32 
the 2016 -2017 academic year.  33 
SUMMARY  34 
This bill establishes data privacy practices for the Department of Education and 35 
school administrative units.  It prohibits the department and school administrative units 36 
from disclos ing personally identifiable information about students without the written 37 
 
 Page 8 - 127LR0839(01) -1 
 consent of the parents of children under 18 years of age and the written consent of the 1 
students themselves when the students are at least 18 years of age.  There are specific 2 
excep tions to the prohibitions.  The bill also prohibits the collection, entry and 3 
maintenance of certain information about students and their families.  A contractor, 4 
consultant or other party that has entered into a contract or other agreement with the 5 
depart ment or a school administrative unit who violates the restrictions is subject to a 6 
$5,000 civil penalty per violation and disqualification from future access to education 7 
records.  8 
 
