 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1666  
H.P. 1136  House of Representatives, March 22, 2016  
 
 
Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Portions of Chapter 3: 
Maine Clean Election Act and Related Provisions, a Late -filed 
Major Substantive Rule of the Commission on Governmental Ethics 
and Election Practices  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reported by Representative LUCHINI of Ellsworth for the Commission on Governmental 
Ethics and Election  Practices pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, section 8072 and 
approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council.  
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed 
pursuant to Joint Rule 2 18. 
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2708(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A requires 3 
legislative aut horization before major substantive agency rules may be finally adopted by 4 
the agency; and  5 
Whereas, the above -named major substantive rule has been submitted to the 6 
Legislature outside the legislative rule acceptance period; and  7 
Whereas, immediate enactmen t of this resolve is necessary to record the 8 
Legislature's position on final adoption of the rule; and  9 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 10 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following le gislation as 11 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 12 
therefore, be it  13 
Sec. 1.  Adoption.  Resolved:  That final adoption of portions of Chapter 3: Maine 14 
Clean Election Act and Related Provisions, a provisiona lly adopted major substantive 15 
rule of the Commission on Governmental Ethics and Election Practices that has been 16 
submitted to the Legislature for review pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, 17 
chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A outside the legislative ru le acceptance period, is authorized.  18 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 19 
legislation takes effect when approved.  20 
SUMMARY  21 
This resolve provides for legislative review of portions of Chapter 3: Maine Clean 22 
Election Act and  Related Provisions, a major substantive rule of the Commission on 23 
Governmental Ethics and Election Practices that was filed outside the legislative rule 24 
acceptance period.  25 
 
