 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled  paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 516  
H.P. 355  House of Representatives, February 24, 2015  
 
 
An Act Regarding Gaming  
 
(AFTER DEADLINE)  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
205. 
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative LUCHINI of Ellsworth.  
Cosponsored by Senator CYRWAY of Kennebec and  
Representatives: MONAGHAN of Cape Elizabeth, SAUCIER of Presque Isle, TURNER of 
Burlington, Senator: PATRICK of Oxford.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1913(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, the laws governing the Maine State Lottery are vague with regard to the 3 
authority of the S tate Liquor and Lottery Commission to conduct certain games of 4 
chance; and  5 
Whereas, the Legislature should have the opportunity to provide input if the 6 
commission intends to offer games of chance to the public in a manner substantially 7 
different from the w ay lottery tickets and shares are currently sold to the public; and  8 
Whereas, information has been presented that indicates the commission intends, 9 
within the next 6 months, to offer games of chance in a manner substantially different 10 
from the way lottery t ickets and shares are currently sold; and  11 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 12 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 13 
immediately necessary for the preservation of th e public peace, health and safety; now, 14 
therefore,  15 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  16 
Sec. 1.  8 MRSA §374, first ¶, as enacted by PL 1987, c. 505, §2, is amended to 17 
read:  18 
The commission shall meet with the director, not less tha n once each month, to 19 
promulgate  adopt  and amend rules, subject to the approval of the commissioner, relating 20 
to the lotteries; to make recommendations and set policy for state lotteries and to transact 21 
other business that may be properly brought before th e commission.  Lotteries under this 22 
section may include, but are not limited to, draw games in which the prize paid to a 23 
winning player is calculated as a share of the prize pool but may not include draw games 24 
in which a player wins a set prize amount base d on the wager made by the player and in 25 
which the operator keeps all losing wagers, as with the draw game commonly known as 26 
keno.   Rules adopted by the commission shall  must  be adopted in a manner consistent 27 
with the Maine Administrative Procedure Act,  Title 5, chapter 375.  28 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 29 
legislation takes effect when approved.  30 
SUMMARY  31 
This bill clarifies the authority of the State Liquor and Lottery Commission with 32 
regard to the conduct of lotteries .  It provides that lotteries may include draw games in 33 
which the prize paid is calculated as a share of the prize pool but may not include draw 34 
games, such as keno, in which the player wins a set prize amount based on the wager 35 
made by the player.  36 
 
