 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1094  
H.P. 755  House of Representatives, March 25, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Improve Tribal -state Relations  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative DANA of the Passamaquoddy Tribe.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: BEAR of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, CHIPMAN 
of Portland, MAKER of Calais, MITCHELL of the Penobscot Nation.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1284(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  30 MRSA §6206, sub -§1, as enacted by PL 1979, c. 732, §§1 and 31, is 2 
amended to read:  3 
1.  General powers.  Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the Passamaquoddy 4 
Tribe and the Peno bscot Nation, within their respective Indian territories, shall have, 5 
exercise and enjoy all the rights, privileges, powers and immunities of a municipality , 6 
including, but without limitation, the power of a municipality  to enact ordinances and 7 
collect tax es, and shall be subject to all the duties, obligations, liabilities and limitations 8 
of a municipality of  and are subject to the laws of the State, provided, however,  except  9 
that internal tribal matters, including membership in the respective tribe or nati on, the 10 
right to reside within the respective Indian territories, tribal organization, tribal 11 
government, tribal elections and the use or disposition of settlement fund income shall  12 
may not be subject to regulation by the State. The Passamaquoddy Tribe and  the 13 
Penobscot Nation shall designate such officers and officials as are necessary to 14 
implement and administer those laws of the State applicable to the respective Indian 15 
territories and the residents thereof. Any resident of the Passamaquoddy Indian terri tory 16 
or the Penobscot Indian territory who is not a member of the respective tribe or nation 17 
nonetheless shall be  is equally entitled to receive any municipal or governmental services 18 
provided by the respective tribe or nation or by the State, except those  services which  that 19 
are provided exclusively to members of the respective tribe or nation pursuant to state or 20 
federal law, and shall be  is entitled to vote in national, state and county elections in the 21 
same manner as any tribal member residing within In dian territory.  22 
Sec. 2.  Effective date; certification.  This Act does not take effect unless, within 23 
60 days of the adjournment of the Legislature, the Secretary of State receives written 24 
certification by the Tribal Chief and Council of the Penobscot Nati on and the Joint Tribal 25 
Council of the Passamaquoddy Tribe that the nation and tribe have agreed to the 26 
provisions of this Act pursuant to 25 United States Code, Section 1725(e), copies of 27 
which must be submitted by the Secretary of State to the Secretary of the Senate, the 28 
Clerk of the House of Representatives and the Revisor of Statutes, except that in no event 29 
may this Act become effective until 90 days after the adjournment of the Legislature.  30 
SUMMARY  31 
This bill amends An Act to Implement the Maine India n Claims Settlement by 32 
removing language that provides that the Passamaquoddy Tribe and the Penobscot 33 
Nation, within their respective Indian territories, are subject to all the duties, obligations, 34 
liabilities and limitations of a municipality.  35 
 
