 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 567  
H.P. 391  House of Representatives, February 26, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Implement Recommendations from the Maine Science, 
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education and 
Workforce Plan  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative POULIOT of Augusta.  
Cosponsored by Senator MILLETT of Cumberland and  
Representatives: DAUGHTRY of Brunswick, MAKER of Calais.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1418(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Education to implement recommendations from 1 
Maine Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education and 2 
Workforce Plan.  Resolved:  That the Department of Education shall implement the 3 
recommendations from the Maine Science,  Technology, Engineering and Mathematics 4 
Council in the Maine Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education and 5 
Workforce Plan dated December 15, 2014.  The department shall convene a stakeholder - 6 
based advisory committee with representatives f rom the science, technology, engineering 7 
and mathematics fields, including computer science, to assist the department in 8 
developing and implementing recommendations made in the plan, including the adoption 9 
of next generation science standards in all school  administrative units, and to determine 10 
the feasibility of implementing the other recommendations in the plan.  11 
SUMMARY  12 
This bill requires the Department of Education to convene a stakeholder -based 13 
advisory committee with representatives from the science, t echnology, engineering and 14 
mathematics fields, including computer science, to assist the department in developing 15 
and implementing recommendations made in the Maine Science, Technology, 16 
Engineering and Mathematics Education and Workforce Plan, including th e adoption of 17 
next generation science standards in all school administrative units, and to determine the 18 
feasibility of implementing the other recommendations in the plan.  19 
 
