 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 290  
S.P. 104  In Senate, February 5, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Refund the Sales Tax Paid on Fuel Used in Commercial 
Agricultural Production and Commercial Wood Harvesting  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Taxation suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator CUSHING of Penobscot.  
Cosponsored by Representative THERIAULT of China and  
Senators: BURNS of Washington, President THIBODEAU of Waldo, Representatives: 
ESPLING of New Gloucester, FARRIN of Norridgewock, GUERIN of Glenburn, 
HANINGTON of Lincoln, HEAD of Bethel, WADSWORTH of Hiram.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0986(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  36 MRSA §2013, sub -§§2 and 3, as amended by PL 2011, c. 657, Pt. N, 2 
§2 and affected by §3, are further amended to read:  3 
2.  Refund authorized.   Any person, association of persons, firm or corporation that 4 
purchases electricity, or that purchases or leases depreciable machinery or equipment, for 5 
use in commercial agricultural production, commercial fishing, commercial aquacultural 6 
production or commercial wood harvesting or that purchases  fuel for use in a commercial 7 
fishing vessel or fuel for use in commercial wood harvesting or commercial agricultural 8 
production  must be refunded the amount of sales tax paid upon presenting to the State 9 
Tax Assessor evidence that the purchase is eligible for refund under this section.  10 
Evidence required by the assessor may include a copy or copies of that portion of the 11 
purchaser's or lessee's most recent filing under the United States Internal Revenue Code 12 
that indicates that the purchaser or lessee is eng aged in commercial agricultural 13 
production, commercial fishing, commercial aquacultural production or commercial 14 
wood harvesting and that the purchased machinery or equipment is depreciable for those 15 
purposes or would be depreciable for those purposes if o wned by the lessee.  16 
In the event that any piece of machinery or equipment is only partially depreciable under 17 
the United States Internal Revenue Code, any reimbursement of the sales tax must be 18 
prorated accordingly.  In the event that electricity or fuel f or a commercial fishing vessel 19 
is used in qualifying and nonqualifying activities, any reimbursement of the sales tax 20 
must be prorated accordingly.  21 
Application for refunds must be filed with the assessor within 36 months of the date of 22 
purchase or executio n of the lease.  23 
3.  Purchases made free of tax with certificate.   Sales tax need not be paid on the 24 
purchase of electricity, fuel for a commercial fishing vessel or for use in commercial 25 
wood harvesting or commercial agricultural production  or a single ite m of machinery or 26 
equipment if the purchaser has obtained a certificate from the assessor stating that the 27 
purchaser is engaged in commercial agricultural production, commercial fishing, 28 
commercial aquacultural production or commercial wood harvesting and authorizing the 29 
purchaser to purchase electricity, fuel for a commercial fishing vessel or for use in 30 
commercial wood harvesting or commercial agricultural production  or depreciable 31 
machinery and equipment without paying Maine sales tax.  The seller is req uired to 32 
obtain a copy of the certificate together with an affidavit as prescribed by the assessor, to 33 
be maintained in the seller's records, attesting to the qualification of the purchase for 34 
exemption pursuant to this section.  In order to qualify for th is exemption, the electricity, 35 
fuel for a commercial fishing vessel or for use in commercial wood harvesting or 36 
commercial agricultural production  or depreciable machinery or equipment must be used 37 
directly in commercial agricultural production, commercial  fishing, commercial 38 
aquacultural production or commercial wood harvesting.  In order to qualify for this 39 
exemption, the electricity or fuel for a commercial fishing vessel or for use in commercial 40 
wood harvesting or commercial agricultural production  must  be used in qualifying 41 
activities, including support operations.  42 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0986(01) -1 
 Sec. 2.  Effective date.  This Act takes effect October 1, 2015.  1 
SUMMARY  2 
This bill provides a sales and use tax refund or exemption for fuel used in commercial 3 
wood harvesting or commercial a gricultural production.  4 
 
