 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 636  
S.P. 229  In Senate, March 3, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Provide Consumers of Health Care with Information 
Regarding Health Care Costs  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Insurance and Financial Services suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator DILL of Penobscot.  
Cosponsored by Representative SANBORN of Gorham and  
Senators: ALFOND of Cumberland, GRATWICK of Penobscot, SAVIELLO of Franklin, 
Representatives: FARNSWORTH of Portland, NOON of Sanford.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1725(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง4303, sub -ยง20 is enacted to read:  2 
20.  Information about prescription drugs.   A carrier offering a health plan in this 3 
State shall provide the following information to prospe ctive enrollees and enrollees with 4 
respect to prescription drug coverage on its publicly accessible website.  5 
A.  A carrier shall post each prescription drug formulary for each health plan offered 6 
by the carrier. The prescription drug formularies must be po sted in a manner that 7 
allows prospective enrollees and enrollees to search the formularies and compare 8 
formularies to determine whether a particular prescription drug is covered under a 9 
formulary.  When a change is made to a formulary, the updated formular y must be 10 
posted on the website within 72 hours.  11 
B.  A carrier shall provide an explanation of:  12 
(1)  The requirements for utilization review, prior authorization or step therapy 13 
for each category of prescription drug covered under a health plan;  14 
(2)  The c ost-sharing requirements for prescription drug coverage, including a 15 
description of how the costs of prescription drugs will specifically be applied or 16 
not applied to any deductible or out -of-pocket maximum required under a health 17 
plan;  18 
(3)  The exclusions  from coverage under a health plan and any restrictions on use 19 
or quantity of covered health care services in each category of benefits; and  20 
(4)  The amount of coverage provided under a health plan for out -of-network 21 
providers or noncovered health care ser vices and any right of appeal available to 22 
an enrollee when out -of-network providers or noncovered health care services are 23 
medically necessary.  24 
SUMMARY  25 
This bill requires all health insurance carriers offering individual and group health 26 
plans to provide certain information with respect to prescription drug coverage to 27 
prospective enrollees and enrollees on its publicly accessible website. The bill requires 28 
carriers to post each prescription drug formulary for each health plan in a manner that 29 
allows enrol lees to determine whether a particular prescription drug is covered under a 30 
formulary. The bill also requires carriers to provide information about utilization review, 31 
prior authorization or step therapy, cost -sharing, exclusions from coverage and the 32 
amou nt of coverage for out -of-network providers or noncovered health care services.  33 
 
