 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 54  
H.P. 48  House of Representatives, January 14, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Ensure Notification to the Public of the Location in 
Maine of Persons Convicted in Foreign Countries of Crimes 
Relating to the Sexual Abuse of a Child  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative MAKER of Calais.  
Cosponsored by Senator DIAMOND of Cumberland and  
Representatives: BATTLE of South Portland, HERBIG of Belfast, HOBART of Bowdoinham, 
KINNEY of Limington, McELWEE of Caribou, PARRY of Arundel, TUELL of East Machias, 
Senator: BURNS of Washington.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0390(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Convene task force.  Resolved:  That the Attorney General shall 1 
convene a task force to develop a procedure for notifying affected members of the public 2 
of the location in this State of a person who was convicted in a foreign country of a crime 3 
relating to the sexual abuse of a child that, if committed in this State, would subject a 4 
person to inclusion on this State's sex offender registry.  The task force must be composed 5 
of 3 members of the Maine Sheriffs' Association or their designees, 3 member s of the 6 
Maine Chiefs of Police Association or their designees and the Attorney General or the 7 
Attorney General's designee.  The task force may consider information provided by the 8 
Department of Public Safety, Bureau of State Police.  The Attorney General shall submit 9 
a report of the task force's findings, including any suggested legislation, to the Joint 10 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety by December 2, 2015.  The 11 
joint standing committee may report out a bill related to the report of  the task force to the 12 
Second Regular Session of the 127th Legislature.  13 
SUMMARY  14 
This resolve directs the Attorney General to convene a task force that includes 15 
members of the Maine Sheriffs' Association, members of the Maine Chiefs of Police 16 
Association an d the Attorney General to develop a procedure for notifying affected 17 
members of the public of the location in this State of a person who was convicted in a 18 
foreign country of a crime relating to the sexual abuse of a child that, if committed in this 19 
State,  would subject a person to inclusion on this State's sex offender registry.  It provides 20 
that the task force may consider information provided by the Department of Public 21 
Safety, Bureau of State Police.  It directs the Attorney General to submit a report o f the 22 
task force's findings to the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public 23 
Safety by December 2, 2015 and allows the joint standing committee to report out a bill 24 
related to the report of the task force to the Second Regular Session of the 127th 25 
Legislature.  26 
 
