 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 571  
H.P. 395  House of Representatives, February 26, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Study the Need for a Standard Formula for the 
Horsepower of Motors Used on the Lakes and Ponds of the State  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative CRAFTS of Lisbon.  
Cosponsored by Senator DAVIS of Piscataquis and  
Representatives: BLACK of Wilton, GREENWOOD of Wales, LONG of Sherman, 
TIMBERLAKE of Turner, WOOD of Sabattus.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1488(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to create working 1 
group to study horsepower of watercraft motors on lakes and ponds.  2 
Resolved:  That the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife shall create a working 3 
group of interested parties to  study the horsepower of watercraft motors used on lakes and 4 
ponds in the State pursuant to the department's authority under the Maine Revised 5 
Statutes, Title 12, section 13051, subsection 5 to determine the need for a standard 6 
formula for determining maxi mum horsepower based upon the activity the watercraft are 7 
engaged in, the size of the lake or pond, interference with other users and uses of the lake 8 
or pond not requiring a watercraft motor and other related factors.  The working group 9 
must include owner s of property on lakes and ponds, persons representing fishing 10 
interests and users of lakes and ponds who use motorized watercraft and users who do not 11 
use motorized watercraft; and be it further  12 
Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That, by December 2, 2015, the Department of Inland 13 
Fisheries and Wildlife shall submit a report and any recommended legislation from the 14 
working group under section 1 to the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and 15 
Wildlife.  The Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and  Wildlife may report out 16 
legislation based upon the report to the Second Regular Session of the 127th Legislature.  17 
SUMMARY  18 
This resolve directs the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to create a 19 
working group to study and recommend legislation reg arding the need for a standard 20 
formula for determining maximum horsepower for motorized watercraft on lakes and 21 
ponds in the State.  The department is directed to submit the report and any recommended 22 
legislation to the Joint Standing Committee on Inland F isheries and Wildlife by 23 
December 2, 2015.  24 
 
