 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 106  
S.P. 43  In Senate, January 20, 2015  
 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine To Increase the Length of Terms of Senators to 4 Years  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator DUTREMBLE of York.  
Cosponsored by Representative FOWLE of Vassalboro and  
Senators: COLLINS of York, LANGLEY of Hancock, MILLETT of Cumberland, PATRICK 
of Oxford, VALENTINO of York.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0827(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved:  Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. II, ยง4 is amended to read:  4 
Section 4.  Time of state election; absentee voting.  The election of Senators 5 
and members of the House of  Representatives shall be on the Tuesday following the first 6 
Monday of November biennially forever and the  , except that, beginning with the general 7 
election held in 2016, the election of Senator s must be held on the Tuesday following the 8 
first Monday of November every 4 years. The  election of Governor shall be on the 9 
Tuesday following the first Monday of November every 4 years.  The Legislature under 10 
proper enactment shall authorize and provide f or voting by citizens of the State absent 11 
therefrom in the Armed Forces of the United States or of this State and for voting by 12 
other citizens absent or physically incapacitated for reasons deemed sufficient.  13 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Second, ยง1 is amende d to read:  14 
Section 1.  Number of Senators.  The Senate shall consist of an odd number of 15 
Senators, not less than 31 nor more than 35, elected at the same time and for the same 16 
term as Representatives  for 4 -year terms  by the qualified electors of the distri cts into 17 
which the State shall be from time to time divided.  18 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Second, ยง5 is amended to read:  19 
Section 5.  Determination of Senators elected; procedure for filling 20 
vacancies.  The Senate shall, on said first Wednesday of December, b iennially until the 21 
election held in 2016 and quadrennially thereafter  determine who is elected by a plurality 22 
of votes to be Senator in each district.  All vacancies in the Senate arising from death, 23 
resignation, removal from the State or like causes, and  also vacancies, if any, which may 24 
occur because of the failure of any district to elect by a plurality of votes the Senator to 25 
which said district shall be entitled shall be filled by an immediate election in the 26 
unrepresented district.  The Governor shal l issue a proclamation therefor and therein fix 27 
the time of such election.  28 
Constitution, Art. X, ยง4 is amended to read:  29 
Section 4.  Amendments to Constitution.  The Legislature, whenever 2/3 of 30 
both Houses shall deem it necessary, may propose amendments to  this Constitution; and 31 
when any amendments shall be so agreed upon, a resolution shall be passed and sent to 32 
the selectmen of the several towns, and the assessors of the several plantations, 33 
empowering and directing them to notify the inhabitants of their  respective towns and 34 
plantations, in the manner prescribed by law, at the next biennial meetings in the month 35 
of November, or to meet in the manner prescribed by law for calling and holding biennial 36 
meetings of said inhabitants for the election of Senator s and  Representatives, on the 37 
Tuesday following the first Monday of November following the passage of said resolve, 38 
to give in their votes on the question, whether such amendment shall be made; and if it 39 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0827(01) -1 
 shall appear that a majority of the inhabitants voti ng on the question are in favor of such 1 
amendment, it shall become a part of this Constitution.  2 
; and be it further  3 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 4 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the  inhabitants of their 5 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 6 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 7 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratif ication of the amendment 8 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  9 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to change the term of 10 
office for State Senators from 2 years to 4 years, beginning with the 11 
Senators elected in 201 6?" 12 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 13 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 14 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, cou nted and 15 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 16 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 17 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes ar e cast in favor of the 18 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 19 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 20 
further  21 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That th e Secretary of State 22 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 23 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  24 
SUMMARY  25 
This constitutional resolution increases the length of the t erms of State Senators from 26 
2 years to 4 years, beginning with the Senators elected in 2016.  27 
 
