 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1572  
S.P. 620  In Senate, January 21, 2016  
 
 
An Act To Ensure Nondiscrimination against Gun Owners in Public 
Housing  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
203. 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator CUSHING of Penobscot.  
Cosponsored by Representative FREDETTE of Newport and  
Senators: BRAKEY of Androscoggin, BURNS of Washington, President THIBODEAU of 
Waldo, WHITTEMORE of Somerset, Representatives: ESPLING of New Gloucester, 
GINZLER of Bridgton, GUERIN of Glenburn, SHERMAN of Hodgdon.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2539(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  14 MRSA ยง6030 -F is enacted to read:  2 
ยง6030 -F.  Firearms in public housing  3 
1.  Definitions.   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 4 
following terms have the following meanings.  5 
A.  "Firearm" has the same meaning as in Title 12, section 10001, subsection 21.  6 
B.  "Public housing" means any housing that is financed in whole or in part with 7 
public funds subsidizing housing accommodations.  8 
C.  "Rental agreement" me ans an agreement, written or oral, and valid rules and 9 
regulations embodying the terms and conditions concerning the use and occupancy of 10 
a dwelling unit and premises.  11 
2.  Prohibition or restriction on firearms prohibited.   A rental agreement for the 12 
provi sion of public housing may not contain a provision or impose a rule that requires a 13 
person to agree, as a condition of tenancy, to a prohibition or restriction on the lawful 14 
ownership, use, possession, bearing or transportation of a firearm, firearm compon ent or 15 
ammunition on or within the premises, including the common areas of the premises, by a 16 
tenant, tenant's household member or guest.  17 
3.  Damages; attorney's fees.   If a landlord brings an action to enforce a provision or 18 
rule prohibited under subsecti on 2, a tenant, tenant's household member or guest may 19 
recover actual damages sustained by that tenant, tenant's household member or guest and 20 
reasonable attorney's fees.  21 
4.  Immunity.   Except in cases of gross negligence, a public housing authority or 22 
private landlord is not liable in a civil action for personal injury, death, property damage 23 
or other damages resulting from or arising out of an occurrence involving a lawfully 24 
owned firearm, firearm component or ammunition that the public housing authority or 25 
private landlord is required to allow on the property under this section.  26 
5.  Exception.   This section does not apply to any prohibition or restriction that is 27 
required by federal law or regulation.  28 
SUMMARY  29 
This bill prohibits a rental agreement for the  provision of public housing from 30 
containing a provision requiring a tenant to agree to a prohibition on the lawful 31 
ownership, use, possession, bearing or transportation of a firearm, firearm component or 32 
ammunition on or within the premises by a tenant, t enant's household member or guest.  33 
 
