 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on  recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1261  
H.P. 861  House of Representatives, April 7, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Correct Defects in Title Created by Improperly 
Discharged Mortgages  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Insurance and Financial Services suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative FREDETTE of Newport.  
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1269(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. as mortgagee of 2 
record; discharge or satisfaction or partial release of mortgage.  The following 3 
provisions govern mortgages that identify  Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. 4 
as the mortgagee of record and mortgages that are assigned to Mortgage Electronic 5 
Registration Systems, Inc.  6 
1.  Discharge or satisfaction of mortgage.   A discharge or satisfaction of a 7 
mortgage recorded in t he appropriate registry of deeds and executed by Mortgage 8 
Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. or by an assignee or successor of Mortgage 9 
Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. when Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, 10 
Inc. appears of record to be the  holder of the mortgage is considered conclusive evidence 11 
of the satisfaction of a mortgage in favor of any person claiming by, through or under the 12 
mortgagor.  13 
2.  Partial release.  A partial release of a mortgage recorded in the appropriate 14 
registry of de eds and executed by Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. or by 15 
an assignee or successor of Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. when 16 
Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. appears of record to be the holder of the 17 
mortgage is co nsidered conclusive evidence of the termination of the mortgage with 18 
respect to the land described in the partial release in favor of any person claiming by, 19 
through or under the mortgagor.  20 
SUMMARY  21 
This bill provides the following with respect to mortgages  that identify Mortgage 22 
Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. as the mortgagee of record and mortgages that are 23 
assigned to Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc.  24 
1.  A discharge or satisfaction of a mortgage recorded in the appropriate registry of  25 
deeds and executed by Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. or by an assignee 26 
or successor of Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. when Mortgage 27 
Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. appears of record to be the holder of the mortgage is  28 
considered conclusive evidence of the satisfaction of a mortgage in favor of any person 29 
claiming by, through or under the mortgagor.  30 
2.  A partial release of a mortgage recorded in the appropriate registry of deeds and 31 
executed by Mortgage Electronic Regi stration Systems, Inc. or by an assignee or 32 
successor of Mortgage Electronic Registration Systems, Inc. when Mortgage Electronic 33 
Registration Systems, Inc. appears of record to be the holder of the mortgage is 34 
considered conclusive evidence of the terminat ion of the mortgage with respect to the 35 
land described in the partial release in favor of any person claiming by, through or under 36 
the mortgagor.  37 
 
