 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 703  
H.P. 479  House of Representatives, March 5, 2015  
 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine To Protect the People's Right To Hunt, Fish and Harvest 
Wildlife  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative WARD of Dedham.  
Cosponsored by Senator DAVIS of Piscataquis and  
Representatives: HANINGTON of Lincoln, HICKMAN of Winthrop, LOCKMAN of 
Amherst, LYFORD of Eddington, MALABY of Hancock, PICCHIOTTI of Fairfield, REED of 
Carmel, SAWICKI of Auburn.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0651(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved:  Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IX, ยง26 is enacted to read:  4 
Section 26.  Personal right to hunt, fish an d harvest wildlife; limitations.  5 
Every citizen has the personal right to hunt, fish and harvest wildlife, subject only to 6 
statutes enacted by the Legislature and to rules adopted by the state agency designated to 7 
promote wildlife conservation and manageme nt and to preserve the future of hunting and 8 
fishing.  Public hunting, fishing and harvesting wildlife are a preferred means of 9 
managing and controlling wildlife.  This section may not be construed to modify any 10 
provision of law relating to trespass or pro perty rights.  11 
; and be it further  12 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 13 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 14 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the man ner prescribed by law for 15 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 16 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 17 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  18 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to provide that the 19 
citizens of Maine have the personal right to hunt, fish and harvest 20 
wildlife, subject to laws and rules that promote wildlife conservation and 21 
preserve the future of hunting and  fishing, and to provide that public 22 
hunting, fishing and harvesting wildlife are a preferred means of 23 
managing and controlling wildlife?"  24 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 25 
and designate their choice b y a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 26 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 27 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 28 
State in the same manne r as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 29 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 30 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 31 
becomes part of t he Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 32 
further  33 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 34 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 35 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  36 
SUMMARY  37 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to provide that the 38 
citizens of Maine have the personal right to hunt, fish and harvest wildlife, subject to laws 39 
and rul es that promote wildlife conservation and preserve the future of hunting and 40 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0651(01) -1 
 fishing, and to provide that public hunting, fishing and harvesting wildlife are a preferred 1 
means of managing and controlling wildlife.  2 
 
