 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1526  
S.P. 588  In Senate, January 6, 2016  
 
 
An Act To Permit Disclosure of Certain Intelligence and 
Investigative Record Information by a Criminal Justice Agency to a 
Nongovernmental Advocacy Program for Persons with Mental 
Illness  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
203. 
Reference to the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safe ty suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator BURNS of Washington.  
Cosponsored by Representative HOBBINS of Saco and  
Senators: ALFOND of Cumberland, DAVIS of Piscataquis, GRATWICK of Penobscot, 
WHITTEMORE of Somerset, Representatives: GATTINE of Westbrook, TIMBERLAKE of 
Turner.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2250(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  16 MRSA ยง806, sub -ยง3, as enacted by PL 2013, c. 267, Pt. A, ยง3, is 2 
amended to read:  3 
3.  A counselor or advocate.  A sexual assault counselor, as defined in section 53 -A, 4 
subsection 1, p aragraph B, or an advocate, as defined in section 53 -B, subsection 1, 5 
paragraph A, or an employee of or volunteer for a nongovernmental advocacy program 6 
for persons with mental illness, referred to in this subsection as "a mental health 7 
advocate,"  with a s pecific agreement with a criminal justice agency.  An agreement 8 
between a criminal justice agency and a sexual assault counselor or, an advocate or a 9 
mental health advocate  must, at a minimum, include provisions that:  10 
A.  Permit the sexual assault counselo r or, advocate or mental health advocate  to use 11 
a report or record that contains intelligence and investigative record information if the 12 
intelligence and investigative record information is used in planning for the safety of 13 
a victim named in the report o r record;  14 
B.  Prohibit the sexual assault counselor or, advocate or mental health advocate  from 15 
further disseminating a report or record that contains intelligence and investigative 16 
record information;  17 
C.  Require the sexual assault counselor or, advocate or mental health advocate  to 18 
ensure that a report or record that contains intelligence and investigative record 19 
information remain  remains  secure and confidential;  20 
D.  Require the sexual assault counselor or, advocate or mental health advocate  to 21 
destroy a  report or record that contains intelligence and investigative record 22 
information within 30 days after the sexual assault counselor's or, advocate's or 23 
mental health advocate's  receiving the report or record;  24 
E.  Permit the criminal justice agency to perfo rm reasonable and appropriate audits in 25 
order to ensure that a report or record containing intelligence and investigative record 26 
information that are is obtained by and that are is in the custody of the sexual assault 27 
counselor or, advocate are or mental h ealth advocate is  maintained in accordance 28 
with the requirements of this subsection;  29 
F.  Require the sexual assault counselor or, advocate or mental health advocate  to 30 
indemnify and hold harmless the criminal justice agency with respect to any litigation 31 
that may result from the provision of reports or records that contain intelligence and 32 
investigative record information;  33 
G.  Permit a criminal justice agency to immediately and unilaterally revoke an 34 
agreement made under this subsection; and  35 
H.  Provide san ctions for any violations of this subsection.  36 
The Commissioner of Public Safety may adopt a model agreement pursuant to this 37 
subsection for use by criminal justice agencies, sexual assault counselors and, advocates 38 
and mental health advocates . 39 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR2250(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This bill allows a state criminal justice agency, subject to reasonable limitations, to 2 
disclose intelligence and investigative record information to an employee or volunteer of 3 
a nongovernmental advocacy program for persons with mental illness as long as the 4 
employee or volunteer has a specific agreement with the agency that complies with the 5 
Maine Revised Statutes, Title 16, section 806, subsection 3.  6 
 
