 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 53  
H.P. 47  House of Representatives, January 14, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Require Shareholder Consent for Corporate Political 
Contributions  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative RYKERSON of Kittery.  
Cosponsored by Representative STUCKEY of Portland, Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot 
and Representatives: BEAVERS of South Berwick, BLUME of York, CAMPBELL of 
Orrington, CHIPMAN of Portland, EVANGELOS of Friendship, GOODE of Bangor, 
HARLOW of Portland, MASTRACCIO of Sanford.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0884(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  13-C MRSA ยง305 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง305.  Political contributions  3 
1.  Political contributions.  A corporation must obtain the consent of a majority of 4 
its shareholders before making a c ontribution or expenditure in a political campaign.  The 5 
consent of a majority of shareholders under this subsection must be an affirmative vote of 6 
a majority of all votes entitled to be cast at a properly held shareholder meeting prior to 7 
making the polit ical contribution or expenditure.  If a majority of a corporation's shares 8 
are owned by one or more institutional investors that cannot hold public office, such as a 9 
pension fund or a for -profit or nonprofit corporation, the corporation may not make any 10 
political contributions or expenditures.  11 
2.  Definitions.   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 12 
following terms have the following meanings.  13 
A.  "Contribution" has the same meaning as in Title 21 -A, section 1052, subsection 3.  14 
B.  "Expenditure" has the same meaning as in Title 21 -A, section 1052, subsection 4.  15 
3.  Notice.  If the corporation has a website accessible to its shareholders, within 48 16 
hours after making a political contribution or expenditure under this section the 17 
corporation shall post the notice of the contribution or expenditure on the website.  18 
4.  Pro rata rebate.  If a shareholder disagrees with a political contribution or 19 
expenditure made under this section, the shareholder may receive from the corporation 20 
upon request a pro rata rebate in an amount of the percentage of the political contribution 21 
or expenditure equal to the percentage of ownership the shareholder has in the 22 
corporation.  23 
SUMMARY  24 
This bill requires a majority vote of a corporation's shareholders before the 25 
corporation makes a political contribution or expenditure and requires that once the 26 
contribution or expenditure has been made, the corporation posts notice of the 27 
contribution or expenditure on its website.  This bill disallows a corporation th at has over 28 
half of its shares owned by one or more institutional investors who cannot hold public 29 
office, such as a pension fund or a for -profit or nonprofit corporation, from making any 30 
political contributions or expenditures.  This bill also allows a sh areholder who disagrees 31 
with a corporation's political contribution or expenditure to receive from the corporation 32 
upon request a rebate of a percentage of the political contribution or expenditure equal to 33 
the percentage of ownership the shareholder has i n the corporation.  34 
 
