 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 334  
H.P. 228  House of Representatives, February 10, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Improve the Maine Clean Election Act  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee  on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative DEVIN of Newcastle.  
Cosponsored by Senator JOHNSON of Lincoln and  
Representatives: CAMPBELL of Orrington, EVANGELOS of Friendship, TUELL of East 
Machias.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0318(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA ยง1125, sub -ยง6-F is enacted to read:  2 
6-F.  Participation in political action committees.  A certified candidate, may not 3 
establish a political action committee for which the ce rtified candidate is a principal 4 
officer, fund -raiser or decision maker except as provided by this subsection.  A certified 5 
candidate seeking election to the State Senate or State House of Representatives may 6 
establish and serve as the principal officer an d fund -raiser for a political action committee 7 
established for the purpose of providing that certified candidate with professional 8 
development, networking and educational opportunities related to functions that a person 9 
may perform as a legislator.  Expens es related to this purpose, including administrative 10 
and travel costs, consultant fees and other relevant noncampaign -related costs, may be 11 
paid for using funds raised by the political action committee.  A certified candidate who 12 
serves as the principal of ficer, fund -raiser or decision maker for a political action 13 
committee established for the purpose of providing that certified candidate with 14 
professional development, networking and educational opportunities as described in this 15 
subsection shall limit the total amount raised for the political action committee, including 16 
any funds carried over from a political action committee established during a previous 17 
election, as follows:  18 
A.  Fifteen thousand dollars for candidates for the State Senate; and  19 
B.  Seven t housand five hundred dollars for candidates for the House of 20 
Representatives.  21 
SUMMARY  22 
This bill prohibits a person certified as a Maine Clean Election Act candidate seeking 23 
election to the State Senate or State House of Representatives from establishing a 24 
political action committee or serving as a fund -raiser or principal decision maker for a 25 
political action committee unless the political action committee is established to provide 26 
the person with professional development, networking and educational opportu nities 27 
related to work that person may perform as a legislator.  The bill also sets limits on how 28 
much money may be raised for such a political action committee.  29 
 
