 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1693  
H.P. 1158  House of Representatives, April 1, 2016  
 
 
Resolve, Establishing the Commission To Study the Economic, 
Environmental and Energy Benefits of the Maine Biomass Industry  
 
(AFTER DEADLINE)  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
205. 
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative GIDEON of Freeport.  
Cosponsored by Senator BURNS of Washington and  
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, HIGGINS of Dover -Foxcroft, MAKER of Calais, 
McCABE of Skowhegan, SAUCIER of Presque Isle, TUELL of East Machias, Senators: 
EDGECOMB of Aroostook, PATRICK of Oxford.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2640(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Commission to Study the Economic, Environmental and Energy 1 
Benefits of the Maine Biomass Industry established.  Resolved:  That the 2 
Commission to Study the Economic, Environmental and Energy Benefits of the Maine 3 
Biomass Industry, referred to in t his resolve as "the commission," is established; and be it 4 
further  5 
Sec. 2.  Membership.  Resolved:  That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 353, the 6 
commission consists of 15 members appointed as follows:  7 
1.  Two members of the Senate appointed by the President o f the Senate, including a 8 
member from each of the 2 parties holding the largest number of seats in the Legislature;  9 
2.  Three members of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the 10 
House, including a member from each of the 2 parties holdi ng the largest number of seats 11 
in the Legislature;  12 
3.  Four members appointed by the President of the Senate as follows:  13 
A.  A commercial wood harvester who supplies biomass;  14 
B.  A representative of the biomass electric industry;  15 
C.  A representative of a sawmill located in the State; and  16 
D.  A scientist from the University of Maine who studies forest health and 17 
silviculture;  18 
4.  Four members appointed by the Speaker of the House as follows:  19 
A.  A representative of a conservation organization;  20 
B.  A represe ntative of a pulp and paper manufacturer located in the State;  21 
C.  A representative of commercial timber holdings in the State; and  22 
D.  A representative of a business that uses biomass for thermal generation or 23 
cogeneration or an expert in the use of bioma ss energy for thermal generation or 24 
cogeneration;  25 
5.  The Director of the Efficiency Maine Trust or the director's designee; and  26 
6.  The chair of the Public Utilities Commission or the chair's designee; and be it 27 
further  28 
Sec. 3.  Commission chairs.  Resolv ed:  That the first -named Senator is the 29 
Senate chair of the commission and the first -named member of the House of 30 
Representatives is the House chair of the commission; and be it further  31 
Sec. 4.  Appointments; convening of commission.  Resolved:  That all 32 
appointments must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 33 
resolve.  The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 34 
Council once all appointments have been made.  When the appointment of all memb ers 35 
has been completed, the chairs of the commission shall call and convene the first meeting 36 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR2640(01) -1 
 of the commission.  If 30 days or more after the effective date of this resolve a majority 1 
of but not all appointments have been made, the chairs may request auth ority and the 2 
Legislative Council may grant authority for the commission to meet and conduct its 3 
business; and be it further  4 
Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the commission shall:  5 
1.  Review and evaluate the economic, environmental and energy benefits of Maine's 6 
biomass resources, as well as public policy and economic proposals to create and 7 
maintain a sustainable future for the Maine biomass industry;  8 
2.  Consider the interconnection of economic markets for biomass and forest products 9 
and the energy polic y of the State;  10 
3.  Consider whether the environmental, economic and energy benefits of biomass 11 
support updating the State's energy policy to strengthen and increase the role that biomass 12 
and the forest products industry play throughout the State;  13 
4.  Cons ider the costs of implementing any recommendations and the effect of 14 
leaving current policies in place; and  15 
5.  Examine any other issues to further the purposes of the study.  16 
In conducting the duties under this section, the commission shall seek public inp ut 17 
from individuals, loggers, landowners, the forest products industry, consumers of biomass 18 
resources, biomass energy generators and municipal and economic development officials 19 
from communities supported by biomass and forest products and shall consult a nd 20 
collaborate with stakeholders and experts in the fields of economic development, natural 21 
resources and energy policy; and be it further  22 
Sec. 6.  Meetings.  Resolved:  That the commission shall hold at least 4 meetings; 23 
and be it further  24 
Sec. 7.  Staff a ssistance.  Resolved:  That the Legislative Council shall provide 25 
staffing services to the commission except that the commission shall employ a 3rd party 26 
to help with data collection, research and best practices and to develop policy 27 
recommendations in col laboration with the commission.  The commission may invite the 28 
Department of Economic and Community Development, the Public Utilities Commission, 29 
the Office of the Public Advocate, the Governor's Energy Office, the Efficiency Maine 30 
Trust, the Department of  Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry and other appropriate 31 
agencies of State Government to provide additional staff support or assistance to the 32 
commission.  Funding for the commission must be derived from federal funds provided 33 
by the United States Dep artment of Energy to the Governor's Energy Office; and be it 34 
further  35 
Sec. 8.  Report.  Resolved:  That the commission shall submit a report and any 36 
suggested implementing legislation for presentation to the Joint Standing Committee on 37 
Energy, Utilities and  Technology and the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, 38 
Conservation and Forestry no later than December 6, 2016.  39 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR2640(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This resolve establishes the Commission to Study the Economic, Environmental and 2 
Energy Benefits of the Maine Biomass Industry.  Membership of the commission consists 3 
of, among others, Legislators, a wood harvester and representatives of the biomass energy 4 
generation industry, a sawmill, the pulp and paper industry and users of biomass energy.  5 
The commission is required to examine and evaluate the economic, environmental and 6 
energy benefits of Maine's biomass resources, as well as public policy and economic 7 
proposals to create and maintain a sustainable future for the Maine biomass industry, and 8 
determine whether the environmental, economic and energy benefits of biomass support 9 
updating the State's energy policy to strengthen and increase the role that biomass and the 10 
forest products industry play throughout the State.  The commission is required to report 11 
the results of its study a nd any recommendations by December 6, 2016 to the Joint 12 
Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology and the Joint Standing 13 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry.  14 
 
