 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 712  
H.P. 488  House of Representatives, March 5, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Increase Organic Waste Recycling in the State  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative HARLOW of Portland.  
Cosponsored by Senator SAVIELLO of Franklin and  
Representatives: CAMPBELL of Orrington, CHIPMAN of Portland, DUCHESNE of Hudson, 
WHITE of Washburn.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1376(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  38 MRSA ยง1303 -C, sub -ยง19-D is enacted to read:  2 
19-D.  Organic waste.  "Organic waste" means solid waste that is of biological origin 3 
and is biodegradable, including, but not limited to,  agricultural waste, animal and human 4 
waste and food waste.  "Organic waste" does not include hazardous waste, biomedical 5 
waste or septage.  6 
Sec. 2.  38 MRSA ยง2133 -A is enacted to read:  7 
ยง2133 -A.  Organic waste recycling  8 
The department shall track state, reg ional, municipal and local organic waste 9 
recycling efforts and, as resources allow, may develop, implement and administer 10 
programs to encourage or support organic waste recycling in the State.  The department 11 
shall, by January 15, 2017, and annually therea fter, submit a report to the joint standing 12 
committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over environmental and natural 13 
resources matters detailing its findings and any recommendations related to organic waste 14 
recycling, including any proposed legislat ion to implement its recommendations.  After 15 
receiving the report, the committee may report out a bill relating to organic waste 16 
recycling.  17 
Sec. 3.  Department of Environmental Protection; organic waste recycling 18 
pilot program.  The Department of Environme ntal Protection shall develop, implement 19 
and administer an organic waste recycling pilot program as described in this section.  20 
1.  The department shall invite municipalities to participate in the pilot program and 21 
shall select as participants at least one municipality from each of the 3 following groups 22 
of counties:  23 
A.  Androscoggin, Cumberland, Lincoln, Sagadahoc and York;  24 
B.  Franklin, Kennebec, Knox, Oxford and Waldo; and  25 
C.  Aroostook, Hancock, Penobscot, Piscataquis, Somerset and Washington.  26 
2.  The de partment shall invite the Legislative Council to participate in the pilot 27 
program with respect to the State House facilities.  The department shall invite the 28 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau of General Services to 29 
participate in  the pilot program with respect to the Cross State Office Building facilities.  30 
3.  The department shall provide technical assistance, and may provide financial 31 
assistance, to each participating entity to develop and implement an organic waste 32 
recycling pro gram.  Each participating entity shall collect data on and document the 33 
amount of organic waste diverted from the waste stream by the program, the related cost 34 
savings realized by the participating entity and any problems encountered in 35 
implementing the pr ogram.  Each participating entity shall compile this information into a 36 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1376(01) -1 
 report and transmit the report to the department on or before a date determined by the 1 
department.  2 
4.  The department shall analyze the reports submitted by the participating entities 3 
and, by January 15, 2017, shall submit a report to the joint standing committee of the 4 
Legislature having jurisdiction over environmental and natural resources matters detailing 5 
the data collected by each participating entity and any additional findings an d shall 6 
include any recommendations for legislation to implement permanent organic waste 7 
recycling programs at the state, regional, municipal or local level or to otherwise increase 8 
the rate of organic waste recycling in the State.  9 
SUMMARY  10 
This bill enacts  a statutory provision directing the Department of Environmental 11 
Protection to track state, regional, municipal and local organic waste recycling efforts 12 
and, as resources allow, to develop, implement and administer programs to encourage or 13 
support organic  waste recycling in the State.  The department is directed to submit by 14 
January 15, 2017, and annually thereafter, a report to the joint standing committee of the 15 
Legislature having jurisdiction over environmental and natural resources matters detailing 16 
its findings and any recommendations related to organic waste recycling, including any 17 
proposed legislation to implement its recommendations.  After receiving the report, the 18 
committee may report out a bill relating to organic waste recycling.  The bill also  directs 19 
the department to develop, implement and administer an organic waste recycling pilot 20 
program.  For the pilot program, the department is required to invite as participants at 21 
least 3 municipalities and the Legislative Council and the Department of Administrative 22 
and Financial Services, Bureau of General Services.  The department is directed to 23 
provide technical assistance and may provide financial assistance to each participating 24 
entity in developing and implementing an organic waste recycling progr am.  Each 25 
participating entity must collect data on and document the amount of organic waste 26 
diverted from the waste stream by the program, the related cost savings realized by the 27 
participating entity and any problems encountered in implementing the progr am, and 28 
must compile this information into a report for the department.  The department is 29 
directed to analyze the reports submitted by the participating entities and, by January 15, 30 
2017, submit a report to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having 31 
jurisdiction over environmental and natural resources matters detailing the findings of the 32 
program and including any recommendations for legislation.  This bill also adopts a 33 
definition for the term "organic waste."  34 
 
