 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 865  
S.P. 310  In Senate, March 12, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Protect Vision Care Patients and Providers  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Insurance and Financial Services suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator WHITTEMORE of Somerset.  
Cosponsored by Representative FREDETTE of Newport and  
Senators: GRATWICK of Penobscot, HAMPER of Oxford, KATZ of Kennebec, 
Representatives: BECK of Waterville, DUNPHY of Embden, McCABE of Skowhegan, 
PICCHIOTTI of Fairfield, WALLACE of Dexter.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1445(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง2769 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง2769.  Vision care coverage  3 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 4 
following terms have the followin g meanings.  5 
A.  "Contractual discount" means a percentage or other reduction from a provider's 6 
usual and customary rate for a covered service or covered material required under a 7 
participating provider agreement.  8 
B.  "Covered material" means a material for  which reimbursement from an insurer, 9 
limited benefit health insurance plan, limited benefit coverage plan or vision care 10 
plan is provided to a vision care provider by an enrollee's plan contract or for which 11 
reimbursement would be available but for the ap plication of an enrollee's contractual 12 
obligations for deductibles, copayments or coinsurance.  13 
C.  "Covered service" means a service for which reimbursement from an insurer, 14 
limited benefit health insurance plan, limited benefit coverage plan or vision car e 15 
plan is provided to a vision care provider by an enrollee's plan contract or for which 16 
reimbursement would be available but for the application of an enrollee's contractual 17 
obligations for deductibles, copayments or coinsurance.  18 
D.  "Insurer" means every  person engaged as principal and as indemnitor, surety or 19 
contractor in the business of entering into a contract of health insurance, including 20 
those health insurance contracts described in chapters 9, 33, 35 and 56 -A. 21 
E.  "Limited benefit coverage" means coverage limited to only accidental injury, 22 
specified disease, hospital indemnity, Medicare supplement, disability income, long - 23 
term care or other limited benefits, including coverage limited to only vision care.  24 
F.  "Limited benefit health insurance plan"  means a health insurance plan that 25 
provides only accidental injury, specified disease, hospital indemnity, Medicare 26 
supplement, disability income, long -term care or other limited benefits, including a 27 
plan that covers only vision care.  28 
G.  "Material" mean s ophthalmic devices, including but not limited to lenses, devices 29 
containing lenses, artificial intraocular lenses, ophthalmic frames and other lens 30 
mounting apparatuses, prisms, lens treatments and coating, contact lenses and 31 
prosthetic devices to correc t, relieve or treat defects or abnormal conditions of the 32 
human eye or its adnexa.  33 
H.  "Services" means the professional work performed by a vision care provider.  34 
I.  "Vision care plan" means insurance underwritten to provide coverage for eye care, 35 
includi ng entities, products or policies that create, promote, sell, provide, advertise or 36 
administer integrated or stand -alone vision benefit plans or vision care insurance 37 
policies or contracts that provide vision benefits to an enrollee pertaining to the 38 
provi sions of a covered service or covered material.  "Vision care plan" includes a 39 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1445(01) -1 
 limited benefit health insurance plan and limited benefit coverage plan that provides 1 
coverage for eye care.  2 
J.  "Vision care provider" means a licensed doctor of optometry prac ticing under the 3 
authority of Title 32, chapter 34 -A or a licensed osteopathic or medical doctor 4 
practicing under the authority of Title 32, chapter 36 or 48 who has also completed a 5 
residency in ophthalmology.  6 
2.  Noncovered services and materials provisi ons.  An agreement between an 7 
insurer or vision care plan and a vision care provider may not seek to or require a vision 8 
care provider to provide services or materials at a fee limited or set by the insurer or 9 
vision care plan unless the services or materi als are reimbursed as a covered service or a 10 
covered material under the agreement.  11 
3.  Prohibition on laboratory or supplier requirements.  An agreement between an 12 
insurer or vision care plan and a vision care provider may not restrict or limit, directly o r 13 
indirectly, the vision care provider's choice of sources and suppliers of services or 14 
materials or use of optical laboratories provided by the vision care provider to an enrollee 15 
in a vision care plan.  16 
4.  Notification requirements for contract changes.  An insurer or vision care plan 17 
may not change any term, contractual discount or reimbursement rate contained in an 18 
agreement with a vision care provider without a signed written acknowledgment from the 19 
vision care provider at least 60 days before the chan ge is implemented.  20 
5.  Credentialling.  An agreement between an insurer or vision care plan and a vision 21 
care provider may not require that a vision care provider participate with or be 22 
credentialled by any specific limited benefit health insurance plan, l imited benefit 23 
coverage plan or vision care plan as a condition of joining an insurer's provider network.  24 
6.  Contract length.  A vision care plan agreement between an insurer and a vision 25 
care provider may not be longer than 2 years from the date the agre ement is first signed.  26 
7.  Enforcement.  The following provisions apply.  27 
A.  A person adversely affected by a violation of this section may bring an action in 28 
the Superior Court of the county in which the person resides or has the person's 29 
principal place of business, or may be brought in the Superior Court of Kennebec 30 
County.  The Superior Court may issue temporary or permanent injunctions to 31 
restrain and prevent violations of this section and may make such other orders or 32 
judgments as may be necessary to restore to a person who has suffered an 33 
ascertainable loss by reason of the use or employment of an act in violation of this 34 
section, including recovery of monetary damages of no more than $1,000 for each 35 
day found to be in violation.  A person who violate s the terms of an injunction issued 36 
under this section shall forfeit and pay to the State a civil penalty of not more than 37 
$10,000 for each violation.  Upon prevailing in an action under this section, when an 38 
injunction is denied, the court may order the d efendant to pay the attorney's fees and 39 
costs of the prevailing party.  40 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR1445(01) -1 
 B.  The superintendent or the Attorney General may also seek an injunction against 1 
an insurer or vision care plan in a court of competent jurisdiction with respect to a 2 
violation of thi s section.  An action brought under this paragraph must be brought in 3 
accordance with the procedures for an injunction under Title 5, chapter 10.  4 
8.  Rules.  The bureau shall adopt any rules necessary for the administration of this 5 
section.  Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine technical rules as defined 6 
in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. 7 
9.  Application.  The requirements of this section apply to all vision care plan 8 
policies, contracts and certificates executed, delivered, issued fo r delivery, continued or 9 
renewed in this State on or after the effective date of this section.  For purposes of this 10 
section, all contracts are deemed to be renewed no later than the next yearly anniversary 11 
of the contract date.  12 
SUMMARY  13 
This bill establish es standards relating to agreements between an insurer and a vision 14 
care provider related to insurance coverage for vision care.  15 
 
