 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 419  
H.P. 286  House of Representatives, February 12, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Promote Academic Opportunities for Maine Youth 
during Summer Months  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative PIERCE of Falmouth.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: DION of Portland, HOBBINS of Saco, POULIOT of 
Augusta, STEARNS of Guilford, Senator: LIBBY of Androscoggin.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1664(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
The bill proposes to amend the current law to promote the establishment and 5 
expansion of summer school programs for  elementary and secondary school students.  6 
The bill proposes that:  7 
1. Elementary and secondary schools be provided with additional resources and 8 
incentives to establish or expand summer school programs that enhance the academic 9 
opportunities for Maine stu dents;  10 
2. The Department of Education provide elementary and secondary schools with 11 
examples of effective models of summer school programs that improve student 12 
performance, including model programs that involve school networking and partnerships 13 
with commu nity-based organizations such as the Maine Alliance of Boys & Girls Clubs 14 
that provide summer activities to align and leverage existing resources, improve program 15 
quality and develop shared outcomes for student success; and  16 
3. The current provisions in the  Maine Revised Statutes, Title 20 -A related to funding 17 
summer school programs be amended to provide additional funds for the establishment 18 
and expansion of summer school programs for elementary and secondary school students.  19 
The amendments to the current law may include, but are not limited to:  20 
A. Providing an adjustment of the state share of the total allocation to qualifying 21 
school administrative units for the costs of establishing or expanding summer school 22 
programs for elementary and secondary school s tudents; or  23 
B. Providing qualifying school administrative units with the allocation of state grants 24 
to be awarded on an annual basis by the Department of Education for the 25 
establishment and expansion of summer school programs for elementary and 26 
secondary s chool students.  27 
 
