 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1418  
H.P. 965  House of Representatives, May 19, 2015  
 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine To Provide for a Lieutenant Governor and Change the Line 
of Succession for Governor  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative STETKIS of Canaan.  (GOVERNOR'S BILL)  
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2019(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. First, §5 is amended to read:  4 
Section 5.  Election of Representat ives; lists of votes delivered forthwith; 5 
lists of votes examined by Governor; summons of persons who appear to be 6 
elected; lists shall be laid before the House.  The meetings within this State for the 7 
choice of Representatives shall be warned in due cours e of law by qualified officials of 8 
the several towns and cities 7 days at least before the election, and the election officials of 9 
the various towns and cities shall preside impartially at such meetings, receive the votes 10 
of all the qualified electors, sor t, count and declare them in open meeting; and a list of the 11 
persons voted for shall be formed, with the number of votes for each person against that 12 
person's name.  Cities and towns belonging to any Representative District shall hold their 13 
meetings at the  same time in the respective cities and towns; and such meetings shall be 14 
notified, held and regulated, the votes received, sorted, counted and declared in the same 15 
manner.  Fair copies of the lists of votes shall be attested by the municipal officers and 16 
the clerks of the cities and towns and the city and town clerks respectively shall cause the 17 
same to be delivered into the office of the Secretary of State  Lieutenant Governor  18 
forthwith.  The Governor shall examine the returned copies of such lists and 7 d ays 19 
before the first Wednesday of December biennially, shall issue a summons to such 20 
persons as shall appear to have been elected by a plurality of all votes returned, to attend 21 
and take their seats.  All such lists shall be laid before the House of Repres entatives on 22 
the first Wednesday of December biennially, and they shall finally determine who are 23 
elected.  24 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Second, §3 is amended to read:  25 
Section 3.  Election of Senators; lists of votes delivered forthwith.  The 26 
meetings within this State for the election of Senators shall be notified, held and regulated 27 
and the votes received, sorted, counted, declared and recorded, in the same manner as 28 
those for Representatives.  Fair copies of the lists of votes shall be attested by the clerk s 29 
of the cities and towns or other duly authorized officials and sealed up in open meetings 30 
and such officials shall cause said lists to be delivered into the office of the Secretary of 31 
State  Lieutenant Governor  forthwith.  32 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third,  §§17, 18, 20 and 22 are amended to read:  33 
Section 17.  Proceedings for people's veto.  34 
1.  Petition procedure; petition for people's veto.  Upon written petition of electors, 35 
the number of which shall not be less than 10% of the total vote for Governor cast  in the 36 
last gubernatorial election preceding the filing of such petition, and addressed to the 37 
Governor and filed in the office of the Secretary of State  Lieutenant Governor  by the hour 38 
of 5:00 p.m., on or before the 90th day after the recess of the Legis lature, or if such 90th 39 
day is a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday, by the hour of 5:00 p.m., on the preceding 40 
day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday, or a legal holiday, requesting that one or more 41 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR2019(01) -1 
 Acts, bills, resolves or resolutions, or part or part s thereof, passed by the Legislature but 1 
not then in effect by reason of the provisions of the preceding section, be referred to the 2 
people, such Acts, bills, resolves, or resolutions or part or parts thereof as are specified in 3 
such petition shall not tak e effect until 30 days after the Governor shall have announced 4 
by public proclamation that the same have been ratified by a majority of the electors 5 
voting thereon at a statewide or general election.  6 
2.  Effect of referendum.  The effect of any Act, bill, resolve or resolution or part or 7 
parts thereof as are specified in such petition shall be suspended upon the filing of such 8 
petition.  If it is later finally determined, in accordance with any procedure enacted by the 9 
Legislature pursuant to the Constituti on, that such petition was invalid, such Act, bill, 10 
resolve or resolution or part or parts thereof shall then take effect upon the day following 11 
such final determination.  12 
3.  Referral to electors; proclamation by Governor.  As soon as it appears that the 13 
effect of any Act, bill, resolve, or resolution or part or parts thereof has been suspended 14 
by petition in manner aforesaid, the Governor by public proclamation shall give notice 15 
thereof and of the time when such measure is to be voted on by the people, whi ch shall be 16 
at the next statewide or general election, whichever comes first, not less than 60 days 17 
after such proclamation.  If the Governor fails to order such measure to be submitted to 18 
the people at the next statewide or general election, the Secretary  of State  Lieutenant 19 
Governor  shall, by proclamation, order such measure to be submitted to the people at 20 
such an election and such order shall be sufficient to enable the people to vote.  21 
Section 18.  Direct initiative of legislation.  22 
1.  Petition procedur e.  The electors may propose to the Legislature for its 23 
consideration any bill, resolve or resolution, including bills to amend or repeal emergency 24 
legislation but not an amendment of the State Constitution, by written petition addressed 25 
to the Legislature  or to either branch thereof and filed in the office of the Secretary of 26 
State  Lieutenant Governor  by the hour of 5:00 p.m., on or before the 50th day after the 27 
date of convening of the Legislature in first regular session or on or before the 25th day 28 
after the date of convening of the Legislature in second regular session, except that the 29 
written petition may not be filed in the office of the Secretary of State  Lieutenant 30 
Governor  later than 18 months after the date the petition form was furnished or appro ved 31 
by the Secretary of State  Lieutenant Governor .  If the applicable deadline falls on a 32 
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period runs until the hour of 5:00 p.m., of the next 33 
day which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.  34 
2.  Referral to el ectors unless enacted by the Legislature without change; 35 
number of signatures necessary on direct initiative petitions; dating signatures on 36 
petitions; competing measures.  For any measure thus proposed by electors, the number 37 
of signatures shall not be le ss than 10% of the total vote for Governor cast in the last 38 
gubernatorial election preceding the filing of such petition.  The date each signature was 39 
made shall be written next to the signature on the petition.  A signature is not valid if it is 40 
dated mor e than one year prior to the date that the petition was filed in the office of the 41 
Secretary of State  Lieutenant Governor .  The measure thus proposed, unless enacted 42 
without change by the Legislature at the session at which it is presented, shall be 43 
submit ted to the electors together with any amended form, substitute, or recommendation 44 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR2019(01) -1 
 of the Legislature, and in such manner that the people can choose between the competing 1 
measures or reject both. When there are competing bills and neither receives a majorit y of 2 
the votes given for or against both, the one receiving the most votes shall at the next 3 
statewide election to be held not less than 60 days after the first vote thereon be submitted 4 
by itself if it receives more than 1/3 of the votes given for and aga inst both.  If the 5 
measure initiated is enacted by the Legislature without change, it shall not go to a 6 
referendum vote unless in pursuance of a demand made in accordance with the preceding 7 
section.  The Legislature may order a special election on any meas ure that is subject to a 8 
vote of the people.  9 
3.  Timing of elections; proclamation by Governor.  The Governor shall, by 10 
proclamation, order any measure proposed to the Legislature as herein provided, and not 11 
enacted by the Legislature without change, refe rred to the people at an election to be held 12 
in November of the year in which the petition is filed.  If the Governor fails to order a 13 
measure proposed to the Legislature and not enacted without change to be submitted to 14 
the people at such an election by p roclamation within 10 days after the recess of the 15 
Legislature to which the measure was proposed, the Secretary of State  Lieutenant 16 
Governor  shall, by proclamation, order such measure to be submitted to the people at an 17 
election as requested, and such orde r shall be sufficient to enable the people to vote.  18 
Section 20.  Meaning of words "electors," "people," "recess of 19 
Legislature," "statewide election," "measure," "circulator," and "written 20 
petition"; written petitions for people's veto; written petitions f or direct 21 
initiative.  As used in any of the 3 preceding sections or in this section the words 22 
"electors" and "people" mean the electors of the State qualified to vote for Governor; 23 
"recess of the Legislature" means the adjournment without day of a session  of the 24 
Legislature; "statewide election" means any election held throughout the State on a 25 
particular day; "measure" means an Act, bill, resolve or resolution proposed by the 26 
people, or 2 or more such, or part or parts of such, as the case may be; "circul ator" means 27 
a person who solicits signatures for written petitions, and who must be a resident of this 28 
State and whose name must appear on the voting list of the city, town or plantation of the 29 
circulator's residence as qualified to vote for Governor; "wri tten petition" means one or 30 
more petitions written or printed, or partly written and partly printed, with the original 31 
signatures of the petitioners attached, verified as to the authenticity of the signatures by 32 
the oath of the circulator that all of the s ignatures to the petition were made in the 33 
presence of the circulator and that to the best of the circulator's knowledge and belief 34 
each signature is the signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and 35 
accompanied by the certificate of the offici al authorized by law to maintain the voting list 36 
or to certify signatures on petitions for voters on the voting list of the city, town or 37 
plantation in which the petitioners reside that their names appear on the voting list of the 38 
city, town or plantation of the official as qualified to vote for Governor.  The oath of the 39 
circulator must be sworn to in the presence of a person authorized by law to administer 40 
oaths.  Written petitions for a people's veto pursuant to Article IV, Part Third, Section 17 41 
must be  submitted to the appropriate officials of cities, towns or plantations, or state 42 
election officials as authorized by law, for determination of whether the petitioners are 43 
qualified voters by the hour of 5:00 p.m., on the 5th day before the petition must b e filed 44 
in the office of the Secretary of State  Lieutenant Governor , or, if such 5th day is a 45 
Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday, by 5:00 p.m., on the next day which is not a 46 
 
 Page 4 - 127LR2019(01) -1 
 Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday.  Written petitions for a direct initiat ive pursuant to 1 
Article IV, Part Third, Section 18 must be submitted to the appropriate officials of cities, 2 
towns or plantations, or state election officials as authorized by law, for determination of 3 
whether the petitioners are qualified voters by the ho ur of 5:00 p.m., on the 10th day 4 
before the petition must be filed in the office of the Secretary of State  Lieutenant 5 
Governor , or, if such 10th day is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday, by 5:00 p.m., on 6 
the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday  or a legal holiday.  Such officials must 7 
complete the certification of only those petitions submitted by these deadlines and must 8 
return them to the circulators or their agents within 2 days for a petition for a people's 9 
veto and within 5 days for a petit ion for a direct initiative, Saturdays, Sundays and legal 10 
holidays excepted, of the date on which such petitions were submitted to them.  11 
Signatures on petitions not submitted to the appropriate local or state officials by these 12 
deadlines may not be certif ied.  The petition shall set forth the full text of the measure 13 
requested or proposed.  Petition forms shall be furnished or approved by the Secretary of 14 
State  Lieutenant Governor  upon written application signed and notarized and submitted 15 
to the office of  the Secretary of State  Lieutenant Governor  by a resident of this State 16 
whose name must appear on the voting list of the city, town or plantation of that resident 17 
as qualified to vote for Governor.  The full text of a measure submitted to a vote of the 18 
people under the provisions of the Constitution need not be printed on the official ballots, 19 
but, until otherwise provided by the Legislature, the Secretary of State  Lieutenant 20 
Governor  shall prepare the ballots in such form as to present the question or ques tions 21 
concisely and intelligibly.  22 
Section 22.  Election officers and officials, how governed.  Until the 23 
Legislature shall enact further laws not inconsistent with the Constitution for applying the 24 
people's veto and direct initiative, the election officers  and other officials shall be 25 
governed by the provisions of this Constitution and of the general law, supplemented by 26 
such reasonable action as may be necessary to render the preceding sections self 27 
executing.  The Legislature may enact laws not inconsiste nt with the Constitution to 28 
establish procedures for determination of the validity of written petitions.  Such laws shall 29 
include provision for judicial review of any determination, to be completed within 100 30 
days from the date of filing of a written petit ion in the office of the Secretary of State  31 
Lieutenant Governor . 32 
Constitution, Art. V, Pt. First, §§2, 3, 4, 14 and 15 are amended to read:  33 
Section 2.  Term of office; reelection eligibility.  The Governor shall be elected 34 
by the qualified electors, and sh all hold the office for 4 years from the first Wednesday 35 
after the first Tuesday of January next following the election and until the successor to 36 
the Governor has been duly elected and qualified.  The person who has served 2 37 
consecutive popular elective 4 -year terms of office as Governor shall be ineligible to 38 
succeed himself or herself.  In the election of Governor and Lieutenant Governor, voting 39 
for such offices shall be as a unit.  Neither candidate's name shall appear on the ballot 40 
except in conjunctio n with the name of the candidate for the other office.  41 
Section 3.  Election; votes to be returned to Lieutenant Governor; 42 
Lieutenant Governor to lay lists before the Senate and House of 43 
Representatives; provision in case of tie.  The meetings for election of Governor 44 
 
 Page 5 - 127LR2019(01) -1 
 and Lieutenant Governor  shall be notified, held and regulated and votes shall be received, 1 
sorted, counted and declared and recorded, in the same manner as those for Senators and 2 
Representatives.  Copies of lists of votes shall be sealed and re turned to the secretary's  3 
Lieutenant Governor's  office in the same manner and at the same time as those for 4 
Senators.  The Secretary of State  Lieutenant Governor  for the time being shall, on the 5 
first Wednesday after the first Tuesday of January then next,  lay the lists returned to the 6 
secretary's  Lieutenant Governor's  office before the Senate and House of Representatives 7 
to be by them examined, together with the ballots cast if they so elect, and they shall 8 
determine the number of votes duly cast for the office offices  of Governor and Lieutenant 9 
Governor , and in case of a choice by plurality of all of the votes returned they shall 10 
declare and publish the same.  If there shall be a tie between the 2  persons having the 11 
largest number of votes for in the elect ion of  Governor and Lieutenant Governor , the 12 
House of Representatives and the Senate meeting in joint session, and each member of 13 
said bodies having a single vote, shall elect one of said 2 persons  from the candidates  14 
having so received an equal number of votes and the person so elected by the Senate and 15 
House of Representatives shall be declared  the Governor and the Lieutenant Governor . 16 
Section 4.  Qualifications.  The Governor shall, at the commencement of the 17 
Governor's term, be not less than 30 years of  age; a citizen of the United States for at least 18 
15 years, have been 5 years a resident of the State; and at the time of election and during 19 
the term for which elected, be a resident of said State.  The Lieutenant Governor shall, at 20 
the commencement of th e Governor's term, be not less than 30 years of age; a citizen of 21 
the United States for at least 15 years, have been 5 years a resident of the State; and at the 22 
time of election and during the term for which elected, be a resident of said State.  23 
Section 14 .  Vacancy, how supplied.  Whenever the office of Governor shall 24 
become vacant because of the death, resignation or removal of a Governor in office, or 25 
any other cause, the President of the Senate  Lieutenant Governor  shall assume the office 26 
of Governor until another Governor shall be duly qualified.  When the vacancy occurs 27 
more than 90 days preceding the date of the primary election for nominating candidates to 28 
be voted for at the biennial election next succeeding, the President of the Senate shall 29 
assume the office of Governor until the first Wednesday after the first Tuesday of January 30 
following the biennial election.  At the biennial election, a Governor shall be elected to 31 
fill the unexpired term created by the vacancy.  When the vacancy occurs less tha n 90 32 
days preceding the date of a primary election the President of the Senate shall fill the 33 
unexpired term . 34 
Whenever the offices of Governor, and President of the Senate  Lieutenant Governor  35 
are vacant at the same time, the Speaker of the House of Represe ntatives  President of the 36 
Senate  shall assume the office of Governor for the same term and under the same 37 
conditions as the President of the Senate .  When the vacancies in the offices of Governor 38 
and Lieutenant Governor occur more than 90 days preceding th e date of the primary 39 
election for nominating candidates to be voted for at the biennial election next 40 
succeeding, the President of the Senate shall assume the office of Governor until the first 41 
Wednesday after the first Tuesday of January following the bi ennial election.  At the 42 
biennial election, a Governor and a Lieutenant Governor shall be elected to fill the 43 
unexpired terms created by the vacancies.  When the vacancies occur less than 90 days 44 
 
 Page 6 - 127LR2019(01) -1 
 preceding the date of a primary election the President of th e Senate shall fill the 1 
unexpired term of Governor.  2 
Whenever the offices of Governor, Lieutenant Governor and  President of the Senate 3 
and Speaker of the House of Representatives  are vacant at the same time, the person 4 
acting as Secretary of State  Speaker o f the House of Representatives  for the time being 5 
shall exercise the office of Governor and shall forthwith by proclamation convene the 6 
Senate and the House of Representatives which shall fill respectively the vacancies in the 7 
offices of the President of t he Senate and the Speaker of the House , and by joint ballot of 8 
the Senators and Representatives in convention choose a person who shall assume the 9 
office of Governor for the same term and under the same conditions as the President of 10 
the Senate .  When the vacancies in the offices of Governor, Lieutenant Governor and 11 
President of the Senate occur more than 90 days preceding the date of the primary 12 
election for nominating candidates to be voted for at the biennial election next 13 
succeeding, the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall assume the office of 14 
Governor until the first Wednesday after the first Tuesday of January following the 15 
biennial election.  At the biennial election, a Governor and a Lieutenant Governor shall 16 
be elected to fill the unexpire d terms created by the vacancies in the positions of 17 
Governor and Lieutenant Governor.  When the vacancies occur less than 90 days 18 
preceding the date of a primary election the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall 19 
fill the unexpired term of Governo r. 20 
Mental or physical disability of the Governor continuously for more than 6 21 
months.  Whenever for 6 months a Governor in office shall have been continuously 22 
unable to discharge the powers and duties of that office because of mental or physical 23 
disability  such office shall be deemed vacant.  Such vacancy shall be declared by the 24 
Supreme Judicial Court upon presentment to it of a joint resolution declaring the ground 25 
of the vacancy, adopted by a vote of 2/3 of the Senators and Representatives in 26 
convention,  and upon notice, hearing before the court and a decision by a majority of the 27 
court that ground exists for declaring the office to be vacant.  28 
Section 15.  Temporary mental or physical disability of Governor.  29 
Whenever the Governor is unable to discharge t he powers and duties of that office 30 
because of mental or physical disability, the President of the Senate  Lieutenant Governor , 31 
or if that office is vacant, the Speaker of the House of Representatives  President of the 32 
Senate , shall exercise the powers and d uties of the office of Governor until the Governor 33 
is again able to discharge the powers and duties of that office, or until the office of 34 
Governor is declared to be vacant or until another Governor shall be duly qualified.  35 
Whenever the Governor is unable to discharge the powers and duties of that office, 36 
the Governor may so certify to the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, in which 37 
case and upon notice from the Chief Justice, the President of the Senate  Lieutenant 38 
Governor , or if that office is v acant, the Speaker of the House of Representatives  39 
President of the Senate , shall exercise the powers and duties of the office of Governor 40 
until such time as the Governor shall certify to the Chief Justice that the Governor is able 41 
to discharge such powers  and duties and the Chief Justice shall so notify the officer who 42 
is exercising the powers and duties of the office of Governor.  43 
 
 Page 7 - 127LR2019(01) -1 
 When the Secretary of State  Lieutenant Governor  shall have reason to believe that the 1 
Governor is unable to discharge the dutie s of that office, the Secretary of State  Lieutenant 2 
Governor  may so certify to the Supreme Judicial Court, declaring the reason for such 3 
belief.  After notice to the Governor, a hearing before the court and a decision by a 4 
majority of the court that the Go vernor is unable to discharge the duties of the office of 5 
Governor, the court shall notify the President of the Senate  Lieutenant Governor , or if 6 
that office is vacant the Speaker of the House of Representatives  President of the Senate , 7 
of such inability a nd that officer shall exercise the functions, powers and duties of the 8 
office of Governor until such time as the Secretary of State  Lieutenant Governor  or the 9 
Governor shall certify to the court that the Governor is able to discharge the duties of the 10 
office of Governor and the court, after notice to the Governor and a hearing before the 11 
court, decides that the Governor is able to discharge the duties of that office and so 12 
notifies the officer who is exercising the powers and duties of the office of Governo r. 13 
Whenever either the President of the Senate  Lieutenant Governor  or Speaker of the 14 
House of Representatives  President of the Senate  shall exercise the office of Governor, 15 
the officer shall receive only the compensation of Governor, but the officer's duti es as 16 
President  Lieutenant Governor  or Speaker  President of the Senate  shall be suspended; and 17 
the Senate or House  shall fill the vacancy resulting from such suspension, until the officer 18 
shall cease to exercise the office of Governor.  19 
Constitution, Art. V , Pt. Second, headnote is amended to read:  20 
Part Second  21 
Secretary  Lieutenant Governor . 22 
Constitution, Art. V, Pt. Second, §§1, 1 -A, 2, 3 and 4 are amended to read:  23 
Section 1.  Election.  The Secretary of State  Lieutenant Governor  shall be chosen 24 
biennially a t the first session of the Legislature, by joint ballot of the Senators and 25 
Representatives in convention  elected by the qualified electors, and shall hold the office 26 
for 4 years from the first Wednesday after the first Tuesday of January next following th e 27 
election and until the successor to the Lieutenant Governor has been duly elected and 28 
qualified.  The person who has served 2 consecutive popular elective 4 -year terms of 29 
office as Lieutenant Governor shall be ineligible to succeed himself or herself . 30 
Section 1 -A.  Succession to the office of Lieutenant Governor.  If a vacancy 31 
occurs in the office of the Secretary of State  Lieutenant Governor , the first deputy 32 
secretary of state  Lieutenant Governor  shall act as the Secretary of State  Lieutenant 33 
Governor  until a Secretary of State  Lieutenant Governor  is elected by the Legislature 34 
during the current session if in session, or at the next regular or special session  in 35 
accordance with Article V, Part Second, Section 1 . 36 
Section 2.  Records of State; deputies.  The records of the State shall be kept in 37 
the office of the secretary  Lieutenant Governor , who may appoint deputies to that office, 38 
for whose conduct the secretary  Lieutenant Governor  shall be accountable.  39 
 
 Page 8 - 127LR2019(01) -1 
 Section 3.  Attend the Governor, Senate, and House.   The Secretary of State  1 
Lieutenant Governor  shall attend the Governor, Senate and House of Representatives, in 2 
person or by the deputies of the Secretary of State  Lieutenant Governor  as they shall 3 
respectively require.  4 
Section 4.  Records of executive and  legislative departments.  The Secretary 5 
of State  Lieutenant Governor  shall carefully keep and preserve the records of all the 6 
official acts and proceedings of the Governor, Senate and House of Representatives, and, 7 
when required, lay the same before eithe r branch of the Legislature, and perform such 8 
other duties as are enjoined by this Constitution, or shall be required by law.  9 
Constitution, Art. IX, §3 is amended to read:  10 
Section 3.  Commissions. All commissions shall be in the name of the State, 11 
signed b y the Governor, attested by the Secretary  Lieutenant Governor  or a deputy of the 12 
Secretary  Lieutenant Governor  and have the seal of the State thereto affixed.  13 
Constitution, Art. IX, §24, sub -§1 is amended to read:  14 
1.  Procedure.  Beginning in 2021 and ever y 10 years thereafter, when the Secretary 15 
of State  Lieutenant Governor  has received notification of the number of congressional 16 
seats to which the State is entitled and the Federal Decennial Census population count is 17 
final, the Legislative Apportionment C ommission, established every 10 years pursuant to 18 
Article IV, Part Third, Section 1 -A, shall review the existing congressional districts.  If 19 
the districts do not conform to Supreme Judicial Court guidelines, the commission shall 20 
reapportion the State into  congressional districts.  21 
In making such a reapportionment, the commission shall ensure that each 22 
congressional district is formed of compact and contiguous territory and crosses political 23 
subdivisions the least number of times necessary to establish distr icts as equally 24 
populated as possible.  The commission shall submit its plan to the Clerk of the House of 25 
Representatives no later than June 1st of the year in which apportionment is required. The 26 
Legislature shall enact the submitted plan of the commissio n or a plan of its own in 27 
regular or special session by a vote of 2/3 of the members of each House by June 11th of 28 
the year in which apportionment is required to the Clerk of the House of Representatives. 29 
This action is subject to the Governor's approval, as provided in Article IV, Part Third, 30 
Section 2.  31 
Constitution, Art. X, §6 is amended to read:  32 
Section 6.  Constitution to be arranged by Chief Justice of the Supreme 33 
Judicial Court; Constitution to be enrolled and printed with laws; supreme 34 
law of the Sta te.  The Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court shall arrange the 35 
Constitution, as amended, under appropriate titles and in proper articles, parts and 36 
sections, omitting all sections, clauses and words not in force and making no other 37 
changes in the p rovisions or language thereof, and shall submit the same to the 38 
Legislature; and such arrangement of the Constitution shall be made and submitted to the 39 
regular session of the Legislature in 1973 and every 10 years thereafter unless sooner 40 
 
 Page 9 - 127LR2019(01) -1 
 authorized by th e Legislature; and the draft and arrangement, when approved by the 1 
Legislature, shall be enrolled on parchment and deposited in the office of the Secretary of 2 
State  Lieutenant Governor ; and printed copies thereof shall be prefixed to the books 3 
containing t he Revised Statutes of the State.  And the Constitution, with the amendments 4 
made thereto, in accordance with the provisions thereof, shall be the supreme law of the 5 
State.  6 
; and be it further  7 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effectiv e date. 8 
Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 9 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 10 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month  of November 11 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 12 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  13 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to eliminate the 14 
position of Secretary  of State and replace it with the position of 15 
Lieutenant Governor, who would be:  16 
1.  Elected by popular vote and on the same ballot as is the Governor in a 17 
general statewide election;  18 
2.  Limited to serving 2 consecutive terms;  19 
3.  Subject to the same elig ibility requirements as is the Governor;  20 
4.  First in line of succession to the position of Governor in the event of 21 
the Governor's death, resignation or removal from office; and  22 
5.  Responsible for the duties currently held by the Secretary of State 23 
regar ding storing and archiving official state records, overseeing the 24 
citizen's initiative and people's veto processes and overseeing elections 25 
and voting processes?"  26 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 27 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 28 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 29 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of  30 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 31 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 32 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the ame ndment 33 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 34 
further  35 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 36 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, ret urns and copies 37 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  38 
 
 Page 10 - 127LR2019(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to eliminate the position 2 
of Secretary of State and replace it with the position of Lieutenant Go vernor, to be elected 3 
by popular vote and on the same ballot as is the Governor.  Under this resolution, a 4 
person serving as Lieutenant Governor:  5 
1.  Is limited to serving 2 consecutive terms;  6 
2.  Is subject to the same eligibility requirements as is the G overnor;  7 
3.  Is first in line of succession to the position of Governor in the event of the 8 
Governor's death, resignation or removal from office; and  9 
4.  Is responsible for the duties currently held by the Secretary of State regarding 10 
storing and archiving  official state records, overseeing elections and voting processes and 11 
overseeing the citizen's initiative and people's veto processes.  12 
 
