 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1498  
H.P. 1021  House of Representatives, December 23, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Clarify Medicaid Managed Care Ombudsman Services  
 
 
 
Approved for  introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
203. 
Received by the Clerk of the House on December 21, 2015.  Referred to the Committee on 
Health and Human Services pursuant to Joint Rule 308.2 and ordered printed pursuant to  Joint 
Rule 401.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative VACHON of Scarborough.  
Cosponsored by Senator VOLK of Cumberland and  
Representatives: BATTLE of South Portland, COREY of Windham, FOLEY of Wells, 
GERRISH of Lebanon, GINZLER of Bridgton, HEAD of Bethel, HYMANSON of York, 
MAKER of Calais, MALABY of Hancock, McCLELLAN of Raymond, McELWEE of 
Caribou, ORDWAY of Standish, PICCHIOTTI of Fairfield, PICKETT of Dixfield, TUELL of 
East Machias, Senators: CYRWAY of Kennebec, DAVIS of Piscat aquis, VALENTINO of 
York.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2454(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง3174 -X, as enacted by PL 1999, c. 681, ยง1, is repealed and the 2 
following enacted in its place:  3 
ยง3174 -X.  Contracted ombudsman services  4 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section , unless the context otherwise indicates, the 5 
following terms have the following meanings.  6 
A.  "Children's health insurance program" means the state children's health insurance 7 
program under Title XXI of the Social Security Act.  8 
B.  "Eligible member" means  a person who is eligible to participate as a member or 9 
beneficiary of the MaineCare program or the children's health insurance program.  10 
C.  "Medicaid managed care" means all Medicaid and children's health insurance 11 
program programs and services that are d etermined by the United States Department 12 
of Health and Human Services to be managed care programs. Such managed care 13 
programs include but are not limited to primary care case management and health 14 
homes or other patient -centered medical homes that include  MaineCare or children's 15 
health insurance program members, including behavioral health homes.  16 
D.  "Ombudsman" means the director of the program and persons employed or 17 
volunteering to perform the work of the program.  18 
E.  "Outreach and education" includes, but is not limited to, work site and 19 
community -based training and workshops; outreach at events such as town fairs, 20 
expositions and health fairs; development of mailings about coverage options, open 21 
enrollment periods and other important updates; informati on hotline response, 22 
including providing information and referrals to members and eligible members who 23 
call; and screening for eligibility for coverage programs, including programs other 24 
than Medicaid programs.  25 
F.  "Program" means the ombudsman program est ablished under this section.  26 
2.  Program established.  The ombudsman program is established as an independent 27 
program to provide ombudsman services to the Medicaid managed care population 28 
regarding Medicaid services provided by the department and the depar tment's office for 29 
family independence and office of MaineCare services.  The program shall consider and 30 
promote the best interests of the Medicaid and children's health insurance program 31 
populations, answer inquiries and investigate, advise and work towar d resolution of 32 
complaints of infringement of the rights of a member or eligible member.  The program 33 
shall include outreach and education to eligible members and those who serve eligible 34 
members, including health care providers, social service providers a nd health insurance 35 
navigators and other enrollment professionals.  The program shall function through the 36 
staff of the program, subcontractors and any volunteers recruited and trained to assist in 37 
the duties of the program.  38 
3.  Contracted services; politi cal activity prohibited.  The program shall operate by 39 
contract with a nonprofit organization that is best able to provide services on a statewide 40 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR2454(01) -1 
 basis.  The ombudsman may not be actively involved in state -level political party 1 
activities or publicly endo rse, solicit funds for or make contributions to political parties 2 
on the state level or candidates for statewide elective office.  The ombudsman may not be 3 
a candidate for or hold any statewide elective or appointive public office.  4 
4.  Program services.  The first priority in the work of the program and the contract 5 
for ombudsman services under subsection 3 must be case -specific advocacy and 6 
enrollment services.  In performing services under this section, the program, as it 7 
determines to be appropriate, may  create and maintain records and case -specific reports. 8 
The program may:  9 
A.  Provide information to the public about the services of the program through a 10 
comprehensive outreach program.  The program shall provide information through a 11 
toll-free telephone number or numbers;  12 
B.  Answer inquiries, investigate and work toward resolution of complaints regarding 13 
the performance and services of the department and participate in conferences, 14 
meetings and studies that may improve the performance of the department;  15 
C.  Provide services to members and eligible members to assist them in protecting 16 
their rights;  17 
D.  Inform members and eligible members of the means of obtaining services from 18 
the department;  19 
E.  Provide information and referral services;  20 
F.  Analyze and p rovide opinions and recommendations to agencies, the Governor 21 
and the Legislature on state programs, rules, policies and laws;  22 
G.  Determine what types of complaints and inquiries will be accepted for action by 23 
the program and adopt policies and procedures  regarding communication with 24 
members and eligible members making inquiries or complaints and the department;  25 
H.  Apply for and use grants, gifts and funds for the purpose of performing the duties 26 
of the program; and  27 
I.  Collect and analyze records and dat a relevant to the duties and activities of the 28 
program and make reports as required by law or as the department considers 29 
appropriate.  30 
5.  Information for members and eligible members; eligibility.  The program, in 31 
consultation with appropriate interested parties, shall provide information about eligibility 32 
requirements and procedures for enrolling in MaineCare to members and eligible 33 
members, including their dependents.  The providing of the information under this 34 
subsection does not constitute representat ion of members and eligible members. Members 35 
and eligible members may seek and receive information regardless of whether they are 36 
represented by legal counsel.  The information must be provided free of charge to 37 
members and eligible members.  38 
This subsectio n does not create new rights or obligations concerning the provision of 39 
legal advice or representation of members and eligible members.  40 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR2454(01) -1 
 6.  Confidentiality of records.  Information held by or records or case -specific 1 
reports maintained by the program are c onfidential. Disclosure may be made only if the 2 
ombudsman determines such disclosure is lawful and in the best interest of the member or 3 
eligible member.  4 
7.  Liability.  Any person who in good faith submits a complaint or inquiry to the 5 
program pursuant to  this section is immune from any civil or criminal liability arising 6 
from that complaint or inquiry.  For the purpose of any civil or criminal proceedings, 7 
there is a rebuttable presumption that any person acting pursuant to this section did so in 8 
good fai th.  The ombudsman and employees and volunteers of the program are employees 9 
of the State for the purposes of the Maine Tort Claims Act.  10 
8.  Information.  Information about the services of the program must be given to all 11 
members and eligible members who r eceive or are eligible to receive services from the 12 
department and from persons and entities contracting with the department for the 13 
provision of Medicaid services.  14 
9.  Report.  The program shall report to the department according to the requirements 15 
of the program contract under subsection 3.  16 
10.  Funding.  The department shall contract for ombudsman services under this 17 
section as long as nonstate funding is available for use as the state seed money for such a 18 
contract and General Fund money is not require d. 19 
SUMMARY  20 
Current law requires the Department of Health and Human Services to contract for 21 
ombudsman services for the Medicaid managed care population as long as nonstate 22 
funding is available.  This bill retains that provision and establishes the ombudsma n 23 
program in statute, describes the Medicaid managed care population and specifies the 24 
duties of the ombudsman program, which include providing services and outreach for 25 
members and eligible members of the Medicaid program and the state children's health 26 
insurance program under Title XXI of the Social Security Act.  27 
 
