 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 205  
H.P. 148  House of Representatives, January 29, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Facilitate the Development and Operation of a Group 
Home for Post-High School Adults with Developmental Disabilities  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative HUBBELL of Bar Harbor.  
Cosponsored by Senator LANGLEY of Hancock.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0924(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to provide necessary statutory support for a proposal for the 5 
development and operation of a gro up assisted living facility in Bar Harbor for post -high 6 
school adults with developmental disabilities operated by Local Solutions, a Maine 7 
corporation, referred to in this legislation as "the project."  The project's goal is to assist 8 
the facility resident s in building independent lives in the local community, supported by 9 
funds provided by the Department of Health and Human Services through a MaineCare 10 
waiver program or other possible sources of funding.  11 
The project has partnered with Community Housing of Maine, Inc., a corporation 12 
registered in the State, to develop a model to create innovative and accessible housing for 13 
young adults with intellectual, physical and cognitive disabilities to be replicated in other 14 
communities throughout the State.  The site  of the project is the donated former parish 15 
hall of St. Saviour's Episcopal Church in Bar Harbor, which will be renovated to provide 16 
housing to allow the residents to live as independently as possible while supported by 17 
paid staff and volunteers providing  meals, taking residents to appointments and helping 18 
the residents with health and cleanliness practices and general cleaning and maintenance 19 
of the group home.  The residents will be provided assistance with finding employment 20 
and recreation and with volu nteering in the local community.  The project has sought out 21 
other funding sources, including private fund -raising and housing choice vouchers from 22 
the Federal Government.  23 
 
