 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 330  
H.P. 224  House of Representatives, February 10, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Protect Rights and Privileges Granted under the United 
States Constitution and the Constitution of Maine  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative McCLELLAN of Raymond.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: BICKFORD of Auburn, DUNPHY of Embden, HARLOW 
of Portland, HAWKE of Boothbay Harbor, NADEAU of Winslow, O'CONNOR of Berwick, 
PETERSON of Rumford, SHORT of Pittsfield.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1322(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  14 MRSA c. 14 is enacted to read:  2 
CHAPTER 14  3 
APPLICATION OF FOREI GN LAW  4 
§351.  Findings  5 
While the Legislature fully recognizes the right to contract freely under the laws of 6 
this State,  it also recognizes that this right may be reasonably and rationally 7 
circumscribed pursuant to the State's interest to protect and promote rights and privileges 8 
granted under the United States Constitution and the Constitution of Maine.  9 
§352.  Foreign law,  legal code or legal system defined  10 
As used in this chapter, "foreign law, legal code or legal system" means any law, 11 
legal code or legal system of a jurisdiction outside of any state or territory of the United 12 
States, including, but not limited to, intern ational organizations and tribunals, that is 13 
applied by that jurisdiction's courts, administrative bodies or other formal or informal 14 
tribunals.  15 
§353.  Comity to foreign decision  16 
The primary factor that a court, administrative agency, arbitrator, mediator or other 17 
entity or person acting under the authority of state law must consider in granting comity 18 
to a decision rendered under a foreign law, legal code or legal system against a natural 19 
person in this State is whether the decision rendered either violate d or would violate any 20 
right of the natural person in this State guaranteed by the Constitution of Maine or the 21 
United States Constitution or any statute or decision under those constitutions.  22 
§354.  Choice of law  23 
1.  Preservation of constitutional rights.   If a contract, arbitration agreement or 24 
other agreement provides for the choice of a foreign law, legal code or legal system to 25 
govern its interpretation or the resolution of any claim or dispute and if the enforcement 26 
or interpretation of the contract, arbitration agreement or other agreement applying that 27 
choice of law provision either resulted or would result in a violation of any right 28 
guaranteed by the Constitution of Maine or the United States Constitution, the primary 29 
factor in interpretation, enfo rcement or application of the contract, arbitration agreement 30 
or other agreement is preservation of the constitutional rights of the natural person in this 31 
State against whom enforcement is sought, unless otherwise directed by state law.  32 
2.  Voluntary rest riction or limitation.  This chapter may not be interpreted to limit 33 
the right of a natural person of this State to voluntarily restrict or limit that person's own 34 
constitutional rights by contract or specific waiver consistent with constitutional 35 
principl es; however, the language of any such contract or other waiver must be strictly 36 
construed in favor of preserving the constitutional rights of the natural person in this 37 
State.  38 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1322(01) -1 
 §355.  Choice of venue or forum  1 
1.  Preservation of constitutional rights.  If any contract, arbitration agreement or 2 
other agreement provides for the choice of venue or forum outside any state or territory of 3 
the United States and if the enforcement or interpretation of the contract, arbitration 4 
agreement or other agreement applying that choice of venue or forum provision either 5 
resulted or would result in a violation of any right of a natural person in this State 6 
guaranteed by the Constitution of Maine or the United States Constitution, in interpreting 7 
or construing the contract or a rbitration agreement or other agreement, the primary factor 8 
to be considered is whether the contract, arbitration agreement or other agreement can be 9 
interpreted or construed to preserve the constitutional rights of the natural person in this 10 
State against  whom enforcement is sought.  11 
2.  Denial of claim.  If a natural person of this State, subject to personal jurisdiction 12 
in this State, seeks to maintain litigation, arbitration, agency or similarly binding 13 
proceedings in this State and if the courts of this  State find that granting a claim of forum 14 
non conveniens or a related claim violates or would likely violate the constitutional rights 15 
of the nonclaimant in the foreign forum with respect to the matter in dispute, the claim 16 
must be denied.  17 
§356.  Applicat ion 18 
1.  Corporation, partnership or other business entity.  This chapter does not apply 19 
to a corporation, partnership, limited liability corporation, professional corporation or any 20 
other legal business entity recognized under the laws of the State.  21 
2.  Actual or foreseeable violations.  This chapter applies only to actual or to 22 
foreseeable violations of constitutional rights of a natural person in this State from a 23 
foreign law, legal code or legal system.  24 
SUMMARY  25 
This bill is based on Tennessee Public Acts , 2010, Public Chapter Number 983.  The 26 
bill addresses the application of foreign law in this State.  27 
The bill provides that the factor in considering whether to grant comity to a decision 28 
rendered under any foreign law, legal code or legal system against a  natural person in this 29 
State is whether the constitutional rights under the United States Constitution and the 30 
Constitution of Maine of the person would be protected.  Similarly, if a contract or other 31 
agreement provides for the choice of a foreign law, l egal code or legal system, the 32 
primary factor in the interpretation, enforcement or application of the agreement is the 33 
preservation of the constitutional rights of the natural person in this State.  The right of a 34 
natural person to voluntarily restrict or  limit that person's own constitutional rights 35 
consistent with constitutional principles is not limited by the bill; however, a contract or 36 
specific waiver restricting or limiting rights must be strictly construed in favor of 37 
preserving the constitutional rights of the natural person.  38 
The bill provides that the primary factor to be considered in interpreting or construing 39 
a choice of venue or forum provision is whether it can be interpreted or construed to 40 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR1322(01) -1 
 preserve the constitutional rights of the natural p erson in this State against whom 1 
enforcement is sought.  A claim for forum non conveniens or a related claim must be 2 
denied if the court determines that granting the claim violates or would likely violate the 3 
constitutional rights of the nonclaimant in the  foreign forum with respect to the matter in 4 
dispute.  5 
The bill does not apply to a corporation, partnership or other legal business entity.  6 
The bill applies only to actual or to foreseeable violations of the constitutional rights 7 
of a natural person in thi s State from a foreign law, legal code or legal system.  8 
 
