 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 74  
H.P. 68  House of Representatives, January 16, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Establish a Task Force To Ensure Equity in the Benefits 
Provided to Military Service Members  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative HANINGTON of Lincoln.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, LONG of Sherman, STANLEY of 
Medway, TURNER of Burlington, WALLACE of Dexter.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0633(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Task force established.  Resolved:  That the Task Force to Ensure 1 
Equity in the Benefits Provided to Military Service Members in the State, referred to in 2 
this resolve as "the task force," is established; and be it further  3 
Sec. 2.  Task force memb ership.  Resolved:  That the task force consists of 9 4 
members as follows:  5 
1.  Two members of the Senate serving on the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 6 
and Legal Affairs, appointed by the President of the Senate;  7 
2.  A representative of the American Le gion, appointed by the President of the 8 
Senate;  9 
3.  Three members of the House of Representatives serving on the Joint Standing 10 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, appointed by the Speaker of the House;  11 
4.  A representative of an honor guard associati on within the State, appointed by the 12 
Speaker of the House;  13 
5.  A representative of the Department of Maine Marine Corps League, appointed by 14 
the Governor; and  15 
6.  The Commissioner of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management or the 16 
commissioner's designe e; and be it further  17 
Sec. 3.  Compensation.  Resolved:  That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 353, public 18 
members of the task force are not entitled to reimbursement for their expenses; and be it 19 
further  20 
Sec. 4.  Chairs. Resolved:  That the first -named Senate m ember is the Senate 21 
chair and the first -named House of Representives member is the House chair of the task 22 
force; and be it further  23 
Sec. 5.  Appointments; convening of task force.  Resolved:  That all 24 
appointments must be made no later than 30 days followi ng the effective date of this 25 
resolve. The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 26 
Council once all appointments have been completed. After appointment of all members, 27 
the chairs shall call and convene the first meetin g of the task force. If 30 days or more 28 
after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been 29 
made, the chairs may request authority and the Legislative Council may grant authority 30 
for the task force to meet and conduct its business; and be it further  31 
Sec. 6.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the task force shall study the benefits established 32 
for military service members and veterans in the State and develop recommendations to 33 
ensure the benefits are being provided.  The task fo rce shall ascertain if there is equity in 34 
the establishment, provision and application of these benefits and if the benefits are 35 
known to those eligible to receive them. The benefits include, but are not limited to, 36 
property tax exemptions, free automobile  registration, automobile sales tax exemption, 37 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0633(01) -1 
 complimentary and reduced -rate licenses to hunt, trap and fish and day use passes to state 1 
parks and historic sites; and be it further  2 
Sec. 7.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:  That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 35 3, the 3 
Legislative Council shall provide necessary staffing services to the task force; and be it 4 
further  5 
Sec. 8.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than December 2, 2015, the task force 6 
shall submit a report that includes its findings and recommendations , including suggested 7 
legislation, to the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. The joint 8 
standing committee is authorized to introduce a bill to the Second Regular Session of the 9 
127th Legislature related to the subject matter of the rep ort. 10 
SUMMARY  11 
This resolve establishes the Task Force to Ensure Equity in the Benefits Provided to 12 
Military Service Members in the State.  The task force is directed to study and find out if 13 
there is equity in the establishment, provision and application of  the benefits and if the 14 
benefits are known to those eligible to receive them. The benefits include, but are not 15 
limited to, property tax exemptions, free automobile registration, automobile sales tax 16 
exemption, complimentary and reduced -rate licenses to h unt, trap and fish and day use 17 
passes to state parks and historic sites. The task force is also directed to submit a report to 18 
the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, and the joint standing 19 
committee is authorized to introduce a bill to  the Second Regular Session of the 127th 20 
Legislature based on that report.  21 
 
