 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1469  
S.P. 567  In Senate, December 18, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Promote Private Fund -raising for the Maine Educational 
Center for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing and the Governor Baxter 
School for the Deaf  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
203. 
Received by the Secretary of the Senate on December 18, 2015.  Referred to the Committee 
on Educat ion and Cultural Affairs pursuant to Joint Rule 308.2 and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator BREEN of Cumberland.  
Cosponsored by Representative PIERCE of Falmouth and  
Senators: HASKELL of Cumberland, LANGLEY of Hancock, MILLETT of Cumberland, 
Representatives: BEAVERS of South Berwick, MAKER of Calais.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2269(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง7413 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง7413.  Private support organization  3 
1.  Designation of private support organization.  The executive director shall 4 
designate a nonprofit organizatio n as the private support organization for the school.  The 5 
designated organization must be incorporated as a nonprofit corporation under the laws of 6 
the State, and its sole purpose, as reflected in its bylaws, must be to organize and foster 7 
support for the  school and the school's programs.  8 
2.  Nonvoting member on board of directors.  The executive director, or the 9 
executive director's designee, shall serve as a nonvoting ex officio member of the private 10 
support organization's board of directors.  11 
3.  Plan of  work.  The executive director shall negotiate an annual memorandum of 12 
understanding between the school and the private support organization that outlines a 13 
plan of work identifying priority projects of mutual benefit and cooperation.  14 
4.  Use of property.  The executive director may permit the appropriate use of fixed 15 
property, equipment and facilities of the school by the private support organization.  Such 16 
use must be directly in keeping with the purpose of the private support organization as set 17 
out in s ubsection 1 and must comply with all appropriate state policies and procedures.  18 
SUMMARY  19 
This bill requires the Executive Director of the Maine Educational Center for the 20 
Deaf and Hard of Hearing and the Governor Baxter School for the Deaf to designate a 21 
nonprofit organization as the private support organization for the Maine Educational 22 
Center for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing and the Governor Baxter School for the Deaf to 23 
organize and foster support for the Maine Educational Center for the Deaf and Hard of 24 
Hearing and the Governor Baxter School for the Deaf and its programs.  25 
 
