 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled p aper  
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 292  
S.P. 106  In Senate, February 5, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Require Hospitals To Allow Patients To Provide Their 
Own Medications  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator PATRICK of Oxford.  
Cosponsored by Representative PETERSON of Rumford and  
Senators: BRAKEY of Androscoggin,  DUTREMBLE of York, GRATWICK of Penobscot, 
LIBBY of Androscoggin, MILLETT of Cumberland, Representatives: GILBERT of Jay, 
HERBIG of Belfast, MASTRACCIO of Sanford.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0909(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง1726 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง1726.  Patient medication  3 
1.  Request to provide own medication.  If a patient of an institution licensed as a 4 
hospital under chapter 405, whether adm itted to the hospital or in the hospital on 5 
observation status, makes a request to provide the patient's own medication, the hospital 6 
shall:  7 
A.  Provide to the patient a request form on which to make a written request.  The 8 
patient shall complete the reque st form and list each of the patient's own medications 9 
that the patient requests to provide, including the name and dosage of each 10 
medication; and  11 
B.  Review the patient's medical condition, records of any medications ordered by the 12 
patient's health care p ractitioners and any medications that the patient listed on the 13 
request form under paragraph A and determine whether the patient should continue to 14 
take the medication while in the hospital and whether it is safe and appropriate for the 15 
patient to provide the medication.  If the hospital determines that it is safe and 16 
appropriate for the patient to provide the medication, the hospital shall approve the 17 
request and provide secure storage for the medication and a procedure by which the 18 
patient may have access  to the medication for administration as prescribed by the 19 
patient's health care practitioner.  20 
SUMMARY  21 
This bill provides a process by which a patient admitted to a hospital or on 22 
observation status in a hospital may request and obtain approval to provide the patient's 23 
own medication while in the hospital.  24 
 
