 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 373  
S.P. 141  In Senate, February 12, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Allow a Moose Permit To Be Transferred to a Family 
Member  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator MIRAMANT of Knox.  
Cosponsored by Representative EVANGELOS of Friendship and  
Senators: DAVIS of Piscataquis, VALENTINO of York, Representatives: CRAFTS of Lisbon, 
GRANT of Gardiner, JORGENSEN of Portland, PIERCE of Dresden.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1180(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  12 MRSA ยง11154, sub -ยง15 is enacted to read:  2 
15.  Moose permit transfer.  A person who holds a valid moose permit may transfer 3 
that permit to a family member who meets the eligibility an d permit requirements under 4 
this section and who is not otherwise prohibited from holding the moose permit.  A 5 
permittee may transfer a moose permit to a family member until 30 days prior to the start 6 
of the applicable moose hunting season.  A moose permit  may not be transferred more 7 
than once.  A transferor retains any accumulated points received prior to obtaining a 8 
moose permit and is eligible to obtain another moose permit the following year.  A 9 
transferee is subject to the elimination of any accumulate d points under subsection 8 and 10 
the 3 -year ineligibility period under subsection 5.  For purposes of this subsection, 11 
"family member" means the transferor's spouse, parent, grandparent, stepparent, brother, 12 
sister, half -brother, half -sister, child or adopt ed child.  13 
The commissioner shall adopt rules to implement this subsection and may establish a 14 
transfer fee to recover administrative costs associated with transferring moose permits.  15 
Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine technical rules as  defined in Title 5, 16 
chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. 17 
SUMMARY  18 
This bill authorizes a person who holds a moose permit to transfer that permit to a 19 
family member.  The bill defines "family member."  It also authorizes the Commissioner 20 
of Inland Fisheries and Wil dlife to adopt rules to establish an administrative fee to cover 21 
costs associated with transferring moose permits.  22 
 
