 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 418  
H.P. 285  House of Representatives, February 12, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Study the Use of Social Impact Bonds as a Funding 
Mechanism for Public Education Programs in Maine  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative POULIOT of Augusta.  
Cosponsored by Senator LANGLEY of Hancock and  
Representatives: BROOKS of Lewiston, DOORE of Augusta, EDGECOMB of Fort Fairfield, 
FOWLE of Vassalboro, WHITE of Washburn.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1416(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Education Research Institute to study use of social impact bonds 1 
to fund extended learning programs and prekindergarten programs.  2 
Resolved:  That the Education Research Institute, as established in the Maine Revised 3 
Statutes, Title 20 -A, section 10, shall study the use of social impact bonds to fund 4 
extended learning programs and prekindergarten programs.  For purposes of this resolve, 5 
"social impact bond" means a performance -based bond that operates over a fixed period 6 
of time and for which repay ment to an investor is contingent upon a specific social 7 
outcome being achieved and "extended learning program" means a program that creates 8 
educational opportunities for students whose educational needs and abilities exceed those 9 
addressed by the general curriculum.  A social impact bond generally involves a 10 
government entity partnering with a service provider or outside investor that provides the 11 
financing for the project or service that is the object of the bond with the government 12 
entity not being requi red to pay back the bond unless success is demonstrated by a 13 
measurable outcome; and be it further  14 
Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That the Education Research Institute shall submit a 15 
report with respect to the study under section 1 and any recommended legisl ation to the 16 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs by December 2, 2015.  The 17 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs may report out a bill based 18 
upon the report to the Second Regular Session of the 127th Legislature.  19 
SUMMARY  20 
This resolve requires the University of Maine System's Education Research Institute 21 
to study the use of social impact bonds to fund extended learning programs and 22 
prekindergarten programs.  A social impact bond generally involves a government enti ty 23 
partnering with a service provider or outside investor that provides the financing for the 24 
project or service that is the object of the bond with the government entity not being 25 
required to pay back the bond unless success is demonstrated by a measurabl e outcome.  26 
 
