 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 824  
H.P. 558  House of Representatives, March 10, 2015  
 
 
An Act Regarding Ethanol Motor Fuel  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative O'CONNOR of Berwick.  
Cosponsored by Senator BRAKEY of Androscoggin and  
Representatives: BEAVERS of South Berwick, BLACK of Wilton, CHACE of Durham, 
COREY of Windham, CRAFTS of Lisbon, ESPLING of New Gloucester, FARRIN of 
Norridgewock, FOLEY of Wells, GERRISH of Lebanon, GILBERT of Jay, GINZLER of 
Bridgton, HANLEY of Pittston, HEAD of Bethel, HOBART of Bowdoinham, KINNEY of 
Knox, LOCKM AN of Amherst, LONG of Sherman, LONGSTAFF of Waterville, LYFORD of 
Eddington, MAKER of Calais, McCLELLAN of Raymond, PETERSON of Rumford, 
PICCHIOTTI of Fairfield, PICKETT of Dixfield, PIERCE of Dresden, REED of Carmel, 
RUSSELL of Portland, SIROCKI of Scarb orough, SKOLFIELD of Weld, STEARNS of 
Guilford, THERIAULT of China, TIMBERLAKE of Turner, TUELL of East Machias, 
VACHON of Scarborough, WARD of Dedham, Senators: DAVIS of Piscataquis, 
EDGECOMB of Aroostook, WHITTEMORE of Somerset, WOODSOME of York.  
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1079(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  10 MRSA ยง1457, sub -ยง4 is enacted to read:  2 
4.  Conventional motor fuel.  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, 3 
a motor fuel distributor, franchisor or refiner may not imp ose any condition, restriction, 4 
agreement or understanding that prohibits or limits the sale, resale, transfer or purchase of 5 
conventional, ethanol -free motor fuel products in the State.  6 
Sec. 2.  Stakeholder group; report.   The Commissioner of Environmenta l 7 
Protection, referred to in this section as "the commissioner," shall convene a stakeholder 8 
group to conduct a study regarding motor fuel and fuel additives, including but not 9 
limited to acetaldehyde in ethanol motor fuel.  The commissioner, the Commissio ner of 10 
Transportation, the Commissioner of Economic and Community Development and the 11 
chair of the Public Utilities Commission, or their designees, shall serve as members of the 12 
stakeholder group, and the commissioner shall invite the participation of inte rested 13 
persons and groups, including but not limited to consumer protection groups, small 14 
businesses, motor vehicle dealers and owners of motor fuel refueling stations.  The 15 
stakeholder group shall specifically:  16 
1.  Review the extent to which the State is in compliance with the federal Clean Air 17 
Act Amendments of 1990 with respect to the emissions of acetaldehyde produced by the 18 
combustion of ethanol motor fuel;  19 
2.  Examine whether an increase from 10% ethanol to 15% ethanol in gasoline blends 20 
will increase  the level of acetaldehyde emissions and decrease the State's ability to 21 
comply with the federal Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990;  22 
3.  Conduct a comprehensive review of the statewide costs associated with 23 
acetaldehyde in ethanol motor fuel, including but n ot limited to the corrosive effects of 24 
acetaldehyde on small engines, the effects of acetaldehyde on marine resources in the 25 
State and the negative impact such effects have on business in the State;  26 
4.  Examine the impact of federal subsidies for corn used  to produce ethanol on the 27 
cost of food locally and globally;  28 
5.  Compare the net energy value of corn -derived ethanol to that of ethanol derived 29 
from other products, such as other grains or algae;  30 
6.  Explore alternatives to ethanol motor fuel, including but not limited to biofuels 31 
developed from wood pulp; and  32 
7.  Develop a plan to reduce the supply of ethanol motor fuel in the State.  33 
The commissioner shall report the stakeholder group's findings and recommendations 34 
regarding the study, including any prop osed implementing legislation, to the Joint 35 
Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources by December 1, 2015.  The 36 
committee may report out a bill relating to those recommendations to the Second Regular 37 
Session of the 127th Legislature.  38 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1079(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This bill amends the law regarding ethanol -enhanced motor fuel to clarify that a 2 
motor fuel distributor, franchisor or refiner may not impose any condition, restriction, 3 
agreement or understanding that prohibits or limits the sale, resale, transfer or purc hase of 4 
conventional, ethanol -free motor fuel products in the State.  The bill also directs the 5 
Commissioner of Environmental Protection to convene a stakeholder group to conduct a 6 
study regarding motor fuel and fuel additives, including but not limited to  acetaldehyde in 7 
ethanol motor fuel.  The stakeholder group is directed to study the State's compliance 8 
with the federal Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 with respect to emissions of 9 
acetaldehyde produced by the combustion of ethanol motor fuel, and conduc t a 10 
comprehensive review of the statewide costs associated with the acetaldehyde in ethanol 11 
motor fuel, including the corrosive effects of acetaldehyde on small engines, the effects 12 
of acetaldehyde on marine resources in the State and the negative impact s uch effects 13 
have on business in the State.  The commissioner shall report the stakeholder group's 14 
findings to the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources by 15 
December 1, 2015.  The committee may report out a bill to the Second Regular Session of 16 
the 127th Legislature.  17 
 
