 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recy cled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 329  
H.P. 223  House of Representatives, February 10, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Allow Equipment Rental Companies To Sell Equipment 
Insurance  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Insurance and Financial Services suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative PICCHIOTTI of Fairfield.  
Cosponsored by Senator WHITTEMORE of Somerset and  
Representatives: ESPLING of New Gloucester, FREDETTE of Newport, GUERIN of 
Glenburn, MORRISON of South Portland, TEPLER of Topsham, WALLACE of Dexter, 
WARD of Dedham, Senator: CUSHING of Penobscot.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0688(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง3062 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง3062.  Coverage for rental equipment permitted  3 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 4 
following term s have the following meanings.  5 
A.  "Covered rental agreement" means a written agreement with a term of 30 6 
continuous days or fewer setting forth the terms and conditions governing the use of 7 
covered rental equipment provided by a rental company.  8 
B.  "Cover ed rental equipment" means equipment rented pursuant to a covered rental 9 
agreement for personal or household purposes.  10 
C.  "Rental company" means a person or organization, including a franchisee, in the 11 
business of renting equipment to the public.  12 
2.  Cove rage for rental equipment permitted.  Notwithstanding any other provision 13 
of this Title, a rental company may offer for sale an insurance policy insuring against the 14 
loss of or damage to covered rental equipment under a covered rental agreement.  15 
SUMMARY  16 
This bill allows a rental company to offer for sale an insurance policy insuring 17 
against the loss of or damage to equipment rented for personal or household purposes.  18 
 
