 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 753  
H.P. 506  House of Representatives, March 5, 2015  
 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine To Establish the Right To Hunt and Fish  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative WOOD of Sabattus.  
Cosponsored by Senator BURNS of Washington and  
Representatives:  ALLEY of Beals, BICKFORD of Auburn, BLACK of Wilton, CHACE of 
Durham, CRAFTS of Lisbon, DILLINGHAM of Oxford, ESPLING of New Gloucester, 
HANINGTON of Lincoln, HIGGINS of Dover -Foxcroft, HILLIARD of Belgrade, KINNEY of 
Limington, MALABY of Hancock, MARTIN of Eagle Lake, PARRY of Arundel, REED of 
Carmel, SHORT of Pittsfield, TIMBERLAKE of Turner, WADSWORTH of Hiram, WINSOR 
of Norway, Senators: CUSHING of Penobscot, DAVIS of Piscataquis, President 
THIBODEAU of Waldo.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0346(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IX, ยง26 is enacted to read:  4 
Section 26.  Right to hunt, fish and harvest game and fish.  The right of the 5 
people of this State to hunt, fish and harvest game and fish, including by the use of 6 
traditional methods, may not be infringed, subject to reasonable laws enacted by the 7 
Legislature and reasonable rules adopted by the stat e agency designated for fish and 8 
wildlife management to promote wildlife conservation and management, to maintain 9 
natural resources in trust for public use and to preserve the future of hunting and fishing.  10 
Public hunting and fishing are a preferred means  of managing and controlling wildlife.  11 
This section may not be construed to modify any provision of law relating to eminent 12 
domain, trespass or property rights.  13 
; and be it further  14 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 15 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 16 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 17 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of Novembe r 18 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 19 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  20 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to provide that the 21 
right of the people of this S tate to hunt, fish and harvest game and fish 22 
may not be infringed, subject to reasonable laws and rules, and to provide 23 
that public hunting and fishing are a preferred means of managing and 24 
controlling wildlife?"  25 
The legal voters of each city, town and pla ntation shall vote by ballot on this question 26 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 27 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 28 
declared in open ward, town and planta tion meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 29 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 30 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 31 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 32 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 33 
further  34 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 35 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 36 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  37 
SUMMARY  38 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to provide that the right 39 
of the people of this  State to hunt, fish and harvest game and fish, including by the use of 40 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0346(01) -1 
 traditional methods, may not be infringed, subject to reasonable laws and rules to 1 
promote wildlife conservation and management, to maintain natural resources in trust for 2 
public use a nd to preserve the future of hunting and fishing.  It also provides that public 3 
hunting and fishing are a preferred means of managing and controlling wildlife.  4 
 
