 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 640  
S.P. 233  In Senate, March 3, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Establish a Working Group To Review the Incidental 
Take Permitting Process under the  Endangered Species Laws  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator DAVIS of Piscataquis.  
Cosponsored by Representative SHERMAN of Hodgdon and  
Senators: BRAKEY of Androscoggin, DIAMOND of Cumberland, DILL of Penobscot, 
EDGECOMB of Aroostook, SAVIELLO of Franklin, Representatives: HICKMAN of 
Winthrop, SKOLFIELD of Weld, TIMBERLAKE of Turner.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1375(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to convene working 1 
group.  Resolved:  That the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife shall convene 2 
a working group to recommend statutory amendments or agency rules to implement the 3 
incidental take  permitting process under the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 12, section 4 
12808, subsection 3.  Membership in the working group must include representatives of 5 
interested organizations from related industries, including renewable energy, forest 6 
products, rea l estate development, agriculture and wildlife management.  The report of 7 
the department under section 2 must reflect the different perspectives of the various 8 
members of the working group on the implementation of the incidental take permitting 9 
process; an d be it further  10 
Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That, by December 2, 2015, the Department of Inland 11 
Fisheries and Wildlife shall submit its report on the working group's recommended 12 
legislation to the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.  The joint 13 
standing committee may report out a bill concerning the report to the Second Regular 14 
Session of the 127th Legislature.  15 
SUMMARY  16 
This resolve requires the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to convene a 17 
working group of representatives of  related industries to develop recommended statutory 18 
amendments or agency rules to implement the statute governing the incidental take 19 
permitting process governing the taking of an endangered or threatened species while 20 
engaged in a lawful activity.  21 
 
