 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 526  
S.P. 195  In Senate, February 26, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Require the Department of Health and Human Services 
To Request a Waiver To Prohibit the Use of Food Supplement 
Benefits for the Purchase of Taxable Food Items  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator KATZ of Kennebec.  
Cosponsored by Representative HICKMAN of Winthrop and  
Senators: COLLINS of York, LANGLEY of Hancock, SAVIELLO of Franklin, 
Representatives: FREDETTE of Newport, MAKER of Calais, McCABE of Skowhegan, 
TIMBERLAKE of Turner.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0031(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, the intent of the federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or 3 
SNAP, is to provid e recipients with the means to purchase food; and  4 
Whereas, under the program as administered by the State in accordance with the 5 
requirements established by the United States Department of Agriculture, the use of 6 
benefits to purchase all foods, including t hose with little to no nutritional value, is 7 
permitted; and  8 
Whereas, the purchase of unhealthy products is antithetical to the purpose of the 9 
program; and  10 
Whereas, the State may prohibit the purchase of foods with little to no nutritional 11 
value, which are  generally taxable under state law, only through obtaining a waiver from 12 
the United States Department of Agriculture, a process that may be time -consuming; and  13 
Whereas, the process should be started quickly so that the ban on the use of SNAP 14 
benefits for t he purchase of foods with little to no nutritional value may take place as 15 
soon as possible; and  16 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 17 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislat ion as 18 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 19 
therefore, be it  20 
Sec. 1.  Waiver to prohibit use of benefits for taxable food.  Resolved:  21 
That the Department of Health and Human Services shall request a waive r from the 22 
United States Department of Agriculture to permit the State to prohibit the use of benefits 23 
under the federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program for the purchase of food 24 
items that are otherwise subject to the state sales tax and for bulk  purchases of grocery 25 
staples that, if purchased in smaller quantities, would be considered prepared food and 26 
therefore would be subject to the state sales tax.  The department shall request the waiver 27 
no later than October 1, 2015; and be it further  28 
Sec. 2.  Rulemaking; notice.  Resolved: That, within 60 days of the granting of 29 
the waiver by the United States Department of Agriculture under section 1, the 30 
Department of Health and Human Services shall amend its rules to prohibit the use of 31 
federal Supplemen tal Nutrition Assistance Program benefits for the purchase of food 32 
items that are subject to the state sales tax and for bulk purchases of grocery staples that, 33 
if purchased in smaller quantities, would be considered prepared food and therefore 34 
would be su bject to the state sales tax. The department shall inform retailers in the State 35 
participating in the statewide food supplement program pursuant to the Maine Revised 36 
Statutes, Title 22, section 3104 of the rule change. Rules adopted pursuant to this sectio n 37 
are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. 38 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0031(01) -1 
 Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 1 
legislation takes effect when approved.  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This resolve requires the Department of Health and Hum an Services to request a 4 
waiver from the United States Department of Agriculture to allow Maine to prohibit the 5 
use of federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program benefits for the purchase of 6 
certain food items.  7 
 
