 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 940  
S.P. 331  In Senate, March 17, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Require Hospitals To Provide Information to Parents of 
Infants Regarding Testing for Krabbe Disease  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator SAVIELLO of Franklin.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: BLACK of Wilton, BUCKLAND of Farmington, HARLOW 
of Portland.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0754(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services, Maine Center for 1 
Disease Control and Prevention to develop a pamphlet on Krabbe disease.  2 
Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human Services, Maine Center for 3 
Disease Control and Prevention shall d evelop an information pamphlet on testing for 4 
Krabbe disease to be provided by a hospital to all parents of newborn infants born at the 5 
hospital or to the parents of a child up to 6 months of age not born at the hospital but 6 
being treated at the hospital.  The Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention shall 7 
develop the information pamphlet by December 1, 2015.  8 
SUMMARY  9 
This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services, Maine Center 10 
for Disease Control and Prevention to develop an inform ation pamphlet on testing for 11 
Krabbe disease for dissemination by a hospital to all parents of newborn infants born at 12 
the hospital or to the parents of any child up to 6 months of age being treated at the 13 
hospital.  The Maine Center for Disease Control an d Prevention is required to develop the 14 
pamphlet by December 1, 2015.  15 
 
