 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1061  
H.P. 730  House of Representatives, March 24, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Create the Commission To Study a Stable Continuum of 
Care for Persons with Intellectual Disabilities and Autism  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative McCLELLAN of Raymond.  
Cosponsored by Senator LANGLEY of Hancock and  
Representatives: FARNSWORTH of Portland, MAKER of Calais, Senators: BRAKEY of 
Androscoggin, HASKELL of Cumberland, MILLETT of Cumberland.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1319(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Commission established.  Resolved:  That the Commission To Study a 1 
Stable Continuum of Care for Persons with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities 2 
and Autism, referred to in this resolve as "the commission," is established; and be it 3 
further  4 
Sec. 2.  Commission membership.  Resolved:  That the commission consists of 5 
13 members appointed as follows:  6 
1.  Three members of the Senate appointed by the President of the Senate, including 7 
members from the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, the Joint 8 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs and the Joint Standing Committee 9 
on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic Development;  10 
2.  Five members of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the 11 
House, includi ng members from the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human 12 
Services, the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs and the Joint 13 
Standing Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic Development; and  14 
3.  Five members appointed  by the Governor who possess expertise in the subject 15 
matter of the study, including family members of, advocates for and providers of care for 16 
persons with intellectual and developmental disabilities and autism; and be it further  17 
Sec. 3.  Chairs.  Resolve d:  That the first -named Senate member is the Senate 18 
chair and the first -named House of Representatives member is the House chair of the 19 
commission; and be it further  20 
Sec. 4.  Appointments; convening of commission.  Resolved:  That all 21 
appointments must be  made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 22 
resolve.  The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 23 
Council once all appointments have been completed.  After appointment of all members, 24 
the chairs sh all call and convene the first meeting of the commission.  If 30 days or more 25 
after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been 26 
made, the chairs may request authority and the Legislative Council may grant authority 27 
for the commission to meet and conduct its business; and be it further  28 
Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the commission shall:  29 
1.  Examine the most efficient ways to maintain a stable continuum of care within the 30 
different state systems involved in the life long care of persons with intellectual and 31 
developmental disabilities and autism in the Department of Health and Human Services, 32 
the Department of Education and the Department of Labor so that all 3 departments are 33 
able to provide assistance without duplic ation of efforts and programs and to ensure 34 
seamless transitions between departments; and  35 
2.  Determine the viability of and benefits concerning the participation in this State of 36 
the federal Intermediate Care Facilities for Individuals with Intellectual D isabilities; and 37 
be it further  38 
 
 Page  2 - 127LR1319(01) -1 
 Sec. 6.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:  That the Legislative Council shall provide 1 
necessary staffing services to the commission; and be it further  2 
Sec. 7.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than December 2, 2015, the commiss ion 3 
shall submit a report that includes its findings and recommendations, including suggested 4 
legislation, for presentation to the Second Regular Session of the 127th Legislature.  5 
SUMMARY  6 
This resolve establishes the Commission To Study a Stable Continuum of Care for 7 
Persons with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities and Autism.  The commission is 8 
required to examine the best way for different state systems involved in the lifelong care 9 
of persons with intellectual and developmental disabilities and a utism in the Department 10 
of Health and Human Services, the Department of Education and the Department of 11 
Labor to provide a stable continuum of care without duplication of efforts and programs 12 
and to ensure seamless transitions between departments.  It is r equired to also examine 13 
the status of the federal Intermediate Care Facilities for Individuals with Intellectual 14 
Disabilities.  The commission is required to report its findings to the Second Regular 15 
Session of the 127th Legislature.  16 
 
