 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1103  
H.P. 763  House of Representatives, March 25, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Study Understaffing in State Agencies  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative ROTUNDO of Lewiston.  
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1044(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Administrative and Financial Services to collect 1 
information.  Resolved:  That the Department of Administrative and Financial 2 
Services shall collect and compile information on staffing levels, caseload and workload 3 
averages, turnover  rates and use of overtime for each job title in each department of the 4 
State and shall review any available studies comparing private sector positions and pay 5 
with comparable state positions and pay for comparable work.  The department shall draft 6 
a repor t based upon this information to identify risks to public safety and the safety of 7 
workers; and be it further  8 
Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That, by January 4, 2016, the Department of 9 
Administrative and Financial Services shall submit its report under secti on 1 to the Joint 10 
Standing Committee on State and Local Government.  11 
SUMMARY  12 
This bill directs the Department of Administrative and Financial Services to collect 13 
and compile information concerning staffing of all the departments of the State and 14 
review any available studies comparing private sector positions and pay with comparable 15 
state positions and pay for comparable work and to report its findings to the Joint 16 
Standing Committee on State and Local Government.  17 
 
