 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled pap er  
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1328  
S.P. 480  In Senate, April 14, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Clarify the Ownership of and Access to Ancient and 
Family Burying Grounds  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator CUSHING of Penobscot.  
Cosponsored by Representative TEPLER of Topsham and  
Senators: COLLINS of York, HAMPER of Oxford, KATZ of Kennebec, MASON of 
Androscoggin, Representatives: CHENETTE of Saco, GOLDEN of Lewiston, MARTIN of 
Sinclair, TURNER of Burlington.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0953(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  13 MRSA §1101 -A, sub -§3-A is enacted to read:  2 
3-A.  Ground -penetrating radar.  "Ground -penetrating radar" means the 3 
transmission of high -frequency radar pulses from a surface antenna in to the ground, 4 
which reflects signals that are detected by a radar receiver and used to image the 5 
subsurface.  6 
Sec. 2.  13 MRSA §1101 -B, sub -§1, as amended by PL 2013, c. 421, §2, is 7 
further amended to read:  8 
1.  Access to ancient burying ground on privately  owned land by a municipality 9 
or its designated caretaker.  The owner of  A person who owns a parcel of land that 10 
contains  an ancient burying ground shall provide a municipality or its caretaker 11 
designated pursuant to section 1101 access necessary to perfor m the duties pursuant to 12 
section 1101 and Title 30 -A, section 2901.  A municipality or its designated caretaker 13 
may access an ancient burying ground on privately owned land annually or as determined 14 
by the municipality or designated caretaker as necessary to protect and preserve the 15 
ancient burying ground through activities including, but not limited to, the use of 16 
photography, video recordings, geographic positioning systems and transcription of grave 17 
marker inscriptions to document condition and preserve historic information.  A 18 
municipality or its designated caretaker may determine the location of unmarked graves 19 
and cemetery boundaries through the use of ground -penetrating radar or other 20 
identification techniques.   Any unreasonable denial to provide acce ss may result in the 21 
owner being held responsible for any fines, court costs and attorney's fees incurred by 22 
municipalities in legally obtaining access or for failing to meet the requirements of 23 
section 1101.  24 
Sec. 3.  13 MRSA §1101 -B, sub -§1-A is enacted t o read:  25 
1-A.  Access to ancient burying ground on privately owned land by descendant 26 
or relative of person buried in an ancient burying ground.  A person who owns a 27 
parcel of land that contains an ancient burying ground shall provide a descendant or 28 
relati ve of a person buried in the ancient burying ground, or the designated agent of the 29 
descendant or relative, access to the ancient burying ground to protect and preserve the 30 
ancient burying ground through activities including, but not limited to, the use of  31 
photography, video recordings, geographic positioning systems and transcription of grave 32 
marker inscriptions to document condition and preserve historic information.  A 33 
descendant or relative of a person buried in an ancient burying ground or the designat ed 34 
agent of the descendant or relative may, at the expense of the descendant, relative or 35 
designated agent, determine the location of unmarked graves and cemetery boundaries 36 
through the use of ground -penetrating radar or other identification techniques and  may 37 
erect or repair fencing around the ancient burying ground or repair any gravestone within 38 
the ancient burying ground.  The municipal clerk of the municipality where the ancient 39 
burying ground is situated shall notarize a document whereby a person who owns a parcel 40 
of land that contains an ancient burying ground allows access to that burying ground to a 41 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0953(01) -1 
 descendant or relative of a person buried in the ancient burying ground or the designated 1 
agent of the descendant or relative.  2 
Sec. 4.  13 MRSA §1141 is amended to read:  3 
§1141.  Grounds inalienable; description recorded  4 
When any persons appropriate for a burying ground a piece of land containing not 5 
more than 1/2 of an acre, it shall be  is exempt from attachment and execution, and 6 
inalienable and indivisi ble by the owners without the consent of all; and must  be kept 7 
fenced or otherwise substantially marked and occupied as a burying ground. They shall 8 
cause a written description of it, under their hands, attested by 2 disinterested witnesses, 9 
to be recorded  in the registry of deeds in the county or district where it lies or by the clerk 10 
of the town where it is situated.  If a descendant or relative of a person buried in the 11 
burying ground or the designated agent of the descendant or relative, a municipality or its 12 
designated agent, a historical society, a lineage society or the faculty of an educational 13 
institution is unable to locate a record of the burying ground at the registry of deeds in the 14 
county where the burying ground is situated, or in the records of the municipal clerk of 15 
the municipality where the burying ground is situated, that individual or entity may file a 16 
description of the location and boundaries of the burying ground, along with supporting 17 
documentation, including photographs, with the mun icipal clerk of the municipality 18 
where the burying ground is situated.  The inability to locate a record of a burying ground 19 
at the registry of deeds in the county where a burying ground is situated, or in the records 20 
of the municipal clerk of the municipa lity where a burying ground is situated, does not 21 
negate the ownership of a burying ground.  22 
Sec. 5.  13 MRSA §1142, as amended by PL 1991, c. 412, §1, is further amended 23 
to read:  24 
§1142.  Family burying grounds  25 
When a person appropriates for a family buryin g ground a piece of land containing 26 
not more than 1/4 of an acre, causes a description of it to be recorded in the registry of 27 
deeds of the same county or by the clerk of the town where it is situated and substantially 28 
marks the bounds of the burying groun d or encloses it with a fence, it is exempt from 29 
attachment and execution.  No subsequent conveyance of it is valid while any person is 30 
interred in the burying ground; but it must remain to the person who appropriated, 31 
recorded and marked that burying grou nd and to that person's heirs as a burial place 32 
forever.  If property surrounding a burying ground appropriated pursuant to this section is 33 
conveyed, the property is conveyed by the person who appropriated the property or by an 34 
heir of that person and the conveyance causes the burying ground to be inaccessible from 35 
any public way, the conveyance is made subject to an easement for the benefit of the 36 
spouse, ancestors and descendants of any person interred in the burying ground.  The 37 
easement may be used only  by persons to walk in a direct route from the public way 38 
nearest the burying ground to the burying ground at reasonable hours.   A descendant or 39 
relative of a person buried in a family burying ground or the designated agent of a 40 
descendant or relative may file a description of the location and boundaries of the burying 41 
ground, along with supporting documentation, including photographs, with the municipal 42 
clerk of the municipality where the burying ground is situated.  If a descendant or relative 43 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR0953(01) -1 
 of a person  buried in a family burying ground cannot be located, the municipality or its 1 
designated agent, a historical society, a lineage society or the faculty of an educational 2 
institution may file the description of the burying ground with the municipal clerk of the 3 
municipality where the burying ground is situated.  The inability to locate a record of a 4 
family burying ground at the registry of deeds in the county where a burying ground is 5 
situated, or in the records of the municipal clerk of the municipality wher e a family 6 
burying ground is situated, does not negate ownership of the family burying ground by 7 
descendants or relatives of a person buried in the family burying ground.  A person who 8 
owns a parcel of land that contains a family burying ground shall provi de a descendant or 9 
relative of a person buried in the family burying ground, or the designated agent of the 10 
descendant or relative, access to the family burying ground to protect and preserve the 11 
family burying ground through activities including, but not limited to, the use of 12 
photography, video recordings, geographic positioning systems and transcription of grave 13 
marker inscriptions to document condition and preserve historic information.  A 14 
descendant or relative of a person buried in a family burying gr ound or the designated 15 
agent of the descendant or relative may, at the expense of the descendant, relative or 16 
designated agent, determine the location of unmarked graves and cemetery boundaries 17 
through the use of ground -penetrating radar or other identific ation techniques and may 18 
erect or repair fencing around the family burying ground or repair any gravestone within 19 
the family burying ground.  20 
If property surrounding a burying ground appropriated pursuant to this section is 21 
conveyed, the property is conveye d by the person who appropriated the property or by an 22 
heir of that person and the conveyance causes the burying ground to be inaccessible from 23 
any public way, the conveyance is made subject to an easement for the benefit of the 24 
spouse, ancestors, descenda nts and relatives of any person interred in the burying ground.  25 
The easement may be used only by persons to walk in a direct route from the public way 26 
nearest the burying ground to the burying ground during daylight hours.  The owner of 27 
the property surro unding the family burying ground shall designate the direct route a 28 
person must use to access the family burying ground and is not liable for any injuries 29 
sustained by a person accessing the family burying ground using the designated route or 30 
within the bo undaries of the family burying ground.  31 
SUMMARY  32 
This bill creates the following provisions.  33 
1.  A municipality or its caretaker may access an ancient burying ground on privately 34 
owned land annually or as determined by the municipality or its designated care taker.  35 
2.  A municipality or its designated caretaker may use photography, video recording, 36 
geographic positioning systems and transcription of grave marker inscriptions to 37 
document condition and preserve historic information in a burying ground.  38 
3.  A mun icipality or its designated caretaker may use ground -penetrating radar or 39 
other methods to determine the location of unmarked graves and cemetery boundaries.  40 
 
 Page 4 - 127LR0953(01) -1 
 4.  A person who owns land that contains an ancient burying ground must provide a 1 
descendant or re lative of a person buried in the ancient burying ground, or a descendant 2 
or relative's designated agent, access to the ancient burying ground for the purposes of 3 
protecting or preserving it.  4 
5.  A municipal clerk of the municipality where an ancient buryin g ground is located 5 
must notarize a document allowing access to an ancient burying ground on privately 6 
owned land to a descendant or relative of a person buried in an ancient burying ground or 7 
the designated agent of the descendant or relative by the perso n who owns the parcel of 8 
land.  9 
6.  A descendant or relative of a person buried in an ancient burying ground, or the 10 
agent of a descendant or relative, may use photography, video recording, geographic 11 
positioning systems and transcription of grave marker in scriptions to document condition 12 
and preserve historic information in the burying ground.  A descendant or relative of a 13 
person buried in an ancient burying ground, or the designated agent of a descendant or 14 
relative, may also erect and repair fencing and repair gravestones.  15 
7.  A descendant or relative of a person buried in an ancient burying ground or the 16 
designated agent of a descendant or relative may employ a person to use ground - 17 
penetrating radar or other methods to determine the location of unmarked graves and 18 
cemetery boundaries.  19 
8.  The inability to locate a record of a burying ground at a registry of deeds in the 20 
county in which the burying ground is located or in the records of the municipal clerk of 21 
the municipality in which the burying ground is  located does not negate ownership of the 22 
burying ground.  23 
9.  If a descendant or relative of a person buried in the burying ground, or the 24 
designated agent of a descendant or relative, a municipality or its designated agent, a 25 
historical society, a lineage  society or the faculty of an educational institution is unable to 26 
locate records of a burying ground, that individual or entity may file a description of the 27 
location and boundaries of the burying ground, along with supporting documentation, 28 
with the muni cipal clerk of the municipality where the burying ground is located.  29 
10.  The inability to locate a record of a family burying ground at a registry of deeds 30 
of the county in which the family burying ground is located or in the records of the 31 
municipal cler k of the municipality in which the family burying ground is located does 32 
not negate ownership of a family burying ground by descendants or relatives of a person 33 
buried in the family burying ground.  34 
11.  A descendant or relative of a person buried in a fami ly burying ground, or the 35 
designated agent of a descendant or relative, may file a description of the location and 36 
boundaries of the burying ground, along with supporting documentation, with the 37 
municipal clerk of the municipality where the burying ground is located.  If a descendant 38 
or relative of a person buried in a family burying ground cannot be located, the 39 
municipality or its designated agent, a historical society, a lineage society or the faculty 40 
of an educational institution may file the descriptio n of the burying ground.  41 
 
 Page 5 - 127LR0953(01) -1 
 12.  A descendant or relative of a person buried in a family burying ground, or the 1 
designated agent of a descendant or relative, may use photography, video recording, 2 
geographic positioning systems and transcription of grave marke r inscriptions to 3 
document condition and preserve historic information in the burying ground.  A 4 
descendant or relative of a person buried in a family burying ground, or the designated 5 
agent of a descendant or relative, may also erect and repair fencing an d repair 6 
gravestones.  7 
13.  A descendant or relative of a person buried in a family burying ground, or the 8 
designated agent of a descendant or relative, may employ a person to use ground - 9 
penetrating radar or other methods to determine the location of unmark ed graves and 10 
cemetery boundaries.  11 
14.  A relative of a person interred in a family burying ground is given an easement to 12 
access the burying ground if a property surrounding the burying ground is conveyed in a 13 
way that makes it inaccessible from any publi c way.  Current statute already gives this 14 
benefit to the spouse, ancestors and descendants of a person interred in a family burying 15 
ground.  Under this bill, the easement may be used only during daylight hours, and the 16 
property owner must designate the di rect route a person must use to access the family 17 
burying ground.  18 
15.  The property owner who gives access to the spouse, ancestors, descendants and 19 
relatives of a person interred in a family burying ground is not liable for any injuries 20 
sustained by a per son accessing the burying ground by the designated direct route or 21 
within the boundaries of the burying ground.  22 
 
