 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 274  
H.P. 192  House of Representatives, February 5, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Direct the Department of Health and Human Services 
To Address the Growing Deficit in Room and Board Allowances 
Paid to Agencies Providing Residential Services to Adults with 
Intellectual Disabilities or Autism  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative FARNSWORTH of Portland.  
Cosponsored by Senator HASKELL of Cumberland and  
Representatives: HAMANN of South Portland, McCLELLAN of Raymond, MORRISON of 
South Portland, STUCKEY of Portland, TIPPING -SPITZ of O rono.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1107(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, this resolve directs the office of aging and disability services within the 3 
Department of Health and Human Services to identify the cost to the General Fund to 4 
ensure full funding of room and board costs incurred by agencies providing residential 5 
support to individuals served under the MaineCare Benefits Manual, Chapter II, Section 6 
21, Home and  Community Benefits for Members with Intellectual Disabilities or Autistic 7 
Disorder; and  8 
Whereas, enactment of this resolve before the 90 -day period expires is necessary to 9 
provide sufficient time for the department to identify the cost to the General Fund  and 10 
submit a report to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services in time 11 
for the committee's review of supplemental budget legislation for fiscal year 2016 -17; and  12 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergenc y within 13 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 14 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 15 
therefore, be it  16 
Sec. 1.  Identification of General Fund cost for room and bo ard.  17 
Resolved:  That the office of aging and disability services within the Department of 18 
Health and Human Services shall identify the cost to the General Fund to fund the 19 
difference between rental subsidies paid to and actual room and board costs incurre d by 20 
agencies providing residential support to individuals served under the MaineCare 21 
Benefits Manual, Chapter II, Section 21, Home and Community Benefits for Members 22 
with Intellectual Disabilities or Autistic Disorder.  By January 6, 2016, the department 23 
shall report the General Fund cost identified pursuant to this section to the Joint Standing 24 
Committee on Health and Human Services.  25 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 26 
legislation takes effect when approved.  27 
SUMMARY  28 
This bill requires the office of aging and disability services  within the Department of 29 
Health and Human Services to identify the cost to the General Fund to ensure full funding 30 
of room and board costs incurred by agencies providing residential support to in dividuals 31 
with intellectual disabilities or autistic disorder served under MaineCare.  32 
 
