 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1599  
H.P. 1090  House of Representatives, February 23, 2016  
 
 
Resolve, To Implement the Recommendations of the Commission To 
Strengthen and Align the Services Provided to Maine's Veterans by 
Authorizing MaineCare Transportation Services To Transport 
Veterans to Medical Appointments Administered by the United 
States Department of Veterans Affairs  
 
 
 
 
Reported by Representative LUCHINI of El lsworth for the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs pursuant to Resolve 2015, chapter 48, section 7.  
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed 
pursuant to Joint Rule 218.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2676(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Transportation services eligibility. Resolved:  That the Department of 1 
Health and Human Services shall submit to the United States Department of Health and 2 
Human Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services an application for a waiver 3 
under  the Medicaid program to cover persons who are MaineCare members or eligible to 4 
be MaineCare members and who are also eligible for health care benefits as enrollees 5 
with the United States Department of Veterans Affairs. Under the waiver, the department 6 
shall propose to make available to these persons coverage for transportation to health care 7 
appointments at the United States Department of Veterans Affairs hospital at Togus and 8 
affiliated community -based outpatient clinics.  9 
SUMMARY  10 
This resolve is submitted  by the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal 11 
Affairs pursuant to Resolve 2015, chapter 48 to implement recommendations of the 12 
Commission To Strengthen and Align the Services Provided to Maine’s Veterans.  It 13 
directs the Department of Health and H uman Services to submit to the United States 14 
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 15 
an application for a MaineCare waiver to provide transportation services to veterans who 16 
are eligible for the MaineCare program  but also receive health care benefits from the 17 
United States Department of Veterans Affairs at the hospital located at Togus or affiliated 18 
community -based outpatient clinics.  19 
 
