 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1127  
H.P. 778  House of Representatives, March 26, 2015  
 
 
An Act Regarding the Authority of the Secretary of State and the 
Attorney General To Conduct Investigations of Vote Recounts  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative COOPER of Yarmouth.  
Cosponsored by Senator BREEN of Cumberland and  
Senator: MIRAMANT of Knox.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1072(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA ยง737 -A, sub -ยง13 is enacted to read:  2 
13.  Investigatory authority.  The Secretary of State and the Attorney General may 3 
conduct investigations during a recount on matters relat ed to the recount.  These 4 
investigations may include interviews and depositions of witnesses and other 5 
investigatory methods determined appropriate by the Secretary of State and the Attorney 6 
General.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secreta ry of State or the 7 
Attorney General may initiate a 2nd recount of ballots of any relevant voting district 8 
during the recount process if there are inconsistencies compared to the original ballot 9 
count or other credible reasons to believe the original count or first recount is not 10 
accurate.  A decision to seat provisionally or otherwise a candidate whose election is the 11 
subject of the recount does not terminate the investigatory authority of the Secretary of 12 
State and the Attorney General provided in this sub section.  13 
SUMMARY  14 
This bill provides the Secretary of State and the Attorney General authority to 15 
conduct investigations during a recount on matters related to the recount.  These 16 
investigations may include interviews and depositions of witnesses and other 17 
investigatory methods determined appropriate by the Secretary of State and the Attorney 18 
General.  It allows the Secretary of State or the Attorney General to initiate a 2nd recount 19 
of ballots of any relevant voting district during the recount process if th ere are 20 
inconsistencies compared to the original ballot count or other credible reasons to believe 21 
the original count or first recount is not accurate.  A decision to seat provisionally or 22 
otherwise a candidate whose election is the subject of the recount does not terminate the 23 
investigatory authority of the Secretary of State and the Attorney General.  24 
 
