 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1118  
S.P. 390  In Senate, March 26, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Establish the Study Commission on the Social 
Emotional Learning and Development of  Maine's Young Children  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator BREEN of Cumberland.  
Cosponsored by Representative MALABY of Hancock and  
Senators: ALFOND of Cumberland, GRATWICK of Penobscot, HASKELL of Cumberland, 
MILLETT of Cumberland, Representatives: GATTINE of Westbrook, HUBBELL of Bar 
Harbor, PIERCE of Falmouth, SANBORN of Gorham.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0938(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, the Study Commission on the Social Emotional Learning and 3 
Development of Maine's Young Chi ldren aims to promote the social development of 4 
young children and reduce expulsions in early child care and education settings in the 5 
State; and  6 
Whereas, the study must be initiated before the 90 -day period expires in order that 7 
the study may be completed  and a report submitted in time for submission to the next 8 
legislative session; and  9 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 10 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 11 
immedi ately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 12 
therefore, be it  13 
Sec. 1.  Commission established.  Resolved:  That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 14 
353, the Study Commission on the Social Emotional Learning and Development of 15 
Maine's Young Children, referred to in this resolve as "the commission," is established; 16 
and be it further  17 
Sec. 2.  Commission membership.  Resolved:  That the commission consists of 18 
17 members appointed as follows:  19 
1.  One member of the Senate, appointed b y the President of the Senate;  20 
2.  One member of the House of Representatives, appointed by the Speaker of the 21 
House of Representatives;  22 
3.  Thirteen members appointed by the Commissioner of Education as follows:  23 
A.  One representative of the Department of  Education, Child Development Services 24 
System;  25 
B.  One representative of the Department of Education, Office of Special Services;  26 
C.  One elementary school principal;  27 
D.  One representative of an organization promoting child welfare;  28 
E.  One representative  of an organization promoting children's mental health;  29 
F.  One representative of an organization promoting early childhood advocacy;  30 
G.  One person with experience in the early and periodic screening, diagnostic and 31 
treatment benefit under Medicaid;  32 
H.  O ne pediatrician representing the Maine chapter of the American Academy of 33 
Pediatrics;  34 
I.  One representative of the child care industry; and  35 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0938(01) -1 
 J.  Four members of the Maine Children's Growth Council; and  1 
4.  Two members appointed by the Commissioner of Healt h and Human Service as 2 
follows:  3 
A.  One representative of the Department of Health and Human Services, Office of 4 
Child and Family Services, Child Care Services; and  5 
B.  One representative of the Department of Health and Human Services, Head Start 6 
and Early  Head Start; and be it further  7 
Sec. 3.  Chairs.  Resolved:  That the Senate member is the Senate chair and the 8 
House of Representatives member is the House chair of the commission; and be it further  9 
Sec. 4.  Appointments; convening of commission.  Resolved :  That all 10 
appointments must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 11 
resolve.  The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 12 
Council once all appointments have been completed.  After appointme nts of all members, 13 
the chairs shall call and convene the first meeting of the commission.  If 30 days or more 14 
after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been 15 
made, the chairs may request authority and the Legislat ive Council may grant authority 16 
for the commission to meet and conduct its business; and be it further  17 
Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the commission shall:  18 
1.  Develop a comprehensive inventory of the policies, rules, funding and services for 19 
early chil d care and education programs that promote young children's social emotional 20 
learning and development and that address children's behavioral needs and make 21 
recommendations based on the inventory.  The inventory and recommendations must 22 
address assets and g aps relating to availability, funding and delivery of services that 23 
support the healthy social emotional learning and development of young children across 24 
the State;  25 
2.  Examine the State's current capacity to provide education, training and 26 
professional d evelopment to early childhood program staff and educators to strengthen 27 
skills in promoting young children's social emotional learning and development and 28 
effectively addressing children's behavioral needs;  29 
3.  Gather existing data relating to the expulsio n, suspension and exclusionary 30 
discipline practices with regard to young children up to 8 years of age and teachers' 31 
reporting requirements for professional development and classroom supports in 32 
addressing children's behavioral needs; and  33 
4.  Make recommen dations regarding:  34 
A.  Appropriate and necessary training for early childhood educators and support 35 
staff to support and teach young children the skills the children need for healthy 36 
social emotional learning and development;  37 
B.  Staff competencies and evi dence -based intervention techniques and approaches 38 
that prevent expulsion, suspension and other exclusionary discipline practices, 39 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR0938(01) -1 
 including standards for effective early childhood mental health consultation and 1 
positive behavior intervention and support s trategies;  2 
C.  Changes in the preparation of early childhood educators that facilitate an 3 
understanding of how to teach children social emotional skills and the management 4 
of behaviors;  5 
D.  Methods and guidelines for the ongoing collection of data to monit or the 6 
expulsion, suspension and exclusionary discipline practices with regard to young 7 
children;  8 
E.  Model policies relating to the social emotional learning and development of 9 
children that include practices that are developmentally appropriate, contain 10 
nondiscriminatory discipline procedures and guidelines and promote an integrated 11 
classroom.  The recommendations must include a plan to appropriately transition 12 
children in early child care settings to preschool and kindergarten and support 13 
working parents  and may include a pilot program;  14 
F.   Changes to law and policies that will support a continuum of integrated social 15 
emotional learning and development opportunities for young children based on the 16 
inventory of resources and capacity of early childhood pr ograms under subsection 1;  17 
G.  How early childhood programs and public schools can collaborate and ensure that 18 
a system is developed that efficiently utilizes limited resources and provides 19 
continuity of care for young children moving between programs and schools; and  20 
H.  Parent education that promotes young children's social emotional growth and 21 
effective responses to behavioral challenges; and be it further  22 
Sec. 6.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:  That the Department of Education shall 23 
provide necessary sta ffing services to the commission; and be it further  24 
Sec. 7.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than December 2, 2015, the commission 25 
shall submit a report that includes its findings and recommendations, including suggested 26 
legislation, to the Joint Standi ng Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs.  The Joint 27 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs may report out legislation based 28 
upon the report to the Second Regular Session of the 127th Legislature.  29 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emerg ency cited in the preamble, this 30 
legislation takes effect when approved.  31 
SUMMARY  32 
This resolve creates the Study Commission on the Social Emotional Learning and 33 
Development of Maine's Young Children to promote the social emotional learning and 34 
development o f young children and reduce expulsions in early child care and education 35 
settings in the State by making an inventory of policies, rules, funding and services 36 
regarding early child care and education in the State and making recommendations, 37 
including sugge sted legislation, to strengthen the support for young children's social 38 
emotional learning and development and to address young children's behavioral needs.  39 
