 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1141  
H.P. 779  House of Representatives, March 31, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Increase the Affordability of College Tuition and Attract 
Professionals to Maine  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative DAUGHTRY of Brunswick.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: CHENETTE of Saco, EDGECOMB of Fort Fairfield, 
FECTEAU of Biddeford, MOONEN of Portland, POULIOT of Augusta, TIPPING -SPITZ of 
Orono, TUCKER of Brunswick, WHITE of Washburn.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0252(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to implement a comprehensive strategy to increase the affordability 5 
of tuition at state public u niversities and colleges for Maine residents, thereby increasing 6 
the graduation rate from those state public institutions of higher education, and to attract 7 
to and keep in Maine young professionals. The comprehensive strategy may include, but 8 
is not limit ed to:  9 
1.  Establishing a textbook scholarship program, in coordination with the public 10 
institutions of higher education to provide scholarships for the purchase of textbooks at 11 
those institutions.  The scholarships would be available to graduates of Maine  high 12 
schools who have a grade point average of 3.0 or better on a 4.0 scale;  13 
2.  Establishing scholarships or providing incentives for degree completion with 14 
agreements to remain in the State after graduation for specified periods.  Under this 15 
program, a full scholarship for the 4th and final year of school at a Maine public 16 
institution of higher education would be provided to students who agree to work in the 17 
State for a certain period of time following graduation;  18 
3.  Requiring the Department of Educatio n and the Finance Authority of Maine 19 
cooperatively to issue low -interest student loans to students attending a public or private 20 
institution of higher education in this State who meet certain criteria, such as financial 21 
need, academic merit, graduating wit hin 4 years or agreeing to work in public service for 22 
a certain period after graduation;  23 
4. Requiring the Finance Authority of Maine to establish additional tax credits, state 24 
grants and other forms of financial aid for higher education for residents of th is State who 25 
are graduates from a Maine public institution of higher education and an education loan 26 
repayment program for all graduates of an institution of higher education who are 27 
residents of this State;  28 
5.  Establishing a loan repayment program for gr aduates employed in certain high - 29 
demand fields in this State;  30 
6.  Establishing goals for college graduation attainment for the next 25 years;  31 
7.  Exploring the development of an entity, such as a board of regents, to oversee 32 
higher education in this State in order to best serve the higher education needs of the 33 
residents and businesses of this State; and  34 
8.  Establishing a pilot project, based on Oregon's "Pay Forward, Pay Back" model, 35 
under which a student enrolled in a public institution of higher educati on, in lieu of 36 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0252(01) -1 
 paying tuition or fees, contracts to pay the State a certain percentage of the student's 1 
annual income following graduation for a specified number of years.   The pilot project 2 
would eventually replace the current system of charging a reside nt of the State tuition and 3 
fees for enrollment at a state public institution of higher education.  The pilot project 4 
would:  5 
A.  Allow a student who is a resident of the State and who qualifies for admission to 6 
an institution to enroll in the institution w ithout paying tuition or fees;  7 
B.  Provide that, in lieu of paying tuition or fees, the student must sign a binding 8 
contract to pay to the State or the institution for a specified number of years a certain 9 
percentage of the student's annual adjusted gross income upon graduation from the 10 
institution;  11 
C.  Specify the number of years and the percentage of annual adjusted gross income 12 
for contracts at each participating institution and base the specifications on research 13 
to date; and  14 
D.  Establish a funding so urce for the first 15 to 20 years of the pilot project and a 15 
revolving fund into which payments made under the pilot project are deposited to 16 
provide long -term funding.  17 
A pilot project may include variations by specific institution depending on the total c ost 18 
of education at the institution, the portion of the cost that is paid by the State, the number 19 
of years of student repayment specified in the contract and the percentage of annual 20 
adjusted gross income specified in the contract.  21 
 
