 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 152  
H.P. 110  House of Representatives, January 27, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Encourage Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation To Be 
Taught in High School  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative CAMPBELL of Orrington.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: HARLOW of Portland, LYFORD of Eddington, MAKER of 
Calais, NADEAU of Winslow, SIROCKI of Scarborough, TUELL of East Machias, TURNER 
of Burlington, VEROW of Brewer.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0055(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  20-A MRSA ยง6304, as enacted by PL 2007, c. 267, ยง1, is amended to 2 
read:  3 
ยง6304.  Automated external defibrillators and cardiopulmonary resuscitation  4 
School boards may place automated ext ernal defibrillators in occupied school 5 
buildings and at school athletic events.  School personnel and members of the public may 6 
receive training on how to perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation and use automated 7 
external defibrillators in order to acquire the skills and confidence to respond to 8 
emergencies.  The department shall develop and maintain a model training program on 9 
performing cardiopulmonary resuscitation for a school administrative unit to offer to 10 
school personnel, secondary school students, p arents and members of the public.  In 11 
developing the training program, the department may seek collaboration and support in 12 
the form of monetary donations, staffing and expertise from one or more organizations 13 
that have the purpose of promoting cardiac hea lth.  The department shall encourage all 14 
school administrative units to implement the training program.  15 
SUMMARY  16 
This bill directs the Department of Education to develop a cardiopulmonary 17 
resuscitation model training program for school administrative units to offer to school 18 
personnel, secondary school students, parents and members of the public.  In developing 19 
the training program, the department is authorized to seek collaboration and support in 20 
the form of money, staffing and expertise from organizations with the purpose of 21 
promoting cardiac health.  The department is directed to encourage school administrative 22 
units to implement the training program.  23 
 
