 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 765  
H.P. 518  House of Representatives, March 5, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Develop a Statewide Plan for the Disposal of Household 
Hazardous Waste  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative STANLEY of Medway.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: BEAR of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, CHIPMAN 
of Portland, HARLOW of Portland, LAJOIE of Lewiston, SHORT of Pittsfield, VEROW of 
Brewer.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0934(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Household hazardous waste statewide plan; design; report.  1 
Resolved:  That the Department of Environmental Protection shall design a statewide 2 
plan to support municipalities and regions in the collection of household hazardous waste.  3 
In developin g the plan, the department shall consider designating regional collection 4 
locations for the acceptance of household hazardous waste for disposal by residents in 5 
those regions.  The department shall also identify a long -term funding mechanism to 6 
support the  plan.  By December 2, 2015, the department shall submit to the Joint Standing 7 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources a report concerning the statewide plan 8 
including any proposed legislation necessary to establish and implement the plan.  The 9 
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources may report out a bill 10 
regarding the subject matter of the department's report to the Second Regular Session of 11 
the 127th Legislature.  12 
SUMMARY  13 
This resolve directs the Department of Environmental Pro tection to design a 14 
statewide plan for the collection of household hazardous waste and to develop a long - 15 
term funding mechanism to support the plan.  It directs the department to consider 16 
designating regional collection locations for the acceptance of hous ehold hazardous 17 
waste.  It directs the department to submit a report relating to the plan to the Joint 18 
Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources by December 2, 2015 and 19 
authorizes the committee to report out a bill regarding the subject matte r of the 20 
department's report.  21 
 
