 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 891  
H.P. 610  House of Representatives, March 12, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Help Municipalities Dispose of Certain Abandoned 
Property  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative MAKER of Calais.  
Cosponsored by Senator BURNS of Washington and  
Representatives: DUCHESNE of Hudson, GILLWAY of Searsport, HOBART of 
Bowdoinham, HOGAN of Old Orchard Beach, LOCKMAN of Amherst, TUELL of East 
Machias, TURNER of Burlington, WOOD of Sabattus.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0267(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  10 MRSA ยง9097, sub -ยง13 is enacted to read:  2 
13.  Deserted mobile homes or manufactured housing.   A mobile home or 3 
manufactured housing and all of its contents that has not been subject t o an eviction 4 
process in accordance with this section and has been deserted or unclaimed by a tenant 5 
may be disposed of by a mobile home park owner, operator or municipality without any 6 
notice to the tenant, except for the posting on the mobile home or man ufactured housing 7 
of a written notice of the intended disposition of the property at least 30 days prior to its 8 
removal.  For purposes of this subsection, a mobile home park owner, operator or 9 
municipality shall consider the mobile home or manufactured hou sing as deserted when 10 
there is evidence that demonstrates that the housing is vacant and the tenant has no intent 11 
to return, as well as other reasonable indicia of abandonment described in Title 14, 12 
section 6326, subsection 2.  A municipality may not be he ld liable under this chapter for 13 
its disposition of property in accordance with this subsection.  14 
SUMMARY  15 
This bill simplifies the process for a mobile home park owner, operator or 16 
municipality to dispose of a deserted, vacant mobile home or manufactured ho using that 17 
has been unclaimed by a tenant without any notice to the tenant.  The bill provides 18 
protection from liability for a municipality that disposes of such deserted property.  19 
 
