 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 667  
H.P. 448  House of Representatives, March 3, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services 
To Educate the Public and Department Clients about How To 
Protect One's Family from Bisphenol A  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative BURSTEIN of Lincolnville.  
Cosponsored by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot and  
Representatives: DEVIN of Newcastle, DUNPHY of Old Town, GATTINE of Westbrook, 
HAMANN of South Portland, MASTRACCIO of Sanford, SANBORN of Gorham, WARD of 
Dedham, WELSH of Rockport.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0319(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services to update its website 1 
for accuracy and consistency with the latest scientific information on the 2 
major source of exposure to BPA.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and 3 
Human Services shall update the  page on its publicly accessible website entitled "How to 4 
Protect Your Family from BPA (Bisphenol A)" for the Special Supplemental Nutrition 5 
Program for Women, Infants and Children of the federal Child Nutrition Act of 1966 to 6 
reflect the latest scientific  findings on canned food as the major source of exposure to 7 
bisphenol A, referred to in this resolve as "BPA," to accurately indicate the regulatory 8 
status in this State of other products that once contained BPA, including reusable food 9 
and beverage contai ners, infant formula cans and baby food jars, and to further identify 10 
actions that program participants can take to prevent exposure to BPA; and be it further  11 
Sec. 2.  Department of Health and Human Services to prepare 12 
educational outreach materials on how  to protect one's family from BPA.  13 
Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human Services, Maine Center for 14 
Disease Control and Prevention's division of environmental health shall prepare 15 
educational outreach materials on how to protect one's family from BPA that include 16 
information on the chemical's hazards, major sources of exposure and most susceptible 17 
and most exposed populations.  The educational outreach materials must also include 18 
actions the public can take to prevent exposure to BPA, includin g alternatives to the 19 
consumption of canned foods and jarred foods that contain BPA; and be it further  20 
Sec. 3.  Department of Health and Human Services to educate the public 21 
and program participants about how to protect one's family from BPA.  22 
Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human Services shall develop a plan to 23 
educate the public about how to protect one's family from BPA, with an emphasis on 24 
reaching the populations who are most susceptible and who are most exposed to BPA.  25 
The plan must inc lude an evaluation of the feasibility of providing educational 26 
information directly to participants in the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for 27 
Women, Infants and Children of the federal Child Nutrition Act of 1966 about 28 
alternatives to the consumpti on of canned foods and jarred foods that contain BPA.  The 29 
plan must identify potential sources of funding to implement this educational outreach 30 
program; and be it further  31 
Sec. 4.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than January 1, 2016, the Commissioner 32 
of Health and Human Services shall submit a report on the department's progress in 33 
carrying out the purposes of this resolve to the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 34 
Human Services.  35 
SUMMARY  36 
This resolve directs the Department of Health and Human Servi ces to update the 37 
information it provides on the page on its publicly accessible website entitled "How to 38 
Protect Your Family from BPA (Bisphenol A)" to reflect the latest scientific findings and 39 
to develop educational outreach materials and a plan to educ ate members of the public at 40 
greatest risk from bisphenol A, including participants in the Special Supplemental 41 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0319(01) -1 
 Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children of the federal Child Nutrition Act of 1 
1966.  2 
 
