 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1137  
S.P. 406  In Senate, March 31, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Promote Reemployment of Unemployed Workers  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic Development 
suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator KATZ of Kennebec.  
Cosponsored by Senators: COLLINS of York, CYRWAY of Kennebec, HASKELL of 
Cumberland, LANGLEY of Hancock, McCORMICK of Kennebec, VALENTINO of York.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1374(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to improve reemployment opportunities for workers who are 5 
between jobs in several ways, includin g: 6 
1.  Adjusting orientation and training programs for unemployed workers to prepare 7 
those workers to take new jobs in the event their previous jobs may no longer exist due to 8 
the transformative nature of economic downturns;  9 
2.  Strengthening up -front asse ssment of worker skills, educational deficits and 10 
overall employability for purposes of shaping reemployment plans;  11 
3.  Enhancing the Department of Labor's enterprise option program through qualified 12 
use of other state programs designed to help innovative entrepreneurs establish 13 
businesses;  14 
4.  Formulating performance metrics for the unemployment compensation system that 15 
emphasize cycle times from job to job, measure the degree of wage restoration over time 16 
and assess the efficacy of the unemployment compen sation system in placing workers in 17 
jobs; and  18 
5.  Requiring the Department of Labor to report regularly to the joint standing 19 
committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over unemployment compensation 20 
matters on the effectiveness of these changes in h elping unemployed workers become 21 
reemployed.  22 
 
