 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 58  
H.P. 52  House of Representatives, January 14, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Require Transparency of the Ownership of All 
Companies Providing Funds  To Build Infrastructure for 
Development Purposes  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative LONGSTAFF of Waterville.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: BECK of Waterville, CAMPBELL of Orrington, FOWLE of 
Vassalboro, GOLDEN of Lewiston, HARLOW of Portland, HUBBELL of Bar Harbor, 
MARTIN of Sinclair, NADEAU of Winslow.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0056(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  5 MRSA c. 167 is enacted to read:  2 
CHAPTER 167  3 
TRANSPARENCY IN PRIV ATE FUNDING OF INFRA STRUCTURE FOR 4 
DEVELOPMENT PURPOSES  5 
ยง2041.  Private entity ownership information  6 
1.  Ownership infor mation.   Before a private entity enters into an agreement with a 7 
state agency or other governmental entity to provide funding for the construction of 8 
infrastructure for development purposes, the private entity must provide complete 9 
information about the ow nership of the private entity to the state agency or other 10 
governmental entity for immediate release to the public.  Information in possession of the 11 
state agency or other governmental entity about the ownership of the private entity is a 12 
public record for  the purposes of Title 1, chapter 13, subchapter 1.  13 
2.  Application.   This chapter applies to all construction of infrastructure for 14 
development purposes, including but not limited to transportation -related services and 15 
contracts for construction and maint enance that, by law, are under the supervision of the 16 
Department of Transportation.  17 
SUMMARY  18 
This bill requires a private entity to provide complete information about the 19 
ownership of that entity before it enters into an agreement with a governmental entity  to 20 
provide funding for the construction of infrastructure for development purposes.  The 21 
information must be provided to the governmental entity, which shall immediately release 22 
that information to the public.  Information about such private entities is a  public record 23 
for the purpose of the Freedom of Access Act.  24 
This bill applies to all construction of infrastructure for development purposes, 25 
including contracts that the Department of Transportation supervises.  26 
 
