 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper  
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION-2015 
 
Legislative Document  No. 6  
H.P. 9  House of Representatives, January 7, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Implement Recommendations of the Government 
Oversight Committee To Strengthen the Ethics Practices and 
Procedures for Executive Branch Employees  
 
 
 
 
Reported by Representative KRUGER of Thomaston for the Government Oversight 
Committee pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 3, section 997, subsection 2. 
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed 
pursuant to Joint Rule 218. 
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT 
 Clerk 
 
 
 
 

 
 Page 1  - 127LR0323(01)-1 
 Sec. 1.  Consolidation of ethics standards for state employees. Resolved:  1 
That the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, referred to in this resolve 2 
as "the department," shall develop a consolidated code of ethics and conduct for state 3 
employees, referred to in this resolve as "the code," along with legislation required to 4 
implement the code.  As used in this resolve, "state employee" means any regular 5 
classified or unclassified officer or employee of the executive branch. 6 
In developing the code, the department shall incorporate, as appropriate: 7 
1. Recommendations contained in "Report on Ethics Laws for Executive Branch 8 
Employees" prepared by the Commission on Governmental Ethics and Election Practices 9 
and published in December 2009; 10 
2. Standards of ethics and conduct that exist in statute, executive order, the state 11 
administrative and accounting manual and state agency policies, including standards for 12 
information technology use and personnel policies; 13 
3. Standards to address ethical situations not addressed in the existing standards, 14 
including but not limited to gifts, personal and business relationships affecting 15 
impartiality, post-state employment, use of government property and conflicting outside 16 
employment and activities; 17 
4. Standards regarding employee ethics and guidance adopted for employees of the 18 
Federal Government and other states; and 19 
5. Input from the Commission on Governmental Ethics and Election Practices and 20 
other relevant organizations with expertise in the development and maintenance of ethics 21 
policies and standards; and be it further 22 
Sec. 2.  Code training and communications. Resolved:  That the department 23 
shall develop and implement a training and communications plan to increase the 24 
awareness and accountability of state employees regarding the code. The plan must 25 
provide for clear and regular communications to state employees; accessible formal and 26 
informal guidance documents, including plain language explanations; and ongoing 27 
training opportunities for state employees. The department shall consider incorporating in 28 
the plan a mechanism for periodic confirmation of awareness of the standards in the code 29 
by individual state employees. The plan must be developed in conformity with the 30 
applicable recommendations contained in "Report on Ethics Laws for Executive Branch 31 
Employees" prepared by the Commission on Governmental Ethics and Election Practices 32 
and published in December 2009; and be it further 33 
Sec. 3.  Code guidance and reporting avenues. Resolved:  That the 34 
department shall establish and implement clear avenues and procedures for state 35 
employees to seek guidance regarding the code and to report potential violations of the 36 
code. The procedures must include provisions for confidential reporting; and be it further 37 
Sec. 4.  Report. Resolved:  That the department shall submit an interim report to 38 
the Government Oversight Committee no later than October 1, 2015 describing the status 39 
of the work undertaken to that date pursuant to this resolve. The report must include, but 40 
 
 Page 2  - 127LR0323(01)-1 
 is not limited to, a timeline that establishes specific dates for completion of work required 1 
by the resolve. The department shall submit a final report documenting its work pursuant 2 
to this resolve, together with implementing legislation, to the Government Oversight 3 
Committee and the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government not later 4 
than December 1, 2015. The Government Oversight Committee is authorized to submit 5 
legislation related to the report to the Second Regular Session of the 127th Legislature ; 6 
and be it further 7 
Sec. 5.  Recommendation for legislative branch.  Resolved:  That the 8 
Government Oversight Committee, based on the final report provided to the committee 9 
by the department pursuant to section 4, may recommend a similar consolidated code of 10 
ethics and conduct and related procedures to the Legislative Council for use by the 11 
Legislature. 12 
SUMMARY 13 
This resolve implements the recommendations of the Government Oversight 14 
Committee stemming from 2 reports of the Office of Program Evaluation and 15 
Government Accountability: "Public Utilities Commission" and "Healthy Maine 16 
Partnerships' FY13 Contracts and Funding." The resolve directs the Department of 17 
Administrative and Financial Services to take certain steps to strengthen the ethics 18 
standards and practices for executive branch employees by developing a consolidated 19 
code based in part on recommendations contained in a December 2009 report to the 20 
Legislature from the Commission on Governmental Ethics and Election Practices entitled 21 
"Report on Ethics Laws for Executive Branch Employees."  This resolve also requires the 22 
department to implement procedures for employees to seek guidance on ethics and to 23 
report potential ethics violations. The committee also is authorized to recommend to the 24 
Legislative Council a similar code of ethics and conduct for use by the Legislature. 25 
 
