 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1416  
H.P. 962  House of Representatives, May 14, 2015  
 
 
An Act Regarding Interstate Shellfish Depuration  
 
(AFTER DEADLINE)  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
205. 
Reference to the Committee on Marine Resources suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative BEAVERS of South Berwick.  
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2024(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, shellfish harvested in moderately contaminated marine environments may 3 
be suitable for hum an consumption after undergoing a depuration process; and  4 
Whereas, interstate transfer of shellfish may occur only by formal agreement 5 
between states and in compliance with the United States Food and Drug Administration's 6 
National Shellfish Sanitation Prog ram; and  7 
Whereas, agreements regarding interstate transfer of shellfish do not currently 8 
require reciprocity between states; and  9 
Whereas, shellfish depuration may currently be performed at a facility that is not 10 
certified by the United States Food and Drug  Administration; and  11 
Whereas, to prevent a possible public health risk regarding shellfish depuration, it is 12 
necessary that this legislation take effect as soon as possible; and  13 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency w ithin 14 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 15 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 16 
therefore,  17 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  18 
Sec. 1.   12 MRSA ยง6104 is enacted to read:  19 
ยง6104.  Shellfish depuration; memorandum of agreement  20 
If the commissioner enters into a memorandum of agreement regarding interstate 21 
transport of shellfish for depuration pursuant to the United States Food and Drug 22 
Admin istration's National Shellfish Sanitation Program, the agreement must be reciprocal 23 
among the states involved and provide that depuration of shellfish may occur only in a 24 
facility certified for depuration by the United States Food and Drug Administration.  25 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 26 
legislation takes effect when approved.  27 
SUMMARY  28 
This bill provides that a memorandum of agreement entered into by the 29 
Commissioner of Marine Resources regarding interstate transport of  shellfish for 30 
depuration must be reciprocal among the states involved and require that the depuration 31 
occur in a facility certified for depuration by the United States Food and Drug 32 
Administration.  33 
 
