 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 841  
H.P. 575  House of Representatives, March 10, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, Directing the Department of Health and Human Services 
To Develop a Bus Pass Program  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative STUCKEY of Portland.  
Cosponsored by Senator HASKELL of Cumberland and  
Representatives: BATES of  Westbrook, GOODE of Bangor, SANBORN of Gorham.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1347(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services to develop a bus pass 1 
program.  Resolved:  That, by January 1, 2016, the Department of Health and Human 2 
Services shall develop and implement a bus pass program to provide monthly bus passes 3 
to individuals wh o live in geographical areas of the State served by transit systems that 4 
offer monthly bus passes and who use those transit systems to attend medical 5 
appointments reimbursed by MaineCare under the nonemergency transportation program 6 
within the MaineCare pr ogram and participate in state or municipal programs that aim to 7 
foster independence and economic security such as the Additional Support for People in 8 
Retraining and Employment - Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program as 9 
established in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 22, chapter 1054 -A, work programs 10 
within other public assistance programs and other educational programs.  The Department 11 
of Health and Human Services shall leverage federal and state funds, including any 12 
funding from the nonemergen cy transportation program within the MaineCare program 13 
and possible resources from the Department of Labor and the Department of Education 14 
that are targeted to employment that could be used as part of the bus pass program.  The 15 
Department of Health and Hum an Services shall report to the Joint Standing Committee 16 
on Health and Human Services by March 1, 2016 on the bus pass program including the 17 
number of bus passes issued, the number of individuals being served and the sources of 18 
the funding.  19 
SUMMARY  20 
This re solve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to develop and 21 
implement a bus pass program by January 1, 2016 to serve individuals who live in areas 22 
served by public bus systems and who use those transport systems to attend medical 23 
appointments  reimbursed by MaineCare under the nonemergency transportation program 24 
within the MaineCare program and participate in other programs that are aimed at 25 
fostering independence and economic security such as the ASPIRE -TANF program.  The 26 
department must ident ify funding sources that could be leveraged, including funding 27 
currently used for the nonemergency transportation program within the MaineCare 28 
program and possible Department of Labor and Department of Education resources 29 
targeted toward employment.  The d epartment must report to the Joint Standing 30 
Committee on Health and Human Services by March 1, 2016 on the status of the bus pass 31 
program including the number of passes issued and individuals being served and sources 32 
of funding.  33 
 
