 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 952  
H.P. 655  House of Representatives, March 17, 2015  
 
 
An Act Regarding the Licensure of Funeral Service Providers  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the  Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic Development 
suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative LUCHINI of Ellsworth.  
Cosponsored by Senator LANGLEY of Hancock and  
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, GOODE of Bangor, KUMIEGA of Deer Isle, LOCKMAN 
of Amherst, TUELL of East Machias, Senator: BURNS of Washington.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1693(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  32 MRSA §1501, as amended by PL 2007, c. 402, Pt. J, §§8 and 9, is 2 
further amended by adding at the end a new paragraph to read:  3 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the boar d shall permit the provisional 4 
licensure under this section of a practitioner of funeral service who has been in 5 
continuous practice as a licensed practitioner of funeral service in good standing in 6 
another state for 2 continuous years immediately precedin g submission of an application 7 
under this section if the license from the other state was obtained under substantially 8 
similar requirements as the license requirements under this chapter and the applicant 9 
provides appropriate letters of recommendation as r equired by the board. The board shall 10 
compile and periodically update a list of states that have licensure requirements for the 11 
practice of funeral service substantially similar to those in this chapter.  Upon verification 12 
of a complete application that me ets the requirements of this paragraph, the board shall 13 
issue a temporary license to the applicant that expires in 90 days or when the board rules 14 
on the application, whichever is sooner.  The board shall rule on an application submitted 15 
under this paragra ph within 90 days of the application's submission. If the board approves 16 
an application under this paragraph, the board shall issue a provisional license for the 17 
practice of funeral service.  A person who receives a provisional license under this 18 
paragraph  must achieve a passing score on the examination under this section within one 19 
year of issuance of a provisional license under this paragraph.  The board shall issue a 20 
permanent license under this section to a holder of a provisional license under this 21 
paragraph upon the provisional license holder's passing an examination under this section. 22 
The board shall adopt routine technical rules pursuant to Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 23 
2-A to carry out the provisions of this paragraph.  24 
SUMMARY  25 
This bill creates a process that allows a holder of a license to practice funeral services 26 
in another state with substantially similar licensure requirements as this State who has 27 
practiced for at least 2 consecutive years immediately prior to applying for a license in 28 
this State to receive a provisional license to practice funeral services.  To obtain a 29 
permanent license, the person is required to pass the examination for licensure to practice 30 
funeral services within a year of receiving the provisional license.  31 
 
