 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1675  
H.P. 1143  House of Representatives, March 23, 2016  
 
 
Resolve, To Create the Task Force on Public -private Partnerships 
To Support Public Education  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reported by Representative KORNFIELD of Bangor for the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs pursuant to Resolve 2015, chapter 52.  
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested  and ordered 
printed pursuant to Joint Rule 218.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2781(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, this resolve establishes the Task Force on Public -private Partnerships To 3 
Support Public Education to conduct a comprehensive study of available public -private 4 
funding models to support public education; and  5 
Whereas, the study must be initiated before the 90 -day period expires in order that 6 
the study may be completed and a report submitted in time for submission to the next 7 
legislative session; and  8 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 9 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 10 
immediately necessary for the pre servation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 11 
therefore, be it  12 
Sec. 1.  Task force established.  Resolved:  That, notwithstanding Joint Rule 13 
353, the Task Force on Public -private Partnerships To Support Public Education, referred 14 
to in this resolv e as "the task force," is established; and be it further  15 
Sec. 2.  Task force membership.  Resolved:  That the task force consists of 17 16 
members appointed as follows:  17 
1.  One member of the Senate appointed by the President of the Senate;  18 
2.  Two members of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the 19 
House, including a member from each of the 2 parties holding the largest number of seats 20 
in the Legislature;  21 
3.  Seven members appointed by the President of the Senate as follows:  22 
A.  Two members  with expertise in performance -based contracting funding issues;  23 
B.  One member who is a secondary school principal;  24 
C.  One member who represents a philanthropic organization and who has experience 25 
in performance -based contracting in the social sector or social impact bonds;  26 
D.  One member who represents business interests and who has experience in 27 
performance -based contracting in the social sector or social impact bonds;  28 
E.  One member who represents financing interests and who has experience in 29 
performan ce-based contracting in the social sector or social impact bonds; and  30 
F.  One member of the Maine Education Policy Research Institute;  31 
4.  Six members appointed by the Speaker of the House as follows:  32 
A.  One member with expertise in performance -based cont racting funding issues;  33 
B.  One member who is an elementary school principal;  34 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR2781(01) -1 
 C.  One member who represents a philanthropic organization and who has experience 1 
in performance -based contracting in the social sector or social impact bonds;  2 
D.  One member who  represents business interests and who has experience in 3 
performance -based contracting in the social sector or social impact bonds;  4 
E.  One member who represents financing interests and who has experience in 5 
performance -based contracting in the social sect or or social impact bonds; and  6 
F.  One member of the Maine Education Policy Research Institute; and  7 
5.  The Commissioner of Education or the commissioner's designee.  8 
Prior to making appointments to the task force pursuant to subsections 3 and 4, the 9 
Presid ent of the Senate and the Speaker of the House shall seek nominations from the 10 
Maine Principals' Association. The President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House 11 
shall request the Maine Principals' Association to survey its members for recommended 12 
nominations; and be it further  13 
Sec. 3.  Chairs.  Resolved:  That the Senate member is the Senate chair and the 14 
first-named House of Representatives member is the House chair of the task force; and be 15 
it further  16 
Sec. 4.  Appointments; convening of task force.  Resolved:  That all 17 
appointments must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 18 
resolve.  The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 19 
Council once all appointments have been completed.  After appointment of all members, 20 
the chairs shall call and convene the first meeting of the task force.  If 30 days or more 21 
after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been 22 
made, the chairs may request authority and the Legislative Council may grant authority 23 
for the task force to meet and conduct its business; and be it further  24 
Sec. 5.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the task force shall meet 4 times in order to 25 
conduct a comprehensive study on performance -based contracting an d social impact 26 
bonding for public education. In performing its work, the task force shall research the 27 
various aspects of the issues related to using performance -based contracting and social 28 
impact bonding to support public education. The task force shall  develop a pilot project 29 
for the implementation of performance -based contracting and social impact bonding with 30 
private and governmental entities to support public education; and be it further  31 
Sec. 6.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:  That the Legislative Cou ncil shall provide 32 
necessary staffing services to the task force; and be it further  33 
Sec. 7.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than November 2, 2016, the task force 34 
shall submit a report that includes its findings and recommendations, including suggested 35 
legislation, for presentation to the First Regular Session of the 128th Legislature.  The 36 
joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over education and 37 
cultural affairs may report out a bill to the First Regular Session of the 128th Le gislature.  38 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR2781(01) -1 
 Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 1 
legislation takes effect when approved.  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This resolve establishes the Task Force on Public -private Partnerships To Support 4 
Public Education. The task force has 17 mem bers, including legislative members, the 5 
Commissioner of Education, school principals and members representing philanthropic, 6 
business and financing interests who have experience in performance -based contracting 7 
in the social sector or social impact bonds.  The task force must research the various 8 
aspects of the issues related to using performance -based contracting and social impact 9 
bonding to support public education and develop a pilot project for the implementation of 10 
performance -based contracting and soc ial impact bonding to support public education. 11 
The task force must report its findings to the First Regular Session of the 128th 12 
Legislature. The joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over 13 
education and cultural affairs may repor t out a bill based on the task force's report.  14 
 
