 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
2 Date: sjt / IS MAJORITY 
L.D.81 
(Filing No. s-19 ) 
3 LABOR, COMMERCE, RESEARCH AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
4 Reproduced and distributed under the direction ofthe Secretary of the Senate. 
5 STATE OF MAINE 
6 SENATE 
7 127TH LEGISLATURE 
8 FIRST REGULAR SESSION 
9 COMMITTEE AMENDMENT "A "to S.P. 29, L.D. 81, Bill, "An Act To Amend 
10 the Workers' Compensation Laws as They Pertain to Employee Representation" 
11 Amend the bill in section 2 by striking out all of paragraph G (page 1, lines 9 to 13 in 
12 L.D.) and inserting the following: 
13 'G. Continued questioning by an investigator, employer or employer's representative 
14 of an employee after that employee requests that a representative of the employee's 
15 choice, including, but not limited to, a family member, friend or coworker, be present 
16 during the questioning and that request is denied; this paragraph applies, without 
17 limitation, to questions regarding the employee's ability to work and job 
18 modifications.' 
19 SU~Y 
20 This amendment, which is the majority report of the Joint Standing Committee on 
21 Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic Development, clarifies that the representative 
22 requested by the employee can include a family member, friend or coworker. 
FISCAL ~OTE REQUIRED 
(See attached) ..... " .. 
Page 1 -127LR0301(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
Approved: 03124115 .::wac-.. 
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD81 LR 301(02) 
An Act To Amend the Workers' Compensation Laws as They Pertain to Employee Representation 
Fiscal Note for Bill as Amended by Committee Amendment IIq'(S-IC\) 
Committee: Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic Development 
Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
Potential current biennium cost increase -All Funds 
Fiscal Detail and Notes 
This legislation expands the definition of "duress" under the Workers' Compensation Act of 1992 that determines 
under what circumstances certain statements made by an injured employee may not be admitted into evidence in 
workers' compensation proceedings to include the injured employee's answers to questions from an employer or an 
employer representative when the injured employee has been denied a request to have a representative of the 
employee's choice present. 
The Office of Workers' Compensation within the Bureau of Human Resources, Department of Administrative and 
Financial Services, indicates that this legislation may result in additional costs to the State's Workers' Compensation 
Management Fund Program if the provision in this legislation results in situations where, in order to comply with the 
injured employee's request, the process of coordinating schedules results in a delay in the injured employee receiving 
medical treatment resulting in an increase in the amount of time that the injured employee remains out of work. 
LR030l(02) -Fiscal Note -Page 1 of 1 
