 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 710  
H.P. 486  House of Representatives, March 5, 2015  
 
 
An Act Providing a Good Samaritan Defense to Individuals 
Reporting a Drug Overdose  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative DION of Portland.  
Cosponsored by Senator GERZOFSKY of Cumberland and  
Representatives: BATES of Westbrook, CHENETTE of Saco, CHIPMAN of Portland, 
GATTINE of Westbrook, GIDEON of Freeport, GRANT of Gardiner, NADEAU of Winslow.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1654(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  17-A MRSA ยง1107 -A, sub -ยง6 is enacted to read:  2 
6.  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that:  3 
A.  The evidence of possession was obtained as a result of the per son's seeking, in 4 
good faith, medical assistance for someone experiencing a drug -related overdose; or  5 
B.  The evidence of possession was obtained as a result of the person's seeking or 6 
obtaining medical assistance for a drug -related overdose the person is experiencing.  7 
The assertion of an affirmative defense under this subsection is not grounds for 8 
suppression of evidence with respect to any crime.  9 
SUMMARY  10 
This bill creates an affirmative defense to prosecution for unlawful possession of a 11 
scheduled drug.  The bill specifies that it is an affirmative defense to prosecution that the 12 
evidence of possession was obtained as a result of the person's seeking, in good faith, 13 
medical assistance for someone experiencing a drug -related overdose or the evidence of 14 
possession was obtained as a result of the person's seeking or obtaining medical 15 
assistance for a drug -related overdose the person is experiencing.  The bill also specifies 16 
that the affirmative defense is not grounds for suppression of evidence with respect to  any 17 
crime.  18 
 
