 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 251  
S.P. 89  In Senate, February 3, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Limit Allowable Health Care Charges in Certain 
Specified Situations  
 
 
 
 
Reference to  the Committee on Insurance and Financial Services suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot.  
Cosponsored by Representative MORRISON of South Portland and  
Senators: DILL of  Penobscot, DUTREMBLE of York, MIRAMANT of Knox, 
WHITTEMORE of Somerset, Representatives: HAMANN of South Portland, McCREIGHT of 
Harpswell.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0589(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง4303, sub -ยง8-A, as enacted by PL 2011, c. 238, Pt. A, ยง1, 2 
is amended to read:  3 
8-A.  Protection from balance billing by providers.  An enrollee's responsibility for 4 
payment un der a managed care plan must be limited as provided in this subsection.  5 
A.  The terms of a managed care plan must provide that the enrollee's responsibility 6 
for the cost of covered health care rendered by participating providers is limited to 7 
the cost -sharing provisions expressly disclosed in the contract, such as deductibles, 8 
copayments and coinsurance, and that if the enrollee has paid the enrollee's share of 9 
the charge as specified in the plan, the carrier shall hold the enrollee harmless from 10 
any additi onal amount owed to a participating provider for covered health care.  11 
B.  Every provider agreement with a participating provider must be in writing and 12 
must set forth that if the carrier fails to pay for health care services as set forth in the 13 
contract, t he enrollee is not liable to the provider for any sums owed by the carrier.  14 
C.  A participating provider may not collect or attempt to collect any charge from an 15 
enrollee for covered health care beyond the amount permitted by the terms of the 16 
plan, notwith standing the carrier's insolvency, the carrier's failure to pay the amount 17 
owed by the carrier, any other breach by the carrier of the provider agreement or the 18 
failure of the provider agreement to include the written hold harmless provision 19 
required by pa ragraph B.  20 
D.  An enrollee's responsibility for the cost of covered health care rendered by an out - 21 
of-network provider in the hospital or other health care facility of a participating 22 
provider is limited to the cost -sharing provisions expressly disclosed i n the contract 23 
for services rendered by participating providers.  If the enrollee has paid the enrollee's 24 
share of the charge as specified in the managed care plan, the carrier shall hold the 25 
enrollee harmless from any additional amount owed to an out -of-network provider for 26 
covered health care.  An enrollee is not liable to any out -of-network provider working 27 
within the hospital or health care facility of a participating provider for any charge 28 
beyond the amount permitted by the terms of the cost -sharing p rovisions of the plan.  29 
SUMMARY  30 
This bill limits a health plan enrollee's responsibility for the cost of covered health 31 
care when an enrollee receives health care services from an out -of-network provider at a 32 
participating hospital or other health care faci lity to the cost -sharing provisions for 33 
participating providers.  34 
 
