 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1262  
H.P. 862  House of Representatives, April 7, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Authorize Tribal -state Memoranda in the Eel and Elver 
Fisheries  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Marine Resources suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative DANA of the Passamaquoddy Tribe.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: BEAR of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, MITCHELL 
of the Penobscot Nation.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1285(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  12 MRSA ยง6302 -C is enacted to read:  2 
ยง6302 -C.  Memorandum of agreement between federally recognized Indian tribes 3 
and the State  4 
1.  Authorization.  The commissioner may enter into a memo randum of agreement 5 
with the Passamaquoddy Tribe, Penobscot Nation, Aroostook Band of Micmacs or 6 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians regarding the management of commercial fishing in 7 
the eel and elver fisheries.  8 
2.  Report.  If a memorandum of agreement is en tered into pursuant to subsection 1, 9 
the commissioner shall report the terms of the memorandum of agreement to the joint 10 
standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over marine resources matters.  11 
The committee may report out a bill to the ne xt regular session of the Legislature after the 12 
session in which the report is received to make any necessary statutory changes in 13 
response to the memorandum of agreement.  14 
SUMMARY  15 
This bill authorizes the Commissioner of Marine Resources to enter into a 16 
memorandum of agreement with the Passamaquoddy Tribe, Penobscot Nation, Aroostook 17 
Band of Micmacs or Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians regarding the management of 18 
commercial fishing in the eel and elver fisheries.  This bill requires the commissioner to 19 
repor t the terms of a memorandum of agreement to the joint standing committee of the 20 
Legislature having jurisdiction over marine resources matters.  The committee may report 21 
out a bill to the next regular session of the Legislature after the session in which th e 22 
report is received to make any necessary statutory changes in response to the agreement.  23 
 
