 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1166  
H.P. 800  House of Representatives, March 31, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Protect Taxpayers by Regulating Personal Services 
Contracts  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative MARTIN of Sinclair.  
Cosponsored by Senator PATRICK of Oxford and  
Representatives: BRYANT of Windham, DOORE of Augusta, FOWLE of Vassalboro, 
GILBERT of Jay, HERBIG of Belfast, POULIOT of Augusta, SAUCIER of Presque Isle, 
Senator: SAVIELLO of Franklin.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1379(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  5 MRSA ยง1813 -B is enacted to read:  2 
ยง1813 -B.  Cost -savings information available through the Internet  3 
The Director of the Bureau of General Services shall make cost -savings information 4 
for the award winners of all competitively bid contracts for services for the State 5 
available through the department's publicly accessible site on the Internet. For a contract 6 
with a new contractor, the cost -savings information must, where applicable, inclu de 7 
projected savings of the contract over the State's costs of providing the same service and 8 
include the amount of savings over the previous contractor's contract. For a contract with 9 
a contractor renewing or extending a contract for the first time, the c ost-savings 10 
information must, where applicable, include details of cost -savings for the expiring 11 
contract over the previous contractor's costs and details of continued cost -savings at or 12 
below costs in the current contract adjusted for inflation. For a con tract with a contractor 13 
renewing or extending a contract beyond a first renewal or extension, the cost -savings 14 
information must include details on continued cost -savings at or below costs in the 15 
current contract adjusted for inflation. The Director of the Bureau of General Services 16 
shall coordinate with all departments and agencies in the State to ensure the collection of 17 
the cost -savings information described in this section. The Director of the Bureau of 18 
General Services, with the approval of the Commissi oner of Administrative and Financial 19 
Services, shall establish by rule practices and procedures to make the cost -savings 20 
information available on the department's publicly accessible site on the Internet. Rules 21 
adopted pursuant to this section are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 22 
375, subchapter 2 -A. 23 
SUMMARY  24 
This bill requires the Director of the Bureau of General Services to coordinate with 25 
all state departments and agencies to make cost -savings information available on the 26 
department 's website for the winners of all competitively bid service contracts for the 27 
State. Cost -savings information for a contract with a new contractor must, where 28 
applicable, include the projected savings of the contract over the State's costs of providing 29 
the same service and include the amount of savings over the previous contractor. Cost - 30 
savings information for a contract with a contractor renewing or extending a contract for 31 
the first time must include details of the expiring contract's cost savings and det ails of 32 
continued cost -savings at or below costs in the current contract adjusted for inflation. 33 
Cost-savings information for a contract with a contractor renewing or extending a 34 
contract beyond a first renewal or extension must include details on continue d cost - 35 
savings at or below costs in the current contract adjusted for inflation. This bill requires 36 
that the Director of the Bureau of General Services, with the approval of the 37 
Commissioner of Administrative and Financial Services, establish practices and  38 
procedures to make the cost -savings information available on the department's website 39 
and gives the director the authority to do this by rule.  40 
 
