 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1064  
H.P. 733  House of Representatives, March 24, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Establish the Maine Summer Success Program  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative POULIOT of Augusta.  
Cosponsored by Senator MILLETT of Cumberland and  
Representatives: DAUGHTRY of Brunswick, PIERCE of Falmouth, TIPPING -SPITZ of 
Orono.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1408(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Education to establish the Maine Summer Success 1 
Program.  Resolved:  That the Department of Education shall develop and establish 2 
the Maine Summer Success Program, using traditional and alternative teaching methods, 3 
to ensure that ev ery secondary student has access to a high -quality extended school 4 
program.  The department shall encourage school districts to implement the Maine 5 
Summer Success Program in order to address the needs of children who fail to meet 6 
grade -level proficiency st andards.  In developing this program, the department shall:  7 
1.  Put into place at the end of the freshman year for all Maine public secondary 8 
school students the use of a suite of tests that determines a student’s knowledge in 9 
mathematics, reading and writ ing with the goal of preparing the student to enroll in 10 
college -level courses.  If a student is not at the correct grade level based on the results of 11 
the tests, the student is eligible to be part of the Maine Summer Success Program,  a 12 
district -based summ er school program that offers students the opportunity of alternative 13 
or online coursework; and  14 
2.  Explore the use of social impact bonds to fund the Maine Summer Success 15 
Program.  For the purpose of this resolve, "social impact bond" means a performance - 16 
based bond that operates over a fixed period of time in which repayment to an investor is 17 
contingent upon the achievement of a desired social outcome.  When funds are secured, 18 
the Department of Education, through a grant application process, shall provide funding 19 
to cover 90% of the costs of extended school year programs in districts with greater than 20 
50% student participation in the free and reduced lunch rate program.  Any remaining 21 
available funds must be provided to districts with greater than 35% free and reduced 22 
lunch participation rates; and be it further  23 
Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That the Department of Education shall report on its 24 
development of the Maine Summer Success Program under section 1 to the Joint 25 
Standing Committee on Education and Cult ural Affairs by December 2, 2015.  The Joint 26 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs may submit a bill related to this 27 
report to the Second Regular Session of the 127th Legislature.  28 
SUMMARY  29 
This resolve directs the Department of Education to d evelop the Maine Summer 30 
Success Program, which would use the results of a series of tests in order to identify 31 
students who are not achieving their grade levels of competence and to see who would 32 
benefit from attendance at such a program.  The department i s directed to explore the use 33 
of social impact bonds to fund the program.  The department is to report its development 34 
plan to the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs by December 2, 35 
2015.  36 
 
