 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1134  
S.P. 403  In Senate, March 31, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Require the Department of Health and Human Services 
To Distribute Information Regarding Down Syndrome to Providers 
of Prenatal and Postnatal Care and to Genetic Counselors  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator VOLK of Cumberland.  
Cosponsored by Representative LAJOIE of Lewiston and  
Senators: BRAKEY of Androscoggin, CUSHING of Penobscot, EDGECOMB of Aroostook, 
LIBBY of Androscoggin, MASON of Androscoggin, PATRICK of Oxford, Representatives: 
CRAFTS of Lisb on, TIMBERLAKE of Turner.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1500(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง1642 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง1642.  Down syndrome  3 
The department shall establish, maintain and operate an information service for 4 
Down syndrome.  For the purposes of this section,  "Down syndrome" means a 5 
chromosomal condition caused by an error in cell division that results in the presence of 6 
an extra whole or partial copy of chromosome 21.  7 
1.  Expectant or new parent; others.  A hospital, physician, health care provider or 8 
certifi ed nurse midwife who renders prenatal care or postnatal care or a genetic counselor 9 
who renders prenatal or postnatal genetic counseling shall, upon receipt of a positive test 10 
result from a prenatal or postnatal test for Down syndrome, provide the expectan t or new 11 
parent with information provided by the department under subsection 2.  The department 12 
shall also make such information available to any other person who has received a 13 
positive test result from a prenatal or postnatal test for Down syndrome.  14 
2.  Information provided.  The department shall make available to a person who 15 
renders prenatal care, postnatal care or genetic counseling to expectant or new parents 16 
who receive a prenatal or postnatal diagnosis of Down syndrome the following:  17 
A.  Up-to-date evidence -based written information about Down syndrome that 18 
includes physical, developmental, educational and psychosocial outcomes, life 19 
expectancy, clinical course and intellectual and functional development and treatment 20 
options.  The information must h ave been reviewed by medical experts and national 21 
Down syndrome organizations; and  22 
B.  Contact information regarding support programs and services, including 23 
information hotlines specific to Down syndrome, resource centers and 24 
clearinghouses, national, sta tewide and local Down syndrome organizations and other 25 
educational and support programs.  26 
3.  Accessibility of information.  Information provided under this section must be 27 
culturally and linguistically appropriate for a person receiving a positive prenatal  28 
diagnosis and for the family of a child receiving a postnatal diagnosis of Down syndrome.  29 
SUMMARY  30 
This bill requires that hospitals, physicians and other health professionals provide 31 
information about Down syndrome to expectant or new parents who have rec eived a 32 
prenatal or postnatal diagnosis of Down syndrome.  The Department of Health and 33 
Human Services is directed to distribute appropriate information to health care providers 34 
for distribution.  35 
 
