 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 256  
S.P. 94  In Senate, February 3, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Allow Nonresident College Students To Obtain Resident 
Hunting, Fishing and Trapping Licenses  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator DAVIS of Piscataquis.  
Cosponsored by Senators: BRAKEY of Androscoggin, BURNS of  Washington, CYRWAY of 
Kennebec, DIAMOND of Cumberland, HAMPER of Oxford, KATZ of Kennebec, 
SAVIELLO of Franklin, Representative: MARTIN of Sinclair.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0371(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  12 MRSA ยง10752, sub -ยง7 is enacted to read:  2 
7.  Nonresident student enrolled in an institution of higher education.   A 3 
nonresident enrolled as a full -time student in an institution of hi gher education is eligible 4 
for any trapping, fishing, hunting or combination fishing and hunting license or permit 5 
under this Part at the resident fee and has the same privileges as a resident of this State in 6 
regard to trapping, hunting and fishing.  7 
In or der to obtain a resident trapping, hunting, fishing or combination fishing and hunting 8 
license or permit, a nonresident student must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the 9 
commissioner or the commissioner's agent that the person is enrolled as a full -time 10 
student in an institution of higher education and that the person has been enrolled as a 11 
full-time student in an institution of higher education for at least one semester prior to 12 
applying for a resident license or permit.  13 
For purposes of this subsection, "institution of higher education" means an institution of 14 
higher education located in this State that meets the requirements of and conforms to the 15 
definitions contained in the federal Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended, 20 United 16 
States Code, Sectio n 1001(a) and the regulations, guidelines and procedures promulgated 17 
by the Secretary of Education pursuant to that Act.  18 
SUMMARY  19 
This bill provides that a nonresident enrolled as a full -time student in an institution of 20 
higher education in this State is el igible for any trapping, fishing, hunting or combination 21 
fishing and hunting license or permit at the resident fee and has the same privileges as a 22 
resident of this State in regard to trapping, hunting and fishing.  23 
 
