 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1084  
H.P. 745  House of Representatives, March 25, 2015  
 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine To Exclude Wildlife Issues from Citizen Initiatives  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative DUNPHY of Old Town.  
Cosponsored by Senator BRAKEY of Androscoggin and 
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, BATES of Westbrook, BEAVERS of South Berwick, 
BICKFORD of Auburn, BLACK of Wilton, BLUME of York, BROOKS of Lewiston, 
DAUGHTRY of Brunswick, DAVITT of Hampden, DEVIN of Newcastle, DOORE of 
Augusta, DUCHESNE of Hudson, E VANGELOS of Friendship, FARRIN of Norridgewock, 
FOLEY of Wells, GUERIN of Glenburn, HICKMAN of Winthrop, HOGAN of Old Orchard 
Beach, HYMANSON of York, KINNEY of Limington, KINNEY of Knox, LONGSTAFF of 
Waterville, MARTIN of Sinclair, McCABE of Skowhegan, Mc CREIGHT of Harpswell, 
MONAGHAN of Cape Elizabeth, PICKETT of Dixfield, POWERS of Naples, SAUCIER of 
Presque Isle, SHAW of Standish, SHORT of Pittsfield, STUCKEY of Portland, TEPLER of 
Topsham, VEROW of Brewer, WARREN of Hallowell, WOOD of Sabattus, Senator : VOLK 
of Cumberland.  
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0739(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง18, sub -ยง1, as amended by CR 2005, c. 2, is 4 
further amend ed to read:  5 
1.  Petition procedure.  The electors may propose to the Legislature for its 6 
consideration any bill, resolve or resolution, including bills to amend or repeal emergency 7 
legislation but not an amendment of the State Constitution and not an amend ment to the 8 
laws of the State governing wildlife management , by written petition addressed to the 9 
Legislature or to either branch thereof and filed in the office of the Secretary of State by 10 
the hour of 5:00 p.m., on or before the 50th day after the date o f convening of the 11 
Legislature in first regular session or on or before the 25th day after the date of convening 12 
of the Legislature in second regular session, except that the written petition may not be 13 
filed in the office of the Secretary of State later t han 18 months after the date the petition 14 
form was furnished or approved by the Secretary of State.  If the applicable deadline falls 15 
on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period runs until the hour of 5:00 p.m., of the 16 
next day which is not a Satur day, Sunday, or legal holiday.  17 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 18 
Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 19 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner  prescribed by law for 20 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 21 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 22 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following que stion:  23 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to provide that laws 24 
governing wildlife management may not be proposed through a citizen 25 
initiative?"  26 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 27 
and desig nate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 28 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 29 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 30 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 31 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 32 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendmen t 33 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 34 
further  35 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 36 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns  and copies 37 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  38 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0739(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to exclude from laws 2 
that may be proposed in a citizen initiative laws governing wildlife management.  3 
 
