 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1223  
H.P. 841  House of Representatives, April 7, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Revise the Charter of the Kennebunk Sewer District  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative DUNPHY of Embden.  
Cosponsored by Senator WOODSOME of York and  
Representatives: BEAVERS of South Berwick, DeCHANT of Bath, GROHMAN of 
Biddeford, HIGGINS of Dover -Foxcroft, O'CONNOR of Berwick, VEROW of Brewer.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, this legislation must take effect before the expiration of the 90 -day period 3 
in order for necessary improvements to be made to the Kennebunk Sewer District system; 4 
and 5 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 6 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 7 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 8 
therefore,  9 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  10 
Sec. 1.  Territorial limits; corporate name; purposes.   The inhabitants and 11 
territorial limits within that part of the Town of Kennebunk situated between the Atlantic 12 
Ocean and the southeasterly side of the Maine Turnpike and the territory of the Town of 13 
Kennebunk situated on the northwesterly side of the Maine Turnpike and described on 14 
the October 2004 Town of  Kennebunk tax maps as follows:  Map 020, Lot 001; P/O Map 15 
020, Lot 002; Map 027, Lot 014; Map 020, Lot 018; P/O 018, Lot 071; P/O 018, Lot 067; 16 
Map 018, Lot 072; P/O 028, Lot 005; Map 027, Lot 005; Map 027, Lot 004; Map 027, 17 
Lot 011; P/O 029, Lot 010; P/O  021, Lot 098; Map 020, Lot 001; Map 020, Lot 002; Map 18 
027, Lot 022; Map 027, Lot 020; Map 027, Lot 019; Map 020, Lot 003; and Map 020, 19 
Lot 024 are made and declared to be a public sewerage district and a quasi -municipal 20 
corporation under the name "Kennebu nk Sewer District," referred to in this Act as "the 21 
district," and is a system of public sewerage constructed, maintained and operated for the 22 
public health and welfare and for the benefits of the inhabitants and property in the 23 
district served by the sewe rage facilities, in the manner and with the rights, duties and 24 
immunities as described in this Act and all applicable statutes.  25 
The district is authorized to provide services outside the territory of the district to 26 
school buildings and facilities owned by  Maine Regional School Unit 21 or its successors 27 
and to municipal buildings and facilities owned by the Town of Kennebunk and may own 28 
such easements, rights of way, sewer lines and other facilities as are necessary or 29 
convenient to provide that service, bu t the cost of locating and constructing sewer 30 
facilities located outside the boundaries of the district for that purpose are borne entirely 31 
by Maine Regional School Unit 21 or its successors or the Town of Kennebunk and any 32 
sewer facilities located outside  the boundaries of the district for that purpose may be used 33 
only by Maine Regional School Unit 21 or its successors and the Town of Kennebunk.  34 
Sec. 2.  Authority to construct and maintain.   Inside the territory and outside 35 
the territory to serve buildings  and facilities owned by Maine Regional School Unit 21 or 36 
its successors and the Town of Kennebunk, the district has the authority to lay pipes, 37 
drains, sewers and conduits, and to take up, repair and maintain the pipes, drains, sewers 38 
and conduits or to c ontract for the pipes, drains, sewers and conduits to be done, in, along 39 
and through any public or private ways and public grounds, and in, along and through 40 
lands of any person or corporation as provided in this Act, to and into tidal waters, rivers, 41 
wate rcourses and treatment works or into any drain or sewer now or hereafter built that 42 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 empties into tidal waters, rivers, watercourses and treatment works.  The discharge from 1 
the pipes, drains, sewers and conduits must be at such points consistent with the 2 
requirements of public health as found convenient and reasonable for the district and the 3 
flow of existing watercourses.  The district shall construct and maintain treatment works, 4 
pumping stations, basins, reservoirs, flush tanks and such other appliances for collecting, 5 
holding, purifying and disposing of sewerage matter and commercial and industrial waste 6 
as may be necessary or proper.  The district has the authority to do any or all other things 7 
necessary or incidental to accomplish the purposes of the d istrict.  8 
Sec. 3.  Exemption from taxation.   The district is a public municipal corporation 9 
within the meaning of the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 36, section 651, and the property 10 
of the district is exempt from taxation to the extent provided in that sect ion. 11 
Sec. 4.  Board of trustees.   All affairs of the district are managed by a board of 12 
trustees composed of 5 members who must be residents of the district and elected as 13 
provided in this Act.  The trustees holding office on the effective date of this Act  shall 14 
continue to hold office until their terms expire.  15 
1.  Nominations and elections; vacancies; terms.   Nominations and elections of 16 
trustees must be conducted in accordance with the laws relating to municipal elections in 17 
the Maine Revised Statutes, Ti tle 30 -A, chapter 121, and all elections must be conducted 18 
by secret ballot in accordance with Title 30 -A, section 2528.  19 
If a vacancy arises in the membership of the board of trustees, the district shall call a 20 
special election, except that, upon request b y the board, the municipal officers may fill 21 
the vacancy by appointment.  22 
The preparation and correction of lists of the persons qualified to vote in the district is the 23 
responsibility of the registrar of the Town of Kennebunk as defined in Title 21 -A, sect ion 24 
1, subsection 38 and must be performed under the same procedure governing the 25 
preparation and correction of lists of persons qualified to vote in town elections.  All 26 
meetings of the district are presided over by a moderator chosen in the same manner a nd 27 
with the same authority as moderators of town meetings. All warrants issued for elections 28 
by the trustees must show that only the voters residing within the territorial limits of the 29 
district are entitled to vote.  30 
At each annual municipal election of th e Town of Kennebunk, the voters of the district 31 
shall elect a trustee for the term of 3 years.  If the Town of Kennebunk does not hold an 32 
annual election, the district shall arrange for an annual election to fill the trustee position 33 
that ends in that year  and to fill any vacancy in the office of trustee.  When a trustee 34 
ceases to be a resident of the district, the trustee shall vacate the office of trustee and the 35 
vacancy is filled as provided in this subsection, as applicable. All trustees are eligible fo r 36 
reelection or reappointment, but a person who is a municipal officer, as defined in Title 37 
30-A, section 2001, subsection 10, of any town located, in whole or in part, within the 38 
district is not eligible for appointment, nomination or election as a truste e of the district.  39 
2.  Organization; conduct of business.   After each annual municipal election of the 40 
Town of Kennebunk, the trustees shall organize by electing a chair, vice -chair, treasurer 41 
and clerk.  The trustees may adopt a corporate seal and, when n ecessary, may choose 42 
other needful officers and agents for the proper conduct and management of the affairs of 43 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 the district and fix any compensation for such officers or agents, who serve at the 1 
pleasure of the board of trustees.  The treasurer shall furni sh bond or insurance in such a 2 
sum and with such sureties as the trustees approve, the cost of the bond or insurance to be 3 
paid by the district.  4 
The trustees may adopt and establish bylaws and rules and regulations consistent with the 5 
laws of this State an d necessary for the convenience and the proper management of the 6 
affairs of the district and perform other acts within the powers delegated by law to the 7 
trustees.  8 
The trustees are sworn to the faithful performance of their duties, which include the 9 
duties  of any member who serves as clerk or clerk pro tem.  10 
At the close of each fiscal year, the trustees shall make a detailed report of their activities, 11 
of the receipts and expenditures of the district, of its financial and physical condition and 12 
of other mat ters and things pertaining to the district and shall file the report with the 13 
municipal authorities.  14 
Business of the district must be conducted in accordance with the applicable provisions of 15 
the Freedom of Access Act.  16 
3.  Meetings of district.  The truste es may call meetings of the district at any time.  17 
Notice of the meeting, signed by the chair or clerk of the board, must be conspicuously 18 
posted at the Kennebunk Town Hall not less than 7 days before the meeting and must 19 
state the business to be transacte d at the meeting.  20 
On written petition of 10% of the voters of the district, the trustees shall call a meeting of 21 
the district within 60 days.  22 
All persons resident in the district and qualified to vote for Governor under the laws of 23 
this State are entitled to vote in any meeting of the district.  24 
4.  Meetings of trustees.  The trustees may call meetings of the board of trustees at 25 
any time.  Notice of the regularly scheduled meetings of the board, signed by the chair or 26 
clerk of the board, must be posted at t he offices of the district and the Kennebunk Town 27 
Hall not less than 7 days before the meeting and must state the business to be transacted 28 
at any such meeting.  29 
Special meetings of the board may be called as are regularly scheduled meetings, but on 30 
one day 's notice.  31 
In the event of an emergency meeting, local representatives of the media must be notified 32 
of the meeting, whenever practical. Notification must include time and location and must 33 
be in the same manner as used to notify the members of the board.  The minutes of an 34 
emergency meeting must state the reason for the meeting.  35 
5.  Decisions of the board.   All decisions of the board of trustees must be made by a 36 
majority of those present and voting, except that a vote to approve the issuing of any 37 
bond, n ote or other evidence of indebtedness payable within a period of more than 12 38 
months after the date of issuance must be approved by a majority of the entire board. A 39 
quorum of the board consists of the total number of authorized trustees divided by 2 and, 40 
 
 Page 4 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 if necessary to obtain a whole number, the resulting number rounded up to the next whole 1 
number.  2 
Trustees are subject to the conflict of interest provisions of Title 30 -A, section 2605.  3 
6.  Trustee compensation.   The trustees receive compensation as recomm ended by 4 
the trustees and approved by majority vote of the municipal officers of the Town of 5 
Kennebunk, including compensation for any duties they perform as officers as well as for 6 
their duties as trustees. Certification of the vote must be recorded with the Secretary of 7 
State and recorded in the bylaws. Compensation for duties as trustees must be based on 8 
an amount specified in the bylaws for each meeting actually attended plus reimbursement 9 
for travel and expenses, with the total not to exceed a specific  amount as specified in the 10 
bylaws. Compensation schedules in effect on January 1, 2013 continue in effect until 11 
changed.  12 
7.  Trustee retirement.   A person who has not been a trustee prior to January 1, 13 
1987, or who is not a full -time employee, is not elig ible to become a member of the 14 
Maine Public Employees Retirement System as a result of the person's selection as a 15 
trustee.  16 
8.  Expenses.  The trustees may obtain an office and incur necessary expenses.  17 
9.  Recall.  The trustees may be recalled in accordan ce with the following provisions.  18 
A.  The qualified electors of the district may petition for the recall of a trustee after 19 
the first year of the term for which the trustee is elected by filing a petition with the 20 
municipal clerk demanding the recall of th e trustee.  A trustee may be subject to 21 
recall for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office.  The petition must be 22 
signed by electors equal to at least 25% of the vote cast for the office of Governor at 23 
the last gubernatorial election within the d istrict.  The recall petition must state the 24 
reason for removal.  25 
B.  Within 3 business days after the petition is offered for filing, the municipal clerk 26 
shall determine by careful examination whether the petition is sufficient and so state 27 
in a certificat e attached to the petition.  If the petition is found to be insufficient, the 28 
certificate must state the particulars creating the insufficiency.  The petition may be 29 
amended to correct an insufficiency within 5 days following the affixing of the 30 
original c ertificate.  Within 2 days after the offering of the amended petition for 31 
filing, the petition must again be carefully examined to determine sufficiency and a 32 
certificate stating the findings must be attached.  Immediately upon finding an 33 
original or amend ed petition sufficient, the municipal clerk shall file the petition and 34 
call a special election to be held not less than 45 days nor more than 90 days from the 35 
date the municipal clerk certifies the petition as sufficient.  The municipal clerk shall 36 
notify  the trustee against whom the recall petition is filed of the special election.  37 
C.  The trustee against whom the recall petition is filed is a candidate at the special 38 
election without nomination, unless the trustee resigns within 10 days after the 39 
origina l filing of the petition.  There is no primary.  Candidates for the office may be 40 
nominated under the usual procedure of nomination for trustees by filing nomination 41 
 
 Page 5 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 papers, not later than 5 p.m., 4 weeks preceding the election and having their names 1 
place d on the ballot at the special election.  2 
D.  The trustee against whom a recall petition has been filed shall continue to perform 3 
the duties of the trustee's office until the result of the special election is officially 4 
declared. The person receiving the hi ghest number of votes at the special election is 5 
declared elected for the remainder of the term.  If the incumbent receives the highest 6 
number of votes, the incumbent continues in office.  If another candidate receives the 7 
highest number of votes, the othe r person succeeds the incumbent within 10 days 8 
after receiving notification.  9 
E.  After one recall petition and special election, no further recall petition may be 10 
filed against the same trustee during the term for which the trustee was elected.  11 
Sec. 5.  Co ordination with municipal planning.   The following provisions 12 
facilitate coordination of municipal planning and sewer extension planning.  13 
1.  Growth management.   The trustees shall cooperate with municipal officials in 14 
the development of municipal growth m anagement and other land use plans and 15 
ordinances.  16 
2.  Development that affects the district.   Municipal officers shall cooperate with 17 
the trustees during the consideration of development applications that may affect the 18 
operations of the district.  19 
Sec. 6.   Powers.   Except as otherwise provided by law, for the purposes of its 20 
incorporation, the district may locate, construct and maintain pipes, drains, sewers, 21 
conduits, treatment plants, pumping stations and other necessary structures and 22 
equipment for the collection, interception and treatment of sewerage, commercial and 23 
industrial waste and storm and surface water for the health, welfare, comfort and 24 
convenience of the inhabitants of the district.  25 
All incidental powers, rights and privileges necessary to a ccomplish the objectives of 26 
this chapter are granted to the district.  27 
Sec. 7.  Right of eminent domain.   The authority and procedures for the exercise 28 
of eminent domain by the district must conform to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38, 29 
sections 1152, 11 52-A, 1153 and 1154. In addition, the district may not take by right of 30 
eminent domain any of the property or facilities of any other public utility used or 31 
acquired for future use by the owner of the public utility in the performance of a public 32 
duty, unl ess expressly authorized by a special Act of the Legislature.  33 
Sec. 8.  Crossing other public utilities and railroad corporations.   If the 34 
district, in constructing, maintaining or replacing any of its facilities, must cross property 35 
of another public utili ty or railroad corporation, the district must obtain the consent of the 36 
other public utility or railroad corporation and undertake the work in accordance with 37 
conditions established by agreement. If, within 30 days after requesting consent, the 38 
district fa ils to reach an agreement with the public utility or railroad corporation, the 39 
district may petition as follows.  40 
 
 Page 6 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 1.  Public utility.   In the case of crossing property of a public utility, the district may 1 
petition the Public Utilities Commission to determi ne the time, place and manner of 2 
crossing. All work done on the property of the public utility must be done under the 3 
supervision and to the satisfaction of the public utility or as prescribed by the Public 4 
Utilities Commission.  5 
2.  Railroad corporation.   In the case of crossing the property of a railroad 6 
corporation, the district may petition the Department of Transportation to determine the 7 
time, place and manner of crossing. All work done on the property of the railroad 8 
corporation must be done under the  supervision and to the satisfaction of the railroad 9 
corporation or as prescribed by the Department of Transportation.  10 
All work under this section must be done at the expense of the district.  11 
Sec. 9.  Sewer extensions.   Sewer extensions are governed by thi s section.  12 
1.  Written assurance from municipality.   The district may not construct any sewer 13 
extension unless it acquires from the municipal officers or the designee of the municipal 14 
officers of any municipality through which the sewer extension will pass  written 15 
assurance that:  16 
A.  Any development, lot or unit intended to be served by the sewer extension is in 17 
conformity with any adopted municipal plans and ordinances regulating land use; and  18 
B.  The sewer extension is consistent with adopted municipal pl ans and ordinances 19 
regulating land use.  20 
If the municipal officers fail to issue a response to a written request from the district for 21 
written assurance within 45 calendar days of receiving the request in writing, the written 22 
assurance is deemed granted.  23 
Not less than 7 days prior to the meeting at which the trustees will take final action on 24 
whether to proceed with the extension, the trustees shall publish notice of the proposed 25 
extension in a newspaper having a general circulation that includes all municip alities 26 
through which the sewer extension will pass.  27 
2.  Review of municipal decision.   For an intermunicipal sewer extension, when 28 
written assurance is denied by municipal officers pursuant to subsection 1, an aggrieved 29 
party may appeal, within 15 days of  the decision, to the Department of Agriculture, 30 
Conservation and Forestry for a review of the municipal officers' decision. 31 
Notwithstanding the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 4, the 32 
following procedures apply to the review by the  Department of Agriculture, Conservation 33 
and Forestry.  34 
A.  The Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry may request any 35 
additional information from the sewer district, the municipality or the Department of 36 
Environmental Protection. All informat ion requested must be submitted within 30 37 
days of the request, unless an extension is granted by the Department of Agriculture, 38 
Conservation and Forestry.  39 
 
 Page 7 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 B.  Within a reasonable time, the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 1 
Forestry shall hold a h earing. The Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 2 
Forestry shall give at least 7 days' written notice of the hearing to the district, the 3 
municipality and the party that requested the hearing. The hearing is informal and the 4 
Department of Agriculture , Conservation and Forestry may receive any information it 5 
considers necessary.  6 
C.  Within 15 days of the hearing and within 60 days of the request for review, the 7 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry shall make a decision that 8 
must include  findings of fact on whether the sewer extension proposal is inconsistent 9 
with adopted municipal plans and ordinances regulating land use. The decision of the 10 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry constitutes final agency action.  11 
D.  Notwith standing subsection 1, if the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 12 
Forestry determines that the sewer extension proposal is not inconsistent with 13 
adopted municipal plans and ordinances regulating land use, the Department of 14 
Agriculture, Conservation  and Forestry shall issue written assurance that the proposal 15 
is consistent with adopted municipal plans and ordinances regulating land use and the 16 
sewer district may construct the sewer extension.  17 
Sec. 10.  Conditions for carrying out work.   When the dist rict enters, digs up or 18 
excavates a public way or other land for the purpose of laying its sewers, drains or pipes 19 
or constructing or maintaining manholes or catch basins or their appurtenances or for any 20 
other purpose, the work must be done expeditiously.   Upon completion of the work, the 21 
district shall restore the way or land to the condition it was in prior to the work or to a 22 
condition equally as good.  Whenever the character of the work is such that it endangers 23 
travel on a public way, the municipal of ficers of the Town of Kennebunk may order a 24 
temporary closing of the way and of any intersecting way upon request of the district.  25 
The way must remain closed to public travel until the municipal officers determine it 26 
restored to a condition safe for traff ic. 27 
Sec. 11.  Contracts.  The district, through its trustees, in order to carry out the 28 
purposes of its incorporation, may contract with a person, district, utility or corporation or 29 
with a municipality, the State or other governmental entity whether locat ed inside or 30 
outside the boundaries of the district.  31 
Sec. 12.  Lease of property.  The district may enter into a lease and leaseback 32 
transaction with respect to some or all of its real or personal property, other than land, and 33 
may take all other necessary  action, including, but not limited to, the granting of 34 
mortgages and liens, to effectuate the transaction. For purposes of this section, "lease" 35 
includes a lease of any length, including leases that may be defined as sales for income 36 
tax purposes.  37 
Sec. 13 .  Enforcement.  The district has enforcement powers as specified in this 38 
section.  39 
1.  Violation of standards by an industrial user.   The district may seek in a civil 40 
action injunctive relief from an industrial user that violates a pretreatment standard or  41 
requirement, administered by the  district. The  district may seek a civil penalty of up to 42 
 
 Page 8 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 $1,000 per day for each violation by an industrial user of a pretreatment standard or 1 
requirement.  2 
2.  Injury to property of the district.   A person may not place,  discharge or leave 3 
any offensive or injurious matter or material on or in the conduits, catch basins or 4 
receptacles of the district contrary to its regulations or knowingly injure any conduit, 5 
pipe, reservoir, flush tank, catch basin, manhole, outlet, eng ine, pump or other property 6 
held, owned or used by the district.  7 
A person who violates this subsection is liable to pay twice the amount of the damages to 8 
the district to be recovered in any proper action and is subject to a civil penalty not to 9 
exceed $2, 500 for each violation, payable to the district. The civil penalty is recoverable 10 
in a civil action.  11 
3. Required connection.   Except as provided in subsection 4, upon receiving a 12 
request from the district to connect a building located in the territory of t he district that is 13 
accessible to a sewer or drain of the district and that is intended for human habitation or 14 
occupancy or that has facilities for discharge or disposal of wastewater or commercial or 15 
industrial waste, the owner of that building shall arr ange to have the building connected 16 
through a sanitary sewer or drainage system to the district's accessible sewer or drain in 17 
the most direct manner possible. If feasible, each building requiring connection must have 18 
its own separate connection. The conne ction must be completed within 90 days of the 19 
receipt by the owner of the request, or within any extended period requested by the owner 20 
and agreed to by the trustees. For purposes of this subsection, "owner" includes the 21 
owners of record or any person agai nst whom property taxes on the building are assessed.  22 
A person who receives a notice in accordance with this subsection to connect to a 23 
building and fails to connect to the building in accordance with this subsection is subject 24 
to a civil penalty not to ex ceed $2,500, payable to the district. This penalty is recoverable 25 
in a civil action.  26 
4.  Connections not required.   An existing building that is already served by a 27 
private sewer system is not required to connect with a sewer or drain of the district as 28 
long as the private sewer or drainage system functions in a satisfactory and sanitary 29 
manner and does not violate applicable law or ordinance applicable to the connection 30 
with a sewer or drain or the district or any applicable requirements of the state plumb ing 31 
code, as determined by the municipal plumbing inspector or the municipal plumbing 32 
inspector's alternate, or, in the event that both are trustees or employees of the sewer 33 
district, the division of health engineering within the Department of Health and Human 34 
Services.  35 
5.  Permissive connection.   A person not otherwise required to connect a private 36 
sewer into a sewer of the district may connect to the district's sewer if that person obtains 37 
a permit from the district and pays any charges required by the d istrict. The clerk of the 38 
district shall record the permit in the district records.  39 
Sec. 14.  Inspection of sewers.   The officers or agents of the district have free 40 
access to all premises served by the district's sewers, at all reasonable hours, for 41 
inspe ction of plumbing and sewage fixtures, to ascertain the quality and quantity of 42 
 
 Page 9 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 sewage discharged and the manner of discharge and to enforce this Act and the rules 1 
prescribed by the trustees.  2 
Sec. 15.  Rights and obligations of abutters and others to enter .  A person 3 
may not connect a private sewer to a district sewer until:  4 
1.  Inspection.   The private sewer has been inspected by a designated agent of the 5 
district and that agent has certified in writing that the private sewer has been constructed 6 
in compli ance with and meets all requirements and conditions of the district's regulations;  7 
2.  Payment.   The person has paid or has made arrangements acceptable to the 8 
district to pay all assessments, impact fees or other charges the district imposes when a 9 
privat e sewer is connected to any of the district sewers; and  10 
3.  Permit.   The person has obtained a permit in writing permitting the connection 11 
from the trustees.  Before a permit is issued, the clerk or the clerk's designee for the 12 
district shall record the pe rmit in the district's records.  13 
Every building in the district intended for human habitation or occupancy or with 14 
facilities for discharge or disposal of sewage or commercial or industrial waste accessible 15 
to a sewer of the district must, in the most direc t manner possible, connect to the district 16 
sewer within 90 days after receiving from the district a request to connect or within such 17 
further time as the trustees of the district may grant.  Whenever feasible, each building 18 
must have a separate connection to the district's sewer.  A building is considered 19 
accessible to a sewer of the district if the building is at any point within 200 feet of a 20 
district sewer or if any private sewer or drain directly or indirectly connected to the 21 
building or carrying waste water or commercial or industrial waste from the building 22 
comes within 200 feet of a district sewer.  This section does not require the owner of a 23 
building to acquire any real property or easement for the sole purpose of making the 24 
connection.  25 
Sec. 16.  Ra tes and fees.  A person, firm and corporation, whether public or 26 
private or municipal, shall pay to the treasurer of the district rates established by the 27 
trustees for the sewer or drainage service used or available with respect to their real estate 28 
so lon g as those rates are consistent with this section.  For the purposes of this section, 29 
"rate" means a rate, toll, rent, assessment, impact fee, supplemental charge or other lawful 30 
charge established by the district.  31 
1.  Uniform rates.   Rates must be uniform  within the district whenever the cost to the 32 
district of installation and maintenance of sewers, treatment facilities or their 33 
appurtenances and the cost of service is substantially uniform, except that:  34 
A.  The district may establish a higher rate in sec tions where, for any reason, the cost 35 
to the district of construction and maintenance, or the cost of service, exceeds the 36 
average as long as the higher rates are uniform throughout the sections where the 37 
rates apply; and  38 
B.  Trustees may reduce the impact  fee or connection fee, as those terms are defined 39 
in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 30 -A, section 5061, for sewer service to newly 40 
constructed affordable housing in accordance with Title 30 -A, chapter 202 -A. 41 
 
 Page 10 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 2.  Multidistrict rates.   Notwithstanding an y other provision of law, the district that 1 
shares, supplies or contracts for services with another district shall establish rates 2 
mutually agreeable to the trustees of each participating district.  3 
3.  Readiness to serve.   The district's rates may include readiness to serve rates 4 
charged against owners of real estate abutting or accessible but not connected to sewers 5 
or drains of the district, whether or not the real estate is improved.  6 
4.  Interest on late payments.   The district may charge and collect int erest on 7 
delinquent accounts at a rate not to exceed the highest lawful rate set by the Treasurer of 8 
State for municipal taxes.  9 
5.  Adoption of rate schedule.   Prior to the adoption of a new rate schedule, the 10 
trustees shall hold a public hearing regarding  the proposed rate schedule. The trustees 11 
shall publish the proposed rates and notice of the hearing not less than once in a 12 
newspaper having a general circulation in the district not less than 7 days prior to the 13 
hearing. The district shall mail to each r atepayer a notice of the public hearing and the 14 
proposed rate at least 14 days prior to the hearing.  15 
6.  Revenue from rates.   The sewer rates, tolls, rents, impact fees, entrance charges 16 
and other lawful charges established by the board of trustees in acco rdance with this Act 17 
must be fixed and adjusted with respect to the aggregate of the rates, tolls, rents, impact 18 
fees and entrance charges so as to produce revenue at least sufficient, together with any 19 
other money available to produce revenue, to:  20 
A.  Pay  the current expenses of operating and maintaining the sewerage, drainage and 21 
treatment system of the district;  22 
B.  Pay the principal of and premium, if any, and interest on all bonds and notes 23 
issued by the district as they become due and payable;  24 
C.  Cre ate and maintain such reserves as may be required by the trustees or any trust 25 
agreement or resolution securing bonds and notes;  26 
D.  Provide funds for paying the cost of all necessary repairs, replacements and 27 
renewals of the sewerage, drainage and treatme nt systems of the district;  28 
E.  Pay or provide for any amounts that the district may be obligated to pay or 29 
provide for by law or contract, including any resolution or contract with or for the 30 
benefit of the holders of its bonds and notes; and  31 
F.  Provide revenue in order to pay all or part of the present or projected cost to 32 
improve, enlarge or expand the district's system, including payment of interest 33 
accruing on any indebtedness for such purposes.  34 
7.  Civil action for unpaid rates.   If rates under this section are not paid, and the 35 
district does not collect unpaid rates pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 38, 36 
section 1050, the district may maintain a civil action against the person who has not paid 37 
rates for the amount of the unpaid rates plus 10% interest.  38 
Sec. 17.  Waiver of sewer district lien foreclosure.   The district may use the 39 
following provisions to waive a lien foreclosure.  40 
 
 Page 11 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 1.  Waiver.  The treasurer of the district, when authorized by the trustees, may waive 1 
the foreclosure of the dis trict lien mortgage created pursuant to this Act by recording in 2 
the York County Registry of Deeds a waiver of foreclosure before the period for the right 3 
of redemption from the lien mortgage has expired. The lien mortgage remains in full 4 
effect after the recording of a waiver. Other methods established by law for the collection 5 
of any unpaid rates are not affected by the filing of a waiver under this section.  6 
2.  Form.   The waiver of foreclosure under subsection 1 must be substantially in the 7 
following for m. 8 
The foreclosure of the sewer lien mortgage on real estate for charges 9 
against........................(NAME) to Kennebunk Sewer District dated...............and recorded 10 
in the York County Registry of Deeds in Book........., Page........ is hereby waived . 11 
The form must be dated, signed by the treasurer of the district and notarized. A copy of 12 
the form must be provided to the party named on the lien mortgage and each record 13 
holder of a mortgage on the real estate.  14 
Sec. 18.  Collection of unpaid rates.   The district may secure payment of the 15 
district's rates pursuant to this section.  16 
1.  Lien.   There is a lien on real estate served or benefited by the sewers of the district 17 
to secure the payment of the district's rates. The lien established under this sectio n takes 18 
precedence over all other claims on such real estate, except claims for taxes.  19 
2.  Collection.   The treasurer of the district may collect rates and all rates must be 20 
committed to the treasurer. The treasurer may, after demand for payment, sue in th e name 21 
of the district in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction for any rates 22 
remaining unpaid. In addition to other methods established by law for the collection of 23 
rates and without waiver of the right to sue for the collection of rates, the lien created 24 
under subsection 1 may be enforced in the following manner.  25 
A.  When rates have been committed to the treasurer of the district for collection, the 26 
treasurer may, after the expiration of 3 months and within one year after the date 27 
when the  rates became due and payable, give to the owner of the real estate served, 28 
leave at the owner's last and usual place of abode or send by certified mail, return 29 
receipt requested, to the owner's last known address a notice in writing signed by the 30 
treasure r or bearing the treasurer's facsimile signature, stating the amount of the rates 31 
due, describing the real estate upon which the lien is claimed and stating that a lien is 32 
claimed on the real estate to secure the payment of the rates and demanding the 33 
paym ent of the rates within 30 days after service or mailing, with $1 added to the 34 
demanded rate for the treasurer and an additional fee to cover mailing the notice by 35 
certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice must contain a statement that the 36 
district is willing to arrange installment payments of the outstanding debt.  37 
B.  After the expiration of 30 days and within one year after giving notice pursuant to 38 
paragraph A, the treasurer of the district shall record in the York County Registry of 39 
Deeds a c ertificate signed by the treasurer setting forth the amount of the rates due, 40 
describing the real estate on which the lien is claimed and stating that a lien is 41 
claimed on the real estate to secure payment of the rates and that a notice and demand 42 
 
 Page 12 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 for paym ent has been given or made in accordance with this section and stating 1 
further that the rates remain unpaid. At the time of the recording of the certificate in 2 
the registry, the treasurer shall file in the office of the district a true copy of the 3 
certific ate and shall mail a true copy of the certificate by certified mail, return receipt 4 
requested, to each record holder of any mortgage on the real estate, addressed to the 5 
record holder at the record holder's last and usual place of abode.  6 
C.  The filing of the certificate in the York County Registry of Deeds creates a 7 
mortgage held by the district on the real estate described in the certificate that has 8 
priority over all other mortgages, liens, attachments and encumbrances of any nature, 9 
except liens, attach ments and claims for taxes, and gives to the district all the rights 10 
usually possessed by mortgagees, except that the district as mortgagee does not have 11 
any right to possession of that real estate until the right of redemption has expired.  12 
D.  If the mort gage created under paragraph C, together with interest and costs, has 13 
not been paid within 18 months after the date of filing the certificate in the York 14 
County Registry of Deeds in accordance with paragraph B, the mortgage is 15 
foreclosed and the right of r edemption expires. The filing of the certificate in the 16 
registry is sufficient notice of the existence of the mortgage. In the event that the rate, 17 
with interest and costs, is paid within the period of redemption, the treasurer of the 18 
district shall discha rge the mortgage in the same manner as provided for discharge of 19 
real estate mortgages.  20 
E.  The owner of the real estate shall pay the sum of the fees for receiving, recording 21 
and indexing the lien, or its discharge, as established by the Maine Revised Sta tutes, 22 
Title 33, section 751, plus $13, plus all certified mail, return receipt requested, fees.  23 
F.  Not more than 45 days or less than 30 days before the foreclosing date of the 24 
mortgage created under paragraph C, the treasurer of the district shall notif y the party 25 
named on the mortgage and each record holder of a mortgage on the real estate in a 26 
writing signed by the treasurer or bearing the treasurer's facsimile signature and left at 27 
the holder's last and usual place of abode or sent by certified mail, return receipt 28 
requested, to the holder's last known address of the impending automatic foreclosure 29 
and indicating the exact date of foreclosure. For sending this notice, the district is 30 
entitled to receive $3 plus all certified mail, return receipt reques ted, fees, which must 31 
be added to and become a part of the amount due under paragraph E. If notice is not 32 
given in the time period specified in this paragraph, the person not receiving timely 33 
notice has up to 30 days after the treasurer provides notice as specified in this 34 
paragraph in which to redeem the mortgage. The notice of impending automatic 35 
foreclosure must be substantially in the following form:  36 
STATE OF MAINE  37 
KENNEBUNK SEWER DISTRICT  38 
NOTICE OF IMPENDING AUTOMATIC FORECLOSURE  39 
SEWER LIEN  40 
M.R.S.A., T itle 38, section 1050  41 
IMPORTANT:  DO NOT DISREGARD THIS NOTICE. YOU WILL LOSE YOUR 42 
PROPERTY UNLESS YOU PAY THE CHARGES, COSTS AND INTEREST FOR 43 
 
 Page 13 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 WHICH A LIEN ON YOUR PROPERTY HAS BEEN CREATED BY THE 1 
KENNEBUNK SEWER DISTRICT.  2 
TO:.............................  3 
You are the party named on the Sewer Lien Certificate filed on........., 20.. and 4 
recorded in Book ...., Page ..... in the York County Registry of Deeds.  This 5 
Kennebunk Sewer District filing created a sewer lien mortgage on the real estate 6 
described in th e Sewer Lien Certificate.  7 
On ......, 20.., the sewer lien mortgage will be foreclosed and your right to redeem the 8 
mortgage and recover your property by paying the district's charges and interest that 9 
are owed will expire.  10 
IF THE LIEN FORECLOSES, THE KENNE BUNK SEWER DISTRICT WILL 11 
OWN YOUR PROPERTY, SUBJECT ONLY TO MUNICIPAL TAX LIENS.  12 
If you cannot pay the outstanding charges, costs and interest that are the subject of 13 
this notice or the subject of installment payment arrangements that you have made 14 
with th e district, please contact me immediately to discuss this notice.  15 
.............................  16 
District Treasurer  17 
G.  The district shall pay the treasurer $1 for the notice, $1 for filing the lien 18 
certificate and the amount paid for certified mail, return  receipt requested, fees. The 19 
fees for recording the lien certificate must be paid by the district to the register of 20 
deeds.  21 
H.  A discharge of the certificate given after the right of redemption has expired, 22 
which discharge has been recorded in the York C ounty Registry of Deeds for more 23 
than one year, terminates all title of the district derived from that certificate or any 24 
other recorded certificate for which the right of redemption expired 10 years or more 25 
prior to the foreclosure date of this discharge lien, unless the district has conveyed 26 
any interest based upon the title acquired from any of the affected liens.  27 
Sec. 19.  District to bill only property owners.   The district may bill only the 28 
owner of the property receiving service.  29 
Sec. 20.  Bonds and notes.   The district may authorize bonds and notes.  30 
1.  Authorization of bonds.   The district may provide by resolution of its board of 31 
trustees, without district vote, except as provided in subsection 10, for the borrowing of 32 
money and the issuance from t ime to time of bonds, subject to the debt limitation set in 33 
this section, for any of its corporate purposes, including, but not limited to:  34 
A.  Paying and refunding its indebtedness;  35 
B.  Paying any necessary expenses and liabilities, whether incurred by th e district or 36 
the Town of Kennebunk, the district being authorized to reimburse the Town of 37 
Kennebunk for any such expenses incurred or paid by it;  38 
 
 Page 14 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 C. Paying costs directly or indirectly associated with acquiring properties, paying 1 
damages, laying sewers, drains and conduits, constructing, maintaining and operating 2 
sewage and treatment plants or systems and making renewals, additions, extensions 3 
and improvements to the same and covering interest payments during the period of 4 
construction and for the period after construction as the trustees may determine;  5 
D. Providing reserves for debt service, repairs and replacements or other capital or 6 
current expenses as may be required by a trust agreement or resolution securing 7 
bonds; and  8 
E.  Any combination of the pur poses in paragraphs A to D.  9 
Bonds may be issued as general obligations of the district or as special obligations 10 
payable solely from particular funds.  The total outstanding and unpaid indebtedness of 11 
the district may not at any one time exceed the sum of $30,000,000.  The principal of and 12 
premium if any and interest on all bonds are payable solely from the funds provided for 13 
that purpose from revenues. "Revenues" means and includes the proceeds of bonds, all 14 
revenues, rates, fees, entrance charges, assessm ents, rents and other receipts derived by 15 
the district from the operation of its sewer system and other properties, including, but not 16 
limited to, investment earnings and the proceeds of insurance, condemnation and sale of 17 
or other disposition of propertie s.  All bonds issued by the district are legal obligations of 18 
the district.  The district is a quasi -municipal corporation within the meaning of the 19 
Maine Revised Statutes, Title 30 -A, section 5701.  Bonds may be issued without 20 
obtaining the consent of a c ommission, board, bureau or agency of the State or the Town 21 
of Kennebunk and without any proceedings, limitations or conditions to meet other than 22 
those specifically required under this Act.  Bonds issued under this Act do not constitute a 23 
debt or liabilit y of the State or the Town of Kennebunk or a pledge of the faith and credit 24 
of the State or the municipality, but the bonds are payable solely from the funds provided 25 
for that purpose, and a statement to that effect must be recited on the face of the bonds . 26 
2.  Notes.   The district may also provide by resolution of its board, without district 27 
vote, for the issuance from time to time of notes in anticipation of bonds authorized under 28 
this section and of notes in anticipation of the revenues to be collected o r received in any 29 
year or in anticipation of the receipt of federal or state grants or other aid.  The issuance 30 
of these notes is governed by the applicable provisions of this section relating to the 31 
issuance of bonds, except that notes in anticipation of revenue must mature no later than 32 
one year from their respective dates and notes issued in anticipation of federal or state 33 
grants or other aid and renewals must mature no later than the expected date of receipt of 34 
those grants or aid. Notes in anticipatio n of revenue issued to mature less than one year 35 
from their dates may be renewed from time to time by the issuance of other notes, except 36 
that the period from the date of an original note to the maturity of any note issued to 37 
renew or pay the same or the i nterest on the note may not exceed one year.  38 
The district is authorized to enter into agreements with the State or the United States, or 39 
any agency of either, or any municipality, corporation, commission or board authorized to 40 
grant or loan money to or oth erwise assist in the financing of projects of the type the 41 
district is authorized to carry out and to accept grants and borrow money from the 42 
government, agency, municipality, corporation, commission or board necessary or 43 
desirable to accomplish the purpos es of the district.  44 
 
 Page 15 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 3.  Maturity; interest; form, temporary bonds.   The bonds issued under this 1 
section must be dated, mature at a time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or 2 
dates and bear interest at a rate or rates determined by the board.  The bonds may be 3 
made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the district, at a price or prices and 4 
under any terms and conditions as may be fixed by the board prior to the issuance of the 5 
bonds.  The board shall determine the form of the bonds, incl uding any interest coupons 6 
to be attached to the bonds, and the manner of execution of the bonds and shall fix the 7 
denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of 8 
principal and interest, which may be at any bank or trust co mpany inside or outside the 9 
State.  Bonds are executed in the name of the district by the manual or facsimile signature 10 
of the officer or officers authorized in the resolution to execute the bonds.  One signature 11 
on each bond must be a manual signature.  C oupons, if any, attached to the bonds must be 12 
executed with the facsimile signature of the officer or officers of the district designated in 13 
the resolution.  If the officer whose signature or a facsimile of whose signature appears on 14 
any bonds or coupons c eases to be an officer before the delivery of the bonds, the 15 
signature or its facsimile is valid and sufficient for all purposes as if the officer had 16 
remained in office until the delivery.  17 
Notwithstanding any of the other provisions in this Act or any rec itals on any bonds 18 
issued under this section, all bonds are deemed to be negotiable instruments under the 19 
laws of this State.  The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the 20 
board may determine.  Provision may be made for the registr ation of any coupon bonds as 21 
to principal alone and as to both principal and interest and for the reconversion into 22 
coupon bonds of any bonds registered as to both principal and interest.  The board may 23 
sell bonds in that manner, either at public or privat e sale, at a price as it determines to be 24 
in the best interest of the district.  The proceeds of the bonds of each issue must be used 25 
solely for the purpose for which those bonds are authorized and must be disbursed in such 26 
a manner and under such restrict ions as the board provides in the resolution authorizing 27 
the issuance of the bonds or in the trust agreement securing the bonds. The resolution 28 
providing for the issuance of bonds and any trust agreement securing the bonds may 29 
contain such limitations upon  the issuance of additional bonds as the board determines 30 
proper.  The additional bonds must be issued under such restrictions and limitations 31 
prescribed by that resolution or trust agreement.  Prior to the preparation of definitive 32 
bonds, the board may, u nder like restrictions, issue interim receipts or temporary bonds, 33 
with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive bonds when those bonds are 34 
executed and are available for delivery.  The board may provide for the replacement of 35 
any bond that is mutil ated, destroyed or lost.  36 
4.  Pledges and covenants; trust agreement.   The issuance of notes or bonds 37 
constitutes a pledge of net revenues of the district for the prompt payment of associated 38 
debt service or bonds when due.  39 
In the discretion of the board, a ny issue of bonds may be secured by a trust agreement by 40 
and between the district and a corporate trustee that may be any trust company inside or 41 
outside the State.  42 
A.  The resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust agreement must, 43 
unles s for another specified source of revenue, pledge or assign, in whole or in part, 44 
the revenues and other money held or to be received by the district and any account 45 
 
 Page 16 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 and contract or other rights to receive the same, whether then existing or coming into 1 
existence and whether then held or acquired by the district, and the proceeds from the 2 
bonds, but the resolution or trust agreement may not convey or mortgage the sewer 3 
system or any other properties of the district.  The resolution may also contain 4 
provision s for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders 5 
that are reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including, but not limited 6 
to, covenants setting forth the duties of the district and the board of trustees in 7 
relation to  the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, repair, 8 
maintenance, operation and assurance of its sewer system or any of its other 9 
properties; the fixing and revising of rates, fees and charges; the application of the 10 
proceeds of bonds; the custody, safeguarding and application of revenues; the 11 
defining of defaults and providing for remedies in the event of defaults, which may 12 
include the acceleration of maturities; the establishment of reserves; and the making 13 
and amending of contracts.  The  resolution or trust agreement may set forth the rights 14 
and remedies of the bondholders and of the corporate trustee, if any, and may restrict 15 
the individual right of action by bondholders as is customary in trust agreements or 16 
trust indentures securing bo nds or debentures of corporations.  In addition, the 17 
resolution or trust agreement may contain such other provisions as the board of 18 
trustees determines reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders.  All 19 
expenses incurred in carrying out the r esolution or trust agreement may be treated as 20 
a part of the cost of operation.  The pledge by any resolution or trust agreement is 21 
valid and binding and is deemed continuously perfected for the purposes of the 22 
Uniform Commercial Code from the time when th e pledge is made.  All revenues, 23 
money, rights and proceeds so pledged and received by the district are immediately 24 
subject to the lien of the pledge without any physical delivery or segregation of the 25 
pledge or further action under the Uniform Commercial Code or otherwise.  The lien 26 
of the pledge is valid and binding against all parties having claims of any kind in tort, 27 
contract or otherwise against the district irrespective of whether those parties have 28 
notice of the lien of the pledge.  29 
B.  The resolutio n authorizing the issuance of bonds under this Act, or any trust 30 
agreement securing those bonds, must, unless for another specified source of revenue, 31 
provide that all or a sufficient amount of revenues, after providing for the payment of 32 
the cost of repai r, maintenance and operation and reserves for the payment as may be 33 
provided in the resolution or trust agreement, is set aside at such regular intervals as 34 
may be provided in the resolution or trust agreement and deposited in the credit of a 35 
fund for the payment of the interest on and the principal of bonds issued under this 36 
chapter as the principal becomes due and the redemption price or purchase price of 37 
bonds retired by call or purchase.  The use and disposition of money to the credit of 38 
the fund is sub ject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution 39 
authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust agreement securing the bonds 40 
and, except as may otherwise be provided in the resolution or trust agreement, the 41 
fund is a fund for the benef it of all bonds without distinction or priority of one over 42 
another.  43 
5.  Trust funds.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all money received 44 
pursuant to the authority provided under this Act is deemed to be trust funds, to be held 45 
and applied sole ly as provided in this Act.  The resolution authorizing the issuance of 46 
 
 Page 17 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 bonds or the trust agreement securing the bonds must provide that any officer to whom, 1 
or bank, trust company or other fiscal agent to which, the money is paid acts as trustee of 2 
the m oney and shall hold and apply the same for the purposes of this Act, subject to such 3 
regulations as may be provided in the resolution or trust agreement or as may be required 4 
under this Act.  5 
6.  Remedies.   A holder of bonds issued under this Act or of any of the coupons 6 
appertaining to the bonds or a corporate trustee under any trust agreement, except to the 7 
extent the rights given may be restricted by the resolution authorizing the issuance of 8 
those bonds or trust agreement, may, either at law or in equity , by suit, action, mandamus 9 
or other proceeding, including proceedings for the appointment of a receiver to take 10 
possession and control of the properties of the district, protect and enforce any and all 11 
rights under the laws of the State or granted under t his Act or under the resolution or trust 12 
agreement.  The holder of bonds and the trustee under any trust agreement may enforce 13 
and compel the performance of any duty required by this Act or by the resolution or trust 14 
agreement to be performed by the distri ct or by any officer of the district, including the 15 
fixing, charging and collecting of rates, fees and charges for the use of or for the services 16 
and facilities furnished by the district.  17 
7.  Refunding bonds.   The board by resolution, without district vote , may issue 18 
refunding bonds for the purpose of paying any of its bonds at maturity or upon 19 
acceleration or redemption.  The refunding bonds may be issued at such time prior to the 20 
maturity or redemption of the refunded bonds as the board determines to be i n the public 21 
interest.  The refunding bonds may be issued in sufficient amounts to pay or provide the 22 
principal of the bonds being refunded, together with any redemption premium on the 23 
bonds, any interest accrued or to accrue to the date of payment of thos e bonds, the 24 
expenses of issue of the refunding bonds, the expenses of redeeming the bonds being 25 
refunded and such reserves for debt service, including costs of issuance,  or other capital 26 
or current expenses from the proceeds of such refunding bonds as ma y be required by a 27 
trust agreement or resolution securing bonds.  The issuance of refunding bonds, the 28 
maturities and other details of the refunding bonds, the security for refunding the bonds, 29 
the rights of the holders of the refunding bonds and the right s, duties and obligations of 30 
the district in respect of the same are governed by the applicable provisions of this section 31 
relating to the issuance of bonds other than refunding bonds.  32 
8.  Tax exemption.   All bonds, notes or other evidences of indebtedness  issued under 33 
this Act, their transfer and the income from the bonds, notes or other evidences of 34 
indebtedness, including any profit made on the sale of bonds, notes or other evidences of 35 
indebtedness, must at all times be free from taxation within the Sta te. 36 
9.  Bonds declared legal investments.   Bonds and notes issued by the district are 37 
securities in which all public officers and public bodies of the State and its political 38 
subdivisions, insurance companies and associations and other persons carrying on an 39 
insurance business; trust companies, banks, bankers and banking associations; savings 40 
banks and savings associations, including savings and loan associations; credit unions; 41 
building and loan associations; investment companies; executors, administrators , trustees 42 
and other fiduciaries; pension, profit -sharing and retirement funds; and other persons 43 
carrying on a banking business, and all other persons who are authorized to invest in 44 
 
 Page 18 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 bonds or other obligations of the State, may properly and legally invest  funds, including 1 
capital in their control or belonging to them. The bonds and notes are securities that may 2 
properly and legally be deposited with and received by any state, municipal or public 3 
officer or any agency or political subdivision of the State f or any purpose for which the 4 
deposit of bonds or other obligations of the State is authorized by law.  5 
10.  Certain bond issues; special meeting; vote.   If the trustees vote to authorize 6 
bonds or notes for any of the corporate purposes of the district, excl uding notes payable 7 
within one year, notes in anticipation of bonds authorized pursuant to this Act, notes in 8 
anticipation of the revenues to be collected or received in any year and notes in 9 
anticipation of the receipt of approved federal or state grants,  the authorized amount of 10 
which singly or in aggregate included in any one financing is $1,000,000 or more, the 11 
trustees must call a special district meeting for the purpose of permitting the collection of 12 
testimony from the public concerning the purpose a nd the amount of debt so authorized.  13 
Notice of the special district meeting, stating the approximate amount of the debt and the 14 
purpose for which it is being issued, must be published not less than 7 full days prior to 15 
the date of the meeting in a newspap er having general circulation in the district and must 16 
be mailed to each ratepayer in the district not later than the date of the publication.  A 17 
debt may not be incurred under the vote of the trustees until the expiration of 7 full days 18 
following the date  of the special district meeting.  19 
Except for debt to fund that part of any project that has been approved for grant financing 20 
by the State Government or Federal Government to meet the requirements of the United 21 
States Clean Water Act, including any related  facilities not eligible for that financing but 22 
essential to the operation of the approved project as an integral system, for debts in excess 23 
of the amount specified in this section, the following petition and referendum procedure 24 
applies.  If, on or befor e the 7th day following the date of the special district meeting, a 25 
petition signed by at least 5%, but not fewer than 50, of the registered voters of the 26 
district is filed with the clerk of the district requesting reference of the vote of the trustees 27 
to referendum, the clerk of the district shall call and hold a special election of the voters 28 
of the district for the purpose of submitting to referendum vote a question of approving 29 
the vote of the trustees.  The vote of the trustees is suspended until it ha s received 30 
approval by vote of a majority of the voters of the district voting on the question at the 31 
special election.  32 
Sec. 21.  Authority to increase debt limits.  Notwithstanding any provision of 33 
this Act to the contrary, the district may increase its d ebt limit by referendum in 34 
accordance with this section. The district is not required to use the procedure provided by 35 
this section and may seek to increase its debt limit by any other lawful means, including 36 
pursuant to any other means described in this A ct or by seeking legislative amendment to 37 
this Act.  38 
1.  Referendum.   If the district chooses to increase its debt limit pursuant to this 39 
section, the board shall propose a new debt limit and submit the proposal for approval at a 40 
districtwide referendum. Th e referendum must be called, advertised and conducted 41 
according to the law relating to municipal elections in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 42 
30-A, chapter 121, except the registrar of voters is not required to prepare or the clerk to 43 
post a new list of voters. The referendum may be held outside the territory of the district 44 
if the usual voting place for persons located within the district is located outside the 45 
 
 Page 19 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 territory of the district. For the purpose of registering voters, the registrar of voters must  1 
be in session on the regular work day preceding the election. The question presented must 2 
conform to the following:  3 
"Do you favor changing the debt limit of the Kennebunk Sewer District 4 
from (insert current debt limit) to (insert proposed debt limit)?"  5 
The voters shall indicate by a cross or check mark placed against the word "Yes" or "No" 6 
their opinion on the question.  7 
The results must be declared by the board and entered upon the district's records. Due 8 
certificate of results must be filed by the clerk w ith the Secretary of State.  9 
2.  Approval.   A debt limit proposal becomes effective upon its acceptance by a 10 
majority of the legal voters within the district voting at the referendum. Failure of 11 
approval by the majority of legal voters voting at the referen dum does not prevent 12 
subsequent referenda from being held for the same purpose. The cost of referenda are 13 
borne by the district.  14 
Sec. 22.  Mutual funds; sewer districts.   The district may invest its funds, 15 
including sinking funds, reserve funds and trust f unds, to the extent that the term of any 16 
instrument creating the funds does not prohibit the investment, in shares of an investment 17 
company registered under the federal Investment Company Act of 1940, whose shares are 18 
registered under the United States Sec urities Act of 1933, only if the investments of the 19 
investment company are limited to obligations of the United States or any agency or 20 
instrumentality, corporate or otherwise, of the United States or repurchase agreements 21 
secured by obligations of the Uni ted States or any agency or instrumentality, corporate or 22 
otherwise, of the United States. This section is in addition to, and not in limitation of, any 23 
power of the district to invest its funds.  24 
Sec. 23.  Competitive bidding.   A contract in excess of $2,0 00 between the 25 
district and a contractor for the construction of facilities located on private property for 26 
the exclusive use of a private individual and for which the private individual is required 27 
to pay the total cost directly to the district must be aw arded by a system of competitive 28 
bidding.  Unless there are valid reasons to the contrary, the contracts must be awarded to 29 
the lowest responsible bidder.  30 
Sec. 24.  District personnel records.   The personnel records of the district are 31 
confidential to the same extent as municipal records pursuant to the Maine Revised 32 
Statutes, Title 30 -A, section 2702, subsection 1.  The records are reviewable by 33 
employees of the district to the same extent and in the same manner as provided for 34 
municipal personnel records pursuant to Title 30 -A, section 2702, subsection 2.  35 
Sec. 25.  P&SL 2005, c. 13, as amended, is repealed.  36 
Sec. 26.  Emergency clause; referendum; effective date.  In view of the 37 
emergency cited in the preamble, this Act takes effect when approved but only f or the 38 
purpose of permitting its submission to the legal voters within the territory described in 39 
section 1 at the election called for that purpose by January 1, 2016.  The election must be 40 
called, advertised and conducted according to the law relating to municipal elections, 41 
 
 Page 20 - 127LR0658(01) -1 
 except that the registrar of voters is not required to prepare or the town clerk to post a 1 
new list of voters.  For the purpose of registration of voters, the registrar of voters must 2 
be in session on the secular day preceding the elec tion.  The subject matter of this Act is 3 
reduced to the following question:  4 
"Do you favor adopting the Kennebunk Sewer District charter, 2015 5 
revision?"  6 
The voters shall indicate by a cross or check mark placed against the word "Yes" or 7 
"No" their opinion of the same.  8 
The results must be declared by the municipal officers of the Town of Kennebunk 9 
and due certificate of the results filed by the town clerk with the Secretary of State.  10 
This Act takes effect for all other purposes immediately upon its approval by a 11 
majority of the legal voters voting at the election.  12 
SUMMARY  13 
This bill revises the Kennebunk Sewer District charter to conform to the Maine 14 
Revised Statutes, Title 38, chapter 10 and make minor changes and updates.  15 
 
