 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 659  
H.P. 440  House of Representatives, March 3, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Increase Recycling in Maine through Increased 
Composting and Energy Recovery from Organic Wastes  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative WELSH of Rockport.  
Cosponsored by Senator SAVIELLO of Franklin and  
Representatives: CAMPBELL of Orrington, DUCHESNE of Hudson, HARLOW of Portland.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1695(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, the State has achieved significant improvements in recycling over the past 3 
30 years but di d not achieve the goal of 50% recycling by 2014, as called for in Maine 4 
law; and  5 
Whereas, studies have shown that organic waste is one of the largest remaining 6 
segments of the waste stream that could be diverted toward recycling and energy 7 
recovery systems  in order to assist the State in achieving higher overall rates of recycling, 8 
perhaps meeting or exceeding the 50% goal; and  9 
Whereas, development of a comprehensive plan for increased composting and 10 
energy recovery must be initiated before the 90 -day perio d expires in order that the 11 
comprehensive strategy established in this resolve and related recommendations may be 12 
developed and submitted in time to be considered in the next legislative session; and  13 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts  create an emergency within 14 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 15 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 16 
therefore, be it  17 
Sec. 1.  Development of comprehensive str ategy.  Resolved:   That the 18 
Department of Environmental Protection shall develop a comprehensive strategy to 19 
encourage composting and energy recovery from food waste and other organic wastes.  20 
The strategy must seek to encourage organic waste diversion by large generators of food 21 
waste, composting at the municipal level through bans on the disposal of leaves and yard 22 
waste and expansion of facilities to compost and convert compostable materials into 23 
energy resources.  As part of the development of a compreh ensive strategy, the 24 
department shall evaluate options for establishing a commercial food waste ban for large 25 
generators of food waste that are located within 40 miles of a food waste composting or 26 
processing facility that has been approved by the departme nt for receiving commercial 27 
food waste.  For purposes of this section, "large generators" means entities that generate 28 
more than one ton of food waste per week and includes hospitals, colleges and 29 
universities, large secondary schools, restaurants, nursing  homes, retail food stores and 30 
resort facilities.  The department shall also explore strategies for keeping food waste out 31 
of the solid waste stream through collaborative initiatives with large generators to divert 32 
food products that are at or beyond their  manufacturer’s expiration dates toward hunger 33 
relief programs and toward farm animal consumption. The department shall also evaluate 34 
impediments to and opportunities for increasing the number of facilities in the State that 35 
provide anaerobic digestion of organic waste; and be it further  36 
Sec. 2.  Stakeholder input.  Resolved:   That, in developing a comprehensive 37 
strategy under section 1, the Department of Environmental Protection shall actively seek 38 
input from a broad range of interested parties, including waste management facility 39 
operators, large institutions that generate significant amounts of food waste, experts in the 40 
composting of organic materials, agricultural representatives, environmental 41 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1695(01) -1 
 organizations, municipalities and operators of anaerobic di gestion facilities; and be it 1 
further  2 
Sec. 3.  Recommendations and report.  Resolved:  That the Department of 3 
Environmental Protection shall submit the comprehensive strategy developed pursuant to 4 
section 1, including recommendations to the Joint Standing Committee on Environment 5 
and Natural Resources by January 15, 2016.  The joint standing committee is authorized 6 
to report out legislation related to the comprehensive strategy.  7 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 8 
legisla tion takes effect when approved.  9 
SUMMARY  10 
This resolve requires the Department of Environmental Protection, with input from 11 
stakeholders, to develop a comprehensive strategy to encourage composting and energy 12 
recovery from food waste and other organic waste s.  It requires the department to submit 13 
the strategy and related recommendations to the Joint Standing Committee on 14 
Environment and Natural Resources by January 15, 2016.  15 
 
