 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1069  
H.P. 738  House of Representatives, March 24, 2015  
 
An Act To  Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue To Upgrade 
Municipal Culverts at Stream Crossings  
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
Presented by Representative McCABE of Skow hegan.  
Cosponsored by Senator DAVIS of Piscataquis and  
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, BABBIDGE of Kennebunk, BATES of Westbrook, BEAR of the Houlton 
Band of Maliseet Indians, BEAVERS of South Berwick, BLUME of York, BROOKS of Lewiston, BRYANT of 
Windham,  BURSTEIN of Lincolnville, CHENETTE of Saco, COOPER of Yarmouth, DAUGHTRY of 
Brunswick, DAVITT of Hampden, DEVIN of Newcastle, DOORE of Augusta, DUCHESNE of Hudson, 
DUNPHY of Old Town, EVANGELOS of Friendship, FARNSWORTH of Portland, FOWLE of Vassalboro, 
FREDETTE of Newport, GIDEON of Freeport, GILBERT of Jay, GOLDEN of Lewiston, GRANT of Gardiner, 
HICKMAN of Winthrop, HOBBINS of Saco, HOGAN of Old Orchard Beach, HUBBELL of Bar Harbor, 
JORGENSEN of Portland, KORNFIELD of Bangor, KUMIEGA of Deer Isle, LAJOIE  of Lewiston, 
LONGSTAFF of Waterville, MARTIN of Eagle Lake, MASTRACCIO of Sanford, McCREIGHT of Harpswell, 
MONAGHAN of Cape Elizabeth, NADEAU of Winslow, PIERCE of Dresden, PIERCE of Falmouth, POWERS 
of Naples, ROTUNDO of Lewiston, RYKERSON of Kittery, SA NBORN of Gorham, SAUCIER of Presque Isle, 
SCHNECK of Bangor, SHAW of Standish, STUCKEY of Portland, TEPLER of Topsham, TIPPING -SPITZ of 
Orono, VEROW of Brewer, WARREN of Hallowell, Senators: ALFOND of Cumberland, BREEN of 
Cumberland, DIAMOND of Cumberland,  DILL of Penobscot, GERZOFSKY of Cumberland, GRATWICK of 
Penobscot, HASKELL of Cumberland, HILL of York, JOHNSON of Lincoln, LANGLEY of Hancock, LIBBY of 
Androscoggin, MILLETT of Cumberland, MIRAMANT of Knox, PATRICK of Oxford, SAVIELLO of Franklin, 
WHITTE MORE of Somerset.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1254(01) -1 
 Preamble.  Two thirds of both Houses of the Legislature deeming it necessary in 1 
accordance with the Constitution of Maine, Article IX, Section 14 to authorize the 2 
issuance of bonds on behalf of the State of Maine to provide funds as described in this 3 
Act, 4 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  5 
Sec. 1.  Authorization of bonds.  The Treasurer of State is authorized, under the 6 
direction of the Governor, to issue bonds in the name and on behalf of the State in an 7 
amount not exceeding $10, 000,000 for the purposes described in section 5 of this Act.  8 
The bonds are a pledge of the full faith and credit of the State.  The bonds may not run for 9 
a period longer than 10 years from the date of the original issue of the bonds.  10 
Sec. 2.  Records of b onds issued; Treasurer of State. The Treasurer of State 11 
shall ensure that an account of each bond is kept showing the number of the bond, the 12 
name of the successful bidder to whom sold, the amount received for the bond, the date of 13 
sale and the date when p ayable.  14 
Sec. 3.  Sale; how negotiated; proceeds appropriated.  The Treasurer of State 15 
may negotiate the sale of the bonds by direction of the Governor, but no bond may be 16 
loaned, pledged or hypothecated on behalf of the State.  The proceeds of the sale of the 17 
bonds, which must be held by the Treasurer of State and paid by the Treasurer of State 18 
upon warrants drawn by the State Controller, are appropriated solely for the purposes set 19 
forth in this Act.  Any unencumbered balances remaining at the completion o f the project 20 
in this Act lapse to the Office of the Treasurer of State to be used for the retirement of 21 
general obligation bonds.  22 
Sec. 4.  Interest and debt retirement.  The Treasurer of State shall pay interest 23 
due or accruing on any bonds issued under t his Act and all sums coming due for payment 24 
of bonds at maturity.  25 
Sec. 5.  Disbursement of bond proceeds from General Fund bond issue.  26 
The proceeds of the sale of the bonds authorized under this Act must be expended as 27 
designated in the following schedule  under the direction and supervision of the agencies 28 
and entities set forth in this section.  29 
 30 
 31 
 
Provides funds for a competitive grant program that matches local funding for the 32 
upgrade of municipal culverts at str eam crossings in order to improve fish and 33 
wildlife habitat and increase community safety.  34 
 35 
 36 
 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION, 
DEPARTMENT OF   
Total  $10,000,000  
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1254(01) -1 
 Sec. 6.  Contingent upon ratification of bond issue.  Sections 1 to 5 do not 1 
become effective unless the people of the State ratify the issuanc e of the bonds as set 2 
forth in this Act.  3 
Sec. 7.  Appropriation balances at year -end.  At the end of each fiscal year, all 4 
unencumbered appropriation balances representing state money carry forward.  Bond 5 
proceeds that have not been expended within 10 year s after the date of the sale of the 6 
bonds lapse to the Office of the Treasurer of State to be used for the retirement of general 7 
obligation bonds.  8 
Sec. 8.  Bonds authorized but not issued.  Any bonds authorized but not issued 9 
within 5 years of ratification  of this Act are deauthorized and may not be issued, except 10 
that the Legislature may, within 2 years after the expiration of that 5 -year period, extend 11 
the period for issuing any remaining unissued bonds for an additional amount of time not 12 
to exceed 5 yea rs. 13 
Sec. 9.  Referendum for ratification; submission at election; form of 14 
question; effective date.  This Act must be submitted to the legal voters of the State at 15 
a statewide election held in the month of November following passage of this Act.  The 16 
munic ipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their respective cities, towns 17 
and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for holding a statewide election, 18 
to vote on the acceptance or rejection of this Act by voting on the follow ing question:  19 
"Do you favor a $10,000,000 bond issue to match local funding for the 20 
upgrade of municipal culverts at stream crossings in order to enhance and 21 
restore our rivers, streams, and fish and wildlife habitat; to allow 22 
communities to better prepare  for extreme storms and floods; and to 23 
create jobs and vital public infrastructure?"  24 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 25 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within a corresponding square 26 
below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 27 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 28 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor  shall 29 
review the returns.  If a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of this Act, the 30 
Governor shall proclaim the result without delay and this Act becomes effective 30 days 31 
after the date of the proclamation.  32 
The Secretary of State shall prepare  and furnish to each city, town and plantation all 33 
ballots, returns and copies of this Act necessary to carry out the purposes of this 34 
referendum.  35 
SUMMARY  36 
The funds provided by this bond issue, in the amount of $10,000,000, will be used for 37 
a competitive g rant program that matches local funding for the upgrade of municipal 38 
culverts at stream crossings in order to improve fish and wildlife habitat and increase 39 
community safety.  40 
