 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1356  
H.P. 924  House of Representatives, April 21, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Create a Working Group To Ensure a Stable 
Continuum of Care for Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities and 
Autism  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative SHERMAN of Hodgdon.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: HANLEY of Pittston, LONG of Sherman.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1755(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Continuum of care for individuals with intellectual disabilities and 1 
autism; working group established.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and 2 
Human Services shall convene a working group to examine the continuum of care 3 
available for indiv iduals with intellectual disabilities and autism and the need for and 4 
availability of 24 -hour nursing care in intermediate care facilities for individuals with 5 
intellectual disabilities.  The working group must include key state employees, including 6 
repres entatives of the offices of MaineCare Services and aging and disability services 7 
within the Department of Health and Human Services.  It must also include private sector 8 
stakeholders, including affected individuals and families, advocates, providers, a 9 
representative of a statewide association of providers of services for individuals with 10 
intellectual disabilities and a representative of a statewide association of long -term care 11 
facilities.  The Department of Health and Human Services shall report the findi ngs and 12 
recommendations of the working group by January 15, 2016 to the Joint Standing 13 
Committee on Health and Human Services.  14 
SUMMARY  15 
This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to convene a 16 
working group to examine the continuum of care available for individuals with 17 
intellectual disabilities and autism and the need for and availability of 24 -hour nursing 18 
care in intermediate care facilities for individuals with intellectual disabilities.  It also 19 
requires the Department of Health an d Human Services to report the findings and 20 
recommendations of the working group by January 15, 2016 to the Joint Standing 21 
Committee on Health and Human Services.  22 
 
