 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 805  
H.P. 554  House of Representatives, March 10, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, Authorizing Certain Individuals To Bring Suit against the 
Department of  Health and Human Services  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative FARNSWORTH of Portland.  
Cosponsored by Senator DUTREMBLE of York and  
Representative: HOBBINS of Saco.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0147(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Authorization to sue State.  Resolved:  That, notwithstanding any 1 
statute or common law to the contrary, Sara Bachelder individually and on behalf of her 2 2 
minor children; Danielle and Christopher Pouliot individually and on behalf of their 3 
minor child; Hannah and Brett Williams individually and on behalf of their minor child; 4 
Tonya Later and Albert Sico III individually and on behalf of their minor child; and 5 
Michelle Tapley individually and on behalf of her minor child are authorized to bring a 6 
civil action against the Department of Health and Human Services for damages claimed 7 
to have been suffered in connection with actions taken by the Department of Health and 8 
Human Services. This resolve is a waiver of the State's defense of immunity under the  9 
Maine Revised Statutes, Title 14, chapter 741.  10 
Notwithstanding the application of any statute of limitations barring this action, this 11 
action must be brought in the York County Superior Court within one year from the date 12 
this resolve takes effect.  Liabi lity and damages, including punitive damages, must be 13 
determined according to state law as in litigation between individuals.  This action may 14 
be heard by a Justice of the Superior Court or by a jury.  The Maine Rules of Civil 15 
Procedure govern the conduct of the action.  The Attorney General shall appear, answer 16 
and defend the action.  To the extent possible, the Attorney General shall conduct 17 
negotiations in good faith to resolve this action by settlement.  18 
The Treasurer of State shall pay any settlement de termined by agreement of the 19 
parties or any judgment, including costs and interest, on final process issued by the 20 
Superior Court or, if applicable, the Supreme Judicial Court.  21 
SUMMARY  22 
This resolve authorizes Sara Bachelder individually and on behalf of he r 2 minor 23 
children; Danielle and Christopher Pouliot individually and on behalf of their minor 24 
child; Hannah and Brett Williams individually and on behalf of their minor child; Tonya 25 
Later and Albert Sico III individually and on behalf of their minor child ; and Michelle 26 
Tapley individually and on behalf of her minor child to bring suit against the Department 27 
of Health and Human Services for damages in connection with actions taken by the 28 
Department of Health and Human Services and constitutes a waiver of th e State's defense 29 
of sovereign immunity.  30 
 
