 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 153  
H.P. 111  House of Representatives, January 27, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Amend Setback Requirements and Standards Related to 
Species Migration under the Laws Regulating Development near 
Vernal Pools  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative CAMPBELL of Orrington.  
Cosponsored  by Senator SAVIELLO of Franklin and  
Representatives: DUCHESNE of Hudson, HARLOW of Portland, NADEAU of Winslow, 
POULIOT of Augusta, RYKERSON of Kittery, TUELL of East Machias, Senators: MASON 
of Androscoggin, President THIBODEAU of Waldo.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0588(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  38 MRSA ยง480 -BB, sub -ยง1-A is enacted to read:  2 
1-A.  Significant vernal pool habitat.  In the case of significant vernal pool habitat, 3 
define an area of regulation that encompasses a fix ed radial area around the vernal pool 4 
depression and allow for use of an alternative directional corridor area with a value to the 5 
protected species that is equal to or greater than that of the fixed radial area.  The 6 
Department of Environmental Protection  may approve the alternative directional corridor 7 
area as the area of regulation instead of the fixed radial area if:  8 
A.  An applicant for a permit under this article requests that an alternative directional 9 
corridor area be the area of regulation of the v ernal pool;  10 
B.  The applicant provides to the department habitat data relating to the vernal pool 11 
and surrounding area demonstrating that use of an alternative directional corridor area 12 
would provide habitat protection value equal to or greater than would the use of the 13 
fixed radial area.  The data must be developed by a professional with experience and 14 
training in either wetland ecology or wildlife ecology; and  15 
C.  The department determines that, based on the best available science, the 16 
alternative directi onal corridor area would provide habitat protection value equal to or 17 
greater than would the fixed radial area.  18 
An alternative directional corridor area must include, at a minimum, a functional water 19 
quality buffer around the vernal pool depression.  The r ules must specify the regulatory 20 
process and standards for obtaining a permit in an alternative directional corridor area 21 
approved by the department.  If an applicant requests that an alternative directional 22 
corridor area be the area of regulation and the department does not approve an alternative 23 
directional corridor area, the fixed radial area is the area of regulation and the applicant 24 
may apply to obtain a permit to conduct an activity in, on or over that area of regulation 25 
in accordance with the proces s and standards applicable to the fixed radial area.  26 
SUMMARY  27 
This bill requires the Department of Environmental Protection and the Department of 28 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to adopt rules regarding significant vernal pool habitats to 29 
define a fixed radia l area of regulation around a vernal pool depression and allow for an 30 
alternative directional corridor area of regulation.  Use of an alternative directional 31 
corridor area would have to be requested by the applicant, who must demonstrate to the 32 
Department of Environmental Protection that the use of an alternative directional corridor 33 
area would provide habitat protection value equal to or greater than would the fixed radial 34 
area of regulation.  Department of Environmental Protection rules must specify the 35 
regulatory process and standards for obtaining a permit in an alternative directional 36 
corridor area.  37 
 
