 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 178  
H.P. 136  House of Representatives, January 27, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, Directing the Department of Marine Resources To Conduct 
an Impact Study in the St. George River Estuary  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Marine Resources suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative KRUGER of Thomaston.  
Cosponsored by Senator GERZOFSKY of Cumberland and  
Representatives: EVANGELOS of Friendship, KUMIEGA of Deer Isle, PARRY of Arundel, 
PIERCE of Dresden, Senators: LANGLEY of Hancock, MIRAMANT of Knox.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0765(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Marine Resources to conduct an impact study in 1 
the St. George River estuary on the effect of harvesting marine worms and 2 
softshell clams in the same area.  Resolved:  That the Department of Marine 3 
Resources shall conduct an impact st udy in the intertidal area of the St. George River 4 
estuary on the effects of harvesting marine worms and softshell clams in the same area.  5 
The department must investigate the effects harvesting marine worms has on softshell 6 
clams in areas where softshell clams are harvested, in particular the effects harvesting 7 
marine worms has on nearby seed clams.  The department shall collaborate with the 8 
Georges River Regional Shellfish Management Committee and the member towns of St. 9 
George, Thomaston, South Thomaston , Cushing and Warren in determining the intertidal 10 
area to be studied and the practices being used in harvesting both marine worms and 11 
softshell clams and developing best management practices for harvesting marine worms 12 
and softshell clams in the same area ; and be it further  13 
Sec. 2.  Report.  Resolved:  That the Department of Marine Resources shall 14 
submit a report on the study under section 1 and any recommended legislation to the Joint 15 
Standing Committee on Marine Resources by January 4, 2016.  The Joint S tanding 16 
Committee on Marine Resources may report out a bill based upon the report to the 17 
Second Regular Session of the 127th Legislature.  18 
SUMMARY  19 
This resolve directs the Department of Marine Resources to conduct an impact study 20 
in the intertidal area of t he St. George River estuary in collaboration with the Georges 21 
River Regional Shellfish Management Committee and the member towns on the effects 22 
of harvesting marine worms and softshell clams in the same intertidal area in order to 23 
develop the best manageme nt practices in harvesting both species in the same area.  The 24 
resolve directs the department to report its findings and any recommended legislation to 25 
the Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources.  26 
 
