 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 912  
H.P. 632  House of Representatives, March 12, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Allow the Establishment of Regional Municipal Utility 
Districts To Support Telecommunications, Broadband 
Communications and Energy Infrastructure  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative FOLEY of Wells.  
Cosponsored by Senator COLLINS of York and  
Representatives: BLUME of York, GERRISH of Lebanon, HIGGINS of Dover -Foxcroft, 
KINNEY of Limington, O'CONNOR of Berwick, PRESCOTT of Waterboro, SAUCIER of 
Presque Isle, TUELL of East Machias.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0665(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  30-A MRSA ยง2203, sub -ยง9 is enacted to read:  2 
9.  Included powers.  Without limiting the powers, privileges or authority that may 3 
be jointly or cooperatively exercised pursuant to this ch apter, any 2 or more parties may 4 
enter into an agreement to establish a regional municipal utility district for any or all of 5 
the following purposes:  6 
A.  To provide or, through public -private partnerships, to support or promote the 7 
provision of any of the following:  8 
(1)  Telecommunications services;  9 
(2)  Broadband services;  10 
(3)  Internet services; and  11 
(4)  Energy generation, transmission or distribution services; and  12 
B.  To issue revenue bonds in support of any of the activities undertaken pursuant to 13 
parag raph A.  14 
Nothing in this subsection exempts a regional municipal utility district from any 15 
applicable provisions of Title 35 -A. 16 
SUMMARY  17 
This bill amends the laws governing interlocal agreements to expressly allow an 18 
agreement that establishes a regional mun icipal utility district to provide or, through 19 
public -private partnerships, to support or promote the provision of telecommunications 20 
services, broadband services, Internet services or energy generation, transmission or 21 
distribution services and to issue r evenue bonds in support of any of these activities.  A 22 
regional municipal utility district that seeks to provide services that are regulated by the 23 
Public Utilities Commission would be subject to the commission's regulations.  24 
 
