 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1014  
S.P. 354  In Senate, March 19, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Ensure Confidentiality of Personally Identifying 
Information for Private Investigators, Investigative Assistants and 
Dependents of Deployed Members of the Military  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator BURNS of Washington.  
Cosponsored by Representative DION of Portland and  
Senators: DAVIS of Piscataquis, KATZ of Kennebec, SAVIELLO of Franklin, 
WHITTEMORE of Somerset, Representatives: DUNPHY of Embden, LONG of Sherman, 
PICKETT of Dixfield, STANLEY of Medway.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1454(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  32 MRSA ยง8124 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง8124.  Confidential information  3 
Except for the name and license number of a professional investigator or 4 
investigative assistant, any personally ident ifying information of an applicant, 5 
professional investigator or investigative assistant obtained by the State under this 6 
chapter, including from an application or the record of any disciplinary matter, 7 
proceeding or hearing, is confidential and may not be  disclosed by the board except by 8 
written consent of the subject of the information, by court order, for criminal justice 9 
purposes or for permitting purposes by law enforcement agencies or permitting 10 
authorities.  11 
Sec. 2.  37-B MRSA ยง11 is enacted to read:  12 
ยง11.  Information of dependents  13 
Any personally identifying information obtained by the State under this Title 14 
concerning a dependent of a member of the United States Armed Forces or state military 15 
forces who is deployed out of state is confidential and may  not be disclosed except by 16 
written consent of the subject of the information or, if the subject of the information is 17 
less than 18 years of age, a parent or guardian of the subject, by court order, for criminal 18 
justice purposes or for official purposes of  the department or the United States 19 
Department of Veterans Affairs.  20 
SUMMARY  21 
This bill makes confidential any personally identifying information of a dependent of 22 
a military member who is deployed out of state and any personally identifying 23 
information of a private investigator or investigative assistant, except for the private 24 
investigator's or investigative assistant's name and license number.  25 
 
