 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 916  
H.P. 636  House of Representatives, March 12, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Establish a Private Support Organization for the Maine 
Commission for Community Service  
 
 
 
Submitted by the Maine Commission for Community Service pursuant to Joint Rule 204.  
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative McLEAN  of Gorham.  
Cosponsored by Senator KATZ of Kennebec and  
Representatives: POULIOT of Augusta, TURNER of Burlington, Senator: SAVIELLO of 
Franklin.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0490(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  5 MRSA ยง7505 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง7505.  Private support organization  3 
1.  Designation of private support organization.   The executive director of the 4 
commission, with the consent of the  voting members of the commission, shall designate a 5 
nonprofit corporation as the private support organization for the commission.  The 6 
nonprofit corporation must be incorporated under the laws of this State and for purposes 7 
that are consistent with the go als, objectives, programs, responsibilities and functions of 8 
the commission.  9 
The commission's private support organization must be organized and operated 10 
exclusively to receive, hold, invest and administer property and funds and to make 11 
expenditures to and  for the benefit of the commission.  12 
2.  Board of directors.   A member of the private support organization's board of 13 
directors may not also be a member of the commission.  The executive director of the 14 
commission, or the executive director's designee, shal l serve as a nonvoting ex -officio 15 
member of the private support organization's board of directors.  16 
3.  Scope of work.   The private support organization shall operate under a 17 
memorandum of understanding negotiated annually by the commission that outlines a 18 
plan of work consistent with the purposes and goals of the commission and shall submit 19 
an annual budget for review and approval by the commission by June 1st.  20 
The memorandum of understanding must further stipulate the reversion to the 21 
commission, or to th e State if the commission ceases to exist, of money and property held 22 
in trust by the private support organization if the private support organization is no longer 23 
designated by the commission pursuant to subsection 1.  24 
4.  Use of property.   The commission may authorize the private support organization 25 
to use the commission's facilities, equipment and other property, except money, in 26 
keeping with the purposes of the private support organization.  27 
SUMMARY  28 
This bill directs the Maine Commission for Community Se rvice to designate a 29 
nonprofit corporation as the private support organization for the commission to support 30 
the commission's work.  The private support organization would be formed exclusively to 31 
receive, hold, invest and administer property and funds and  to make expenditures to and 32 
for the benefit of the commission.  33 
 
