 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1560  
S.P. 611  In Senate, January 14, 2016  
 
 
An Act To Strengthen Intragovernment Communication  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
203. 
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator KATZ of Kennebec.  
Cosponsored by Representative POULIOT of Augusta and  
Senators: BREEN of Cumberland, CYRWAY of Kennebec, DIAMOND of Cumberland, 
Representatives: DOORE of Augusta, FOWLE of Vassalboro, GRANT of Gardiner, TUELL 
of East Machias.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2324(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  2 MRSA c. 7 is enacted to read:  2 
CHAPTER 7  3 
AGENCIES  4 
ยง201.  Participation by agencies in legislative process  5 
Upon the request of a joint standing committee of the Legislature or a study 6 
commission or work group formed by legislative action, a commissioner or director of a 7 
state agency or the commissioner's or director's designee shall appear before and 8 
participate in the public hearings and work sessions of that committee, commission or 9 
work group.  The request to appear must be in writing and must specify the date and time 10 
of the hearing or work session.  11 
As used in this chapter, "state agency" means a state department, agency, office, 12 
board or commission or a quasi -independent agency, boar d, commission, authority or 13 
institution.  14 
SUMMARY  15 
This bill requires the commissioner or director of a state agency, which includes 16 
executive branch departments and quasi -independent agencies, to appear before a joint 17 
standing committee of the Legislature o r a study commission or work group formed by 18 
legislative action and to participate in the hearing and work sessions of that committee, 19 
commission or work group.  The committee, commission or work group must request the 20 
attendance of the commissioner or dir ector in writing and provide the date and time of the 21 
hearing or work session.  22 
 
