 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 566  
H.P. 390  House of Representatives, February 26, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Protect Individuals from Breaches of Trust by Clergy 
Members  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative GUERIN of Glenburn.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: GINZLER of Bridgton, HERRICK of Paris, MONAGHAN 
of Cape Elizabeth, MOONEN of Portland, VEROW of Brewer, WARREN of Hallowell, 
Senators: BURNS of Washington, JOHNSON of Lincoln.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1200(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  17-A MRSA §255 -A, sub -§1, ¶¶W and X, as enacted by PL 2011, c. 2 
423, §6, are amended to read:  3 
W.  The actor is employed to provide care to a dependent person, who is not the 4 
actor's spou se or domestic partner and who is unable to perform self -care because of 5 
advanced age or physical or mental disease, disorder or defect.  For the purposes of 6 
this paragraph, "domestic partners" means 2 unmarried adults who are domiciled 7 
together under a lo ng-term arrangement that evidences a commitment to remain 8 
responsible indefinitely for each other's welfare.  Violation of this paragraph is a 9 
Class D crime; or 10 
X.  The actor is employed to provide care to a dependent person, who is not the 11 
actor's spouse or domestic partner and who is unable to perform self -care because of 12 
advanced age or physical or mental disease, disorder or defect and the sexual contact 13 
includes penetration.  For the purposes of this paragraph, "domestic partners" means 14 
2 unmarried adu lts who are domiciled together under a long -term arrangement that 15 
evidences a commitment to remain responsible indefinitely for each other's welfare.  16 
Violation of this paragraph is a Class C crime .; or 17 
Sec. 2.  17-A MRSA §255 -A, sub -§1, ¶Y is enacted to r ead: 18 
Y.  The actor is a member of the clergy, including a priest, rabbi, Christian Science 19 
healer, imam or minister of any religious denomination, who within the past year has 20 
provided, in private counseling, religious or spiritual advice, aid or comfort t o the 21 
other person, who is not the actor's spouse or domestic partner. A religious institution 22 
that is the employer or superior of a member of the clergy who violates this paragraph 23 
is not civilly liable to the other person unless institutional negligence has been 24 
established. For the purposes of this paragraph, "domestic partner" means one of 2 25 
unmarried adults who are domiciled together under a long -term arrangement that 26 
evidences a commitment to remain responsible indefinitely for each other's welfare. 27 
Violation of this paragraph is a Class D crime.  28 
SUMMARY  29 
This bill makes unlawful any sexual contact by a clergy member with an individual to 30 
whom the clergy member within the past year has provided, in private counseling, 31 
religious or spiritual advice, aid or comfort.  32 
 
