 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 668  
H.P. 449  House of Representatives, March 3, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Market Maine's Hunting and Fishing Opportunities  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative DUCHESNE of Hudson.  
Cosponsored by Senator CYRWAY of Kennebec and  
Representatives: ALLEY of Beals, DUNPHY of Old Town, HILLIARD of Belgrade, 
MARTIN of Sinclair, Senator: DUTREMBLE of York.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0782(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  12 MRSA ยง10108, sub -ยง2-A is enacted to read:  2 
2-A.  Marketing program.   In addition to activities in subsection 2 that the 3 
commissioner may implement, the commissioner shall adopt a comp rehensive marketing 4 
program that ensures the department is responsive to the needs of outdoor recreationists, 5 
license and permit price concerns and resource access and awareness issues and that all 6 
staff members of the department play an appropriate role i n ensuring their respective 7 
programs deliver the best marketing approach with the highest value to the public.  8 
The commissioner shall establish a dedicated marketing specialist position within the 9 
Division of Public Information and Education.  The marketin g specialist shall lead and 10 
coordinate the program.  The program must include the following, at a minimum:  11 
A.  Collaboration with the Department of Economic and Community Development, 12 
Office of Tourism;  13 
B.  Annual surveys;  14 
C.  Training and education for pe rsons in the outdoor recreation industry, including 15 
guides, persons who operate sporting camps and others;  16 
D.  Recommendations to create new hunting and fishing licenses that feature new 17 
privileges or opportunities in order to attract nonresident hunters a nd anglers;  18 
E.  Aggressive promotion of opportunities to hunt and fish, including information 19 
about access to waters and public and private lands for these purposes.  This 20 
information must be publicized, without limitation, in maps and brochures, on 21 
public ly accessible websites and through social media; and  22 
F.  Creation of a database of outdoor writers and reporters and efforts to provide these 23 
writers and reporters with experiences and information that may be used in their 24 
writings.  25 
SUMMARY  26 
This bill direc ts the Commissioner of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to establish a 27 
comprehensive marketing program for the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 28 
that is led and coordinated by a dedicated marketing specialist, whose position is required 29 
to be create d within the department's Division of Public Information and Education.  30 
 
