 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 965  
H.P. 664  House of Representatives, March 17, 2015  
 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine To Permit the Freezing of Property Taxes on the Homes of 
Maine Residents Who Are 65 Years of Age or Older  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Taxation suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative PARRY of Arundel.  
Cosponsored by Senator COLLINS of York and  
Representatives: BRYANT of Windham, GOLDEN of Lewiston, HOBART of Bowdoinham, 
HOGAN of Old Orchard Beach, McLEAN of Gorham, Senators: DIAMOND of Cumberland, 
GERZOFSKY of Cumberland, MASON of Androscoggin.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1461(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IX, ยง8, sub -ยง6 is enacted to read:  4 
6.  Primary residence of individuals 6 5 years of age or older.   The 5 
Legislature has the power to provide that the taxes may not be increased on the primary 6 
residence of a person who is 65 years of age or older and who owns the residence if the 7 
residence is a single -family residence, no member of the household is less than 55 years 8 
of age and the residence is the only property owned by any household member.  If the 9 
property ceases to be the primary residence of a person who is 65 years of age or older, 10 
the property must be taxed in the same mann er as other property.  11 
; and be it further  12 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 13 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 14 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in  the manner prescribed by law for 15 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 16 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 17 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the fo llowing question:  18 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to allow for freezing 19 
property taxes on primary residences of persons who are 65 years of age 20 
or older?"  21 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this ques tion 22 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 23 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 24 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Sec retary of 25 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 26 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 27 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay an d the amendment 28 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 29 
further  30 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 31 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all bal lots, returns and copies 32 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  33 
SUMMARY  34 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to allow the Legislature 35 
to enact a law freezing property taxes on a primary residence o f a person who is 65 years 36 
of age or older and who owns the residence if the residence is a single -family residence, 37 
no member of the household is less than 55 years of age and the residence is the only 38 
property owned by any household member.  If the prope rty ceases to be the primary 39 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1461(01) -1 
 residence of a person who is 65 years of age or older, the property must be taxed in the 1 
same manner as other property.  2 
 
