 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1692  
S.P. 698  In Senate, April 1, 2016  
 
 
An Act To Amend and Clarify the Laws Governing the Brunswick 
Naval Air Station Job Increment Financing Fund  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
203. 
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic Development 
suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator GERZOFSKY of Cumberland.  
Cosponsored by Representative TUCKER of Brunswick and  
Senators: ALFOND of Cumberland, BAKER of Sagadahoc, CUSHING of Penobscot, 
DIAMOND of Cumberland, MASON of Androscoggin, PATRICK of Oxford, 
Representatives: HERBIG of Belfast, WARD of Dedham.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2200(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  5 MRSA §13083 -S-1, sub -§3, ¶B, as enacted by PL 2009, c. 641, §9, is 2 
repealed and the following enacted in its place:  3 
B.  Subject to the provisions of paragraph E, payments allocated to  the college must 4 
be used solely to fund the following costs, as long as those costs are incurred for 5 
educational programs or employment services directly related to support of the target 6 
business sectors in the base area:  7 
(1)  Higher education services, i ncluding, but not limited to, faculty and staff 8 
salaries and instruction; and  9 
(2)  Operations, equipment, maintenance and financing costs, including, but not 10 
limited to, closing costs, issuance costs and interest paid to holders of evidences 11 
of indebtednes s issued to pay for project costs and any premium paid over the 12 
principal amount of that indebtedness because of the redemption of the 13 
obligations before maturity.  14 
As used in this paragraph, "target business sectors" means businesses engaged in the 15 
aerospa ce or aviation, biotechnology, composites and advanced materials, renewable 16 
energy or information technology industry.  17 
Beginning November 15, 2016, the authority and the college jointly shall provide an 18 
annual report to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction 19 
over economic development matters detailing the amounts of the payments allocated 20 
to the college from the fund and the manner in which those payments have been used 21 
during the prior fiscal year.  22 
SUMMARY  23 
Current law provides that the state income tax withholding attributable to employees 24 
at the Brunswick Naval Air Station is placed into a fund and distributed equally to the 25 
Midcoast Regional Redevelopment Authority and Southern Maine Community College.  26 
This bill clarifies that  the funds distributed to Southern Maine Community College 27 
must be used for the support of educational programs or employment services directly 28 
related to target business sector businesses at the former Brunswick Naval Air Station.  29 
This bill also requires  the authority and the college jointly to report to the joint standing 30 
committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over economic development matters 31 
annually regarding the use of the funds allocated to the college.  32 
 
