 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1324  
H.P. 902  House of Representatives, April 14, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Create Transparency with Regard to Large Employers in 
the State with Workforce Members Who Receive Public Benefits  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative McCABE of Skowhegan.  
Cosponsored by Representatives: GOODE of Bangor, HARLOW of Portland, MELARAGNO 
of Auburn, RUSSELL of Portland, STUCKEY of Portland, Senator: GERZOFSKY of 
Cumberland.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1245(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง3195 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง3195.  Employer disclosure regarding MaineCare beneficiaries  3 
1.  Definitions.  As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 4 
following terms have the following meanings.  5 
A.  "MaineCare beneficiary" means a person who receives MaineCare benefits under 6 
this chapter or Titles XIX or XXI of the federal Social Security Act, as amended.  7 
2.  Report.  The department shall prepare a report  that includes the following 8 
information for each employer in the State that has 50 or more employees who are either 9 
MaineCare beneficiaries or who are the spouses or custodial parents of MaineCare 10 
beneficiaries.  For each such employer, the report must in clude:  11 
A.  The name of the employer and the total number of employees in the State;  12 
B.  The number of employees who are MaineCare beneficiaries and, of that number, 13 
the number who are full -time employees and the number who are part -time 14 
employees;  15 
C.  The number of employees who are spouses of MaineCare beneficiaries and, of 16 
that number, the number who are full -time employees and the number who are part - 17 
time employees;  18 
D.  The number of employees who are custodial parents of MaineCare beneficiaries 19 
and, of that number, the number who are full -time employees and the number who 20 
are part -time employees;  21 
E.  Information on whether the employer offers health insurance benefits to full -time 22 
employees, part -time employees, employees' spouses or employees' dependent s; 23 
F.  Information on whether employees receive health insurance benefits through the 24 
employer when MaineCare pays some or all of the premiums for such health 25 
insurance benefits; and  26 
G.  The cost to the State of providing MaineCare benefits for the employe r's 27 
employees and enrolled dependents listed as total cost and per capita cost.  28 
In preparing the report, the department shall make industry -wide comparisons by sorting 29 
employers into industry categories based on available information.  30 
3.  Information acqui sition.  To aid in the preparation of the report required 31 
pursuant to subsection 2, the department shall implement policies and procedures to 32 
acquire information required by the report, including, but not limited to:  33 
A.  Information required at the time of  the MaineCare application or verification 34 
process;  35 
B.  Information that is accumulated from a vendor contracting with the State to 36 
identify available insurance; and  37 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1245(01) -1 
 C.  Information that is voluntarily submitted by state employers.  1 
4.  Employees with multi ple employers.  If the department determines that a 2 
MaineCare beneficiary is employed by more than one employer, the department shall 3 
count the beneficiary as a portion of one person for each employer for purposes of the 4 
report required pursuant to subsect ion 2.  5 
5.  Issuance quarterly.  The department shall submit the report required pursuant to 6 
subsection 2 to the Governor and the joint standing committee of the Legislature having 7 
jurisdiction over health and human services matters 120 days after the end o f each 8 
calendar quarter, starting with the first calendar quarter of 2016. The report must be made 9 
available on the department's publicly accessible website.  10 
SUMMARY  11 
This bill requires the Department of Health and Human Services to submit a quarterly 12 
repor t to the Governor and the Legislature that includes the information for each 13 
employer in the State that has 50 or more employees who are either MaineCare 14 
beneficiaries or who are the spouses or custodial parents of MaineCare beneficiaries.  For 15 
each such e mployer, the report must include information on the numbers of employees 16 
who are MaineCare beneficiaries, spouses of MaineCare beneficiaries, custodial parents 17 
of MaineCare beneficiaries, full -time employees and part -time employees. The report 18 
must also in clude information on whether the employer offers health insurance benefits to 19 
full-time employees, part -time employees, employees' spouses or employees' dependents, 20 
and the cost to the State of providing MaineCare benefits for the employer's employees 21 
and enrolled dependents listed as total cost and per capita cost.  22 
 
