 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 390  
H.P. 256  House of Representatives, February 12, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Enforce Restrictions in Parking Spaces and Access 
Designated for Persons with a Walking Disability  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Transportation suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative CRAFTS of Lisbon.  
Cosponsored by Senator MASON of Androscoggin and  
Representatives: BATTLE of South Portland, BLACK of Wilton, GREENWOOD of Wales, 
HANLEY of Pittston, LONG of Sherman, PICKETT of Dixfield, TIMBERLAKE of Turner, 
TURNER of Burlington.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1169(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  29-A MRSA ยง521, sub -ยง9-A, as amended by PL 2013, c. 381, Pt. C, ยง1, 2 
is further amended to read:  3 
9-A.  Enforcement of disability parking restrictions.  A law enforcement officer 4 
may enfo rce disability parking restrictions.  The State Police shall enforce disability 5 
parking restrictions at service facilities established on the Maine Turnpike and on the 6 
interstate highway system in the State.  A person commits a traffic infraction if that 7 
person parks in a parking space designated and clearly marked for persons with physical 8 
disabilities and has not been issued or is not transporting a person who has been issued a 9 
disability registration plate or a removable windshield placard pursuant to th is section or 10 
section 523 or a disability registration plate or placard issued by another state.  A person 11 
commits a traffic infraction if that person parks in an access aisle, regardless of whether 12 
the person has been issued a disability registration plat e or removable placard.  A person 13 
who violates this subsection is subject to a fine of not less than $200 and not more than 14 
$500.  Testimony under oath with clear photographic evidence from a person with a 15 
disability as defined under subsection 1 or the dr iver of a vehicle transporting a person 16 
with a disability as defined under subsection 1 that a vehicle was parked in violation of 17 
this subsection is prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection.  18 
SUMMARY  19 
This bill provides that testimony under oat h with clear photographic evidence from a 20 
person with a disability or the driver of a vehicle transporting a person with a disability is 21 
prima facie evidence that a violation of a disability parking restriction has occurred.  22 
 
