 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1525  
S.P. 587  In Senate, January 6, 2016  
 
 
An Act To Encourage the Purchase of Products Made in Maine and 
in the United States and To Give Preference to Maine Businesses 
When Awarding Contracts  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
203. 
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEAT HER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator SAVIELLO of Franklin.  
Cosponsored by Representative BLACK of Wilton and  
Senators: BAKER of Sagadahoc, CYRWAY of Kennebec, LANGLEY of Hancock, PATRICK 
of Oxford, WHITTEMORE of Somerset, WOODSOME  of York.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2207(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  5 MRSA c. 153, sub -c. 3 is enacted to read:  2 
SUBCHAPTER 3  3 
MATERIALS, SUPPLIERS  AND VENDORS  4 
ยง1777.  Definitions  5 
As used in this subchapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the fol lowing 6 
terms have the following meanings.  7 
1.  Emergency life safety and property safety goods.  "Emergency life safety and 8 
property safety goods" means any goods that are part of or for addition to a system 9 
designed to prevent, respond to, alert regarding,  suppress, control or extinguish an 10 
emergency or the cause of an emergency, or goods used to assist evacuation in the event 11 
of an emergency, that threatens life or property.  "Emergency life safety and property 12 
safety goods" includes, but is not limited to , goods relating to systems or items for fire 13 
alarm, fire sprinkling, fire suppression, fire extinguishing, security, gas detection, 14 
intrusion detection, access control, video surveillance and recording, mass notification, 15 
public address, emergency lightin g, patient wandering, infant tagging and nurse call.  16 
2.  Manufactured good.  "Manufactured good" means:  17 
A.  An article, material or supply, including any preassembled items, brought to a 18 
construction site for incorporation into a public building or public work; and  19 
B.  An article, material or supply acquired for public use.  20 
3.  Manufactured in Maine or in the United States.  "Manufactured in Maine or in 21 
the United States" means:  22 
A.  In the case of an iron or steel product, all manufacturing takes place in  Maine or 23 
another state in the United States, except metallurgical processes involving the 24 
refinement of steel additives; and  25 
B.  In the case of a manufactured good, other than an iron or steel product:  26 
(1)  All of the manufacturing processes for the manuf actured good take place in 27 
Maine or another state in the United States; and  28 
(2)  The origin of a manufactured good's components or subcomponents meets a 29 
minimum level of domestic content, as defined in rules established by the 30 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services pursuant to section 1780.  31 
4.  Public agency.  "Public agency" means the State and its departments, agencies, 32 
boards, commissions and institutions, but does not mean a county, municipality or school 33 
administrative unit.  34 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR2207(01) -1 
 5.  Public bui lding or public work.  "Public building or public work" means any 1 
structure, building, highway, waterway, street, bridge, transit system, airport or other 2 
betterment, work or improvement whether of a permanent or temporary nature and 3 
whether for government al or proprietary use.  "Public building or public work" includes, 4 
but is not limited to, any railway; street railway; subway; elevated and monorail 5 
passenger rolling stock; passenger and railroad rolling stock; self -propelled car; gallery 6 
car; locomotive;  passenger bus; wires, poles and equipment for electrification of a transit 7 
system; rails; tracks; roadbed; guideway; elevated structure; building; school; hospital; 8 
station; terminal; dock; and shelter and repairs to any such public buildings and public 9 
works.  10 
6.  United States.  "United States" means the United States of America and any 11 
territory or insular possession subject to the jurisdiction of the United States.  12 
ยง1778.  Use of materials manufactured in Maine or in the United States  13 
1.  Mandatory cont ract provision.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a 14 
contract for the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, improvement or 15 
maintenance of a public building or public work made by a public agency must contain a 16 
provision that the manuf actured goods, including iron and steel, used or supplied in the 17 
performance of the contract or any subcontract to the contract must be manufactured in 18 
Maine or in the United States.  19 
2.  Exceptions.  A public agency may apply to the Governor or the Governo r's 20 
designee for a waiver of the requirements of subsection 1 in any case or category of cases 21 
in which the executive head of a public agency finds:  22 
A.  That the application of the requirements of subsection 1 would be inconsistent 23 
with the public interest ; 24 
B.  That the necessary manufactured goods are not produced in Maine or in the 25 
United States in sufficient and reasonably available quantities and of a satisfactory 26 
quality;  27 
C.  That inclusion of manufactured goods manufactured in Maine or in the United 28 
States will increase the cost of the overall project contract by an unreasonable 29 
amount, as defined in rules established by the Department of Administrative and 30 
Financial Services pursuant to section 1780; or  31 
D.  That the cost of the total contract for the construction, reconstruction, alteration, 32 
repair, improvement or maintenance of a public building or public work is below a 33 
minimum project cost, as established by rules of the Department of Administrative 34 
and Financial Services pursuant to section 1780.  35 
3.  Public review and comment.  The Department of Administrative and Financial 36 
Services shall implement procedures to allow a reasonable amount of time for public 37 
review and comment on a requested waiver under subsection 2 before making a finding 38 
based on t he request and shall publish on the department's publicly accessible website, or 39 
in a newspaper of general circulation in the area of the proposed work, a detailed 40 
justification for any waiver granted.  41 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR2207(01) -1 
 4.  Intentional violations.  The Department of Adminis trative and Financial Services 1 
shall, after a hearing, debar a person, business or other entity from participation in 2 
contracts and subcontracts with the State for 2 years if the department has reason to 3 
believe that person, business or other entity has in tentionally:  4 
A.  Affixed a label bearing a "Made in Maine" or "Made in America" inscription, or 5 
any inscription with the same meaning, to any manufactured good, including iron and 6 
steel, used in a project to which this section applies when that manufacture d good 7 
was not manufactured in Maine or in the United States;  8 
B.  Represented that any manufactured good, including iron and steel, used in a 9 
project to which this section applies was manufactured in Maine or in the United 10 
States when that manufactured goo d was not manufactured in Maine or in the United 11 
States; or  12 
C.  Violated any provision of this subchapter.  13 
5.  International trade obligations.  This section must be applied in a manner 14 
consistent with the State's obligations under any applicable internati onal agreements 15 
pertaining to government procurement.  16 
6.  Exception for emergency life safety and property safety goods.  The provisions 17 
of this subchapter do not apply to emergency life safety and property safety goods.  18 
ยง1779.  Preference for businesses l ocated in the State  19 
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the Director of the Bureau of 20 
General Services shall apply a preference percentage of 5% for a business submitting a 21 
bid for a contract under this subchapter whose principal place of  business is located in the 22 
State and that pays a majority of its payroll to residents of the State as long as:  23 
1.  Quality.   The product or service offered by the business is comparable in quality 24 
to the product or service offered by the best -value bidder ; and  25 
2.  Price.   The bid submitted by the business is no more than 5% over the bid 26 
submitted by the best -value bidder.  27 
ยง1780.  Rules  28 
The Department of Administrative and Financial Services shall adopt routine 29 
technical rules as described in chapter 375, s ubchapter 2 -A to implement this subchapter.  30 
Sec. 2.  Effective date.  This Act takes effect September 1, 2016.  31 
SUMMARY  32 
This bill requires that all contracts for the construction, reconstruction, alteration, 33 
repair, improvement or maintenance of a public bu ilding or public work made by a state 34 
department, agency, board, commission or institution contain a provision that the 35 
manufactured goods, including iron and steel, used or supplied in the performance of the 36 
contract or any subcontract under the contract must be manufactured in Maine or in the 37 
 
 Page 4 - 127LR2207(01) -1 
 United States.  This requirement does not apply to counties, municipalities or school 1 
administrative units.  2 
The bill requires that, in the case of a manufactured good other than an iron or steel 3 
product, all of the m anufacturing processes take place in Maine or in the United States 4 
and the origin of the manufactured good's components or subcomponents meet a 5 
minimum level of domestic content as established by rule.  6 
The bill provides that a public agency may apply to th e Governor or the Governor's 7 
designee for a waiver of the requirement if the executive head of the public agency finds 8 
that the application of the requirement would be inconsistent with the public interest, that 9 
the necessary manufactured goods are not pro duced in Maine or in the United States in 10 
sufficient and reasonably available quantities and of a satisfactory quality or that 11 
inclusion of manufactured goods made in Maine or in the United States will increase the 12 
cost of the overall project contract by a n unreasonable amount.  The Department of 13 
Administrative and Financial Services is directed to develop rules regarding this 14 
legislation, including rules to guide the waiver process and the process for public review 15 
and comment regarding requests for a waiv er. 16 
The bill requires that if the Department of Administrative and Financial Services has 17 
reason to believe that any person, business or other entity has intentionally made 18 
fraudulent representations about the domestic content of a manufactured good or has  19 
intentionally violated any provision of this legislation, the department must, after a 20 
hearing, debar that person, business or other entity from contracts or subcontracts with 21 
the State for 2 years.  22 
The bill gives preference in the awarding of contracts t o businesses located in the 23 
State.  24 
The bill provides that the provisions of this legislation must be applied in a manner 25 
consistent with the State's obligations under any applicable international agreements 26 
pertaining to government procurement.  27 
 
