 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 957  
S.P. 337  In Senate, March 17, 2015  
 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine To Provide for the Popular Election of the Attorney General, 
Secretary of State and Treasurer of State  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator CUSHING of Penobscot.  
Cosponsored by Representative CHENETTE of Saco and  
Senators: MASON of Androscoggin, President THIBODEAU of Waldo, WILLETTE of 
Aroostook, Representatives: ESPLING of New Gloucester, FREDETTE of Newport, 
HOBBINS of Saco.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0264(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved:  Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. V, Pt. Second, §1 is amended to read:  4 
Section 1.  Election.  The Secreta ry of State shall be chosen biennially at the first 5 
session of the Legislature,  by joint ballot of the  popular election on the same date and in 6 
the same manner as provided by this Constitution for the election of  Senators and 7 
Representatives in convention . 8 
Constitution, Art. V, Pt. Second, §1 -A is amended to read:  9 
Section 1 -A.  Succession to the office of Secretary of State.  If a vacancy 10 
occurs in the office of the Secretary of State, the first deputy secretary of state shall act as 11 
the Secretary of State until a Secretary of State is elected by the Legislature during the 12 
current session if in session, or at the next regular or special session  popular election .  A 13 
vacancy in the office of the Secretary of State may be filled by a new election.  14 
Constitution,  Art. V, Pt. Third, §1 is amended to read:  15 
Section 1.  Election.  The Treasurer shall be chosen biennially, at the first session 16 
of the Legislature,  by joint ballot of the  popular election on the same date and in the same 17 
manner as provided by this Constit ution for the election of  Senators , and Representatives 18 
in convention . 19 
Constitution, Art. V, Pt. Third, §1 -A is amended to read:  20 
Section 1 -A.  Succession to the office of Treasurer.  If a vacancy occurs in the 21 
office of Treasurer of State, the deputy treas urer of state shall act as the Treasurer of State 22 
until a Treasurer of State is elected by the Legislature during the current session if in 23 
session, or at the next regular or special session  popular election .  A vacancy in the office 24 
of Treasurer of State may be filled by a new election.  25 
Constitution, Art. IX, §11 is amended to read:  26 
Section 11.  Attorney General.  The Attorney General shall be chosen biennially  27 
by joint ballot  popular election on the same date and in the same manner as provided by 28 
this Con stitution for the election  of the Senators and Representatives in convention .  29 
Vacancy in said office occurring when the Legislature is not in session,  may be filled by 30 
appointment by the Governor, subject to confirmation as required by this Constitution f or 31 
Justices of the Supreme Judicial Court.  32 
; and be it further  33 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 34 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 35 
respective cities, towns and pl antations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 36 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 37 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0264(01) -1 
 following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 1 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  2 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to provide that the 3 
Secretary of State, the Treasurer of State and the Attorney General be 4 
elected by the people biennially in the same manner as members of the 5 
Senate and the House of Representatives?"  6 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 7 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 8 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballot s must be received, sorted, counted and 9 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 10 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 11 
review the returns.  If it appears that a  majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 12 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 13 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 14 
further  15 
Secretary of State shall pre pare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 16 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 17 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  18 
SUMMARY  19 
This resolution proposes a co nstitutional amendment that provides for direct popular 20 
election beginning in 2016 of the Secretary of State, the Treasurer of State and the 21 
Attorney General biennially in the manner currently provided for Senators and 22 
Representatives.  23 
 
