 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 560  
H.P. 384  House of Representatives, February 26, 2015  
 
 
An Act Regarding Patient Information Under the Maine Medical 
Use of Marijuana  Act 
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative RUSSELL of Portland.  
Cosponsored by Senator BRAKEY of Androscoggin and  
Representatives: DION of Portland, O'CONNOR of Berwick.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0002(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to amend the registration process for patients under the Maine 5 
Medical Use of Marijuana Act by:  6 
1.  Requiring medical providers to send only the date of birth of a qualifying patient 7 
and the zip code of that patient's residence to the Department of Health and Human 8 
Services;  9 
2.  Requiring the department to assign a unique identifying number for that qualifying 10 
patient and notify the medical provider of that number; and  11 
3.  Requiring the medical provider to issue the qualifying patient a card with the 12 
qualifying patient's unique identifying number.  13 
A qualifying patient is required to provide the card t o a registered dispensary or 14 
primary caregiver in order to obtain prepared marijuana.  15 
This bill also proposes to require registered dispensaries and primary caregivers to 16 
submit monthly reports to the department showing transfers of prepared marijuana to 17 
qualifying patients, using only the unique identifying number assigned by the department 18 
to identify the qualifying patient.  Other information about the qualifying patient is only 19 
released in compliance with the federal Health Insurance Portability and Acc ountability 20 
Act of 1996, as amended.  21 
 
