 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 664  
H.P. 445  House of Representatives, March 3, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Direct the Department of Health and Human Services 
To Submit a State Plan Amendment To Allow Community -based 
and Other Health Care Providers To Be Reimbursed by MaineCare  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative SANBORN of Gorham.  
Cosponsored by Senator VALENTINO of York and  
Representatives: BURSTEIN of Lincolnville, GATTINE of Westbrook, JORGENSEN of 
Portland.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1214(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services to submit a state plan 1 
amendment to allow community -based health care providers to be 2 
reimbursed.  Resolved:  That, by October 1, 2015, the Department of Health and 3 
Human Services shall submit a state plan a mendment to the United States Department of 4 
Health and Human Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to seek 5 
approval to reimburse for preventive tests and services that are currently reimbursed by 6 
MaineCare when administered by a licensed enr olled physician or other licensed 7 
practitioner when those preventive tests and services are administered by other 8 
practitioners acting within their scope of practice, including, but not limited to, 9 
community -based health care providers.  Upon approval of t he state plan amendment, the 10 
Department of Health and Human Services shall amend its rules to reflect the state plan 11 
amendment.  12 
SUMMARY  13 
This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to submit a state 14 
plan amendment to the United States Department of Health and Human Services, Centers 15 
for Medicare and Medicaid Services to seek approval to reimburse for preventive tests 16 
and services that are currently reimbursed by MaineCare when administered by a licensed 17 
enrolled physician or other licen sed practitioner when those preventive tests and services 18 
are administered by other practitioners acting within their scope of practice, including, 19 
but not limited to, community -based health care providers.  Upon approval of the state 20 
plan amendment, the D epartment of Health and Human Services is directed to amend its 21 
rules to reflect the state plan amendment.  22 
 
