 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 421  
H.P. 288  House of Representatives, February 12, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Improve Program Integrity Activities within the 
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative GATTINE of Westbrook.  
Cosponsored by Senator LIBBY of Androscoggin and  
Representatives: BECK of Waterville, DION of Portland, FARNSWORTH of Portland, 
FOWLE of Vassalboro, GIDEON of Freeport, GOLDEN of Lewiston, SANBORN of Gorham.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1146(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA §§20 and 20 -A are enacted to read:  2 
§20.  Report of department’s efforts to investigate MaineCare program integrity  3 
The department shall design a comprehensive and well -coordinat ed system to ensure 4 
that public funds are well managed and dispensed for the purposes for which they are 5 
appropriated and deliver the best value for the people that they serve.  6 
The department shall report annually by February 15th to the joint standing 7 
committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services matters 8 
and the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over financial 9 
affairs regarding MaineCare program integrity efforts of the department, including e fforts 10 
to investigate and prosecute fraudulent incidents or practices.  The report must contain the 11 
following information:  12 
1.  MaineCare programs.  The following baseline information for the prior year for 13 
MaineCare programs:  14 
A.  The total unduplicated num ber of households, children, persons with disabilities 15 
and seniors receiving assistance under each MaineCare program; and  16 
B.  The total MaineCare program expenditure in general funds, federal allocations 17 
and any special revenue funds;  18 
2.  Description of pr ogram integrity efforts of department.  A description of the 19 
department’s efforts under this section and under chapter 855, including any efforts made 20 
in cooperation with federal agency partners in investigating and prosecuting fraudulent 21 
claims and overpa yments to providers, vendors and retailers, including:  22 
A.  The number of staff investigating cases;  23 
B.  The number of cases opened, investigated and disposed of;  24 
C.  The sources of the cases opened;  25 
D.  The dispositions of the cases closed;  26 
E.  The number and amount of fraudulent overpayments recovered and fines or 27 
penalties actually imposed, expressed in absolute dollar values and as percentages of 28 
all funds spent in each program;  29 
F.  The amount of recoveries of fraudulent claims reclaimed by the Federal 30 
Government;  31 
G.  All costs associated with all activities related to discovering, investigating and 32 
prosecuting cases in which fraud was alleged, whether or not fraud was determined to 33 
exist, for each program, both in absolute dollar values and as percentage s of each 34 
program;  35 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1146(01) -1 
 H.  The average length of time to recover fraudulent overpayments and fines or 1 
penalties imposed from the time cases are opened until the time overpayments and 2 
fines or penalties are repaid in full;  3 
I.  The amount of fraudulent overpayme nts determined as uncollectible;  4 
J.  The amount of fraudulent overpayments recovered by type of offender;  5 
K.  The amount of fraudulent overpayments recovered by a business unit within the 6 
department's audits and program integrity activities group;  7 
L.  The number of MaineCare providers, retailers or vendors, by type, that are 8 
terminated from participation or otherwise sanctioned from participation in public 9 
programs as a result of program integrity activities;  10 
M.  The amount of all recoveries of fraudulent overpayments received as a result of 11 
multistate litigation against pharmaceutical companies or other providers; and  12 
N.  The dollar amount, by provider type, of any overpayment recoveries;  13 
3.  Referrals to Attorney General.  The status of cases referred to the Attorney 14 
General's health care crimes or other unit or other law enforcement entities and the 15 
number and disposition of those cases and the amount of overpayments recovered, all 16 
detailed on a per case basis, as long as the information disclosed conform s to the 17 
requirements of Title 16, section 804 and does not compromise the investigation or 18 
prosecution of a case;  19 
4.  Performance and activities of vendor, contractor or other program integrity 20 
unit used by the department.  If the department uses a vendor , contractor or other 21 
program integrity unit to assist in the identification and recovery of overpayments, a 22 
description of the performance and activities of the vendor, contractor or other program 23 
integrity unit used by the department.  The report must in clude what the scope of the 24 
vendor's, contractor's or other program integrity unit's activity is, what payments have 25 
been made to the vendor, contractor or other program integrity unit, how many cases have 26 
been opened, how many overpayments have been recov ered and any other benefits from 27 
the vendor's, contractor's or other program integrity unit’s involvement;  28 
5.  Department's participation in federally mandated program integrity efforts.  29 
A description of the department's participation in federally mandate d program integrity 30 
efforts, including the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Recovery 31 
Audit Program and Payment Error Rate Measurement program, and the impact of this 32 
participation on department resources and money recovered and the number  of providers 33 
sanctioned and referrals made as a result of this participation;  34 
6.  Results of federal audits.  The results of any federal audits of the department's 35 
program integrity activities, including weaknesses identified and best practices identified ; 36 
7.  Defects, deficiencies or weaknesses in department systems.  A description of 37 
any known defects, deficiencies or weaknesses in any systems managed or used by the 38 
department that resulted in the improper or inaccurate payment of claims or benefits, 39 
including but not limited to the Medicaid information system, provider enrollment system 40 
and eligibility determination system.  The report must include an estimate of the financial 41 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR1146(01) -1 
 impact of these issues and a timeline for remediation and a description of any  known 1 
defects, deficiencies or weaknesses in any systems managed or used by the department 2 
that have been corrected and an estimate of the cost of and any savings from these 3 
corrections;  4 
8.  Planned investments in technology.  A description of any investm ents in 5 
technology planned by the department to improve efforts to prevent improper payments; 6 
and 7 
9.  Policy changes or improvements.  A description of any policy changes or 8 
improvements implemented by the department to improve the accurate payment of clai ms 9 
and benefits.  10 
§20-A.  Report of department’s efforts to investigate program integrity made under 11 
the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families and food supplement 12 
programs  13 
The department shall design comprehensive and well -coordinated systems to ensure 14 
that public funds are well managed and dispensed for the purposes for which they are 15 
appropriated and deliver the best value for the people that they serve.  16 
The department shall report annually by February 15th to the joint standing 17 
committee of the Legislat ure having jurisdiction over health and human services matters 18 
and the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over financial 19 
affairs regarding the program integrity efforts of the department in the Temporary 20 
Assistance for Needy Fa milies program and the food supplement program under section 21 
3104, including efforts to investigate and prosecute fraudulent incidents or practices.  The 22 
report must contain the following information:  23 
1.  Temporary Assistance for Needy Families and food su pplement programs.  24 
The following baseline information for the prior year for the Temporary Assistance for 25 
Needy Families and food supplement programs:  26 
A.  The total unduplicated number of households, children, persons with disabilities 27 
and seniors receivi ng assistance under each program;  28 
B.  The average monthly benefit for each program in general funds, federal 29 
allocations and any special revenue funds; and  30 
C.  The total program expenditure in general funds, federal allocations and any 31 
special revenue fund s for each program;  32 
2.  Description of program integrity efforts of department.  A description of the 33 
department's efforts under this section and under chapters 851, 1053 -B and 1054 -A, 34 
including any efforts made in cooperation with federal agency partners in investigating 35 
and prosecuting fraudulent claims in the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families and 36 
food supplement programs, misuse of public benefits instruments investigated pursuant to 37 
Title 17 -A, section 905 -C and vendor and retailer fraud, includin g: 38 
A.  The number of staff investigating cases;  39 
B.  The number of cases opened, investigated and disposed of;  40 
 
 Page 4 - 127LR1146(01) -1 
 C.  The sources of the cases opened;  1 
D.  The dispositions of the cases closed;  2 
E.  The number and amount of fraudulent overpayments recovered and fines or 3 
penalties actually imposed, expressed in absolute dollar values and as percentages of 4 
all funds spent in each program;  5 
F.  The amount of recoveries of fraudulent claims reclaimed by the Federal 6 
Government;  7 
G.  All costs associated with all activit ies related to discovering, investigating and 8 
prosecuting cases in which fraud was alleged, whether or not fraud was determined to 9 
exist, for each program, both in absolute dollar values and as percentages of each 10 
program;  11 
H.  The average length of time to  recover fraudulent overpayments and fines or 12 
penalties imposed from the time cases are opened until the time overpayments and 13 
fines or penalties are repaid in full;  14 
I.  The amount of fraudulent overpayments determined as uncollectible; and  15 
J.  The amount of fraudulent overpayments recovered by type of offender;  16 
3.  Referrals to Attorney General.  The status of cases referred to the Attorney 17 
General's health care crimes or other unit or other law enforcement entities and the 18 
number and disposition of those cases and the amount of overpayments recovered, all 19 
detailed on a per case basis, as long as the information disclosed conforms to the 20 
requirements of Title 16, section 804 and does not compromise the investigation or 21 
prosecution of a case;  22 
4.  Performance  and activities of vendor, contractor or other program integrity 23 
unit used by the department.  If the department uses a vendor, contractor or other 24 
program integrity unit to assist in the identification and recovery of overpayments, a 25 
description of the pe rformance and activities of the vendor, contractor or other program 26 
integrity unit used by the department.  The report must include what the scope of the 27 
vendor's, contractor's or other program integrity unit's activity is, what payments have 28 
been made to the vendor, contractor or other program integrity unit, how many cases have 29 
been opened, how many overpayments have been recovered and any other benefits from 30 
the vendor's, contractor's or other program integrity unit's involvement;  31 
5.  Department's partic ipation in federally mandated program integrity efforts.  32 
A description of the department's participation in federally mandated program integrity 33 
efforts, including the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Recovery 34 
Audit Program and Payment E rror Rate Measurement program, and the impact of this 35 
participation on department resources and money recovered and the number of providers 36 
sanctioned and referrals made as a result of this participation;  37 
6.  Results of federal audits.  The results of any federal audits of the department's 38 
program integrity activities, including weaknesses identified and best practices identified;  39 
 
 Page 5 - 127LR1146(01) -1 
 7.  Defects, deficiencies or weaknesses in department systems.  A description of 1 
any known defects, deficiencies or weaknesses i n any systems managed or used by the 2 
department that resulted in the improper or inaccurate payment of claims or benefits, 3 
including but not limited to the Medicaid information system, provider enrollment system 4 
and eligibility determination system.  The r eport must include an estimate of the financial 5 
impact of these issues and a timeline for remediation and a description of any known 6 
defects, deficiencies or weaknesses in any systems managed or used by the department 7 
that have been corrected and an estima te of the cost of and any savings from these 8 
corrections;  9 
8.  Planned investments in technology.  A description of any investments in 10 
technology planned by the department to improve efforts to prevent improper payments; 11 
and 12 
9.  Policy changes or improvemen ts.  A description of any policy changes or 13 
improvements implemented by the department to improve the accurate payment of claims 14 
and benefits.  15 
Sec. 2.  Existing resources.  The requirements of this Act must be accomplished 16 
within the existing resources of the Department of Health and Human Services.  17 
SUMMARY  18 
This bill requires the Department of Health and Human Services to report annually by 19 
February 15th to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over 20 
health and human services ma tters and the joint standing committee of the Legislature 21 
having jurisdiction over financial affairs regarding actions taken by the department to 22 
investigate program integrity under the MaineCare, Temporary Assistance for Needy 23 
Families and food supplement  programs, including the amount recovered, the cost of 24 
those investigations and prosecutions, the number of personnel working on the 25 
investigations, the status of cases referred to the Attorney General's office, a description 26 
of the performance and activit ies of a vendor, contractor or other program integrity unit 27 
used by the department to help recover overpayments, a description of the department's 28 
participation in federally mandated program integrity efforts, the results of federal audits, 29 
a description o f defects, deficiencies or weaknesses in department systems, a description 30 
of planned investments in technology and a description of policy changes or 31 
improvements implemented.  The bill specifies that information disclosed by the Office 32 
of the Attorney Ge neral for the purposes of the annual report from the Department of 33 
Health and Human Services on investigations and prosecutions of false claims made 34 
under the MaineCare, TANF and food supplement programs on the status of cases must 35 
conform to the law on in telligence and investigative record information and may not 36 
compromise the investigation or prosecution of a case.  The bill also specifies that the 37 
requirements of the bill must be accomplished within the existing resources of the 38 
department.  39 
 
