 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 219  
H.P. 151  House of Representatives, February 3, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Protect a Child from Misuse of Identity  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative BRYANT of Windham.  
Cosponsored by Senator DIAMOND of Cumberland and  
Representatives: FARNSWORTH of Portland, GATTINE of Westbrook, McCREIGHT of 
Harpswell, MONAGHAN of Cape Elizabeth, TUELL of East Machias, Senators: 
GERZOFSKY of Cumberland, MIRAMANT of Knox, PATRICK of Oxford.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1162(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA ยง42, sub -ยง10 is enacted to read:  2 
10.  Protection of a child from misuse of identity.  The department shall adopt rules 3 
to protect a child from the misuse of the identity of the child for household, business or 4 
commercial purposes. Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine technical 5 
rules as defined by Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A.  The rules must provide for the 6 
following procedures when a person in a househol d that includes a minor child applies for 7 
cash or medical assistance from the department or renews an application for cash or 8 
medical assistance:  9 
A.  Enabling the department to review information about and inquire and ascertain 10 
whether a person who is appl ying for or renewing an application for cash or medical 11 
assistance has misused the identity of the child including, but not limited to, the 12 
social security number and credit history of the child;  13 
B.  Requiring that, in applying for or renewing an applicati on for cash or medical 14 
assistance, the applicant and the child, if the child is able to sign a release, each sign a 15 
release authorizing the department to make the inquiry and to receive and review any 16 
information under paragraph A.  The rules must require releases with respect to all 17 
children in a household; and  18 
C.  Referring the matter to the Attorney General for consideration and possible legal 19 
action if the department determines that the identity of a child has been misused.  20 
The department shall report b y April 1st each year to the joint standing committee of the 21 
Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services matters on the results of 22 
inquiries, reviews of information and referrals made pursuant to this subsection.  23 
SUMMARY  24 
This bill direct s the Department of Health and Human Services to adopt rules to 25 
protect a child from the misuse of the identity of the child for household, business or 26 
commercial purposes. The rules must provide for releases to make an inquiry, to review 27 
information and t o refer a matter to the Attorney General if the department finds that a 28 
person has misused a child's identity for household, business or commercial purposes.  29 
The bill requires the department to report by April 1st each year to the joint standing 30 
committee  of the Legislature having jurisdiction over health and human services matters 31 
on the results of child identity inquiries, reviews of information and referrals.  32 
 
