 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1558  
H.P. 1061  House of Representatives, January 14, 2016  
 
 
An Act To Make Efficient Electric Heat Pumps Available to Utility 
Customers, Including Low -income Customers  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
203. 
Reference to the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative GROHMAN of Biddeford.  
Cosponsored by Senator WOODSOME of York and  
Representatives: BROOKS of Lewiston, CHAPMAN of Brooksville, DeCHANT of Bath, 
DEVIN of Newcastle, DUNPHY of Embden, EVANGELOS of Friendship, FREDETTE of 
Newport, SAUCIER of Presque Isle.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2435(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  35-A MRSA §3105 is enacted to read:  2 
§3105.  Heat pump program  3 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a transmission and distribution utility 4 
may develop and implement, upon approva l of the commission, a program within its 5 
service territory to assist low -income customers and other customers who need assistance 6 
in obtaining the benefits of efficient electric heat pumps as set forth in this section and 7 
may advertise the availability of  its program to its customers.  8 
1.  Approval; activities of the utility.  A transmission and distribution utility must 9 
submit a proposed program to the commission for approval.  The commission shall 10 
examine the proposed program and, if it finds the proposed  program is reasonably 11 
designed and consistent with the provisions and program elements of this section, shall 12 
approve the program.  All activities of a transmission and distribution utility under an 13 
approved program must be considered regulated activities  of the utility subject to 14 
commission regulation as a utility service, notwithstanding any provision of law 15 
otherwise limiting the amount of investment or revenue a utility may make or receive in a 16 
business venture separate from the delivery of electricity .  Recovery of all reasonable and 17 
prudent costs associated with the program must be through customers participating in the 18 
program and may not be passed through to customers not participating in the program.  19 
2.  Program elements.  A program under this sect ion must include the following 20 
program elements:  21 
A.  A transmission and distribution utility may, through a qualified heat pump 22 
installer selected by a customer participating in the program, provide an efficient 23 
electric heat pump to a customer within its service territory who, for purposes of this 24 
paragraph, is unable to purchase and install a heat pump due to income or other 25 
reasons.  The utility may own the heat pump provided to a customer participating in 26 
the program and may charge the customer for the costs associated with providing the 27 
heat pump and the customer must be provided an option to later buy the heat pump 28 
provided on reasonable terms approved by the commission.  If the customer is 29 
delinquent in payments under the program, the utility may unde rtake reasonable debt 30 
collection activities as approved by the commission and otherwise consistent with 31 
applicable law, but in no event may the customer's electric service be disconnected as 32 
a result of the customer's delinquency under the program;  33 
B.  The overall energy costs to customers under the program must decrease as a result 34 
of participation in the program, as measured by the overall energy costs of customers 35 
over the lifespan of the heat pumps, regardless of the source of energy, and the costs 36 
associated with participation in the program; and  37 
C.  A transmission and distribution utility may offer incentives to customers 38 
participating in the program to acquire efficient electric heat pumps to be used to 39 
reduce the total installation cost of such heat pumps.  40 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR2435(01) -1 
 3.  Utility to provide information.  A transmission and distribution utility that 1 
implements a program under this section shall, upon request from the commission, 2 
provide sufficient information to demonstrate that the program is meeting the 3 
require ments of this section.  4 
Nothing in this section is intended to limit the authority of the commission to 5 
establish electric distribution rates for customers participating in a program under this 6 
section.  7 
Sec. 2.  PL 2011, c. 637, §11, as amended by PL 2013,  c. 369, Pt. G, §§1 and 2, is 8 
repealed.  9 
SUMMARY  10 
This bill allows transmission and distribution utilities to implement programs to 11 
provide efficient electric heat pumps to customers who are unable to purchase and install 12 
heat pumps due to income or other re asons.  The program's design and operation is 13 
subject to review and regulation by the Public Utilities Commission and may include 14 
rates for customers participating in the program to cover program costs, which costs may 15 
be paid only by customers participati ng in the program, and the program must offer 16 
customer choice of qualified 3rd -party installers.  It also repeals the provision of law that 17 
allowed transmission and distribution utilities to develop and implement pilot programs 18 
to provide efficient electri c heating systems to customers.  19 
 
