 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1350  
H.P. 920  House of Representatives, April 16, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Increase the Reimbursement Rate for Direct -care 
Workers Serving Adults with Long -term Care Needs  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Speaker EVES of North Berwick.  
Cosponsored by Senator BURNS of Washington and  
Representatives: ESPLING of New Gloucester, GOODE of Bangor, McCREIGHT of 
Harpswell, McELWEE of Caribou, SAUCIER of Presque Isle.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0156(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Reimbursement.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human 1 
Services shall reimburse in -home and community support direct -care service providers 2 
based on a uniform rate -setting process that is consistent across types of care and 3 
services.  The department shall increase reimbursement to providers to a minimum rate of 4 
$25 per hour for providing personal care assistance services as defined in the Maine 5 
Revised Statutes, Title 22, section 7302.  Of the increase in the rate to providers, at least  6 
85% must be used for wages and employee benefits including health care, mileage 7 
reimbursement, training costs and other benefits.  The provider shall provide the 8 
department with a quarterly report documenting the provider's compliance with this 9 
section; t he report must be based upon actual, documented expenditures.  10 
SUMMARY  11 
This resolve directs the Department of Health and Human Services to increase 12 
reimbursement to providers of in -home and community support direct -care services to 13 
$25 per hour of service.  Of the increase in the rate to providers, at least 85% must be 14 
used for wages and employee benefits including health care, mileage reimbursement, 15 
training costs and other benefits.  16 
 
