 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1417  
H.P. 964  House of Representatives, May 19, 2015  
 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine To Change the Selection Process for the Attorney General  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on State and Local Government suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative STETKIS of Canaan.  (GOVERNOR'S BILL)  
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2022(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IX, ยง11 is amended to read:  4 
Section 11.  Attorney General.   The Governor shall nominate and, subject to the 5 
same confirmation procedure as that for Justices of the Supreme Judicial Court, appoint 6 
the Attorney General shall be chosen biennially by joint ballot of the Senators and 7 
Representatives in convention.  Vacancy in said o ffice occurring when the Legislature is 8 
not in session, may be filled by appointment by the Governor, subject to confirmation as 9 
required by this Constitution for Justices of the Supreme Judicial Court . 10 
; and be it further  11 
Constitutional referendum procedu re; form of question; effective date. 12 
Resolved:   That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 13 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law for 14 
holding a statewide election, at a statew ide election held in the month of November 15 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 16 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  17 
"Do you favor amending the Constitution of Maine to chang e the process 18 
for selection of the Attorney General, requiring the Governor to nominate 19 
and appoint the Attorney General subject to confirmation by the Senate, 20 
the same selection process used for Justices of the Supreme Judicial 21 
Court?"  22 
The legal voters of  each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 23 
and designate their choice by a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 24 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 25 
declared in op en ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 26 
State in the same manner as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 27 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 28 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 29 
becomes part of the Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 30 
further  31 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved: That the Secretary of State 32 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 33 
of this resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  34 
SUMMARY  35 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to change the selection  36 
process for the Attorney General.  Currently, the Attorney General is selected by the 37 
Legislature.  This resolution proposes that the Governor nominate and appoint the 38 
Attorney General, subject to confirmation by the Senate.  39 
