 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1501  
H.P. 1024  House of Representatives, December 23, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Amend the Law Regarding Disqualification for 
Unemployment Benefits during Stoppages of Work  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
Submitted by the Department of Labor pursuant to Joint Rule 203.  
Received by the Clerk of the House on December 21, 2015.  Referred to the Committee on 
Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic Development pur suant to Joint Rule 308.2 and 
ordered printed pursuant to Joint Rule 401.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative STETKIS of Canaan.  
Cosponsored by Senator CUSHING of Penobscot and  
Representatives: HARRINGTON of Sanford, ORDWAY of Standish, SIROCKI of 
Scarborough, Senator: BRAKEY of Androscoggin.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2376(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, stoppages of work may occur at any time; and  3 
Whereas, it is necessary to ensure that the e mployment security law does not 4 
penalize employers who are required to maintain ongoing operations in emergency 5 
conditions or to maintain the provision of necessary services; and  6 
Whereas, the intent of this legislation is to prevent payments from the 7 
Unemp loyment Compensation Fund to certain individuals for the purposes of ensuring 8 
the highest possible balance in the fund and lowering taxes on employers; and  9 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 10 
the meaning of t he Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 11 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 12 
therefore,  13 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  14 
Sec. 1.  26 MRSA ยง1193, sub -ยง4, as amended by PL 1997, c. 391, ยง1, is further 15 
amended to read:  16 
4.  Stoppage of work.   For any week with respect to which the deputy, after 17 
notification by the Director of Unemployment Compensation under section 1194, 18 
subsection 2, finds that the claiman t's total or partial unemployment is due to a stoppage 19 
of work that exists because of a labor dispute at the factory, establishment or other 20 
premises at which the claimant is or was employed , or there would have been a stoppage 21 
of work had substantially no rmal operations not been maintained with other personnel 22 
previously and currently employed by the same employer and any other additional 23 
personnel that the employer may hire to perform tasks not previously done by the striking 24 
employees . This subsection do es not apply if it is shown to the satisfaction of the deputy 25 
that:  26 
A.  The claimant is not participating in or financing or directly interested in the labor 27 
dispute that caused the stoppage of work;  28 
B.  The claimant does not belong to a grade or class of  workers of which, 29 
immediately before the commencement of the stoppage there were members 30 
employed at the premises at which the stoppage occurs, any of whom are 31 
participating in or financing or directly interested in the dispute;  32 
C.  The claimant has obtai ned employment subsequent to the beginning of the 33 
stoppage of work and has earned at least 8 times the claimant's weekly benefit 34 
amount in employment by an employer or has been in employment by an employer 35 
for 5 full weeks;  36 
D.  The claimant became unemploy ed because of a strike or lockout caused by an 37 
employer's willful failure to observe the terms of the safety and health section of a 38 
union contract; an employer's willful failure to comply in a timely fashion with an 39 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR2376(01) -1 
 official citation for a violation of fe deral and state laws involving occupational safety 1 
and health; or the quitting of labor by an employee or employees in good faith 2 
because of an abnormally dangerous condition for work at the place of employment 3 
of that employee or employees; provided that the strike or lockout does not extend 4 
past the time of the employer's compliance with the safety and health section of the 5 
union contract, the employer's compliance with the official citation or the finding that 6 
an abnormally dangerous condition does not e xist by a federal or state official 7 
empowered to issue official citations for violation of federal and state laws involving 8 
occupational safety and health; or  9 
E.  The claimant became unemployed because of a lockout by the employer.  For 10 
purposes of this su bsection, the word "lockout" means the withholding of 11 
employment by an employer from its employees for the purpose of resisting their 12 
demands or gaining a concession from them.  13 
If in any case separate branches of work that are commonly conducted as separat e 14 
businesses in separate premises are conducted in separate departments of the same 15 
premises, each department must, for the purposes of this subsection, be deemed to be a 16 
separate factory, establishment or other premises;  17 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 18 
legislation takes effect when approved.  19 
SUMMARY  20 
This bill removes the provision of law affecting the disqualification for 21 
unemployment benefits of employees at an establishment at which there is a labor dispute 22 
and at which there would have been a work stoppage but for the employer's maintaining 23 
substantially normal operations through the use of other personnel.  24 
 
