 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 75  
S.P. 23  In Senate, January 20, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Strengthen Health Care Services for Maine Residents 
Affected by Neurodegenerative Diseases  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot.  
Cosponsored by Representative HYMANSON of York and  
Senators:  DILL of Penobscot, HASKELL of Cumberland, MIRAMANT of Knox, 
WHITTEMORE of Somerset, Representatives: BROOKS of Lewiston, COOPER of 
Yarmouth, JORGENSEN of Portland, RYKERSON of Kittery.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0590(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Feasibility study; network of services for residents of the State 1 
affected by neurodegenerative diseases. Resolved:   That the Department of Health 2 
and Human Services shall convene a stakeholder group that includes, but is not limited to, 3 
Legislato rs, health care providers, physicians, insurers, patients, representatives of state 4 
agencies and family caregivers to conduct a feasibility study assessing the need for and 5 
costs of developing a network of in -state health care services, including home care  and 6 
care in long -term care facilities, for residents of the State affected by neurodegenerative 7 
diseases. The department shall submit a report regarding the findings of the stakeholder 8 
group, along with any recommended legislation, to the Joint Standing C ommittee on 9 
Health and Human Services no later than January 15, 2016. The joint standing committee 10 
may report out a bill to the Second Regular Session of the 127th Legislature based on the 11 
report.  12 
SUMMARY  13 
This resolve directs the Department of Health and H uman Services to convene a 14 
stakeholder group to conduct a feasibility study assessing the need for and costs of 15 
developing a network of in -state health care services, including home care and care in 16 
long-term care facilities, for residents of the State aff ected by neurodegenerative diseases. 17 
The resolve requires the department to report to the Joint Standing Committee on Health 18 
and Human Services in the Second Regular Session of the 127th Legislature and 19 
authorizes the committee to report out a bill based o n the group’s report.  20 
 
