 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1003  
H.P. 698  House of Representatives, March 19, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Prohibit Discrimination by Employers and Protect the 
Privacy of an Applicant for Employment, an Employee or an 
Employee's Dependents Regarding Reproductive Health Decisions  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative McCREIGHT of Harpswell.  
Cosponsored by Senator GRATWICK of Penobscot and  
Representatives: CAMPBELL of Newfield, HERBIG of Belfast, MELARAGNO of Auburn, 
TIPPING -SPITZ of Orono, WARREN of Hallowell, WINSOR of Norway, Senators: BURNS 
of Washington, GERZOFSKY of Cumberland . 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1158(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  26 MRSA c. 7, sub -c. 2-B is enacted to read:  2 
SUBCHAPTER 2 -B 3 
PROTECTION OF PRIVAC Y OF REPRODUCTIVE HE ALTH 4 
DECISIONS  5 
ยง651.  Discrimination prohibited  6 
A person, firm, corporation, unincorp orated association, state agency, unit of local 7 
government or any public or private entity may not discriminate with respect to 8 
compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment against an employee, an 9 
employee's dependent or an applicant for emp loyment on the basis of the employer's 10 
beliefs about a particular drug, device or medical service.  11 
ยง652.  Adverse employment action prohibited  12 
An employer may not take any adverse employment action against an employee 13 
based on the use of a particular drug,  device or medical service related to the employee's 14 
or the employee's dependent's reproductive health decisions.  For purposes of this section, 15 
"adverse employment action" includes but is not limited to termination, demotion or 16 
refusal to promote or advan ce, removal from better or loss of career specialty, 17 
reassignment to a different shift, reduction of wages or benefits, refusal to provide 18 
training opportunities or transfer to a different department, adverse administrative action 19 
or any other penalty or d isciplinary or retaliatory action.  20 
ยง653.  Privacy protected  21 
An employer may not obtain or inquire about an employee's personal information 22 
regarding the employee's or the employee's dependent's reproductive health decisions, 23 
including but not limited to a decision to use a particular drug, device or medical service, 24 
without the employee's prior informed affirmative written consent.  25 
ยง654.  Other rights and protections not limited  26 
Nothing in this chapter may be construed to limit any rights or protections aga inst 27 
employment discrimination of an employee provided through any other provision of law 28 
or collective bargaining unit.  29 
SUMMARY  30 
This bill protects employees and employment applicants from discrimination based 31 
on an employer's beliefs about a particular dr ug, device or medical service.  It also 32 
prohibits an employer from obtaining or inquiring about information about an employee's 33 
or an employee's dependent's reproductive health decisions, including but not limited to a 34 
decision to use a particular drug, de vice or medical service, without the employee's prior 35 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1158(01) -1 
 informed affirmative written consent.  The bill prohibits employers from taking any 1 
adverse employment action against an employee based on the use of any particular drug, 2 
device or medical service relat ed to the employee's or the employee's dependent's 3 
reproductive health decisions.  No existing rights or protections against discrimination of 4 
an employee provided through any other provision of law or collective bargaining unit 5 
are limited by this chapter . 6 
 
