 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on re cycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 69  
H.P. 63  House of Representatives, January 16, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Require Drug Testing of the Driver of a Motor Vehicle 
Involved in a Fatal Accident  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative FOWLE of Vassalboro.  
Cosponsored by Senator McCORMICK of Kennebec and  
Representatives: DOORE of Augusta, KINNEY of Limington, LAJOIE of Lewiston, 
NADEAU of Winslow, SAUCIER of Presque Isle, SHERMAN of Hodgdon, Senator: 
DIAMOND of Cumberland.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0154(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  29-A MRSA §2522, sub -§2, as amended by PL 2003, c. 565, §1, is 2 
further amended to read:  3 
2.  Administration of test.   The investigating law enforcement officer shall cause a 4 
blood test and a breath test or another chemical test  to be administered to the operator of 5 
the motor vehicle as soon as practicable following the accident and may also cause a 6 
breath test or another chemical test to be administered if the officer determines 7 
appropria te.  The operator shall submit to and complete all tests administered.  Except as 8 
otherwise provided in this section, testing must be conducted in accordance with section 9 
2521.  10 
SUMMARY  11 
Current law requires a law enforcement officer investigating a motor ve hicle accident 12 
that has resulted in, or may result in, a death to require the operator of a motor vehicle to 13 
submit to a blood test.  If the investigating officer determines it to be appropriate, the 14 
officer may require that operator to also submit to a br eath test or chemical test to 15 
determine the operator’s alcohol level or the presence of a drug or drug metabolite.  16 
This bill requires the investigating officer to require the operator of a motor vehicle 17 
involved in an accident that results in, or may resul t in, death to submit to a breath test or 18 
chemical test to determine the alcohol level or the presence of a drug or drug metabolite.  19 
 
