 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from scanned originals with text recognition applied 
(searchable text may contain so me errors and/or omissions) 
 
 
~~ 
2 Date:5-\frf" jU\ \ t'\or\~ 
L.D. 1544 
(Filing No. s-L.\O\) 
3 EDUCATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS 
4 Reproduced and distributed under the direction of the Secretary of the Senate. 
5 STATE OF MAINE 
6 SENATE 
7 127TH LEGISLATURE 
8 SECOND REGULAR SESSION 
9 COMMITTEE AMENDMENT " A" to S.P. 604, L.D. 1544, Bill, "An Act To 
10 Improve Teaching Assignments in Maine's Public Schools" 
11 Amend the bill by striking out everything after the enacting clause and inserting the 
12 following: 
13 'Sec. 1. 20-A MRSA ยง4502, sub-ยง4-C is enacted to read: 
14 4-C. Involuntary transfers. If a school administrative unit transfers a teacher to a 
15 teaching assignment and that transfer is involuntary, the school administrative unit must 
16 accomplish the transfer in accordance with a written policy adopted by the school 
17 administrative unit that addresses involuntary transfers. If a school administrative unit 
18 adopts a written policy pursuant to this subsection, the policy must include a provision for 
19 notice to the affected teacher of the involuntary transfer. A teacher who receives notice 
20 of an involuntary transfer may request during the 15 days following such notification a 
21 hearing with the school board. The teacher may request the reasons for the involuntary 
22 transfer. The hearing must be private except by mutual consent and except that either or 
23 both parties may be represented by counsel. The hearing must be granted within 30 days 
24 of the receipt of the teacher's request.' 
25 SUMMARY 
26 This amendment replaces the bill, which is a concept draft. This amendment 
27 provides that if a school administrative unit seeks to transfer a teacher to a teaching 
28 assignment and that transfer is involuntary, it must do so in accordance with a written 
29 policy adopted by the school administrative unit that addresses involuntary transfers. If a 
30 school administrative unit adopts a written policy on involuntary transfers, the policy 
31 must provide for notification to the teacher of the involuntary transfer. This amendment 
32 provides that a teacher who receives notice of an involuntary transfer may request, within 
33 15 days of the notice, a hearing with the school board, which must take place within 30 
34 days of the request. 
Page 1 -127LR2390(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
COMMITIEE AMENDMENT" A" to S.P. 604, L.D. 1544 
1 The fiscal note on the amendment identifies certain requirements in this amendment 
2 as a potential state mandate. In order to be a mandate pursuant to the Constitution of 
3 Maine, a provision must require a local unit of government to expand or modify its 
4 activities so as to necessitate additional expenditures from local revenue. The committee 
5 members voting for this report find that the provisions identified as a potential mandate 
6 do not require a local unit of government to expand or modify its activities so as to 
7 necessitate additional expenditures from local revenue. 
8 The requirement in the amendment that a school administrative unit adopt a written 
9 policy on involuntary transfers if the school administrative unit decides to involuntarily 
10 transfer a teacher does not require an expansion or modification of activities so as to 
11 necessitate additional expenditures from local revenue since there is no requirement that a 
12 school administrative unit involuntarily transfer a teacher. 
13 FISCAL NOTE REQUIRED 
14 (See attached) 
~-,4:, 
Page 2 -127LR2390(02)-1 
COMMITTEE AMENDMENT 
State Mandates 
Required Activity Approved: 02/17 /16 feac 
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE 
LD 1544 LR2390(02) 
An Act To Improve Teaching Assignments in Maine's Public Schools 
Fiscal Note for Bill as Amended by Committee Amendment ''A" ~ ... l(Q ~ 
Committee: Education and Cultural Affairs 1 J 
Fiscal Note Required: Yes 
Fiscal Note 
Potential State Mandate -Unfunded 
Unit Affected Local Cost 
Requires local school administrative units to adopt a written local policy governing 
involuntary transfers of teachers among teaching assignments. School Insignificant 
statewide 
The required local activities in this bill may represent a state mandate pursuant to the Constitution of Maine. If the bill 
does require a local unit of government to expand or modify its activities so as to necessitate additional expenditures 
from local revenue, the state mandate provisions of the Constitution of Maine require either: (1) General Fund 
appropriations be provided to fund at least 90% of any additional necessitated local costs of the mandate; or (2) a 
Mandate Preamble be added to the bill and two-thirds of the members of each House vote to exempt the mandate from 
the funding requirement. If the bill does represent a state mandate and neither one of these actions occurs, the local 
units of government will not be required to implement the mandated activities. 
LR2390(02) -Fiscal Note -Page 1 of 1 
