 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1322  
H.P. 900  House of Representatives, April 14, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Implement the Recommendations of the Probate and 
Trust Law Advisory Commission Concerning the Probate Code  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Judiciary suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative HOBBINS of Saco.  
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0311(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
CONCEPT DRAFT  2 
SUMMARY  3 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.  4 
This bill proposes to implement the recommendations of the Probate and Trust Law 5 
Advisory Commission concerning the  Probate Code pursuant to Resolve 2013, chapter 5 6 
and chapter 82.  7 
The report submitted by the Probate and Trust Law Advisory Commission may be 8 
found here:  http://legislature.maine.gov/opla /PATLACReport.pdf  9 
The Probate and Trust Law Advisory Commission has recommended adoption of the 10 
Uniform Probate Code with amendments.  The proposed language, including proposed 11 
Maine Comments, may be found here:  12 
http://legislature.maine.gov/opla/PATLACRecommendations.pdf  13 
 
 
 
 
 
The following materials  
are the documents available  
at the link (s) identified  
in the Legislative Document.  
 
PATLAC Report on Resolve 2013, chapter 5 – Update of Maine Probate Code  
Page 1 
 MAINE PROBATE AND TRUST LAW ADVISORY COMMISSION  
Report to Maine Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
Re:  Resolve 2013, chapter 5 
 
“Resolve, Directing the Probate and Trust Law Advisory  Commission To Review 
Maine's Probate Code and the Uniform  Probate Code ” 
 
 
Introduction  
 
The Probate and Trust Law Advisory Commission  (“PATLAC”)  hereby reports to the Maine 
Legislature, Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary , on Resolve 2013, chapter 5, entitled, 
"Resolve, Directing the Probate and Trust Law Advi sory Commission To Review Maine's 
Probate Code and the Uniform  Probate Code .” 
 
By Resolve 2013, Chapter 5, the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  directed PATLAC  to 
conduct a review of the current Maine Probate Code and the most recent version of the Uniform 
Probate Code , to invite the participation of  interested parties in the review , and to submit its 
report with recommendations to the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary no later than 
December 1, 2013, together with any necessary implementing legisla tion.  PATLAC submitted 
its interim report before the original December 1 , 2013 reporting deadline, and by L.D. 174 1, the 
Legislature amended Resolve 2013, chapter 5 to extend the date for PATLAC to issue its final 
report to December 15, 2014.  
 
 
Discussion  
 
The Uniform Probate Code (UPC) was originally approved by the National Conference of 
Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, now the Uniform Law Commission, in 1969. The 
original version of the U PC was adopted by 1 6 states, including Maine. Many other states  have 
adopted various portions of the UPC in a piecemeal fashion. Maine adopted the Maine Probate 
Code, based on the 1969 version of the UPC , in 1979, with an effective date of January 1, 1981. 
Since the 1969 approval of the original version of the UPC, th e Uniform Law Commission  
updated the UPC in 1975, 1982, 1987, 1989, 1991, 1997, 1998, 2002, 2003, and 2008, with 
major revisions in 1990 and 2010.  
 
Although Maine has adopted a number of changes to the Maine Probate Code since the original 
1981 effective date, Maine has n ever undertaken a comprehensive review of the Maine Probate 
Code to compare its provisions to the revised and updated UPC.  With the frequency with which 
people move from one state to another, there is a benefit to providing a uniform body of law on 
matters as important a s wills, inheritance and probate. One of the benefits of Maine’s adoption of 
the UPC is that Maine’s citizens, lawyers and judges may look to court decisions in other states 
for guidance in interpreting provisions of the Mai ne Probate Code. The more Maine maintains 
uniformity with the UPC as enacted in other states, the greater the opportunity to look to court 
decisions in other states for guidance in interpreting provisions of the Maine Probate Code.  
 
PATLAC Report on Resolve 2013, chapter 5 – Update of Maine Probate Code  
Page 2 
  
The UPC, with Comments,  as most recently updated by the Uniform Law Commission, is 
roughly 800 pages in length. To assist it in its review  of the UPC , PATLAC created six 
subcommittees and invited Maine lawyers and judges to review various portions of the existing 
Maine Probate C ode, compare the existing Maine Probate Code provisions with the counterpart 
provisions of the updated  UPC, and provide recommendations for changes.  Twenty -one lawyers 
and judges accepted PATLAC’s invitation to join the review process.  The six subcommitt ees 
each prepared reports to PATLAC summarizing their review of assigned sections of the UPC and 
the Maine Probate Code, and PATLAC met repeatedly with the subcommittees to review the 
subcommittees’ reports and recommendations.   
 
After completing its meet ings with the six subcommittees to review recommendations for 
changes, PATLAC then met several times to again review and debate the recommendations of 
the subcommit tees. As PATLAC considered and compared competing provisions of the new 
UPC with existing pr ovisions of the Maine Probate Code, PATLAC approached the review with 
a preference toward maintaining uniformity with the UPC unless there was a logical reason to 
deviate from the uniform language. PATLAC’s approach, with a bias toward maintaining 
uniformi ty, is consistent with the approach taken when Maine adopted the current Maine Probate 
Code in 1979.  As indicated above, adopting uniform language provides the significant benefit of 
an opportunity to look to court decisions in other states for guidance in  interpreting provisions of 
the Maine Probate Code.  
 
Maine lawyers and judges will be pleased to see that the most recent version of the UPC follows 
the same general format of the Maine Probate Code with which practitioners and judges have 
become familiar over the past 34 years. Most section numbers are unchanged, and the 
organization of the Probate Code, in its Articles and Parts, is unchanged and will be completely 
familiar.  
 
The work product of PATLAC’s review of the subcommittees’ recommendations was a report 
that covered  Articles I, II, III, IV, V, and VI of the M aine Probate Code .  PATLAC’s review did 
not include Article V, Part 6 (Public Guardian and Conservator – a non -uniform portion of the 
Maine Probate Code ); Article V, Part 5 -A (the Uniform Adult  Guardianship and Protective 
Proceedings Jurisdiction Act, which was recently adopted in Maine with an effective date of July 
1, 2013); Article V, Part 8 (the Uniform Health Care Decisions Act); Article V, Part 9 (the Maine 
Uniform Power of Attorney Act); Article VII (which includes the Uniform Principal and Income 
Act); or Article VIII (Miscellaneous Provisions).  
 
PATLAC’s preliminary report presented its recommendations for changes to the Maine Probate 
Code, organized by Article, with e ach Article present ed by section, with each section containing 
five separate subparts: (i) The language of the UPC section, with PATLAC’s recommended 
changes (if any) shown by underlined (for added) and strikeout (for deleted) text; (ii) the 
language of the existing counterp art M aine Probate Code  section(s), if any; (iii) a brief summary 
of the differences between the UPC and the existing M aine Probate Code ; (iv) PATLAC’s 
recommendation; and (v) the language of a proposed Maine Comment (if any) to accompany the 
new statute.  
 
 
PATLAC Report on Resolve 2013, chapter 5 – Update of Maine Probate Code  
Page 3 
 In March 2014, PATLAC sent its preliminary report, to the following groups that PATLAC 
identified a s interested or stakeholder groups, and requested comment s on PATLAC’s proposed 
changes  to the Maine Probate Code : 
 
 Maine Probate Judges Assembly  
 Family Law Advisory Commission  
 Maine Bankers Association  
 Maine State Bar Association Elder Law Section  
 Maine State Bar Association Litigation Section  
 Maine State Bar Association Real Estate and Title Section  
 Maine State Bar Association Trusts and Estates Section  
 Equa lity Maine  
 Gay & Lesbian Advocates & Defenders (GLAD)  
 Maine Legal Services for the Elderly  
 Maine Association of Area Agencies on Aging  
 Disability Rights Center  
 NAMI Maine (National Alliance on Mental Illness)  
 
PATLAC received comments, with recommendations  for changes, from many sources, including  
Legal Services for the Elderly; Disability Rights Center; Maine Equal Justice Partners; 
Cumberland Legal Aid Clinic; American Civil Liberties Union of Maine; AARP Maine; Maine 
Council On Aging; Gay & Lesbian Advoc ates & Defenders ; Equality Maine ; Legal Services for 
the Elderly; Maine Assoc iation of Area Agencies on Aging ; Maine Equal Justice Partners ; 
Service & Advocacy for GLBT Elders ME ; Maine Women’s Lobby ; Immigrant Legal Advocacy 
Project ; Cumberland Legal Aid Clinic ; Maine State Bar Association, E lder Law Section ; Maine 
State Bar Association, Real Estate and Title S ection ; Maine Credit Union League; and the Family 
Law Advisory Commission.  
 
Several of the groups listed above provided extensive feedback.  PATLAC  then met to review 
and discuss all comments received from interested and stakeholder groups, had personal 
conversations with representatives of several of the groups , and made many revisions to its draft 
report to incorporate comments and suggestions recei ved from the various groups.  
 
The recommended legislative changes that accompany this report reflect the combined thoughtful 
and cogent input from many individuals and groups. PATLAC presents the recommended 
changes with confidence that the changes  repres ent improvements to  the Maine Probate Code . 
 
As background reference for PATLAC’s recommended legislative changes, PATLAC has 
updated its report in the format as distributed to interested and stakeholder groups with the same 
five subparts described above f or each section of the UPC. The UPC contains extensive 
Comments that are not included in PATLAC’s background reference report.  Including the 
complete text of the Comments would add several hundred pages to PATLAC’s background 
reference report .  For many of  the UPC sections, reading the section’s accompanying Comment 
from the Uniform Law Commission is essential to a complete understanding of the nuances of, 
and the policy considerations underlying, the statutory language.   
 
PATLAC Report on Resolve 2013, chapter 5 – Update of Maine Probate Code  
Page 4 
 The entire U niform Probate Code , with all Comments  of the Uniform Law Commission , is 
available at http://www.law.cornell.edu/uniform/probate .  
 
 
Conclusion  
 
 The Probate and Trust Law Advisory Commission recommends adoption of the  legislative 
changes  to the Maine Probate Code in the form as submitted with this report.  
 
Dated:  December 6, 201 4 
 
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Probate and Trust Law Advisory Commission  
 
David J. Backer, Esq., Chair  
Barbara Carlin, Esq.  
Jill A. Checkoway, Esq . 
Katherine Greason, AAG  
Jeffrey W. Jones, Esq.  
Justin LeBlanc, Esq., Vice -Chair  
Judge Susan W. Longley, Waldo County Probate Court  
Judge Joseph Mazziotti, Cumberland County Probate Court  
Justice Robert Murray  
Jane Skelton, Esq., Secretary -Treasurer  
 
 
Page 1 of 253 PATLAC Recommendations: Uniform Probate Code  with proposed amendments and comments 
SECTION 1-101. 
Short Title   
This Act shall be known and may be c ited as the Maine Uniform Probate Code  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law.  
 
 
SECTION 1-102 .   
PURPOSES; RULE OF CONSTRUCTION 
(a)    This Code shall be liberally construed and applied to promote its under lying purposes and policies. 
(b)   The underlying purposes and policies of this Code are:  
(1)    to simplify and clarify the law concerning the affairs of decedents, missing persons, protected persons, 
minors and incapacitated persons; (2)    to discover and make effective the intent of a decedent in the distribution of his property; 
(3)    to promote a speedy and efficient system for liqui dating the estate of the decedent and making distribution 
to his successors; 
(4)    to facilitate use and enforcement of certain trusts; (5) to make uniform the law among the various jurisdictions. 
 
  
SECTION 1-103    
SUPPLEMENTARY GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LAW APPLICABLE 
Unless displaced by the particular provisions  of this Code, the principles of law and equity supplement its provisions. 
 
 
 
SECTION 1-104  
SEVERABILITY  
If any provision of this  Code or the application thereo f to any person or circumstances  is held invalid, the invalidity 
shall not affect other provisions or app lications of the Code whic h can be given effect wit hout the invalid provision or 
application, and to this end th e provisions of this Code ar e declared to be severable. 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 253  
SECTION 1-105 .   
CONSTRUCTION AGAINST IMPLIED REPEAL 
This Code is a general act intended as  a unified coverage of its subject ma tter and no part of it shall be deemed 
impliedly repealed by subsequent legisl ation if it can reasonably be avoided. 
 
 
 
SECTION 1-106 .   
EFFECT OF FRAUD AND EVASION  
Whenever fraud has been perpetrated in connection with an y proceeding or in any statement filed under this Code or 
if fraud is used to avoid or circumve nt the provisions or purposes of this C ode, any person injured thereby may obtain 
appropriate relief against the perpetrato r of the fraud or restitution from any pe rson, other than a bona fide purchaser, 
benefitting from the fraud, whether innocent or not. Any proceeding must be commence d within 2 years after the 
discovery of the fraud, but no proceeding may be brought agai nst one not a perpetrator of  the fraud later than 5 6 
years after the time of commission of th e fraud. This section has no bearing on re medies relating to fraud practiced on 
a decedent during his lifetime which affects the succession of his estate. 
 
  
SECTION 1-107 .   
EVIDENCE AS TO DEATH OR STATUS 
In addition to the rules of evidence in courts of general jurisdiction, the following rules re lating to a determination of 
death and status apply: In proceedings under this Code, the rules of evidence in courts of general jurisdiction 
including any relating to simu ltaneous deaths, are applicable unless specif ically displaced by the Code or by rules 
promulgated under section 1-304. In addition, notwithstanding  Title 22, section 2707, the following rules relating to 
determination of death a nd status are applicable: 
(1) Death occurs when an individual is determined to be  dead under the Uniform Determ ination of Death Act, Title 
22, section 2811. (1978/1980)] [has sustained either (i) irreversible cessation of circulatory a nd respiratory functions 
or (ii) irreversible cessation of all f unctions of the entire brai n, including the brain stem.  A determination of death 
must be made in accordance with accepted medical standards]. 
(2) A certified or authenticated copy of a death certificate purporting to be issued by an official or agency of the place 
where the death purportedly occurred is prima facie evid ence of the fact, place, date , and time of death and the 
identity of the decedent. 
(3) A certified or authenticated  copy of any record or report of a government al agency, domestic or foreign, that an 
individual is missing, detained, dead, or alive is prima facie evidence of the stat us and of the dates, circumstances, 
 
Page 3 of 253 and places disclosed by the record or report. 
(4) In the absence of prima facie eviden ce of death under paragraph (2) or (3), th e fact of death may be established by 
clear and convincing evidence, including circumstantial evidence. (5) An individual whose death is not established under th e preceding paragraphs who is absent for a continuous 
period of five years, during which he [or she] the indivi dual has not been heard from, and whose absence is not 
satisfactorily explained after di ligent search or inquiry, is presumed to be dead.  His [or her] Death is presumed to 
have occurred at the end of the period unless there is suffi cient evidence for determining th at death occurred earlier. 
(6) In the absence of evidence disputing the time of death stated on a document described in paragr aph (2) or (3), a 
document described in paragraph (2) or (3) that states a time of death 120 hours or more after the time of death of 
another individual, however the time of death of the other individual is  determined, establishes by clear and 
convincing evidence that the individual survived the other individual by 120 hours. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  Subsections (4) and (6) are new, w ith no previous co unterparts in the 
MPC.   
  
SECTION 1-108 .   
ACTS BY HOLDER OF GENERAL POWER . 
For the purpose of granting consent or approval with regard to the acts or accounts of a personal representative or 
trustee, including relief fr om liability or penalty for failure to post bond, to register a trust, or to  perform other duties, 
and for purposes of consenting to modificat ion or termination of a trust or to de viation from its terms, the sole holder 
or all co-holders of a presently exerci sable general power of appointment, incl uding one in the form of a power of 
amendment or revocation, are deemed to act for beneficiaries to the extent their interests, as  objects, takers in default, 
or otherwise, are subject to the power. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  This section removes the reference to registration of a trust, due to the 
enactment of the Maine Uniform Trust Code and repeal of  the former MPC provisions re garding trust registration. 
 
 
1-109 
COST OF LIVING ADJUSTMENT OF CERTAIN DOLLAR AMOUNTS 
(a) In this section: 
(1) “CPI” means the Consumer Price Index (Annual Averag e) for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U):  U.S.  City 
Average — All items, reported by the Bureau  of Labor Statistics, United States Department of Labor or its successor 
or, if the index is discontinued, an equivalent index reporte d by a federal authority.  If no such index is reported, the 
term means the substitute index chosen by [insert appropriate state agency]; and 
 
Page 4 of 253 (2) “Reference base index” means the CPI for calendar year [insert year immediately preced ing the year in 
which this section takes effect]. (b) The dollar amounts stated in Sections 2-102, [2-102A ,] 2-202(b), 2-402, 2-403 and 2-405, and 3-1201 apply to the 
estate of a decedent who died in or after 2015, but for the estate of a decedent who died after  2014,  these dollar 
amounts must be increased or decrease d if the CPI for the calendar year imme diately preceding th e year of death 
exceeds or is less than the reference base index.  The amount  of any increase or decrease is computed by multiplying 
each dollar amount by the percentage by which the CPI for th e calendar year immediately preceding the year of death 
exceeds or is less than the reference base index.  If any increase or decrease produced by the computation is not a 
multiple of $100, the increase or decrease is  rounded down, if an increase, or up, if  a decrease, to the next multiple of 
$100, but for the purpose of Section 2-405, the periodic installment amount is the lump-sum amount divided by 12.  
If the CPI for 2014 is changed by the Bureau of Labor Statis tics, the reference base index must be revised using the 
rebasing factor reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, or other comparab le data if a reba sing factor is not 
reported. [(c) Before February 1, [insert year afte r the year in which this section takes effect], and before February 1 of each 
succeeding year, the [insert appropriat e state agency] shall publish a cumula tive list, beginning with the dollar 
amounts effective for the estate of a decedent who died in [insert year after the year in which this section takes 
effect], of each dollar amount as incr eased or decreased under this section.] 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  Section 1-109 was added to make it unnecessary in the future for the 
Legislature to continue to amend the UPC periodically to adjust certain dolla r amounts for inflation.  This section 
provides for an automatic adjustment of  each of the above dollar amounts annually. 
 
 
NONE  (current MPC section 1-109) 
MARRIED WOMEN'S STATUS 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  Former section 1-109 was deleted for consistency with the UPC. 
 
 
NONE  (current MPC section 1-110) 
TRANSFER FOR VALUE 
§ 1-110 Transfer for value 
 
Any recorded instrument described in this Code on which the register of deeds shall note by an appropriate stamp 
"Maine Real Estate Transfer Tax Paid" shall be prima facie evidence that such tran sfer was made for value. 
 
 
Page 5 of 253 Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Section 1-110 is retained from prior Maine law as a non-uniform 
provision. 
  
NONE  (current MPC section 1-111) 
POWERS OF FIDUCIARIES RE LATING TO COMPLIANCE WI TH ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS 
§1-111. Powers of fiduciaries relating to  compliance with environmental laws 
(a).    From the inception of the trus t or estate, a fiduciary has the followi ng powers, without court authorization, 
which the fiduciary may use in the fiduciary's sole discretion to comply with environmental law: 
(1).    To inspect and monitor property held by the fiducia ry, including interests in sole proprietorships, partnerships 
or corporations and any assets owned by any such busine ss enterprise, for the purpose of determining compliance 
with environmental law affecting the property and to respond to any actual or thre atened violation of any 
environmental law affecting the property held by the fiduciary; 
(2).    To take, on behalf of the esta te or trust, any action necessary to prev ent, abate or otherwise remedy any actual 
or threatened violation of a ny environmental law affecting property held by the fiduciary, either before or after the 
initiation of an enforcement action by any governmental body; 
(3).    To refuse to accept property if the fiduciary determines that any property to be donated to the trust or estate 
either is contaminated by any hazardous substance or is be ing used or has been used for any activity directly or 
indirectly involving any hazardous substance th at could result in liability to the tr ust or estate or ot herwise impair the 
value of the assets held in the trust or estate, except nothing in this  paragraph applies to propert y in the trust or estate 
at its inception; 
(4).    To settle or compromise at any time any claims  against the trust or estate that may be asserted by any 
governmental body or private party involvi ng the alleged violation of any envir onmental law affecting property held 
in trust or in an estate; 
(5).    To disclaim any power granted by any document, st atute or rule of law that, in  the sole discretion of the 
fiduciary, may cause the fiduciary to incur pers onal liability under any environmental law; or 
(6).    To decline to serve or to resi gn as a fiduciary if the fiduciary reasonab ly believes that there is or may be a 
conflict of interest between the fiduci ary's fiduciary capacity and the fiduci ary's individual capacity because of 
potential claims or liabilities that may be  asserted against the fiduciary on behalf of the trust or estate because of the 
type or condition of assets he ld in the trust or estate. 
(b).    For purposes of this section, "environmental law" means any federal, state or lo cal law, rule, regulation or 
ordinance relating to protection of th e environment or human health.  For purposes of this section, "hazardous 
substances" has the meaning set forth in Title 38, secti on 1362, subsection 1. 
(c).    The fiduciary may charge the cost of any inspect ion, review, abatement, response, cleanup or remedial action 
authorized in this section against the inco me or principal of the trust or estate.  A fiduciary is not personally liable to 
any beneficiary or other party for any decr ease in value of assets in  trust or in an estate by reason of the fiduciary's 
compliance with any environmental law, specifically includ ing any reporting requirement under the law.  Neither the 
 
Page 6 of 253 acceptance by the fiduciary of property nor a failure by the fiduciary to inspect pr operty creates an inference as to 
whether there is or may be any liability under any envir onmental law with resp ect to the property. 
(d).    This section applies to  all estates and trusts  in existence on and cr eated after July 1, 1994. 
(e).    The exercise by a fiduciary of any of the powers gran ted in this section does not cons titute a transaction that is 
affected by a substantial conflict of in terest on the part of the fiduciary. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The UPC has no provision concerning powers of fiduciaries relating to 
compliance with environmental laws. 
  
NONE  (current MPC section 1-112) 
GUARDIAN AD LITEM 
§1-112.  Guardian ad litem 
(a).    In any proceeding under this Title for which the c ourt may appoint a guardian ad litem for a child involved in 
the proceeding, at the time of  the appointment, the court shall specify th e guardian ad litem's length of appointment, 
duties and fee arrangements. 
(b).    A guardian ad litem appointed  on or after October 1, 2005 must meet  the qualifications established by the 
Supreme Judicial Court. 
(c).    If, in order to perform the guardian ad litem's duties, the guardian ad litem needs information concerning the 
child or parents, the court may order the parents to sign an  authorization form allowing the release of the necessary 
information.  The guardian ad litem must be allowed acce ss to the child by caretaker s of the child, whether the 
caretakers are individuals, authorized agencies or child care providers. 
(d).    The guardian ad litem shall use the standard of the best interest of the child as set forth in Title 19-A, section 
1653, subsection 3.  The guardian ad litem shall make the wi shes of the child known to the court if the child has 
expressed them, regardless of the reco mmendation of the guardian ad litem. 
(e).    If required by the court, the guardian ad litem shall make a final written report to the parties and the court 
reasonably in advance of a hearing.  The report is admi ssible as evidence and subjec t to cross-examination and 
rebuttal, whether or not objected to by a party. 
(f).    A person appointed by the court as a guardian ad l item acts as the court's agent a nd is entitled to quasi-judicial 
immunity for acts performed within the scope  of the duties of the guardian ad litem. 
(g).    A guardian ad litem must be given notice of all civil or criminal he arings and proceedings, including, but not 
limited to, grand juries, in which the child  is a party or a witness.   The guardian ad lite m shall protect the best 
interests of the child in those hearings and proceedings, unless otherwise ordered by the court. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The UPC has no provision con cerning guardians ad litem. 
 
 
Page 7 of 253  
1-201  
GENERAL DEFINITIONS. 
Subject to additional definitions contained in the subseque nt Articles that are applicable to specific Articles or 
parts, or sections and unless the cont ext otherwise requires, in this Code: 
(1) “Agent” includes an a ttorney-in-fact under a durab le or nondurable power of attorney, an individual 
authorized to make decisions concerni ng another’s health care, and an indivi dual authorized to make decisions for 
another under a natural d eath act the Uniform Health Care Decisions Act. 
(2) “Application” means a written request to the Regist rar  Register for an order of informal probate or 
appointment under Part 3 of Article III. 
(3) “Beneficiary,” as it relates to a trust beneficiary, includes a person who has any present or future interest, 
vested or contingent, and also  includes the owner of an interest by assign ment or other transfer; as it relates to a 
charitable trust, includes any person entitled to enforce th e trust; as it relates to a “beneficiary of a beneficiary 
designation,” refers to a bene ficiary of an insurance or annuity polic y, of an account with POD designation, of a 
security registered in beneficiary form  (TOD), or of a pension, profit-sharing, re tirement, or similar benefit plan, or 
other nonprobate transfer at death; and, as  it relates to a “beneficiary designa ted in a governing instrument,” includes 
a grantee of a deed, a devisee, a trust beneficiary, a beneficiary of a benefi ciary designation, a donee, appointee, or 
taker in default of a power of  appointment, and a person in whose favor a power of attorney or a power held in any 
individual, fiduciary, or representative capacity is exercised. 
(4) “Beneficiary designation” refers to a governing instrument naming a beneficiary of an insurance or annuity 
policy, of an account with POD designati on, of a security registered in bene ficiary form (TOD), or of a pension, 
profit-sharing, retirement, or similar benefit pl an, or other nonprobate transfer at death. 
(5) “Child” includes an indivi dual entitled to take as a child under this  Code by intestate succession from the 
parent whose relationship is involved a nd excludes a person who is only a stepch ild, a foster child, a grandchild, or 
any more remote descendant. 
(6) “Claims,” in respect to estates of decedents and protected persons, in cludes liabilities of the decedent or 
protected person, whether arising in contract , in tort, or otherwise, and liabilities of the estate which arise at or after 
the death of the decedent or after the appointment of a conservator, includi ng funeral expenses and expenses of 
administration.  The term does not include estate or inherita nce taxes, or demands or di sputes regarding title of a 
decedent or protected person to specific asse ts alleged to be included in the estate. 
(7) “Conservator” is as defined in Section 5-102.  (8) “Court” means the [……….  Court] or branch in this  state having jurisdiction in  matters relating to the 
affairs of decedents. any one of the severa l courts of probate of th is State established as pr ovided in Title 4, sections 
201 and 202. 
(9) “Descendant” of an indivi dual means all of his or he r descendants of all genera tions, with the relationship 
of parent and child at each generation being determined by the definition of  child and parent cont ained in this Code. 
(10) “Devise,” when used as a noun means a testamentary disposition of real or personal property and, when 
 
Page 8 of 253 used as a verb, means to dispose of real or personal property by will. 
(11) “Devisee” means a person designated in a will to recei ve a devise.  For the purposes of Article III, in the 
case of a devise to an existing trust or trustee, or to a tr ustee or trust described by will,  the trust or trustee is the 
devisee and the benefici aries are not devisees. 
(12) “Distributee” means any person who has received pr operty of a decedent from  his or her the personal 
representative other than as creditor or purchaser.  A testamentary truste e is a distributee only to the extent of 
distributed assets or increment thereto remaining in his or  her the trustee's hands.  A be neficiary of a testamentary 
trust to whom the trustee has distribu ted property received from a personal re presentative is a di stributee of the 
personal representative.  For the purposes of this provision, “testamentary trustee” includes a trustee to whom assets 
are transferred by will, to the extent of the devised assets. 
(12-A).    "Domestic partner" means one of 2 unmarri ed adults who are domiciled together under long-term 
arrangements that evidence a commitment to remain responsible indefinitely for each other's welfare. 
(13) “Estate” includes the property of the decedent, trus t, or other person whose a ffairs are subject to this 
Code as originally constituted and as it ex ists from time to time during administration. 
(14) “Exempt property” means that property of a d ecedent’s estate which is described in Section 2-403 
(15) “Fiduciary” includes a pe rsonal representative, guardian,  conservator, and trustee. 
(16) “Foreign personal representative” means a persona l representative appointed  by another jurisdiction. 
(17) “Formal proceedings” means proceedings within th e exclusive jurisdiction of the court conducted before 
a judge with notice to  interested persons. 
(18) “Governing instrument” means a deed, will, trus t, insurance or annuity policy, account with POD 
designation, security registered in be neficiary form (TOD), transfer on deat h (TOD) deed, pension, profit-sharing, 
retirement, or similar benefit plan, inst rument creating or exercising a power of  appointment or a power of attorney, 
or a dispositive, appointive, or nomin ative instrument of any similar type. 
(19) “Guardian” is as defined in Section 5-102.  
(20) “Heirs,” except as controlled  by Section 2-711 means persons, incl uding the surviving spouse and the 
state, who are entitled under the statutes of inte state succession to the property of a decedent. 
(21) “Incapacitated person” means an i ndividual described in Section 5-102. 
(22) “Informal proceedings” means those conducted withou t notice to interested persons by an officer of the 
court acting as a registrar register  for probate of a will or appointme nt of a personal representative. 
(23) “Interested person” includes heir s, devisees, children, spous es, creditors, benefici aries, and any others 
having a property right in or claim agains t a trust estate or the esta te of a decedent, ward, or protected person.  It also 
includes persons having priority for appointment as pers onal representative, and othe r fiduciaries representing 
interested persons.   In any proceeding or hearing under Article 5 affecting a trus t estate or estate, when the ward or 
protected person has received benefits from the Veterans Ad ministration within 3 years, the administrator of Veterans 
Affairs of the United States is an "int erested person."  The meaning as it relate s to particular persons may vary from 
time to time and must be determined according to the partic ular purposes of, and matter involved in, any proceeding. 
(24) “Issue” of an indivi dual means descendant. 
 
Page 9 of 253 (25) “Joint tenants with the right of survivorship” and “community proper ty with the right of survivorship” 
includes co-owners of property held under circumstances that entitle one or more to the whole of the property on the 
death of the other or others, but excludes forms of co-own ership registration in whic h the underlying ownership of 
each party is in proportion to that party’s contribution. 
(26) “Lease” includes an oil, gas, or other mineral lease. 
(27) “Letters” includes letters of authority, letters testamentary, le tters of guardianship, letters of 
administration, and letters of conservatorship. 
(28) “Minor” has the meaning described in Section 5-102.  (29) “Mortgage” means any conveyance, agreement, or a rrangement in which property is encumbered or used 
as security. 
(30) “Nonresident decedent” means a decedent who was dom iciled in another jurisdicti on at the time of his or 
her death. 
(31) “Organization” means a corpora tion, business trust, estate, trust, pa rtnership, joint vent ure, association, 
government or governmental subdivision or agen cy, or any other legal or commercial entity. 
(32) “Parent” includes any person entit led to take, or who would be entitled to take if the child died without a 
will, as a parent under this Code by in testate succession from the child whose relationship is in question and excludes 
any person who is only a stepparent, foster parent, or grandparent. 
(33) “Payor” means a trustee, in surer, business entity, employer, gove rnment, governmental agency or 
subdivision, or any other person author ized or obligated by law or a govern ing instrument to make payments. 
(34) “Person” means an indi vidual, or an organization. 
(35) “Personal representative” includ es executor, administrator, successor personal representative, special 
administrator, and persons who perform substantially the same function under the la w governing their status.  
“General personal representative” excludes special administrator. 
(36) “Petition” means a written request to the court for an order after notice. 
(37) “Proceeding” includes any civil action in any court of co mpetent jurisdiction an action at law and suit in 
equity. 
(38) “Property” includes both real an d personal property or any interest therein and means anything that may 
be the subject of ownership. 
(39) “Protected person” is as defined in Section 5-102.  
(40) “Protective proceeding” is  as defined in Section 5-101. 
(41) “Record” means information that is inscribed on a ta ngible medium or that is stored in an electronic or 
other medium and is retrievable in perceivable form. 
(42) “Registrar” refers to "R egister means" the official of the court elected or appoi nted as provided in section 
1-501, or any other person performing the f unctions of register as provided in Article I, Part 5.de signated to perform 
the functions of Registrar as provided in. 
(42-A).   "Registered domestic partners" means domestic  partners who are registered  in accordance with Title 
22, section 2710. 
 
Page 10 of 253 (43) “Security” includes any note, st ock, treasury stock, bond, debenture, ev idence of indebte dness, certificate 
of interest or participation in  an oil, gas, or mining title or lease or in  payments out of production under such a title or 
lease, collateral trust ce rtificate, transferable share, voting trust certificate or, in general, any interest or instrument 
commonly known as a security, or any certi ficate of interest or pa rticipation, any temporary or interim certificate, 
receipt, or certificate of deposit for, or any warrant or right to subscribe to or purchase, any of the foregoing. 
(44) “Settlement,” in reference to a decedent’s estate, includes the full process of administration, distribution 
and closing. 
(45) “Sign” means, with present intent to au thenticate or adopt a reco rd other than a will: 
 (A) to execute or adopt a tangible symbol; or  (B) to attach to or logically associate with the record an el ectronic symbol, sound, or process. 
(46) “Special administrator” means a personal repres entative as described by Sections 3-614 through 3-618. 
(46-A) "Spouse" means one who is lawfully married a nd includes registered domestic  partners and individuals 
who are in a legal union that was validly formed in any State or jurisdiction that pr ovides substantially the same 
rights, benefits, and respons ibilities as a marriage. 
(47) “State” means a state of the Unit ed States, the District of Columbia , the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, 
or any territory or insular po ssession subject to the jurisdiction of the United States. 
(48) “Successor personal representativ e” means a personal representative, ot her than a special administrator, 
who is appointed to succ eed a previously appointed  personal representative. 
(49) “Successors” means persons, other than creditors, who are entitled to property of a decedent under his or 
her the decedent's will or this Code. 
(50) “Supervised administration” refers to the proceedings described in Article III, Part 5. 
(51) “Survive” means that an individual has neither predeceased an event, including the death of another 
individual, nor is deemed to have predeceased an ev ent under Section 2-104 or 2-702.  The term includes its 
derivatives, such as “survives,” “sur vived,” “survivor,”  and “surviving.” 
(52) “Testacy proceeding” means a proceeding to establish a will or determine intestacy. (53) “Testator” includes an individual of either sex who has executed a will. 
(54) “Trust” includes an express trus t, private or charitable, with addi tions thereto, wherever and however 
created.  The term also includes a trust created or determ ined by judgment or decree unde r which the trust is to be 
administered in the manner of an express trust.  The te rm excludes other constructive trusts and excludes resulting 
trusts, conservatorships, personal repres entatives, trust accounts as defined in  Article VI, custodial arrangements 
pursuant to the Maine Uniform Transfers to Minors Act, bus iness trusts providing for certi ficates to be issued to 
beneficiaries, common trust funds, voting trusts, security arrangements, liquidati on trusts, and trusts for the primary 
purpose of paying debts, dividends, intere st, salaries, wages, profits, pensions, or employee benefits of any kind, and 
any arrangement under which a person is  nominee or escrowee for another. 
(55) “Trustee” includes an original, additional, or succes sor trustee, whether or not appointed or confirmed by 
court. 
(56) “Ward” means an individual described in Se ction 5-102. (57) “Will” includes a codicil and any 
 
Page 11 of 253 testamentary instrument that merely appoints an executor, revokes or revises another will, nominates a guardian, or 
expressly excludes or limits the right of an individual or  class to succeed to propert y of the decedent passing by 
intestate succession. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section adds several definitions from the former MPC which do not 
appear in the UPC. 
   
1-301  
TERRITORIAL APPLICATION 
Except as otherwise provided in this [code], this [code] applies to: 
(1) the affairs and estates of decedents, missing persons, a nd persons to be protected, do miciled in this state,  
(2) the property of nonresidents locate d in this state or property coming into  the control of a fiduciary who is 
subject to the laws of this state,  
(3) incapacitated persons a nd minors in this state,  
(4) survivorship and related acc ounts in this state, and  
(5) trusts subject to admi nistration in this state. 
 
 
 
1-302  
SUBJECT MATTER JURISDICTION 
(a) To the full extent permitted by the constitution Maine st atutes, the court has jurisdiction over all subject matter 
relating to  
 (1) estates of decedents, including construction of wills and determination of heirs and successors of 
decedents, and estates of  protected persons;  
 (2) protection of minors and incapacitated persons; and  
 (3) trusts. (b) The court has full power to make orders, judgments and decrees and take all other action nece ssary and proper to 
administer justice in the matters which come before it. (c) The court has jurisdiction over protectiv e proceedings and guardianship proceedings. 
(d)  If both guardianship and protective proceedings as to the same person are commenced or pending in the same 
court, the proceedings may be consolidated. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
Page 12 of 253  
 
1-303  
VENUE, MULTIPLE PROCEEDINGS, TRANSFER  
(a)    Where a proceeding under this [code] could be maintain ed in more than one place in this state, the court in 
which the proceeding is first commenced  has the exclusive right to proceed. 
(b)    If proceedings concerning the same estate, protected person, ward, or trust are commenced in more than one 
court of this state, the court in whic h the proceeding was first commenced shall continue to hear the matter, and the 
other courts shall hold the matter in abeyance until the ques tion of venue is decided, and if  the ruling court determines 
that venue is properly in another court, it shal l transfer the proceeding to the other court. 
(c)    If a court finds that in the intere st of justice a proceeding or a file should be located in another court of this state , 
the court making the finding may transfer th e proceeding or file to the other court. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Adopt UPC 
 
 
1-304  
PRACTICE IN COURT 
Unless specifically provided to the contrary in this [code] or  unless inconsistent with its provisions, the rules of civil 
procedure including the rules concerning vacation of orders and a ppellate review govern formal proceedings under 
this [code]. (a) The Supreme Judicial Court shall have the power to prescribe by general ru les the forms, practice and 
procedure, including rules of evidence, to be followed in all proceedings under this Code  and all appeals therefrom; 
provided that the rules shall be consistent with the provisi ons of this Code and shall not  abridge, enlarge or modify 
any substantive right. (b) After the effective date of th e rules as promulgated or am ended, all laws in conflict 
therewith shall be of no further force or effect, except that in the event of conflict with a provision of this Code, the 
Code provision shall prevail. 
 
 
 
1-305.  
RECORDS AND CERTIFIED COPIES   
The [Clerk of Court] shall keep a record for each deceden t, ward, protected person or tr ust involved in any document 
which may be filed with the court under this [code], incl uding petitions and applications, demands for notices or 
bonds, trust registrations, and of any orde rs or responses relating thereto by the Registrar or court, and establish and 
maintain a system for indexing, filing or  recording which is sufficient to en able users of the records to obtain 
adequate information.  Upon payment of  the fees required by law the clerk must issue certified copies of any 
 
Page 13 of 253 probated wills, letters issued to personal representatives, or  any other record or paper filed or recorded.  Certificates 
relating to probated wills must indicate whether the deceden t was domiciled in this state and whether the probate was 
formal or informal.  Certificates rela ting to letters must show the date of appointment. Th e register shall maintain 
records and files and provide copies of documents as pr ovided in sections 1-501 through 1-511 and such further 
records and copies as the Supreme Judicial Court may by rule  provide. The register shall be  subject to the supervision 
and authority of the judge of the c ourt in which such register serves. 
 
 
   
1-306  
JURY TRIAL NO JURY TRIAL; REMOVAL. 
(a) If duly demanded, a party is entitled to trial by jury  in [a formal testacy proceeding and] any proceeding in 
which any controverted question of fact  arises as to which any party has a constitutional right to trial by jury. 
(b) If there is no right to trial by jury  under subsection (a) or the right is waiv ed, the court in its discretion may call a 
jury to decide any issue of fact, in wh ich case the verdict is advisory only.   
(a).    The court sh all sit wit hout a jury. 
(b).  Upon timely demand by any party any proceeding not within the exclusive jurisd iction of the court may be 
removed for trial to the Superior Cour t under such procedures as the Suprem e Judicial Court may by rule provide. 
 
 
 
1-307  
REGISTER REGISTER; POWERS 
The acts and orders which this [code] sp ecifies as performable by the Registra r may be performed either by a judge 
of the court or by a person, in cluding the clerk, designa ted by the court by a written order filed and recorded in the 
office of the court. 
The register has the power to probate w ills and appoint personal representatives  as provided in sections 3-302 and 3-
307 and to perform other duties as set out in this Title generally.  The acts and orders that this Code specifies as 
performable by the register may also be performed by a judge  of the court or by a deputy  register appointed under 
the provisions of section 1-506. 
 
 
 
1-308 
 
Page 14 of 253 APPEALS. 
Appellate review, including th e right to appellate review, interlocutory appeal, provis ions as to time, manner, 
notice, appeal bond, stays, scope of revi ew, record on appeal, briefs, arguments and power of the appellate court, is 
governed by the rules applicab le to the appeals to the [Supreme Court] in  equity cases from the [court of general 
jurisdiction], except that in proceedings where jury trial has been had as a matter of right, the rules applicable to the 
scope of review in jury cases apply. 
Appeals from all final judgments, orders and decrees of  the court shall lie to th e Supreme Judicial Court, 
sitting as the law court, as in other civil actions. 
 
 
  
1-309 
JUDGES 
A judge of the court must have the same qualifications  as a judge of the [court of general jurisdiction]. 
A judge of the court shall be chosen and serv e as provided in Title 4, sections 301 to 311. 
 
 
 
1-310 
OATH OR AFFIRMATION ON FILED DOCUMENTS 
Except as otherwise specifically prov ided in this Code or by rule, ever y document filed with the court under 
this Code including applications, petiti ons, and demands for notice, shall be d eemed to include an oath, affirmation, 
or statement to the effect that its re presentations are true as far as the person executing or filing it knows or is 
informed, and penalties for perjury may follow deliberate falsification therein. 
 
 
 
1-401 
NOTICE; METHOD OF TIME AND GIVING 
 
 
 
1-402 
NOTICE; WAIVER 
A person, including a guardian ad litem, conservator or ot her fiduciary, may waive notic e by a writing signed by him 
 
Page 15 of 253 or his attorney and filed in the proc eeding  in such manner as the Supreme Judicial Court shall by rule provide. A 
person for whom a guardianship or othe r protective order is sought, a ward, or a protected pe rson may not waive 
notice. 
 
 
 
1-403  
PLEADINGS; WHEN PARTIES BOUND BY OTHERS: NOTICE  
In formal proceedings involving trusts or estates of decedents, minors, protect ed persons, or incapacitated persons, 
and in judicially supervised settle ments, the following rules apply: 
(1) Interests to be affected must be described in pleadings that give reasona ble information to owners by name or 
class, by reference to the instrument creating the interests or in another appropriate manner.   
(2) A person is bound by an order bind ing another in the following cases:   
       (A) An order binding the sole holder or all co-holders of  a power of revocation or a presently exercisable general 
power of appointment, including one in the form of a power of amendment, binds other pe rsons to the extent their 
interests as objects, takers in default, or otherwise are subject to the power.   
       (B) To the extent there is no conflict of interest between them or among persons represented: 
               (i) an order binding a conserva tor binds the person whose estate  the conservator controls;  
               (ii) an order binding a guardian binds th e ward if no conservator of the wa rd’s estate has been appointed;  
               (iii) an order binding a trustee binds bene ficiaries of the trust in proceedi ngs to probate a will establishing or 
adding to a trust, to review the acts or  accounts of a former fiduciary, and in pr oceedings involving creditors or other 
third parties;                  (iv) an order binding a personal repres entative binds persons interested in the undistributed assets of a 
decedent’s estate in actions or proc eedings by or against the estate; and 
                 (v) an order binding a sole holder or all co-holders of a general testam entary power of appointment binds 
other persons to the extent th eir interests as objects, takers in defau lt, or otherwise are subject to the power. 
      (C) Unless otherwise represented, a minor or an incapacitated, unborn, or unasc ertained person is bound by an 
order to the extent the person’s intere st is adequately represented by anothe r party having a substantially identical 
interest in the proceeding.   (3) If no conservator or guardian has been a ppointed, a parent may represent a minor child. 
(4) Notice is required as follows:             (A) The notice prescribed by Section 1-401 must be given to every in terested person or to one who can bind an 
interested person as described in paragraph (2)(A) or (B).  Notice may be  given both to a person and to another who 
may bind the person.             (B) Notice is given to  unborn or unascertained persons who are not  represented under paragraph (2)(A) or (B) 
by giving notice to all known persons whose interests in the proceedings are substantially identical to those of the 
 
Page 16 of 253 unborn or unascertained persons.   
(5) At any point in a proceeding, a court may appoint a guard ian ad litem to represent th e interest of a minor, an 
incapacitated, unborn, or unascertained person, or a person whose identity or  address is unknown, if the court 
determines that representation of the in terest otherwise would be inadequate.  If not precluded by conf lict of interests, 
a guardian ad litem may be appointed to represent several pe rsons or interests.  The cour t shall state its reasons for 
appointing a guardian ad litem as a part  of the record of the proceeding. 
 
 
 
None 
Part 5.  REGISTERS OF PROBATE 
§1-501.  Election; bond; vacanc ies; salaries; copies 
Registers of probate are elected or appointed as provi ded in the Constitution of Maine.  Their election is 
effected and determined as is provided respecting county commissioners by Title 30-A, chapter 1, subchapter II, and 
they enter upon the discharge of their duties on the first day of January following their elect ion; but the term of those 
appointed to fill vacancies commences im mediately. All registers, before acti ng, shall give bond to the treasurer of 
their county with sufficient sureties in the sum of $2,500, except that th is sum must be $10,000 for Cumberland 
County. Every register, having executed such bond, shall file it  in the office of the clerk of the county commissioners 
of that register's county, to be presented to them at their next meeting for approva l. After the bond has been so 
approved, the clerk shall record it and certi fy the fact thereon, and retaining a copy thereof, deliver the original to the 
register, who shall deliver it to the tr easurer of the county within 10 days af ter its approval, to be filed in the 
treasurer's office.  Vacancies caused by death, resignation, removal from the county, perm anent incapacity as defined 
in Title 30-A, section 1, subsection 2-A or any other reason must be filled as provided in the Constitution of Maine.  
In the case of a vacancy in the term of a register of  probate who was nominated by primary election before the 
general election, the register of probate  appointed by the Governor to fill the vacancy until a successor is chosen at 
election must be enrolled in the same political party as the register of probate whose term  is vacant.  In making the 
appointment, the Governor shall choose from any reco mmendations submitted to the Governor by the county 
committee of the political party from wh ich the appointment is to be made.  
 
Registers of probate in the several coun ties are entitled to receive annual salaries  as set forth in Title 30-A, section 2. 
The salaries of the registers of proba te must be in full compensation for th e performance of all duties required of 
registers of probate. They may make c opies of wills, accounts, inventories, petitions and decrees and furnish the 
same to persons calling for them and may charge a reasonable  fee for such service, which is considered a fee for the 
use of the county. 
Exemplified copies of the record of the probate of w ills and the granting of administrations, guardianships and 
conservatorships, copies of petitions and orders of notice th ereon for personal service, appeal copies and the statutory 
 
Page 17 of 253 fees for abstracts and copies of the waiver of wills and othe r copies required to be record ed in the registry of deeds 
are considered official fees for the use of the county. 
 This section may not be construed to change or repeal  any provisions of law requiri ng the furnishing of certain 
copies without charge. 
§1-502.  Condition of bond 
The condition of such bond shall be to account, according to law, for all fees received by him or payable to him by 
virtue of his office and to pay the same to the county tr easurer by the 15th day of ever y month following the month in 
which they were collected, as provided by law; to keep up, seasonably and in good order, the records of the court; to 
make and keep correct and convenient alphabets of the r ecords and to faithfully discha rge all other duties of the 
office. If such register forfeits hi s bond, he is thenceforth di squalified from holding said  office, and neglect to 
complete his records for more than 6 months at any tim e, sickness or extraordinary casualty excepted, shall be 
adjudged a forfeiture. 
§1-503.  Duties; records;  binding of papers 
Registers of probate have the care and custody of all files,  papers and books belonging to the probate office and shall 
duly record all wills probated formally or informally, letter s of authority of a personal re presentative, guardianship or 
conservatorship issued, bonds approved, accounts filed or allowed, all informal applications and findings, all 
petitions, decrees, orders or judgments of  the judge, including all petitions, decrees or orde rs relating to adoptions 
and changes of names and other matters, as the judge directs.  Re gisters of probate shall ke ep a docket of all probate 
cases and, under the appropriate heading of each case, make  entries of each motion, orde r, decree and proceeding so 
that at all times the docket shows the ex act condition of each case.  Any regist er may act as an auditor of accounts 
when requested to do so by the judge and the judge's decision  is final unless appeal is taken in the same manner as 
other probate appeals.  The r ecords may be attested by the volume and it is  deemed to be a sufficient attestation of 
those records when each volume bears the attest with the written signat ure of the register 
or other person authorized by law to atte st those records.  The registers of pr obate may bind in volumes of convenient 
size original inventories and accounts filed in thei r respective offices and, when bound and indexed, those inventories 
and accounts are deemed to be recorded in  all cases when the law requires a reco rd to be made and no further record 
is required. 
A facsimile of the signature of the register of probate or deputy register of probate im printed at his direction upon 
any instrument, certification or copy wh ich is customarily certified by him or recorded in the probate office, shall 
have the same validity as his signature. 
§1-504.  Certification of wills, appointm ents of personal representatives and elective share petitions involving real 
estate 
Within 30 days after a will has been proved or allowed, or  an appointment of a pers onal representative has been 
made upon an assumption of intestate status and where th e petition for the appointment indicates that the deceased 
owned real estate, or a petition for an elective share has been filed where the w ill or the petition upon which 
appointment of a personal representative has been granted i ndicates that the deceased owned real estate, the register 
shall make out and certify to the register of deeds in the co unty where any affected real estate is situated (1) a true 
 
Page 18 of 253 copy of so much of the will as devises real estate, (2) an ab stract of the appointment of the personal representative, or 
(3) a true copy or abstract of the petition for an elective sh are, as the case may be. Each certification shall include a 
description of the real esta te, so far as it can be furnished from th e probated will or the petition upon which the 
appointment was made, and the name of the decedent and of  the devisees or heirs. In the case of a will, the 
certification shall also set forth the date of the allowan ce of the will and designate whether it was probated formally 
or informally. In the case of the formal probate of a will that was previously informally probated, and of an 
informally probated will that was subsequently denied prob ate in formal proceedings, the register of probate shall 
certify such formal probate or formal denial of probate to the register of deeds to which the prior informally probated 
will was certified, setting forth the date of  the formal probate or denial. The register of deeds receiving such copy or 
certification shall forthwith file the sa me, minuting thereon the time of the reception thereof, and record it in the 
same manner as a deed of real estate. 
§1-505.  Notice to beneficiaries; furnishing of copies 
Registers of probate shall, within 30  days after any will is probated, notify by mail all beneficiaries under that will 
that devises have been made to them, st ating the name of the testator and the na me of the personal representative, if 
one has been appointed at the time this  notification is sent.  Beneficiaries in a will must, upon application to the 
register of probate, be furnished with a copy of the probated will upon payment of a fee of $1 per page. 
§1-506.  Deputy register of probate 
Any register of probate in this State may appoint a de puty register of probate for the county, subject to the 
requirements of Title 30-A, section 501. The deputy may perform any of the duties prescribed by law to be 
performed by the register of probate. His signature as the deputy shall have the same force and effect as the signature 
of the register. The deputy shall give bond to the county for the faithful discharge of his duties in such sum and in the 
same manner as the register of probate. The deputy register shall act as register  in the event of a vacancy or absence 
of the register, until the register resumes his duties or another is qualified as regi ster. The deputy register shall 
receive an annual salary as es tablished by the register and ap proved by the county commissioners. 
In case of the absence of the register in any county wher e no deputy has been appointed as above authorized, or a 
vacancy in the office of register of probate due to death, resignation or any other cause, the judge shall appoint a 
suitable person to act as register pro tempore until the regist er resumes his duties or another is qualified as register. 
He shall be sworn and, if the judge requires it,  give bond as in the case of the register.  
 
§1-507.  Inspection of register's conduct of office 
Every judge of probate shall constantly inspect the conduct of the re gister with respect to hi s records and the duties of 
his office, and give information in writing of any breach of his bond to the treasurer of his county, who shall bring 
civil action. The money thus recovered shall be applied to ward the expenses of comp leting the records of such 
register under the direction of said judge and the surplus, if any, shall inure to the county. If it is not sufficient for that  
purpose, the treasurer may recover the deficien cy from the register  in a civil action. 
§1-508.  Register incapabl e or neglects duties 
When a register is unable to perform his duties or neglects them, the judge shall certify such inability or neglect to 
 
Page 19 of 253 the county treasurer, the time of its commencement and termination, and what  person has performed the duties for 
the time. Such person shall be paid by the treasurer in pr oportion to the time that he has served and the amount shall 
be deducted from the register's salary. 
§1-509.  Records in case of vacancy 
When there is a vacancy in the office of register and the records are incomplete, they ma y be completed and certified 
by the person appointed to act as regi ster or by the register's successor. 
§1-510.  Register or Probate Cour t employee; prohibited activities 
1.  Prohibited activities.   A register may not: 
A.    Be an attorney or counselor in or out of court in an action or matter pending in the court of which the register is 
register or in an appeal in such action or matter; 
B.    Be administrator, gua rdian, commissioner of insolvenc y, appraiser or divide r of an estate, in a case within the 
jurisdiction of the court of wh ich the register is register, except as prov ided in Title 4, section 307, or be in any 
manner interested in the fees and emoluments aris ing from such an estate in that capacity; or 
C.    Commence or conduct, either pers onally or by agent or clerk, any matter, petition, process or proceeding in the 
court of which the register is regi ster, in violation of this section. 
2.  Assistance in drafting.  Except as ot herwise provided in this se ction, a register may not draft or aid in drafting 
documents or paper that the register is by law required to record in full or in  part.  A register may aid in drafting 
applications in informal proceedings, pe titions or sworn statements relating to the closing of decedents' estates that 
have not been contested prior to closing, applications for ch ange of name and petitions for guardians of minors.  A 
register or an employee of the Probate Court may not charge  fees or accept anything of  value for assisting in the 
drafting of documents to be used or filed in the court of which the pers on is the register or an employee. 
3.  Penalties.  The following penalties a pply to violations of this section. 
A.    A register who violat es subsection 1 commits a Class E crime.  Viol ation of subsection 1 is  a strict liability 
crime as defined in Title 17-A, section 34, subsection 4-A. 
B.    A register or employee of the Probate Court who viol ates subsection 2 is subject to a civil penalty of not more 
than $100, to be recovered by a complainan t in a civil action for the complainan t's benefit or by indictment for the 
benefit of the county. 
§1-511.  Fees for approved blanks and forms 
For all approved blanks, forms or schedul e paper required in probate court proceedings, the register shall charge fees 
which shall be set by the register and approved by the county commissioners, so  as not to incur a loss to the county 
for such services. Such fees shall be payable by the regist er to the county treasurer for the use and benefit of the 
county. 
 
 
 
None 
Part 6.  COSTS AND FEES 
 
Page 20 of 253 MPC ARTICLE 1, PART 6. COSTS AND FEES 
§1-601.  Costs in contested cases in probate court 
In contested cases in the original or  appellate court of probate, costs may be allowed to either party, including 
reasonable witness fees, cost of depositions, hospital records or medical reports and attorney's fees, to be paid to 
either or both parties, out of the estate in controvers y, as justice requires. In thos e cases where a will is being 
contested on the grounds of undue influen ce or mental capacity, attorney's fees and costs shall not be allowed to the 
party contesting the will if he is unsuccessful. 
§1-602.  Filing and certification fees 
The register of probate must receive the following fees fo r filing or certifying documents: 
(1).    For making and certifying to the register of deeds copies of devises of real estate, abstract s of petitions for 
appointment of a personal representative or for an electiv e share and any other documen t for which certification is 
required, $15, plus the fee for recordi ng as provided by Title 33, section 751, except as othe rwise expressly provided 
by law.  The fee must be paid by the personal representati ve, petitioner or other person  filing the document to be 
certified when the copy of the devise, ab stract, petition for elective share or othe r document for whic h certification is 
required is requested.  The regi ster of probate shall deliver the certified do cument to the register of deeds together 
with the fee for recording as provided by Title 33, section 751; 
(2).    For receiving and entering each pe tition or application for all estates, testate and intestate, including foreign 
estates, and the filing of a notice by a domiciliary foreign personal represen tative, except for the filing of a successor 
personal representative, when the value of the estate is: 
(i).  (Deleted) 
(i-a).    For filing a will for no probate, no charge; 
(ii).    For filing a will to be pr obated and without an appointment, $15; 
(iii).    $10,000 and under, $20; 
(iv).    $10,001 to $20,000, $40; 
(v).    $20,001 to $30,000, $60; 
(vi).    $30,001 to $40,000, $75; 
(vii).    $40,001 to $50,000, $95; 
(viii).    $50,001 to $75,000, $125; 
(ix).    $75,001 to $100,000, $190; 
(x).    $100,001 to $150,000, $250; 
(xi).    $150,001 to $200,000, $325; 
(xii).    $200,001 to $250,000, $375; 
(xiii).    $250,001 to $300,000, $450; 
(xiv).    $300,001 to $400,000, $500; 
(xv).    $400,001 to $500,000, $575; 
(xvi).    $500,001 to $750,000, $625; 
(xvii).    $750,001 to $1,000,000, $700; 
 
Page 21 of 253 (xviii).    $1,000,001 to $1,500,000, $750; 
(xix).    $1,500,001 to $2,000,000, $875; or 
(xx).    More than $2,000,000, $950, and continuing in step s of $100 for every increase in value of $500,000 or part 
thereof above $2,500,000; 
(3).    For making copies from the records of the court, $1 for each page; 
(4).    For each certificate, under seal  of the court, of the appointment and qualification of a pers onal representative, 
guardian, conservator or trustee, $5, and for each double certificate, $10; 
(5).    For filing a petition for appointment as guardian, $50; 
(6).    For filing application for involuntary hospitalization, $10; 
(7).    For filing a joined  peti tion for guardian and conservator, $75; 
(8).    For filing any other formal proceeding, $25; 
(9).    For filing a petition for appointment of conservator, $50; 
(10).    For all other subsequent  informal appointments, $25; and 
(11).     For filing a petit ion for elective share, $120. 
§1-603.  Registers to acc ount monthly for fees 
Registers of probate shall account for each calendar month unde r oath to the county treasurer s for all fees received by 
them or payable to them by virtue of the office, speci fying the items, and shall pay the whole amount for each 
calendar month to the treasurers of their respective counties no t later than the 15th day of the following month. 
§1-604.  Expenses of partition 
When a partition of real estate is ma de by order of a judge of probate, the expenses thereof shall be paid by the 
parties interested in proportion to th eir interests; but when such expenses  accrue prior to the closing order or 
statement of the personal representati ve of the deceased owner of such real  estate, having in his hands sufficient 
assets for the purpose, he may pay such expenses and allow the same in his account. In cas e of neglect or refusal of 
any person liable to pay such expenses , the judge may issue a warrant of di stress against such delinquent for the 
amount due from him and costs of process. 
§1-605.  Compensation of reporters 
Reporters appointed under Title 4, sections 751 to 756, shall, if  a transcript is requested by the court or a party, file 
the original transcript with the court and receive the same compensation as provide d by law for temporary court 
reporters, and travel at the rate of 10¢ a mile. 
Transcript rates shall be in accordance w ith Title 4, section 651, for transcript furnished for the files of the court and 
shall be paid by the county in which the court or examination is held, after the reporter's bill has been allowed by the 
judge of the court in which th e services were rendered. In probate matters, the personal representa tive, conservator or 
guardian shall, in each case out of the estate in his ha nds, pay to the register for the county the amount of the 
reporter's fees, giving such fees the same priority as provided in section 3-815 for ot her costs and expenses of 
administration, or as otherwise provided for in the case of insolvent estates, provide d that the court can order 
payment by the county in case the es tate assets are not sufficient. 
§1-606.  Reporters to furnish copies 
 
Page 22 of 253 Reporters shall furnish correct typewrit ten copies of the oral testimony taken at any hearing or examination, to any 
person calling for the same, upon payment of transc ript rates prescribed in Title 4, section 651. 
§1-607.  Surcharge for restoration, st orage and preservation of records 
(1).    In addition to any other fees required by law, a register of probate shall collect a surcharge of $10 per petition, 
application or complaint, except for name  changes, filed in the Probate Court. 
(2).    The surcharge imposed in subs ection (1) must be transferred to the c ounty treasurer, who sha ll deposit it in a 
separate, nonlapsing account within 30 da ys of receipt.  Money in the account is not available for use as general 
revenue of the county.  Interest earned on the account must be credited to the account. 
(3).    The money in the account es tablished in subsection (2 ) must be used for the restoration, storage and 
preservation of the records filed in the office of the regist er of probate and in Probate Court.  No withdrawals from 
this account may be made without the express written request or appr oval of the regist er of probate. 
(4).    The judge of probate may waive the surcharge in  subsection (1) if the judge believes that it will prove a 
hardship for the individual filing th e petition, applicati on or complaint. 
§1-608.  Fees not established in statute 
Unless otherwise specifically stated in statute or in the Rules of Probate Procedure as published by the Supreme 
Judicial Court, the Probate Court shall charge the same fee as charged by the Di strict Court or the Superior Court for 
similar procedures. 
 
 
 
NONE  
PART 7. CHANGE OF NAME  
PART 7.  CHANGE OF NAME  
§1-701.  Petition to change name 
(a).    If a person desires to have that person's name changed, the person may petition the judge of probate in the 
county where the person resides.  If th e person is a minor, the person's legal custodian may petition in the person's 
behalf. 
(b).    The judge, after due notice, may change the name of the person.  To protect the person's safety, the judge may 
limit the notice required if the person show s by a preponderance of the evidence that: 
(1).    The person is a victim of abuse; and 
(2).    The person is currently in re asonable fear of the person's safety. 
(c).    The judge shall make and preser ve a record of the name change.  If the judge limited the notice required under 
subsection (b), the judge may seal the records of the name change. 
(d).    The fee for filing th e name change petition is $40. 
(e).    The judge may require the person seeking a name  change to undergo one or more of the following background 
checks:  a criminal history record chec k; a motor vehicle record check; or a credit check.  The judge may require the 
 
Page 23 of 253 person to pay the cost of each background check required. 
(f).    The judge may not change the name of the person if  the judge has reason to believe  that the person is seeking 
the name change for purposes of defrauding another person or  entity or for purposes othe rwise contrary to the public 
interest. 
 
 
 
NONE  
PART 8.  PROBATE AND TRUS T LAW ADVISORY COMMISSION
PROBATE AND TRUST LAW ADVISORY COMMISSION 
§1-801.  Commission established 
The Probate and Trust Law Advisory Commission, established in Title 5, section 12004-I, subsection 73-B and 
referred to in this Part as "the commission," is creat ed for the purpose of conducti ng a continuing study of the 
probate and trust laws of the State. 
1.  Membership.  The commission is composed of 10 member s who have experience in pr acticing probate and trust 
law or are knowledgeable about prob ate and trust law.  The membership of the commission must include: 
A.  Two Probate Court Judges, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court; 
B.  One Superior Court Justice, appointed by th e Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court; 
C.  Five members of the trusts and estates law section of the Maine State Bar Associ ation, appointed by the Chief 
Justice of the Suprem e Judicial Court; 
D.  One member representing the interests of older people, appointed by the Governor; and 
E.  The Attorney General, or the Attorney Gene ral's designee. 
2.  Terms.  A member is appointed for a term of 3 years and may be reappointed. 
3.  Vacancies.  In the event of the death or resignation of a member, the appointing authority under subsection 1 
shall appoint a qualified person for the remainder of the term. 
 
§1-802.  Consultants; experts 
Whenever it considers appropriate, th e commission shall seek the advice of consultants or experts, including 
representatives of the legislative and executive branches, in fields related to the commission's duties. 
 
§1-803.  Duties 
1.  Examine, evaluate and recommend.  The commission shall: 
A.  Examine this Title and Title 18-B and draft am endments that the commission considers advisable; 
B.  Evaluate the operation of this Title and Title 18 -B and recommend amendments based on the evaluation; 
C.  Examine current laws pertaining to probate and tr ust laws and recommend changes based on the examination; 
and 
 
Page 24 of 253 D.  Examine any other aspects of th e State's probate and trust laws, incl uding substantive, procedural and 
administrative matters, that the commission considers relevant. 
2.  Propose changes.  The commission may propose to the Legislature, at the st art of each session, changes in the 
probate and trust laws and in related provisions that the comm ission considers appropriate. 
 
§1-804.  Organization 
The Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court shall no tify all members of the commi ssion of the time and place of 
the first meeting of the commission. At that time the co mmission shall organize, elec t a chair, vice-chair and 
secretary-treasurer from its membership and adopt rule s governing the administration of the commission and its 
affairs. The commission shall maintain financ ial records as required by the State Auditor. 
§1-805.  Federal funds 
The commission may accept federal f unds on behalf of the State. 
 
 
 
2-101 
INTESTATE ESTATE 
(a)  Any part of a decedent’s estate not effectively di sposed of by will passes by intestate succession to the 
decedent’s heirs as prescribed in this Code , except as modified by the decedent’s will. 
(b)  A decedent by will may expressly exclude or limit the right of an individual or class to succeed to property 
of the decedent passing by in testate succession.  If that  individual or a member of that class survives the 
decedent, the share of the decedent’s intestate estate to  which that individual or class would have succeeded 
passes as if that individual or e ach member of that class had discla imed his (or her) intestate share. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Subparagraph (b) is new and makes clear that a decedent may by will 
exclude or limit the right of an individual or class to succeed to property passing by intestate succession. 
 
 
2-102 
SHARE OF SPOUSE 
The intestate share of a decedent’s surviving spouse is: 
(1) the entire intestate estate if: (A) no descendant or parent of the decedent survives the decedent; or 
(B) all of the decedent’s surviving descendants are also  descendants of the surviving spouse and there is no 
other descendant of the surviving spouse who survives the decedent; 
(2) the first $300,000, plus three-fourths of any balance of the intestate estate, if no descendant of the 
 
Page 25 of 253 decedent survives the decedent, but a pare nt of the decedent survives the decedent; 
(3) the first $225 $100,000, plus one-half of any balance of  the intestate estate, if  all of the decedent’s 
surviving descendants are also desce ndants of the surviving spouse and th e surviving spouse has one or more 
surviving descendants who are not descendants of the decedent; 
(4) If there are surviving issue one or  more of whom are not issue of the surviving spouse, ½ of the intestate 
estate.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section changes the amounts payable to a surviving spouse. 
 
 
2-103 
SHARE OF HEIRS OTHER THAN SURVIVING SPOUSE 
 (a) Any part of the intestate estate not passing to a decedent’s surviving spouse under Section 2-102, or the 
entire intestate estate if there is no surviving spouse, passes in the following  order to the individuals who survive 
the decedent: 
(1) to the decedent’s descendants by repres entation per capita at  each generation; 
(2) if there is no surviving descendant , to the decedent’s parents equally if  both survive, or to the surviving 
parent if only one survives; 
(3) if there is no surviving descendant or parent, to the descendants of the deceden t’s parents or either of 
them by representation per capita at each generation; 
(4) if there is no surviving descendant, parent, or des cendant of a parent, but th e decedent is survived on 
both the paternal and maternal side s by one or more grandparents or  descendants of grandparents:  
(A) half to the decedent’s paternal grandparents e qually if both survive, to the surviving paternal 
grandparent if only one survives, or to the descendants of the decedent’s paternal grandpare nts or either of them if 
both are deceased, the descendants taking by repr esentation per capita at each generation; and 
them if both are deceased, the des cendants taking by representation;  
(5) if there is no surviving descendant, parent, or desce ndant of a parent, but the de cedent is survived by one 
or more grandparents or descendants of  grandparents on the paternal but not th e maternal side, or on the maternal 
but not the paternal side, to the deced ent’s relatives on the side with one or  more surviving members in the manner 
described in paragraph (4). 
 (6) if there is no surviving issue, parent or issue of a pare nt, grandparent or issue of a grandparent, but the 
decedent is survived by one or more great-grandparents or issue of great-grandparents, ha lf of the estate passes to 
the paternal great-grandparents who surviv e, or to the issue of th e paternal great-grandparents if all are deceased, to 
be distributed per capita at each generation as defined in section 2-106; and the other half passes to the maternal 
relatives in the same manner, but if th ere is no surviving great-gr andparent or issue of a gr eat-grandparent on either 
the paternal or maternal side, the entire estate passes to  the relatives on the other side in the same manner as the 
 
Page 26 of 253 half. 
(b) If there is no taker under subsection (a), but the decedent has: 
(1) one deceased spouse who has one or more descenda nts who survive the decedent, the estate or part 
thereof passes to that spouse’s descendants  by representation per capita at each generation; or 
(2) more than one deceased spouse who has one or mo re descendants who survive the decedent, an equal 
share of the estate or part thereof pa sses to each set of descendants by re presentation per capita at each generation.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section was modified to add de scendants of a spouse as takers of 
last resort before an estate  escheats to the state.   
 
 
2-104 
REQUIREMENT OF SURVIV AL BY 120 HOURS;  INDIVIDUAL IN GESTATION 
(a)For purposes of intestate succession, homestead allowa nce, and exempt property, and except as otherwise provided 
in subsection (b), the following rules apply: 
(1)An individual born before a decedent’s death who fa ils to survive the deceden t by 120 hours is deemed to 
have predeceased the decedent.  If it is not established by clear and convi ncing evidence that an individual 
born before the decedent’s death survived the decedent by 120 hours, it is deemed that the individual failed to 
survive for the required period. (2)An individual in gestation at a decedent’s death is  deemed to be living at the decedent’s death if the 
individual lives 120 hours after birth.  If it is not established by clear and convi ncing evidence that an 
individual in gestation at the deceden t’s death lived 120 hours after birth, it is  deemed that the individual failed 
to survive for the required period. 
(b) [Section Inapplicable If Estate Would Pass to State .]  This section does not apply if its application would cause 
the estate to pass to the state under Section 2-105. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Section 2-104(a)(2) explicitly include s unborn individuals in gestation.  
Such individuals are deemed to be living as of the decedent ’s death if they live for 120 hours.  The issue of afterborn 
heirs was previously addressed in former MPC Section 2-108. 
 
 
2-105 
NO TAKER.  
If there is no taker under  the provisions of this [article], the intestate estate passes to the State. 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 253  
2-106 
REPRESENTATION—(PER CAPITA  AT EACH GENERATION) 
Section 2-106. Representation – Pe r Capita at Each Generation. 
 
(a)[Definitions.]   In this section: 
(1)"Deceased descendant," "deceased parent," or  "deceased grandparent" means a descendant, parent, 
or grandparent who either predeceased the decedent  or is deemed to have predeceased the decedent 
under Section 2-104. (2)"Surviving descendant" means a descendant who neither predeceased the decedent nor is deemed to have predeceased the de cedent under Section 2-104. 
(b)[Decedent's Descendants.]   If, under Section 2-103(1), a decedent's inte state estate or a part thereof passes "by 
representation"”per capita at each generati on” to the decedent's descendants, the es tate or part thereof is divided into 
as many equal shares as there are (i) surviving descendant s in the generation nearest to the decedent which contains 
one or more surviving descendants an d (ii) deceased descendants in the same generation who left surviving 
descendants, if any. Each surviving descendant in the near est generation is allocated one share. The remaining shares, 
if any, are combined and then divided in the same manner among the surviving descendants of the deceased 
descendants as if the surviving descendants who were allocated a share and their surviving descendants had 
predeceased the decedent. (c)[Descendants of Parents or Grandparents.]  If, under Section 2-103(3) or (4), a decedent's intestate estate or a 
part thereof passes "by representation "per capita at each generation to the descendants of the decedent's deceased 
parents or either of them or to the descendants of the d ecedent's deceased paternal or maternal grandparents or either 
of them, the estate or part thereof is divided into as ma ny equal shares as there are (i ) surviving descendants in the 
generation nearest the deceased parents or  either of them, or the deceased gr andparents or either of them, that 
contains one or more surviving descenda nts and  (ii) deceased de scendants in the same generation who left surviving 
descendants, if any. Each surviving descendant in the near est generation is allocated one share. The remaining shares, 
if any, are combined and then divided in the same manner among the surviving descendants of the deceased 
descendants as if the surviving descendants who were allocated a share and their surviving descendants had 
predeceased the decedent. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
2-107 
KINDRED OF HALF BLOOD 
Relatives of the half bloo d inherit the same share they would inhe rit if they were of the whole blood. 
 
Page 28 of 253  
 
 
2-108 
(Reserved) 
 
2-109 
ADVANCEMENTS 
(a) If an individual dies intestate as to all or a portion of his [or her] estate, propert y the decedent gave during the 
decedent’s lifetime to an individual who, at the decedent’s de ath, is an heir is treated as an advancement against the 
heir’s intestate share only if (i) th e decedent declared in a contemporane ous writing or the heir acknowledged in 
writing that the gift is an advancem ent of (ii) the decedent’s contemporan eous writing or the heir’s written 
acknowledgment otherwise indicates that  the gift is to be taken into ac count in computing the division and 
distribution of the deced ent’s intestate estate. 
(b) For purposes of subsection (a), property advanced is valued as of the time the heir came into possession or 
enjoyment of the property or as of the time of  the decedent’s death, whichever first occurs. 
(c) If the recipient of the property fail s to survive the decedent, the property is  not taken into account in computing 
the division and distribution of the decedent’s intestat e estate, unless the decedent’s contemporaneous writing 
provides otherwise. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
2-110 
DEBTS TO DECEDENT 
A debt owed to a decedent is not charged against the intestate share of any individual except  the debtor.  If the debtor 
fails to survive the decedent, the debt is not taken into account in computing the inte state share of the debtor’s 
descendants. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
2-111 
ALIENAGE. 
No individual is disqualified to take  as an heir because the individual or an individual  through whom he [or she] 
claims is or has been an alien. 
 
Page 29 of 253  
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
2-112 
DOWER AND CURTESY ABOLISHED 
The estates of dower and curtesy are abolished. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
2-113 
INDIVIDUALS RELATED TO DE CEDENT THROUGH TWO LINES 
An individual who is related to the d ecedent through two lines of relationship is  entitled to only a single share based 
on the relationship that would enti tle the individual to the larger share.  In  cases where such an heir would take equal 
shares, he shall be entitled to the equivalent of a single share.  The c ourt shall equitably apportion the amount 
equivalent in value to the share denied su ch heir by the provisi on of this section. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The last two sentences in the section were prev iously adopted under the 
MPC and are retained for clarity.  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
2-114 
PARENT BARRED FROM INHERITING 
(a)  A parent is barred from inheriting from or through a child of the parent if: 
  (1) The parent’s parental rights were terminated and the parent-child relationship was not  judicially reestablished; 
or   (2) The child died before reaching [18] years of age and there is clear and convinc ing evidence that immediately 
before the child’s death the parental right s of the parent could have been termin ated under law of this state other than 
this [code] on the basis of nonsupport, abandonment, abuse, neglect, or other actions or inactions of the parent 
toward the child. (b)  For the purpose of intestate succession from or through the deceased child, a pa rent who is barred from 
inheriting under this section is treated as if the parent predeceased the child. 
 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 253 Subpart 2.  Parent-Child Relationship 
SECTION 2-115.    
DEFINITIONS.   
(1) “Adoptee” means an indi vidual who is adopted. 
(2) “Assisted reproduction” means a method of causing pregnancy ot her than sexual intercourse. 
(3) “Divorce” includes an annulme nt, dissolution, and declaration of invalidity of a marriage. 
(4) “Functioned as a parent of the child” means behaving towa rd a child in a manner consistent with being the child’s 
parent and performing functions that are customarily  performed by a parent, including fulfilling parental 
responsibilities toward the child, re cognizing or holding out the child as the indi vidual’s child, materially 
participating in the child’s upbr inging, and residing with the child in the same household as a regular member of that 
household. (5) “Genetic father” means the man whose sperm fertilized th e egg of a child’s genetic mother.  If the father-child 
relationship is established under the pres umption of paternity under [insert appli cable state law], the term means only 
the man for whom that relationship is established. (6) “Genetic mother” means the woman whose egg was fe rtilized by the sperm of a child’s genetic father. 
(7) “Genetic parent” means a child’s genetic father or genetic mother. 
(8) “Incapacity” means the inability of an individual to f unction as a parent of a child because of the individual’s 
physical or mental condition. (9) “Relative” means a grandparent or  a descendant of a grandparent. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This subpart will treat children conceived through ARTs the same as 
children conceived through sexual intercourse.  This s ubpart is not intended  to change the pare nt-child relationship 
governed by Title 19. 
  
SECTION 2-116 .   
EFFECT OF PARENT-CHILD RELATIONSHIP 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 2-119(b) through (e), if a pa rent-child relationship ex ists or is established 
under this subpart or under [the Maine Parentage Act], the parent  is a parent of the child a nd the child is a child of the 
parent for the purpose of  intestate succession. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section will treat children conceived through ARTs the same as 
children conceived through sexual intercourse.  This section is not intended to change the parent-child relationship 
governed by Title 19. [This section in cludes a reference to the Maine Pare ntage Act as a non-uniform provision, 
which will result in an expanded opportunity for es tablishing a parent-child relationship.] [NOTE: THE 
BRACKETED LANGUAGE SHOULD BE INCLUDED IN  THE PROPOSED MAINE COMMENT ONLY IF 
 
Page 31 of 253 MAINE ENACTS THE MAINE PARENTAGE ACT] 
 
 
 
SECTION 2-117.    
NO DISTINCTION BASED ON  MARITAL STATUS.   
Except as otherwise provided in Sections 2-114, 2-119, 2-12 0, or 2-121, a parent-child re lationship exists between a 
child and the child’s genetic parents, re gardless of the parents’ marital status. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section is not intended to change the parent-child relationship 
governed by Title 19 
  
SECTION 2-118  
ADOPTEE AND ADOPTEE’S ADOPTIVE PARENT OR PARENTS. 
(a) A parent-child relationship exists between an a doptee and the adoptee’s adopt ive parent or parents. 
(b) For purposes of subsection (a): 
(1) an individual who is in the process of being adopted by a married couple when one of the spouses dies is treated 
as adopted by the deceased spouse if the adoption is subs equently granted to the deced ent’s surviving spouse; and 
(2) a child of a genetic parent who is in the process of  being adopted by a genetic pa rent’s spouse when the spouse 
dies is treated as adopted by the dece ased spouse if the genetic parent survives the deceased spouse by 120 hours. 
(c) If, after a parent-child relationshi p is established between a child of as sisted reproduction and a parent under 
Section 2-120 or between a gestational child and a parent under Section 2-121, th e child is in the process of being 
adopted by the parent’s spouse when that  spouse dies, the child is treated as adopted by the deceased spouse for the 
purpose of subsection (b)(2). 
 
   
SECTION 2-119 .   
ADOPTEE AND ADOPTEE’S GENETIC PARENTS . 
(a) Except as otherwise provide d in subsections (b) through (e ), a parent-child relationshi p does not exist between an 
adoptee and the adoptee’s genetic parents. (b) A parent-child relationship exists be tween an individual who is adopted by th e spouse of either genetic parent and: 
(1) the genetic parent whose s pouse adopted the individual; and 
(2) the other genetic parent, but only for the purpose of th e right of the adoptee or a de scendant of the adoptee to 
 
Page 32 of 253 inherit from or through th e other genetic parent. 
(c) A parent-child relationship exists between both genetic parents and an individual who is adopted by a relative of a 
genetic parent, or by the spouse or surviving spouse of a re lative of a genetic parent, but only for the purpose of the 
right of the adoptee or a descendant  of the adoptee to inherit from or through either genetic parent. 
(d) A parent-child relationship exists between both genetic parents and an individual who is  adopted after the death of 
both genetic parents, but only for the pur pose of the right of the adoptee or a de scendant of the adoptee to inherit 
through either genetic parent. (e) If, after a parent-child relationship is established between a child of assist ed reproduction and a parent or parents 
under Section 2-120 or between a gestati onal child and a parent or parents unde r Section 2-121, the child is adopted 
by another or others, the child’s pare nt or parents under Secti on 2-120 or 2-121 are treated as the child’s genetic 
parent or parents for the purpose of this section. (f) Regardless of whether a parent-child  relationship is established or not, an  adoptee shall inherit from his or her 
genetic parents if so provid ed in the adoption decree. 
 
 
 
SECTION 2-120 .   
CHILD CONCEIVED BY ASSISTED REPR ODUCTION OTHER THAN CHILD BORN TO 
GESTATIONAL CARRIER OR CHILD BORN TO SURROGATE. 
(a) In this section: (1) “Birth mother” means a woman, othe r than a gestational carri er or a Surrogate under Section 2-121, who gives 
birth to a child of assisted reproducti on.  The term is not limited to a woma n who is the child’s genetic mother. 
(2) “Child of assisted reproduction” means a child conceived by means of a ssisted reproduction by a woman other 
than a gestational carrier or  Surrogate under Section 2-121. 
(3) “Third-party donor” means an indivi dual who produces eggs or sperm used for assisted reproduction, whether or 
not for consideration.  The term does not include: (A) a husband who provides sperm, or a wi fe who provides eggs, that are used for assisted reproduction by the wife; 
(B) the birth mother of a child of assisted reproduction; or 
(C) an individual who has been determined under subsection (e) or (f) to have a parent-chi ld relationship with a child 
of assisted reproduction.  (b) A parent-child relationship does not exist between a child of assist ed reproduction and a third-party donor. 
 (c) A parent-child relationship exists  between a child of assisted reprodu ction and the child ’s birth mother. 
 (d) Except as otherwise provide d in subsections (i) and (j), a parent-chi ld relationship exists between a child of 
 
Page 33 of 253 assisted reproduction and the husband of the child’s birth mo ther if the husband provided  the sperm that the birth 
mother used during his lifetim e for assisted reproduction. 
(e) A birth certificate identifying an indi vidual other than the birth mother as the other parent of a child of assisted 
reproduction presumptively establishes a parent-child relationship between the ch ild and that individual. 
(f) Except as otherwise provided in subsections (g), (i), and (j), and unle ss a parent-child relationship is established 
under subsection (d) or (e), a parent-c hild relationship exists between a child of assisted reproduction and an 
individual other than the birt h mother who consented to assisted reproducti on by the birth mother with intent to be 
treated as the other parent of the child.  Consent to assisted reproduction by the birth mother with intent to be treated 
as the other parent of the child is established if the individual: 
(1) before or after the child’s birth, si gned a record that, considering all the facts and circumstances, evidences the 
individual’s consent; or (2) in the absence of a signe d record under paragraph (1): 
(A) functioned as a parent of the child no la ter than two years afte r the child’s birth; 
(B) intended to function as a parent of the child no later th an two years after the child’s birth but was prevented from 
carrying out that intent by death, inca pacity, or other circumstances; or  
(C) intended to be treated as a parent of a posthumously c onceived child, if th at intent is esta blished by clear and 
convincing evidence.   (f-1) A parent-child relationship is conclusively establishe d by a court order designating the parent or parents of a 
child of assisted reproduction. 
(g) For the purpose of subsection (f)(1), neither an individu al who signed a record more th an two years after the birth 
of the child, nor a relative of that indi vidual who is not also a relative of the birth mother, inherits from or through the 
child unless the individual functioned as a parent of the child before th e child reached [18] years of age. 
 (h) For the purpose of subsection ( f)(2), the following rules apply: 
(1) If the birth mother is married and no divorce proceed ing is pending, in the absen ce of clear and convincing 
evidence to the contrary, her spouse sa tisfies subsection (f)(2)(A) or (B). 
(2) If the birth mother is a surviving spouse and at he r deceased spouse’s death no divorce proceeding was pending, 
in the absence of clear  and convincing evidence to the contrary, her de ceased spouse satisfies subsection (f)(2)(B) or 
(C). (i) If a married couple is divorced before  placement of eggs, sperm, or embryos, a child resulting from the assisted 
reproduction is not a child of the birth mo ther’s former spouse, unless the former spouse consented in a record that if 
assisted reproduction were to occur after divorce, the child would be treated as the former spouse’s child. 
(j) If, in a record, an individual with draws consent to assisted reproduction be fore placement of eggs, sperm, or 
embryos, a child resulting from the assi sted reproduction is not a child of that individual, unl ess the individual 
subsequently satisfies subsection (f)   
(k) If, under this section, an individual is a parent of a child of assi sted reproduction who is conceived after the 
individual’s death, the child is  treated as in gestation at the individual’s death for purpo ses of Section 2-104(a)(2) if 
the child is: 
 
Page 34 of 253 (1) in utero not later than 36 months  after the individual’s death; or 
(2) born not later than 45 months after the individual’s death. 
 
 
 
SECTION 2-121 .   
CHILD BORN TO GESTATIONAL CARRIER .   
(a) In this section:   
(1) “Gestational agreement” means an enforceable or unenf orceable agreement for assisted reproduction in which a 
woman agrees to carry a child to birt h for an intended parent, intended pare nts, or an individual described in 
subsection (e).   (2) “Gestational carrier” means a woman w ho is not an intended parent who give s birth to a child under a gestational 
agreement (a) who has no genetic connection to the child an d (b) who is not an intended parent..  The term is not 
limited to a woman who is the child’s genetic mother.(3) “Gestational child” means a ch ild born to a gestational 
carrier under a gestational agreement. 
(4) “Intended parent” means an individua l who entered into a gestational agreem ent providing that th e individual will 
be the parent of a child born to a gest ational carrier by means of assisted repr oduction.  The term is not limited to an 
individual who has a genetic relationship with the child. 
(5)  “Surrogate” means a woman who gives birth to a ch ild under a Gestational Agre ement (a) who has a genetic 
connection to the child and (b) who is not an intended parent.  
(b) A parent-child relationship is conclu sively established by a court order de signating the parent or parents of a 
gestational child. (c) A parent-child relationship between a gestational child a nd the child’s gestational carri er does not ex ist unless the 
gestational carrier is designated as a parent of the child in a court order described in subsection (b). 
(c-1) A parent-child relationship betw een a Gestational child and the child’ s Surrogate does not exist unless the 
surrogate is  
(1) designated as a parent of the child in a court order described in subsection (b); or 
(2) the child’s genetic mother and a pa rent-child relationship doe s not exist under this sect ion with an individual 
other than the Surroga tegestational carrier. 
(d) In the absence of a court order under subsection (b), a parent-child re lationship exists between a gestational child 
and an intended parent who: (1) functioned as a parent of the child no late r than two years after the child’s birth; or 
(2) died while the gestational carrier  or surrogate was pregnant if:   
(A) there were two intended parents and the other intended parent functioned as  a parent of the child no later than 
two years after the child’s birth; (B) there were two intended parents, th e other intended parent also died while the gestational carrier  or surrogate was 
 
Page 35 of 253 pregnant, and a relative of  either deceased intended parent or the spous e or surviving spouse of a relative of either 
deceased intended parent functioned as a parent of the child  no later than two years af ter the child’s birth; or  
(C) there was no other intende d parent and a relative of or the spouse or surviving spouse of a relative of the 
deceased intended parent functioned as a parent of the ch ild no later than two year s after the child’s birth. 
(e) In the absence of a court order under subsection (b), a parent-child re lationship exists between a gestational child 
and an individual whose sperm or eggs were used after the individual’s death or  incapacity to co nceive a child under 
a gestational agreement entered into afte r the individual’s death or incapacity if  the individual intended to be treated 
as the parent of the child.  The i ndividual’s intent may be shown by: 
(1) a record signed by the individual wh ich considering all the facts and circ umstances evidences the individual’s 
intent; or  (2) other facts and circumstances establishing the i ndividual’s intent by clear and convincing evidence. 
(f) Except as otherwise provided in subs ection (g), and unless there is clear a nd convincing evidence of a contrary 
intent, an individual is deemed to have  intended to be treated as the parent  of a gestational child for purposes of 
subsection (e)(2) if: (1) the individual, before death or inca pacity, deposited the sperm or eggs th at were used to conceive the child; 
(2) when the individual deposited the sperm or eggs, the individual was married and no divorce proceeding was 
pending; and (3) the individual’s spouse or survivi ng spouse functioned as a parent of the child no later than two years after the 
child’s birth. (g) The presumption under subsection (f) does not apply if there is: 
(1) a court order under subsection (b); or 
(2) a signed record that sa tisfies subsection (e)(1). 
(h) If, under this section, an indi vidual is a parent of a gestational child w ho is conceived after the individual’s death, 
the child is treated as in gestation at the individual’s death for purposes of  Section 2-104(a)(2) if the child is: 
(1) in utero not later than 36 months  after the individual’s death; or 
(2) born not later than 45 months after the individual’s death. 
(i) This section does not affect law of this state other than this [code] regard ing the enforceability or validity of a 
gestational agreement. 
 
    
SECTION 2-122 .  RESERVED 
EQUITABLE ADOPTION. 
This [subpart] does not affect th e doctrine of e quitable adoption. 
 
Page 36 of 253  
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine has chosen not to  adopt UPC section 2-122 
 
 
2-201 
DEFINITIONS. In this [part]: 
(1) As used in sections other than Section 2-205, “decedent’s nonprobate transfers to others” means the 
amounts that are included in the au gmented estate under Section 2-205. 
(2) “Fractional interest in property held in joint tenanc y with the right of survivor ship,” whether the fractional 
interest is unilate rally severable or not, means th e fraction, the numerator of which is one and the denominator of 
which, if the decedent was a joint tenant, is one plus the number of joint tenants who su rvive the decedent and which, 
if the decedent was not a joint tenant , is the number of joint tenants. 
(3) “Marriage,” as it relates to a transfer by the decedent during marriage, means any marriage of the 
decedent to the decedent’s surviving spouse. 
(4) “Nonadverse party” means a person who does not have a substantial beneficial interest in the trust or 
other property arrangement that would be  adversely affected by the exercise or  nonexercise of the power that he [or 
she] possesses respecting the trust or other property ar rangement.  A person having a general power of appointment 
over property is deemed to have a be neficial interest in the property. 
(5) “Power” or “power of appointment” includes a pow er to designate the bene ficiary of a beneficiary 
designation. 
(6) “Presently exercisable general power of appointment” means a power of appointment under which, at the 
time in question, the decedent, whether or not he [or she] th en had the capacity to exercise  the power, held a power to 
create a present or future interest in hi mself [or herself], his [or her] creditors, his [or her] estate, or creditors of his 
[or her] estate, and includes a power to revoke or invade the principal of a trust or other property arrangement. 
(7) “Property” includes values subj ect to a beneficiary designation. 
(8) “Right to income” includes a right to payments unde r a commercial or private a nnuity, an annuity trust, a 
unitrust, or a similar arrangement. 
(9) “Transfer,” as it relates to a tran sfer by or of the decedent, includes: 
(A) an exercise or releas e of a presently exercisable general powe r of appointment held by the decedent,  
(B) a lapse at death of a presentl y exercisable general power of appoi ntment held by the decedent, and  
(C) an exercise, release, or lapse of a general power of appointment that the decedent created in himself [or 
herself] and of a power described in  Section 2-205(2)(B) that the deced ent conferred on a nonadverse party. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  The language does not constitute a substantive cha nge to Maine law.  
 
 
 
Page 37 of 253 2-202  
ELECTIVE SHARE. 
(a) [Elective-Share Amount.]  The surviving spouse of a decedent who dies domiciled in this state has a 
right of election, under the limita tions and conditions stated in  this [part], to take an elective share amount equal to 
50 percent of the value of the marital pr operty portion of the augmented estate. (b) [Supplemental Elective-Share 
Amount.]  If the sum of the amounts described in Sections 2- 207, 2-209(a)(1), and that pa rt of the elective-share 
amount payable from the decedent’s net probate estate a nd nonprobate transfers to others under Section 2-209(c) 
and (d) is less than [$75,000], the surviv ing spouse is entitled to  a supplemental elective- share amount equal to 
[$75,000], minus the sum of the amounts de scribed in those secti ons.  The supplemental elective-share amount is 
payable from the decedent’s net probate estate and from r ecipients of the decedent’s nonprobate transfers to others 
in the order of priority set fo rth in Section 2-209(c) and (d). 
(c) [Effect of Election on Statutory Benefits.] If the right of election is ex ercised by or on behalf of the 
surviving spouse, the surviving spouse’s homestead allowance, exempt property, and family allowance, if any, are 
not charged against but are in addition to the elective share and s upplemental share amounts. (d) [Non-
Domiciliary.]  The right, if any, of the surviv ing spouse of a decedent who dies dom iciled outside this state to take 
an elective share in property in this state is gove rned by the law of the decedent’s domicile at death. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The UPC redefines the elective sh are and introduces the additional 
supplemental elective-share amount.  Th e additional supplemental elective-share amount in UPC 2-202(b) is not 
adopted. 
  
2-203  
COMPOSITION OF THE AUGMENTED ESTA TE; MARITAL-PROPERTY PORTION. 
(a) Subject to Section 2-208, the value of the augmented estate, to the extent provided in Sections 2-204, 2-205, 
2-206, and 2-207, consists of the sum of th e values of all property, whether real or personal; movable or immovable, 
tangible or intangible, wherever situated, that constitute: 
(1) the decedent’s net probate estate; 
(2) the decedent’s nonproba te transfers to others; 
(3) the decedent’s nonprobate transf ers to the surviving spouse; and  
(4) the surviving spouse’s property and nonprobate transfers to others. 
 (b) The value of the marital-property portion of the augmen ted estate consists of the sum of the values of the 
four components of the augmented esta te as determined under subsection (a) multiplied by the following percentage: 
If the decedent and the spouse  
were married to each other: 
Less than 1 year  .................................................................................................. 3% 
 
Page 38 of 253 1 year but less than 2 years .................................................................................  6% 
2 years but less than 3 years  .............................................................................. 12% 3 years but less than 4 years  .............................................................................  18% 4 years but less than 5 years  .............................................................................  24% 5 years but less than 6 years  .............................................................................. 30% 6 years but less than 7 years  .............................................................................  36% 7 years but less than 8 years  .............................................................................  42% 8 years but less than 9 years  .............................................................................. 48% 9 years but less than 10 years  ...........................................................................  54% 10 years but less than 11 years  .......................................................................... 60% 11 years but less than 12 years  .........................................................................  68% 12 years but less than 13 years  .......................................................................... 76% 13 years but less than 14 years  .......................................................................... 84% 14 years but less than 15 years  .......................................................................... 92% 15 years or more  .............................................................................................. 100% 
       [Alternative Subsection (b) for Stat es Preferring a Deferred-Marital-Property System] 
 
 (b) The value of the marital-property portion of the augm ented estate equals the va lue of that portion of the 
augmented estate that would be marital property at the de cedent’s death under [the Mode l Marital Property Act] [copy 
in definition from Model Marital Proper ty Act, including the presumption that a ll property is marital property] [copy in 
other definition chosen by the enacting state]. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The UPC defines the values to be  considered in calculating the 
augmented estate with more clarity and specificity than the MPC.  The UPC app lies a partnership theo ry of marriage in 
calculating this marital propert y portion of the augmented estate which prevents inequitable results by taking in 
account the length of the marriage.   
  
2-204  
DECEDENT’S NET PROBATE ESTATE. 
The value of the augmented estate includes the value of  the decedent’s probate estate, reduced by funeral and 
administration expenses, homestead allowance, family allowances, exempt property, and enforceable claims. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
 
Page 39 of 253 2-205  
DECEDENT’S NONPROBATE TRANSFERS TO OTHERS.  
The value of the augmented estate includes the value of the decedent’s nonprobate transfers to others, not 
included under Section 2-204, of any of the following types, in the amount provi ded respectively for each type of 
transfer: 
(1) Property owned or owned in s ubstance by the decedent immediately be fore death that passed outside 
probate at the decedent’s death.  Property is included under this category only if it consists of any of the following 
types: 
(A) Property over which the decedent alone, immediately before death, held a presently exercisable general 
power of appointment.  The amount included is the value of  the property subject to the power, to the extent the 
property passed at the decedent’s death, by ex ercise, release, lapse, in default, or  otherwise, to or for the benefit of 
any person other than the decedent’s estate or surviving spouse. 
(B) The decedent’s fractional interest in property he ld by the decedent in joint tenancy with the right of 
survivorship.  The amount included is the value of the d ecedent’s fractional interest, to  the extent the fractional 
interest passed by right of survivorship at the decedent’s death to a surviving joint tena nt other than the decedent’s 
surviving spouse. 
(C) The decedent’s ownership intere st in property or accounts held in POD, TOD, or co-ownership 
registration with the righ t of survivorship.  The amount included is the value of the decedent’s ownership interest, to 
the extent the decedent’s ownership interest passed at the decedent’s death to or for th e benefit of any person other 
than the decedent’s estate or surviving spouse. 
(D) Proceeds of insurance, including accidental death be nefits, on the life of the decedent, if the decedent 
owned the insurance policy immediately before death or if and to the extent the decedent alone and immediately 
before death held a presently exercisa ble general power of appointment over th e policy or its proceeds.  The amount 
included is the value of the proceeds, to the extent they we re payable at the decedent’s death to or for the benefit of 
any person other than the decedent’s estate or surviving spouse. 
(2) Property transferred in any of the fo llowing forms by the decedent during marriage: 
(A) Any irrevocable transfer in which the decedent retained the right to  the possession or enjoyment of, or to 
the income from, the property if and to the extent th e decedent’s right terminated  at or continued beyond the 
decedent’s death.  The amount included is the value of th e fraction of the property to which the decedent’s right 
related, to the extent the fraction of th e property passed outside proba te to or for the benefit of any person other than 
the decedent’s estate or surviving spouse. 
(B) Any transfer in which the deced ent created a power over income or property, exercisable by the decedent 
alone or in conjunction with  any other person, or exercisable by a nonadve rse party, to or for the benefit of the 
decedent, creditors of the decedent, th e decedent’s estate, or creditors of th e decedent’s estate.  The amount included 
with respect to a power over property is the value of the property subject to  the power, and the amount included with 
respect to a power over income is the value of the propert y that produces or produced th e income, to the extent the 
power in either case was exercisable at the decedent’s de ath to or for the benefit of  any person other than the 
 
Page 40 of 253 decedent’s surviving spouse or to the extent the property pass ed at the decedent’s death, by exercise, release, lapse, in 
default, or otherwise, to or for the be nefit of any person other than the decedent ’s estate or surviving spouse.  If the 
power is a power over both income and property and the preceding sentence produces di fferent amounts, the amount 
included is the greater amount. 
(3) Property that passed during marriag e and during the two-year period ne xt preceding the decedent’s death 
as a result of a transfer by the decedent if th e transfer was of any of the following types: 
(A) Any property that passed as a resu lt of the termination of a right or interest in, or power over, property 
that would have been included in the a ugmented estate under paragraph (1) (A), (B ), or (C), or under paragraph (2), if 
the right, interest, or power had not terminated until the de cedent’s death.  The amount included is the value of the 
property that would have been included  under those paragraphs if the property  were valued at the time the right, 
interest, or power terminated, and is included only to the extent the property passed upon termination to or for the 
benefit of any person other than the decedent or the decedent’ s estate, spouse, or surviving spouse.  As used in this 
subparagraph, “termination,” with respect to a right or interest in property, occurs when  the right or interest 
terminated by the terms of the governing instrument or the decedent transferred or relinqui shed the right or interest, 
and, with respect to a power over propert y, occurs when the power terminated by ex ercise, release, lapse, default, or 
otherwise, but, with respect to a power described in paragraph (1)(A), “termination” occurs when the power 
terminated by exercise or release, but not otherwise. 
(B) Any transfer of or relating to an insurance policy  on the life of the decedent if the proceeds would have 
been included in the augmented estate under paragraph (1)(D)  had the transfer not occurred.  The amount included is 
the value of the insurance proceeds to the extent the proc eeds were payable at the decedent’s death to or for the 
benefit of any person other than the deced ent’s estate or surviving spouse.   
(C) Any transfer of property, to the extent not otherwise included in the augmented estate, made to or for the 
benefit of a person other than the decede nt’s surviving spouse.  The amount in cluded is the value of the transferred 
property to the extent the transfers to any one donee in either of the two year s exceeded 50 percent of  [$12,000] [the 
amount excludable from taxable gifts under 26 U.S.C. Sectio n 2503(b) [or its successor] on the date next preceding 
the date of the decedent’s death]. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments 
UPC § 2-205 changes Maine law in several respects.  Para graph 1 includes in the augmented estate any property of 
which the decedent could have become th e owner through the exercise of certain specific rights, regardless of who 
created those rights.  Under prior Maine law, such property would be in cluded in the augmented estate only if the 
decedent’s rights were retained in connection with a tr ansfer of the property made by the decedent during the 
marriage.  Paragraph 1 also closes a perceived loophole in the elective share st atute by including in the augmented 
estate proceeds of insurance on the life  of the decedent that are payable to so meone other than the surviving spouse.  
It also clarifies that Individual Retireme nt Accounts and qualified retirement a ssets payable to pers ons other than the 
surviving spouse are included in the gross estate.   
 
 
Page 41 of 253 Paragraph 2 expands the assets that would be included in the augmented es tate under prior law by including powers 
that are exercisable by a “nonadverse pa rty.” Prior law had include d only powers exercisable by the decedent “either 
alone or in conjunction with  any other person . . .”  
 Paragraph 3, subparagraph C increases the amount that is excluded from the augmented es tate to the excess over 50 
percent of the amount excludable from taxable gifts pur suant to 26 U.S.C. § 2503(b).  The exclusion amount had 
been $3,000 under prior law.   
  
2-206  
DECENDENT’S NONPROBATE TRANSF ERS TO THE SURVIVING SPOUSE.  
Excluding property passing to the surviv ing spouse under the federal Social Security system, the value of the 
augmented estate includes the value of the decedent’s nonprob ate transfers to the deceden t’s surviving spouse, which 
consist of all property that passed outs ide probate at the decedent’s death from  the decedent to the surviving spouse 
by reason of the decedent’s death, including: 
(1) the decedent’s fractional interest in property held as a joint tenant wi th the right of survivorship, to the 
extent that the decedent’s fractional interest passed to the surviving spouse as surviving joint tenant,  
(2) the decedent’s ownership interest in property or acc ounts held in co-ownership registration with the right 
of survivorship, to the extent the dece dent’s ownership interest passed to the surviving spouse as surviving co-owner, 
and  
(3) all other property that would have  been included in the augmented es tate under Section 2-205(1) or (2) 
had it passed to or for the benefit of a person other than the decedent’s spouse, surviving spouse, the decedent, or the 
decedent’s creditors, estate, or estate creditors. 
 
  
2-207  
SURVIVING SPOUSE’S PR OPERTY AND NONPROBATE TRANSFERS TO OTHERS.  
(a) [Included Property.] Except to th e extent included in the augmented estate under Section 2-204 or 2-206, 
the value of the augmented es tate includes the value of: 
(1) property that was owned by the decedent’s surviv ing spouse at the decedent’s death, including 
(A) the surviving spouse’s fractional interest in property held in joint tenancy with the right of survivorship, 
(B) the surviving spouse’s ownership in terest in property or ac counts held in co-ownership registration with 
the right of survivorship, and 
(C) property that passed to the surviving spouse by reason of the decedent’s death, but not including the 
spouse’s right to homestead allowance, family allowance,  exempt property, or paymen ts under the federal Social 
 
Page 42 of 253 Security system; and 
(2) property that would have been included in the surviving spouse’s nonp robate transfers to others, other 
than the spouse’s fractional and owners hip interests included under subsection (a )(1)(A) or (B), had the spouse been 
the decedent. 
(b) [Time of Valuation.] Property incl uded under this section is valued at the decedent’s death, taking the fact 
that the decedent predeceased the spouse  into account, but, for purposes of subs ection (a)(1)(A) and (B ), the values of 
the spouse’s fractional and ownership in terests are determined immediately before the decedent’s death if the 
decedent was then a joint tenant or a co-owner of the property or accounts .  For purposes of subsection (a)(2), 
proceeds of insurance that would have been included in the spouse’s nonprobate  transfers to others under Section 2-
205(1)(D) are not valued as if he [or she] were deceased. 
(c) [Reduction for Enforceable Claims.] The value of  property included under this section is reduced by 
enforceable claims against the surviving spouse. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  UPC § 2-207 modifies Maine law by including in the augmented estate 
all of the surviving spouse’s property, regardless of whethe r it was derived from the decedent.  Prior Maine law only 
included property owned by the surviving spouse at the deced ent’s death that was derived from the decedent.  Prior 
Maine law also included property transf erred by the surviving spouse during marri age that would have been included 
in the augmented estate had the surviv ing predeceased the decedent.  UPC § 2- 207 modifies this by including in the 
augmented estate any property that would have constitute d the surviving spouse’s nonprobate transfers to others 
applying the expanded rules under UPC§  2-205 had the surviving spouse been the decedent.   
 
 
2-208  
EXCLUSIONS, VALUATION, AND OVERLAPPING APPLICATION.  
(a) [Exclusions.] The value of any property is exclude d from the decedent’s nonprobate transfers to others: 
(1) to the extent the decedent re ceived adequate and full considerati on in money or money’s worth for a 
transfer of the property; or  
(2) if the property was transferred with the written joinder of, or if the transfer was consented to in writing 
before or after the transf er by, the surviving spouse. 
(b) [Valuation.] The value of property: (1) Included in the augmented estate under Section 2- 205, 2-206, or 2-207 is reduced in each category by 
enforceable claims against the included property; and 
 
disability compensation, death benefit or retirement plan, or any similar arrange ment, exclusive of the federal Social 
Security system(c) [Overlapping Application; No Double In clusion.] In case of overlappi ng application to the same 
property of the paragraphs or subparagraphs of Sec tion 2-205, 2-206, or 2-207, the pr operty is included in the 
 
Page 43 of 253 augmented estate under the provision yi elding the greatest value, and under only one overlapping provision if they all 
yield the same value. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Although the UPC provides that th e value of property includes the 
commuted value of present or future interests and amounts payable under trusts and various contractual 
arrangements, it provides no guidance in terms of valuing bene ficial interest in fully di scretionary trusts for which 
commuted values are not readily determinable.  In adop ting UPC 2-208(b), the MPC is modified to establish a 
rebuttable presumption that the value of a beneficial interest in a fu lly discretionary trust is 50 percent of the value of 
the trust assets.  This provision is similar to the presum ption under MPC 2-207(a) with re spect to the value of an 
electing spouse’s beneficial interest  in a life estate or trust.   
 
 
2-209  
SOURCES FROM WHICH ELECTI VE SHARE PAYABLE. 
(a) [Elective-Share Amount Only.] In a proceeding for an elective share, the following are applied first to 
satisfy the elective-share amount and to reduce or eliminate any contributions due  from the decedent’s probate estate 
and recipients of the decedent’s nonprobate transfer s to others:   
(1) amounts included in the augmented estate under Sect ion 2-204 which pass or have  passed to the surviving 
spouse by testate or intestate successi on and amounts included in the augmen ted estate under Section 2-206; and 
(2) the marital-property portion of  amounts included in the augmente d estate under Section 2-207.   
(b) [Marital Property Portion.] Th e marital-property portion under subs ection (a)(2) is computed by 
multiplying the value of the amounts included in the augmen ted estate under Section 2-207 by the percentage of the 
augmented estate set forth in the schedule in Section 2-203( b) appropriate to the length  of time the spouse and the 
decedent were married to each other. 
(c) [Unsatisfied Balance of Elective-Share Amoun t; Supplemental Elective-Shar e Amount.] If, after the 
application of subsection (a), the elective-share amount is not fully satisfie d, or the surviving spouse is entitled to a 
supplemental elective-share amount, amounts included in the d ecedent’s net probate estate, other than assets passing 
to the surviving spouse by testate or intestate succession, and in the decedent’s nonprobate transfers to others under 
Section 2-205(1), (2), and (3)(B ) are applied first to satisfy the unsatisfied  balance of the elective-share amount or the 
supplemental elective-share amount.  The decedent’s net probat e estate and that portion of the decedent’s nonprobate 
transfers to others are so applied that  liability for the unsatisfied balance of the elective-share amount or for the 
supplemental elective-share amount is apportioned among the r ecipients of the decedent’s net probate estate and of 
that portion of the decedent’s nonprobate transfers to others in proportion to the value of their interests therein. 
(d) [Unsatisfied Balance of Elective-Share and Supplemental Elective-Share Amounts.] If, after the 
application of subsections (a ) and (c), the elective- share or supplemental elective-shar e amount is not fully satisfied, 
the remaining portion of the decedent’s nonprobate transfers to others is so applied that liability for the unsatisfied 
 
Page 44 of 253 balance of the elective-share or supplemental elective- share amount is apportioned am ong the recipients of the 
remaining portion of the decedent’s nonprobate transfers to others in proportion to the value of their interests therein. 
(e) [Unsatisfied Balance Treated as General Pecuniary Devise.] The unsatis fied balance of the elective-share 
or supplemental elective-share amount as determined under subsection (c) or (d) is trea ted as a general pecuniary 
devise for purposes of Section 3-904. 
  
2-210 
PERSONAL LIABILITY OF RECIPIENTS. 
(a) Only original recipients of the decedent’s nonprobate transf ers to others, and the donees of the recipients 
of the decedent’s nonprobate transfers to others, to the extent  the donees have the property or its proceeds, are liable 
to make a proportional contribution towa rd satisfaction of the surviving s pouse’s elective-share or supplemental 
elective-share amount.  A person liable to make contributio n may choose to give up the proportional part of the 
decedent’s nonprobate transfers to him [or her] or to pay the value of the amount for wh ich he [or she] is liable. 
 
(b) If any section or part of any sect ion of this [part] is preempted by fe deral law with respect to a payment, 
an item of property, or any other benefit included in the decedent’s nonprobate transfers to others, a person who, not 
for value, receives the payment, item of property, or any ot her benefit is obligated to return the payment, item of 
property, or benefit, or is pe rsonally liable for the amount of the payment or the value of that item of property or 
benefit, as provided in Section 2-209, to  the person who would have been entitled to it were that section or part of 
that section not preempted.  
 
  
2-211 
PROCEEDING FOR ELECTIV E SHARE; TIME LIMIT. 
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b ), the surviving spouse or the surv iving spouse’s conservator or agent 
under authority of a power of attorney the election must be made must make the election by filing in the court and 
mailing or delivering to the personal repr esentative, if any, a petition for the elective shar e within nine months after 
the date of the decedent’s death, or within six months af ter the probate of the decedent’s will, whichever limitation 
later expires.  Notice The surviving s pouse must give notice of the time and pl ace set for hearing must be given to 
persons interested in the estate and to the distributees and recipients of portions of  the augmented estate whose 
interests will be adversely affected by the taking of the elective share.  Excep t as provided in subsection (b), the 
decedent’s nonprobate transfers to others  are not included within the augmente d estate for the purpose of computing 
the elective share, if th e petition is filed more than nine months after the decedent’s death.  
(b) Within nine months after the decedent’s death,  the surviving spouse may a petition the court for an 
 
Page 45 of 253 extension of time for making an election ma y be filed by the surviving spouse or the surviving spouse ’s conservator or 
agent under the authority of a power of a ttorney.  If, within nine months after the decedent’s deat h, the spouse gives 
notice is given of the petition to all persons interested in the decedent’s nonprobate transfers to others, the court for 
cause shown by the surviving spouse may extend the time for el ection.  If the court grants the spouse’s petition for an 
extension, the decedent’s nonprobate transfer s to others are not excluded from th e augmented estate for the purpose of 
computing the elective-share and supplemental elective-sh are amounts, if the spouse makes an election is made by 
filing in the court and maili ng or delivering to the personal representati ve, if any, a petition for the elective share 
within the time allowed by the extension. 
(c) The surviving spouse may withdraw  his [or her]A demand for an electiv e share may be withdrawn at any 
time before entry of a final determination by the court. 
(d) After notice and hearing, the c ourt shall determine the elective-share and supplemental elective-share 
amounts, and shall order its payment from the assets of the augmented estate or by contri bution as appears appropriate 
under Sections 2-209 and 2-210.  If it appears that a fund or  property included in the augmented estate has not come 
into the possession of the personal repres entative, or has been dist ributed by the personal representative, the court 
nevertheless shall fix the liability of any person who has any interest in th e fund or property or who has possession 
thereof, whether as trustee or otherwise.  The proceeding may be maintained against fewer than all persons against 
whom relief could be sought, but no pers on is subject to contribution in any gr eater amount than he [or she] would 
have been under Sections 2-209 and 2-210 had relief been secured against all persons subject to co ntribution. 
(e) An order or judgment of the court may be enforced as  necessary in suit for contri bution or payment in other 
courts of this state or other jurisdictions. 
  
2-212 
RIGHT OF ELECTION PERSONAL TO SURVIVING  SPOUSE; INCAPACITATED SURVIVING SPOUSE. 
(a) [Surviving Spouse Must Be Living at Time of Elec tion.] The right of election may be exercised only by a 
surviving spouse who is living when the pe tition for the elective share is filed in the court under Se ction 2-211(a).  If 
the election is not exercised by the surv iving spouse personally, it may be exerci sed on the surviving spouse’s behalf 
by his [or her] conservator, guardian, or agent under the authority of a power of attorney.   
 (b) [Incapacitated Surviving Spouse.] If the election is  exercised on behalf of a surviving spouse who is an 
incapacitated person, that por tion of the elective-share and supplemen tal elective-share amounts due from the 
decedent’s probate estate and recipients  of the decedent’s nonprobate transfer s to others under Section 2-209(c) and 
(d) must be placed in a custodial trust for the benefit of  the surviving spouse under the provisions of the [Enacting 
state] Uniform Custodial Trust Act, excep t as modified below.  For the purpos es of this subsection, an election on 
behalf of a surviving spouse by an agen t under a durable power of attorney is pr esumed to be on behalf of a surviving 
spouse who is an incapacitated person.  For purposes of the custodial trust established by this subsection, (i) the 
electing guardian, conservator, or agent is the custodial trustee, (ii) the surviving spouse is the benefi ciary, and (iii) the 
custodial trust is deemed to have been created by the d ecedent spouse by written transfer  that takes effect at the 
 
Page 46 of 253 decedent spouse’s death and that directs th e custodial trustee to administer the cu stodial trust as for an incapacitated 
beneficiary. 
(c) [Custodial Trust.] For the purpose s of subsection (b), the [Enacting state] Uniform Custodial Trust Act 
must be applied as if Section 6(b) ther eof were repealed and Sections 2(e), 9( b), and 17(a) were amended to read as 
follows: 
(1) Neither an incapacitated beneficiary nor anyone act ing on behalf of an incap acitated beneficiary has a 
power to terminate the custodial trust; but  if the beneficiary regain s capacity, the beneficiar y then acquires the power 
to terminate the custodial trust by delivering to the custodial  trustee a writing signed by the beneficiary declaring the 
termination.  If not previously termin ated, the custodial trust terminates on the death of the beneficiary.   
(2) If the beneficiary is incapacitated, the custodial trus tee shall expend so much or all of the custodial trust 
property as the custodial trustee consid ers advisable for the use and benefit of  the beneficiary and individuals who 
were supported by the beneficiary when the beneficiary be came incapacitated, or who ar e legally entitled to support 
by the beneficiary.  Expenditures may be made in the manne r, when, and to the extent that the custodial trustee 
determines suitable and proper, without court order but with regard to othe r support, income, and property of the 
beneficiary [exclusive of] [and ] benefits of medical or other forms of a ssistance from any state or federal government 
or governmental agency for which the benefici ary must qualify on the basis of need.   
(3) Upon the beneficiary’s death, the cu stodial trustee shall transfer the un expended custodial trust property, in 
the following order:  (i) under the residua ry clause, if any, of the will of the beneficiary’s predeceased spouse against 
whom the elective share was taken, as if th at predeceased spouse died immediately af ter the beneficiary; or (ii) to that 
predeceased spouse’s heirs under Section 2-711 of [this state’s]  Uniform Probate Code.   
 
[STATES THAT HAVE NOT ADOPTED THE UNIFO RM CUSTODIAL TRUST ACT SHOULD ADOPT THE 
FOLLOWING ALTERNATIVE USBSECTION (b) AND NOT ADOPT SUBSECTION (b) or (a) ABOVE]   
 
 (b) [Incapacitated Surviving Spouse.] If the election is  exercised on behalf of a surviving spouse who is an 
incapacitated person, the court must se t aside that portion of the elective-share and s upplemental elective-share 
amounts due from the decedent’s probate estate and recipients  of the decedent’s nonprobate transfers to others under 
Section 2-209(c) and (d) and mu st appoint a trustee to admini ster that property for the s upport of the surviving spouse.  
For the purposes of this subsection, an election on behalf of a surviving spous e by an agent under a durable power of 
attorney is presumed to be on behalf of a surviving spouse who is an incapacitate d person.  The trustee must 
administer the trust in accordance with the following terms and such additional terms as the court determines 
appropriate: 
 
(1) Expenditures of income and principal may be made in  the manner, when, and to the extent that the trustee 
determines suitable and proper for the surviving spouse’s support,  without court order but with regard to other 
support, income, and property of the surv iving spouse [exclusive o f] [and] benefits of medical or other forms of 
assistance from any state or federal g overnment or governmental agency for which the surviving spouse must qualify 
 
Page 47 of 253 on the basis of need.   
 
(2) During the surviving spouse’s incap acity, neither the surviving spouse nor anyone acting on behalf of the 
surviving spouse has a power to terminat e the trust; but if the surviving spous e regains capacity, th e surviving spouse 
then acquires the power to te rminate the trust and acquire full ownershi p of the trust property free of trust, by 
delivering to the trustee a writing signed by the surviving spouse declar ing the termination.   
 
(3) Upon the surviving spouse’s death, th e trustee shall transfer the unexpe nded trust property in the following 
order:  (i) under the residuary clause, if any, of the will of the predeceased s pouse against whom the elective share was 
taken, as if that predeceased spouse died immediately after the surviving spouse; or (ii) to the predeceased spouse’s 
heirs under Section 2-711.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section is revised in three significant respects.  First, it makes it 
clear that the right of election may be exercised only by or on behalf of a livi ng surviving spouse.  Second, the election 
can be pursued on behalf of the surviving spouse by the spous e’s conservator or agent.  In any case, the surviving 
spouse must be alive when the election is made and cannot  be pursued on behalf of a decedent.  Third, it treats 
incapacitated spouses the same as spouses  with capacity.  Previously, if spous e was incapacitated, the court exercised 
the share on behalf of the in capacitated spouse only after a ju dicial proceeding to determine the necessity of the share 
for the incapacitated spouse’s life expectancy.  A spouse with capacity was able to elect regardless of need. 
 Treating incapacitated spouses the same as spouses with capacity is a deviation from  the Uniform Probate Code 
(1990) which provides that the incapacitated spouse’s share is to be distributed to a custodial trust for the surviving 
spouse’s life, the remainder beneficiaries of which are th e predeceased spouse’s residuary devisees or heirs.    
 Eliminating the disparate treatment between incapacitated spous es and spouses with capacity  is consistent with the 
revised elective share law which attempts to more clos ely align the amounts that a spouse receives upon divorce to 
that which the spouse receives upon death.  Under this partnership theory of marri age, which forms the basis of much 
of the revisions to elective share law, an incapacitated spouse in a divorce proceeding does not receive less of an 
equitable distribution solely due to the incapacity.  This se ction therefore applies the pa rtnership theory of marriage 
equitably to all surviving spouses. 
  
2-213 
WAIVER OF RIGHT TO ELECT  AND OF OTHER RIGHTS. 
 (a) The right of election of  a surviving spouse and the rights of the surviving spouse to homestead allowance, 
exempt property, and family allowance, or any of them, may be waived, wholly or partially, before or after marriage, 
 
Page 48 of 253 by a written contract, agreem ent, or waiver signed by the surviving spouse.   
(b) A surviving spouse’s waiver is not enforceable if the surviving spouse proves that: (1) he [or she] did not execute  the waiver voluntarily; or  
(2) the waiver was unconscionable when it was executed and, before execution of the waiver, he or she:   
(A) was not provided a fair and reasonab le disclosure of the property or fina ncial obligations of  the decedent;  
(B) did not voluntarily and e xpressly waive, in writing, any right to disclosure of the property or financial 
obligations of the decedent beyond the disclosure provided; and  
(C) did not have, or reasonably coul d not have had, an adequate knowledge of the property or financial 
obligations of the decedent.   
(c) An issue of unconscionability of a waiver is for decision by the court as a matter of law. 
(d) Unless it provides to the contrary, a waiver of “all rights,” or equivalent language, in the property or estate 
of a present or prospective spouse or a complete property se ttlement entered into after or in anticipation of separation 
or divorce is a waiver of all rights of  elective share, homestead allowance, exempt property, and family allowance by 
each spouse in the property of the other and a renunciation by each of all benefits that w ould otherwise pass to him [or 
her] from the other by intestate succession or by virtue of a ny will executed before the waiver or property settlement. 
 
 
 
2-214  
PROTECTION OF PAYORS AN D OTHER THIRD PARTIES.  
(a) Although under Section 2-205 a paymen t, item of property, or other bene fit is included in the decedent’s 
nonprobate transfers to others, a payor or other third party is not li able for having made a pa yment or transferred an 
item of property or other benefit to a beneficiary designated in a governing in strument, or for having taken any other 
action in good faith reliance on the valid ity of a governing instrument, upon re quest and satisfactory proof of the 
decedent’s death, before the payor or other third party rece ived written notice from the surviving spouse or spouse’s 
representative of an intention to file a petition for the elec tive or that a petition for the elective share has been filed.  A  
payor or other third party is liable fo r payments made or other actions take n after the payor or other third party 
received written notice that  a petition for the electiv e share has been filed. 
 (b) A written notice of intention to file a petition for th e elective share or that a petition for the elective share 
has been filed must be mailed to the pa yor’s or other third party’s main office or home by registered or certified mail, 
return receipt requested, or served upon the payor or other third pa rty in the same manner as a summons in a civil 
action. Upon receipt of written notice of intention to file a petition for the el ective share or that  a petition for the 
elective share has been filed, a payor or other third party may pay any amount owed  or transfer or deposit any item of 
property held by it to or with the court having jurisdiction of  the probate proceedings relating to the decedent’s estate, 
or if no proceedings have been commenced, to or with the court having jurisdiction of pr obate proceedings relating to 
 
Page 49 of 253 decedents’ estates located in the county of the decedent’s residence.  The court shall hold the funds or item of 
property, and, upon its determination unde r Section 2-211(d), shall order dis bursement in accordance with the 
determination.  If no petition is filed in the court within the specified time  under Section 2-211(a) or, if filed, the 
demand for an elective share is withdraw n under Section 2-211(c), th e court shall order disbursement to the designated 
beneficiary.  Payments or transfers to the court or deposits made into court di scharge the payor or  other third party 
from all claims for amounts so paid or the value of property so tr ansferred or deposited. 
 (c) Upon petition to the probate court by the beneficiary designated in a governing instrument, the court may 
order that all or part of the property be  paid to the beneficiary in an amount a nd subject to conditions consistent with 
this [part]. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section is new, with no pr evious counterpart in the MPC. 
 
 
2-301 
ENTITLEMENT OF SPOUSE; PREMARITAL WILL. 
 (a) If a testator’s surviving spous e married the testator after the test ator executed his [or her] will, the 
surviving spouse is entitled to receive, as an intestate share, no less than the value of the share of the estate he [or she] 
would have received if the testator had di ed intestate as to that portion of the testator’s estate, if any, that neither is 
devised to a child of the testator who was born before the testator married the surviving spouse and who is not a child 
of the surviving spouse nor is devised to a descendant of such a child or passes under Sec tions 2-603 or 2-604 to such 
a child or to a descendant of such a child, unless: 
(1) it appears from the will or other evidence that the wi ll was made in contemplation of the testator’s marriage 
to the surviving spouse;  
(2) the will expresses the intention that it is to be effective notwithstanding any subsequent marriage; or  
(3) the testator provided for the spouse by transfer outside th e will and the intent that the transfer be in lieu of a 
testamentary provision is shown by the test ator’s statements or is reasonably infe rred from the amount of the transfer 
or other evidence.   
(b) In satisfying the share provided by this section, devises made by the will to the testator’s surviving spouse, 
if any, are applied first, and other devi ses, other than a devise to a child of  the testator who was born before the 
testator married the surviving spouse and who is not a child of the surviving spouse or a devise or substitute gift under 
Sections 2-603 or 2-604 to a descendant of su ch a child, abate as pr ovided in Section 3-902. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change in Maine law. 
 
 
 
Page 50 of 253 2-302 
OMITTED CHILDREN. 
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), if a testator fail s to provide in his [or her] will for any of his [or her] 
children born or adopted after the executi on of the will, the omitted after-born or after-adopted child receives a share 
in the estate as follows: 
(1) If the testator had no child living when he [or she] executed the will, an omitted after-born or after-adopted 
child receives a share in the estate equal in value to that  which the child would have r eceived had the testator died 
intestate, unless the will devised all or substantially all of the estate to the other parent  of the omitted child and that 
other parent survives the testator and is entitled to take under the will.   
(2) If the testator had one or more children living when  he [or she] executed the will, and the will devised 
property or an interest in property to  one or more of the then-living child ren, an omitted after-b orn or after-adopted 
child is entitled to share in the testator’s estate as follows:   
(A) The portion of the testator’s estate in which the omitte d after-born or after-adopted child is entitled to share is 
limited to devises made to the testator’s  then-living childre n under the will.   
(B) The omitted after-born or after-adopted child is entitl ed to receive the share of the testator’s estate, as 
limited in subparagraph (A), that the child would have re ceived had the testator included all omitted after-born and 
after-adopted children with the children to whom devises were made  under the will and had gi ven an equal share of 
the estate to each child.   
(C) To the extent feasible, the interest granted an omitted after-born or after-adop ted child under this section 
must be of the same character, whether equi table or legal, present or future, as th at devised to the te stator’s then-living 
children under the will.   
(D) In satisfying a share provided by th is paragraph, devises to the testat or’s children who were living when 
the will was executed abate ratably.  In abating the devises of the then-living children, the court shall preserve to the 
maximum extent possible the character of the te stamentary plan adopted by the testator.   
(b) Neither subsection (a)(1) nor subsection (a)(2) applies if: 
(1) it appears from the will that the omission was intentional; or  
(2) the testator provided for the omitted after-born or af ter-adopted child by transfer outside the will and the 
intent that the transfer be in lieu of a testamentary pr ovision is shown by the testator’s  statements or is reasonably 
inferred from the amount of the transfer or other evidence.   
(c) If at the time of execution of the will the testator fa ils to provide in his or her- will for a living child solely 
because he [or she] believes the child to be dead, the child is entitled to share in the esta te as if the child were an 
omitted after-born or after-adopted child.   
(d) In satisfying a share provided by subsection (a)(1 ), devises made by the will abate under Section 3-902.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
 
Page 51 of 253 2-401  
APPLICABLE LAW  
This part applies to the estate of the decedent who dies domic iled in this state. Rights to homestead allowance, exempt 
property, and family allowance for a decedent who dies not domiciled in this state are governed by the law of the 
decedent’s domicile at death. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
2-402  
HOMESTEAD ALLOWANCE 
A decedent’s surviving spouse is entitled to a homestead allowance of $22,500. If there is no surviving spouse, each 
minor child and each dependent child of the decedent is entitled to a homestead allowance amounting to $22,500 
divided by the number of minor and de pendent children of the decedent. The homestead allowance is exempt from 
and has priority over all claims against the estate. Home stead allowance is in addition to any share passing to the 
surviving spouse or minor or dependent child by the will of the decedent, unless otherwise provided, by intestate 
succession, or by way of elective share. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  This section increases the homestead allowance to $22,500 from the 
previous $10,000.  The homestead allowan ce is subject to cost of  living adjustments as provided in section 1-109. 
 
 
2-403  
EXEMPT PROPERTY 
In addition to the homestead allowance, the decedent’s surviving spouse is enti tled from the estate to a value, not 
exceeding $15,000 in excess of any security interests ther ein, in household furniture, automobiles, furnishings, 
appliances, and personal effects. If ther e is no surviving spouse, the decedent's children are entitled jo intly to the same 
value. However, the decedent, by will, may exclude one or mo re adult children from the receipt of exempt property. If 
encumbered chattels are selected and the value in excess of security interests, plus that  of other exempt property, is 
less than $15,000, or if there is  not $15,000 worth of exempt property in the estate, the spouse or children are entitled 
to other assets of the estate, if any, to the extent necessary to make up the $15,000 va lue. Rights to exempt property 
and assets needed to make up a deficiency of exempt propert y have priority over all claims  against the estate, but the 
right to any assets to make out a de ficiency of exempt property abates as  necessary to permit earlier payment of 
homestead allowance and family allowance. These rights are in addition to any benef it or share passing to the 
surviving spouse or children by the deced ent’s will, unless otherwise provided, by intestate succession, or by way of 
elective share. 
 
Page 52 of 253  
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  This section increases exempt pr operty to $15,000 from the previous 
$7,000.  Exempt property is subject to cost of living adju stments as provided in section 1-109.  The section now 
provides a specific listing of th e types of property available to satisfy the exempt property entitlement, in lieu of 
referencing Title 14, section 4421 et seq. The section has been  modified to permit the decedent, by will, to exclude 
one or more adult children from the receipt of exempt property. 
 
 
2-404  
FAMILY ALLOWANCE 
(a) In addition to the right to homes tead allowance and exempt property, th e decedent’s surviving spouse and minor 
children whom the decedent was obligated  to support and children who were in fact being supported by the decedent 
are entitled to a reasonable allowanc e in money out of the estate for their maintenance during the period of 
administration, which allowance may not c ontinue for longer than one year if the estate is inadequate to discharge 
allowed claims. The allowance may be paid  as a lump sum or in periodic installm ents. It is payable to the surviving 
spouse, if living, for the use of the surviving spouse and mi nor and dependent children; ot herwise to the children, or 
persons having their care and custody. If a minor child or dependent child is not living with the surviving spouse, the 
allowance may be made partially to the child or his [o r her] guardian or other pers on having the child's care and 
custody, and partially to the spouse, as their needs may appear . The family allowance is exempt from and has priority 
over all claims except the homestead allowance.  (b) The family allowance is not chargeab le against any benefit or share passing to the surviving spouse or children by 
the will of the decedent, unless otherwise provided, by intest ate succession, or by way of elective share. The death of 
any person entitled to family allowance termin ates the right to allowances not yet paid. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  The language does not constitute a substantive change  to Maine law. 
 
 
2-405  
Source, Determination, and Documentation. 
If the estate is otherwise sufficient, property specifically devised may not be  used to satisfy rights to homestead 
allowance or exempt property. Subject to this restriction, the surviving sp ouse, guardians of minor children, or 
children who are adults may select prope rty of the estate as homestead allo wance and exempt property. The personal 
representative may make those selections if the surviving spouse, the chil dren, or the guardians of the minor children 
are unable or fail to do so within a reasonable time or there is no guard ian of a minor child. The personal 
representative may execute an instrument  or deed of distribution to establis h the ownership of property taken as 
 
Page 53 of 253 homestead allowance or exempt propert y. The personal representative may determine the family allowance in a lump 
sum not exceeding $27,000 or periodic installments not ex ceeding $2,250 per month for one year, and may disperse 
funds of the estate in payment of the family allowance a nd any part of the homestead allowance payable in cash. The 
personal representative or an intere sted person aggrieved by any selection, determination, payment, proposed 
payment, or failure to act under this s ection may petition the court for appropria te relief, which may include a family 
allowance other than that which the persona l representative determined or could have  determined.(b)  If the right to an 
elective share is exercised on behalf of a surviving spouse who is an in capacitated person, the personal representative 
may add any unexpended portions payable under the homestead allowance, exempt property, and family allowance to 
the trust established und er section 2-212 (b). 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  Maine’s adoption of section 2-405 re presents a deviation from the UPC 
by eliminating the discretion of the pe rsonal representative to add any unexpended por tions payable under the 
homestead allowance, exempt property, and family allowanc e to a custodial trust established under section 2-212(b).  
Maine has chosen not to treat an incapacitated surviving sp ouse different from a surviving spouse with capacity for 
purposes of the elective share and theref ore has not adopted section 2-212(b) of the UPC.  See Maine Comment to 
section 2-212.  This same concept is applied in this section 2-405 to amounts payable under the home stead allowance, 
exempt property and family allowance, with no distinc tion made between a survivi ng incapacitated spouse and a 
surviving spouse with capacity.     This section increases the family allowance to a lump sum not exceeding $27,000 from the previous $12,000, and 
increases periodic installments to an amount not exceed ing $2,250 per month from the previous $1,000.  The family 
allowance is subject to cost of living adjustments as provided in section 1-109. 
 
 
2-501 
WHO MAY MAKE A WILL 
SECTION 2-501.  WHO MAY MAKE A WILL.  An individual of sound mind. who is 18 or more years of age or a 
legally emancipated minor, who is  of sound mind may make a will.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  This section has been modified to ma ke it clear that a legally emancipated 
minor under the age of 18 may make a will. 
  
2-502 
EXECUTION; WITNESSED OR NOTARIZED WILLS; HOLOGRAPHIC WILLS 
SECTION 2-502.  EXECUTION; WITNESSED OR NOTARIZED WILLS; HOLOGRAPHIC WILLS. 
 
Page 54 of 253 (a) [Witnessed or Notarized Wills.] Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) and in Sections 2-506, and 
2-513, a will must be:   
(1) in writing; (2) signed by the testator or in the testator’s name by some other individual  in the testator’s conscious presence 
and by the testator’s direction; and 
(3) either:   
(A) signed by at least two individu als, each of whom signed within a reasonable time after the individual 
witnessed either the signing of the wi ll as described in paragraph (2) or the testator’s acknowledgment of that 
signature or acknowledgement of the will; or 
(B) acknowledged by the testator before a notary public  or other individual aut horized by law to take 
acknowledgements. 
(b) [Holographic Wills.] A will that does not comply with  subsection (a) is valid as a holographic will, whether 
or not witnessed, if the si gnature and material portions of the docum ent are in the testator’s handwriting. 
(c) [Extrinsic Evidence.] Intent that a document constitu te the testator’s will can be established by extrinsic 
evidence, including, for holographic wills , portions of the document that are not in the testator’s handwriting.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  This section does not adopt the UPC’s alternative method of will 
execution of acknowledgement by a notary in lieu of executi on by two witnesses.  The se ction adopts the “conscious 
presence” test of the UPC.  Under the “conscious presence” test, a signing is su fficient if it was done within the range 
of the testator’s senses such as hearing; the signing need  not have occurred within th e testator’s line of sight. 
The Maine Supreme Judicial Court held in In Re Esta te of Gonzalez 855 A.2d 1146 2004 ME 109 (Me. 2004) that a 
pre-printed form filled in with the testator’s  handwriting can qualify as a holographic will.  
 The section departs from the UPC by not referencing the harmless error standard of the UPC, which standard is not 
adopted in Maine.  
 
 
2-503 
HARMLESS ERROR 
SECTION 2-503.  RESERV EDHARMLESS ERROR.  Although a document or writing added upon a document 
was not executed in compliance with S ection 2-502, the document or writing is trea ted as if it had been executed in 
compliance with that section if the proponent of the documen t or writing establishes by clear and convincing evidence 
that the decedent intended the doc ument or writing to constitute: 
(1) the decedent’s will,  
(2) a partial or complete revocation of the will,  
(3) an addition to or an alteration of the will, or  
 
Page 55 of 253 (4) a partial or complete revival of  his [or her] formerly revoked will or of a formerly revoked portion of the 
will. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  Maine has chosen not to adopt UPC §2-503. 
 
 
2-504 
SELF-PROVED WILL 
SECTION 2-504.  SE LF-PROVED WILL. 
 
(a) A will that is executed with atte sting witnesses may be simultaneously executed, attested, and made self-
proved, by acknowledgment thereof by the testator and affidav its of the witnesses, each made before an officer 
authorized to administer oaths under the laws of the stat e in which execution occurs a nd evidenced by the officer’s 
certificate, under official seal, in  substantially the following form: 
I, _______________, the testator, sign my name to this  
instrument this _____ day of ______________, ______, and being first duly sworn, do hereby declare to the 
undersigned authority that I sign and execute this instrument as  my will and that I sign it wi llingly (or willingly direct 
another to sign for me), that I execute it as my free and voluntary act for th e purposes therein expressed, and that I am 
[18] years of age or older or am a legally emanci pated minor, of sound mind, and under no constraint or undue 
influence. 
 
_______________________  
Testator 
 We, _____________, ______________, the witnesses, sign            
our names to this instrument, being first duly sworn, a nd do hereby declare to the und ersigned authority that the 
testator signs and executes this instrument as (his)(her) will and that (he)(she) signeds it willingly (or willingly 
directeds another to sign for (hims)(her)), and that each of us, in the presence and hearing of the testator, hereby signs 
this will as witness to the te stator’s signing, and that to the best of our knowledge the testat or is [18] years of age or 
older or is a legally emancipate d minor, of sound mind, and under no co nstraint or undue influence. 
________________________ 
Witness 
________________________  
Witness 
 
State of __________ 
 
Page 56 of 253  
County of __________ 
 Subscribed, sworn to and acknowledged before me by ____ __, the testator, and subscribed and sworn to before 
me by ______, and ______, witness, this ______ day of ______. 
 
(Seal)   ___________________________________ 
(Signed)  ___________________________________ 
(Official capacity of officer) 
 (b) A will that is executed with attest ing witnesses may be made self-proved at any time after its execution by 
the acknowledgment thereof by the testator and the affidavits of  the witnesses, each made before an officer authorized 
to administer oaths under the laws of  the state in which the acknowledgment occurs and ev idenced by the officer’s 
certificate, under official seal, attached or anne xed to the will in substantially the following form: 
 
The State of __________ 
 County of __________ 
 We, _____________, ___________, and _____________,  
the testator and the witnesses, respect ively, whose names are signed to the a ttached or foregoing instrument, being 
first duly sworn, do hereby declare to the undersigned authority that the testator signed and executed the instrument as 
the testator’s will and that (he)(she) had signed willingly (or willingly directed another to sign for (him)(her)), that 
(he)(she) executed it as (his)(her) free  and voluntary act for the purposes ther ein expressed, and that each of the 
witnesses, in the presence and hearing of the testator, signed the will as witn ess and that to the best of (his)(her) 
knowledge the testator was at that time [18] years of age or older or was a legally emancipated minor, of sound mind, 
and under no constraint  or undue influence. 
________________________  
Testator 
 
________________________  
Witness 
 
________________________  
Witness 
 
Subscribed, sworn to and acknowledged before me by ____ __, the testator, and subscribed and sworn to before 
 
Page 57 of 253 me by ______, and ______, witnesses, this ______ day of ______. 
 
(Seal)     ___________________________________ 
(Signed)     ___________________________________ 
(Official capacity of officer) 
(a) Any will may be simultaneously ex ecuted, attested, and made self-proved, by acknowledgment thereof by the 
testator and affidavits of th e witnesses, each made before an officer auth orized to administer oaths under the laws of 
the state where execution occurs and evidenced by the o fficer's certificate in substantially the following form: 
I, ..........................., the testator, on this .......... day of .........., 20.., being first duly sworn, do hereby dec lare to the 
undersigned authority that I sign and execute this instrument as my last will and that I sign it willingly (or willingly 
direct another to sign for me), as my fr ee and voluntary act and that I am eighteen years of age or older or am a legally 
emancipated minor, of sound mind, and unde r no constraint or undue influence. 
 ...................................................................  
 Testator  
We, ..........................................., ................................................. the witnesses, being first d uly sworn, do hereby 
declare to the undersigned authority that the testator has sign ed and executed this instrument  as (his)(her) last will and 
that (he)(she) signed it willingly (or w illingly directed another to sign for (him )(her)), and that each of us, in the 
presence and hearing of the te stator, signs this will as witness to the test ator's signing, and that to the best of our 
knowledge the testator is eighteen years of age or older or is a legally emancipated minor, of sound mind and under no 
constraint or undue influence. 
 ...................................................................  
 Witness  
 ...................................................................  
 Witness  
The State of ............................... 
County of ................................... 
Subscribed, sworn to and acknowledged before me by .............., the testator and s ubscribed and sworn to before me by 
.............., and ..................., witnesses, this ........ day of .......... 
 (Signed) ..........................................................  
 ...................................................................  
 (Official capacity of officer)  
(b) An attested will may at any time subsequent to its execution be made self-proved by the acknowledgment thereof 
by the testator and the affidavits of the witnesses, each made before an officer au thorized to administer oaths under the 
laws of the state where the acknowledgment occurs and evid enced by the officer's certificate, attached or annexed to 
 
Page 58 of 253 the will in substantially the following form: 
The State of .................................... 
County of ........................................ 
We, ......................................, ........................................., and .................................... .., the testator and the witnesses, 
respectively, whose names are signed to the attached or foregoing instru ment, being first duly sworn, do hereby 
declare to the undersigned authority that the testator signed and execu ted the instrument as (his )(her) last will and that 
(he)(she) had signed willingly (or willingly directed another to sign for (him)(her)), as (his)(her) free and voluntary 
act, and that each of the witnesse s, in the presence and hearing of the testator , signed the will as witness and that to the 
best of (his)(her) knowledge the testator was at that time eighteen years of age or older or was a legally emancipated 
minor, of sound mind and under no c onstraint or undue influence. 
 ...................................................................  
 Testator  
 ...................................................................  
 Witness  
 ...................................................................  
 Witness  
Subscribed, sworn to and acknowledged before me by ..........................., the testator, and s ubscribed and sworn to 
before me by ......................., and ....................., witn esses, this ......... day of ................. 
(Signed) ..........................................................  
 (Official capacity of officer)  
 
(c) A signature affixed to a self-proving affidavit attached to a will is considered a si gnature affixed to the will, 
if necessary to prove the will’s due execution.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  The section modifies the previous Ma ine statute in three respects: it adds 
references where appropriate to a legally emancipated mi nor, adds male/female gender options where appropriate to 
update the single male pronoun, and deletes refere nces to a notary seal as unnecessary.   
 The section adopts a new paragraph (c) from the UPC to make  clear that it is not necessa ry for a testator, who is 
simultaneously self-proving his/her will, to sign the will twic e - - once on the will itself, and again on the self-proving 
provisions.  A single signature by the testator, on the self-pr oving provisions, is sufficient. 
 
 
2-505 
 
Page 59 of 253 WHO MAY WITNESS A WILL 
SECTION 2-505.  WH O MAY WITNESS. 
(a) An individual generally competent to be a witness may act as a witness to a will. 
(b) The signing of a will by an interested witne ss does not invalidate the will or any provision of it.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
2-506 
CHOICE OF LAW AS TO EXECUTION 
SECTION 2-506.  CHOICE OF LAW AS TO EXECUTION.   
 
A written will is valid if executed in co mpliance with Section 2-502 or 2-503 or if its execution complies with the law 
at the time of execution of th e place where the will is executed, or of th e law of the place where at the time of 
execution or at the time of death the test ator is domiciled, has a place of abode, or is a national or if executed in 
compliance with 10 United States Code, Section 1044d.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  The language does not constitute a subs tantive change to Maine law.  The 
omission of a reference to section 2- 503 is a result of Maine’s former hol ographic will provision being moved to 
section 2-502(b). 
  
2-507 
REVOCATION BY WRITING OR BY ACT 
SECTION 2-507.  REVOCATION BY  WRITING OR BY ACT. 
(a) A will or any part thereof is revoked: 
(1) by executing a subsequent will that revokes the previous will or part expressly or by inconsistency; or (2) by performing a revocatory act on the will, if the te stator performed the act with the intent and for the 
purpose of revoking the will or part or if another individual performed the act in  the testator’s conscious presence and 
by the testator’s direction.  For purpo ses of this paragraph, “revocatory ac t on the will” includes burning, tearing, 
canceling, obliterating, or destroying the will  or any part of it.  A burning, teari ng, or canceling is a “revocatory act on 
the will,” whether or not the burn, tear, or can cellation touched any of the words on the will.   
(b) If a subsequent will does not expressly revoke a prev ious will, the execution of the subsequent will wholly 
revokes the previous will by in consistency if the testator intended the subsequent will to replace rather than 
supplement the previous will. 
(c) The testator is presumed to have intended a subse quent will to replace rather than supplement a previous 
 
Page 60 of 253 will if the subsequent will makes a complete disposition of the testator’s estate.  If this presumption arises and is not 
rebutted by clear and convinci ng evidence, the previous will is revoked; only the subsequent wi ll is operative on the 
testator’s death. 
(d) The testator is presumed to have intended a subse quent will to supplement rather than replace a previous 
will if the subsequent will does not make a complete dispositi on of the testator’s estate.  If this presumption arises and 
is not rebutted by clear and convincing evidence, the subsequent  will revokes the previous will only to the extent the 
subsequent will is inconsistent with th e previous will; each will is fully operative on the testator’s death to the extent 
they are not inconsistent.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The section expands the category of acts that constitute revocation to 
include any act performed by the testator with the intent and for the purpose  of revoking the will in whole or in part. 
 
  
2-508 
REVOCATION BY CHANGE OF CIRCUMSTANCES 
SECTION 2-508.  REVOCATION BY  CHANGE OF CIRCUMSTANCES.   
 
Except as provided in Sections 2-803, 2-803A and 2-804, a cha nge of circumstances does not revoke a will or any part 
of it. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The exceptions referenced in the section are 2-803 (Effect of Homicide); 
2-803A (Effect of Criminal Conviction), formerly 2-806); and 2-804 (Revocation by Divorce), formerly 2-508. 
 
 
2-509 
Revival of Revoked Will 
SECTION 2-509.  REVIVAL OF REVOKED WILL. 
(a) If a subsequent will that wholly revoked a previ ous will is thereafter revoked by a revocatory act under 
Section 2-507(a)(2), the previous will remains revoked unless it is revived.  The previous will is revived if it is evident 
from the circumstances of the revocation of the subsequent  will or from the testator’s contemporary or subsequent 
declarations that the testator intended the previous will to take effect as executed. 
(b) If a subsequent will that par tly revoked a previous will is ther eafter revoked by a revocatory act under 
Section 2-507(a)(2), a revoked part of the previous will is revived unless it is evident from the circumstances of the 
revocation of the subsequent will or from  the testator’s contemporary or subseque nt declarations that  the testator did 
not intend the revoked part to  take effect as executed. 
 
Page 61 of 253 (c) If a subsequent will that revoked a previous will in whole or in part is thereafter revoked by another, later 
will, the previous will remains revoked in  whole or in part, unless it or its re voked part is revived.  The previous will 
or its revoked part is revived to the ex tent it appears from the terms of the la ter will that the te stator intended the 
previous will to take effect.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  The language does not constitute a substantive change  to Maine law. 
 
 
2-510 
INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE 
SECTION 2-510.  INCORPO RATION BY REFERENCE.   
 
A writing in existence when a will is executed may be incorp orated by reference if the la nguage of the will manifests 
this intent and describes the writing sufficiently to permit its identification.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  The language does not constitute a substantive change  to Maine law. 
 
 
2-511 
TESTAMENTARY ADDITIONS TO TRUSTS 
SECTION 2-511.  UNIFORM TESTAMENTARY ADDITIONS TO TRUSTS ACT (1991). 
(a) A will may validly devise property to the trustee of a trust established or to be established (i) during the 
testator’s lifetime by the testator, by the testator and some other person, or by some other person, including a funded 
or unfunded life insurance trust, although the settl or has reserved any or all right s of ownership of the insurance 
contracts, or (ii) at the testator’s deat h by the testator’s devise to the trustee, if the trust is identified in the testator’ s 
will and its terms are set forth in a writt en instrument, other than a will, executed before, concurrently with, or after 
the execution of the testator’s will or in another individual’s  will if that other individual has predeceased the testator, 
regardless of the existence, size, or charac ter of the corpus of the trust.  The de vise is not invalid because the trust is 
amendable or revocable, or because the trust was amended af ter the execution of the will or the testator’s death.   
(b) Unless the testator’s will provides otherwise, propert y devised to a trust described in subsection (a) is not 
held under a testamentary trust of the te stator, but it becomes a part of the trus t to which it is devised, and must be 
administered and disposed of in accorda nce with the provisions of the governing instrument setting forth the terms of 
the trust, including any amendments thereto made  before or after the testator’s death.   
(c) Unless the testator’s will provides otherwise, a revoc ation or termination of the trust before the testator’s 
death causes the devise to lapse.  
 
 
Page 62 of 253 Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
2-512 
EVENTS OF INDEPENDENT SIGNIFICANCE 
SECTION 2-512.  EVENTS OF I NDEPENDENT SIGNIFICANCE.   
A will may dispose of property by reference to acts and even ts that have significance apar t from their effect upon the 
dispositions made by the will, whether they occur before or  after the execution of the will or before or after the 
testator’s death.  The execution or revocation of  another individual’s wi ll is such an event.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
2-513 
SEPARATE WRITING IDENTIFYING DEVISE OF CERTAIN TYPES OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL 
PROPERTY 
SECTION 2-513.  SEPARATE WRITING IDENTIFYIN G DEVISE OF CERTAIN TYPES OF TANGIBLE 
PERSONAL PROPERTY.   
 
Whether or not the provisions relating to holographic wills ap ply, a will may refer to a wr itten statement or list to 
dispose of items of tangible personal property not otherwise specifically dispos ed of by the will, other than money.  
To be admissible under this section as evidence of the in tended disposition, the writing must be in  the handwriting of 
the testator or signed by the testator and must describe the items and the devisees wi th reasonable certainty.  The 
writing may be referred to as one to be in existence at the time of the testator’s death; it  may be prepared before or 
after the execution of the will; it may be altered by the testat or after its preparation; and it may be a writing that has no 
significance apart from its effect on the dispositions made by the will.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  The language does not constitute a substantive change  to Maine law. 
Maine deviates from the UPC by not requi ring the testator’s signature if the separate writing is in the testator’s 
handwriting. 
  
2-514 
CONTRACTS CONCERNING SUCCESSION 
SECTION 2-514.  CONT RACTS CONCERNING SUCCESSION.   
A contract to make a will or devise, or not to revoke a will or  devise, or to die intestate, if executed after the effective 
 
Page 63 of 253 date of this [article], may be established only by (1) provision s of a will stating material pr ovisions of the contract, (2) 
an express reference in a will to a contract and extrinsic evidence proving the terms of the contract, or (3) a writing 
signed by the decedent evidencing the contract.  The executi on of a joint will or mutual wills does not create a 
presumption of a contract not to revoke the will or wills. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law.  
The same provision previously existed as MPC section 2-701. 
 
 
2-515 
DEPOSIT OF WILL WITH COURT IN TESTATOR’S LIFETIME 
SECTION 2-515.  DEPOSIT OF WILL WITH COURT IN TESTATOR’ S LIFETIME.   
A will may be deposited by the testator or the testator’s agen t with any court for safekeeping, under rules of the court.  
The will must be sealed and ke pt confidential.  During the testator’s lifetim e, a deposited will must be delivered only 
to the testator or to a person authorized  in writing signed by the testator to receive the will.  A conservator may be 
allowed to examine a deposited will of a protected testat or under procedures designed to maintain the confidential 
character of the document to the extent possible, and to en sure that it will be resealed and kept on deposit after the 
examination.  Upon being informed of th e testator’s death, the c ourt shall notify any person designated to receive the 
will and deliver it to that person on request; or the court may deliver the will to the appropriate court. 
DISPOSITION OF WILL DEPOSITED WITH COURT 
 A will deposited for safekeeping with the court in the offi ce of the register of probate before September 19, 1997 may 
be delivered only to the testat or or to a person authorized in writing signed by the testat or to receive the will.  A 
conservator may be allowed to examine a deposited will of a protected testator  under procedures designed to maintain 
the confidential character of the document to the extent possi ble and to ensure that it will be resealed and left on 
deposit after the examination.  Upon being informed of the testator's death, the court shall notify any person 
designated to receive the will and deliver it to that design ated person on request; or the court may deliver the will to 
the appropriate court.  The court may not accept a will for safekeeping after September 19, 1997. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law.  
The same provision previously existed as MPC section 2-901. 
 
 
2-516 
DUTY OF CUSTODIAN OF WILLS; LIABILITY 
SECTION 2-516.  DUTY OF CUSTOD IAN OF WILL; LIABILITY. 
After the death of a testator and on request of an interest ed person, a person having custody of a will of the testator 
 
Page 64 of 253 shall deliver it with reasonabl e promptness to a person able to secure its probate and if none is known, to an 
appropriate court.  A person who wilfully fails to deliver a will is liable to any person a ggrieved for any damages that 
may be sustained by the failure.  A person who wilfully refu ses or fails to deliver a wi ll after being ordered by the 
court in a proceeding brought for the purpose of compelling de livery is subject to penalty for contempt of court. 
After the death of a testator, any person having custody of a will of the testator shall deliver it with reasonable 
promptness to a person able to secure its probate and if none  is known, to an appropriate court for filing and recording 
until probate is sought.  Any person having custody of a will is not liable, to any person aggrieved, for failure to learn 
of the death of the testator of that will and the failure, therefore, to deliver that will as required.  Any person who 
willfully fails to deliver a will, or w ho willfully defaces or destroys any will of a deceased person, is liable to any 
person aggrieved for the damages, which may be sustained by  such failure to deliver, or by such defacement or 
destruction. Any person who willfully refuse s or fails to deliver a will, or who so  defaces or destroys it, after being 
ordered by the court in a proceeding brought  for the purpose of compelling delivery is subject to penalty for contempt 
of court.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law.  
The same provision previously existed as MPC section 2-902. 
 
 
2-517 
PENALTY CLAUSE FOR CONTEST 
SECTION 2-517.  PENALTY CL AUSE FOR CONTEST.   
A provision in a will purporting to  penalize an interested person for contesting the will or instituting other proceedings 
relating to the estate is unenforceable if pr obable cause exists for instituting proceedings.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law.  
The same provision previously existed as MPC section 3-905. 
 
 
None 
2-518 STATUTORY WILLS  
None.   
 It is recommended that the Maine stat utory will provision, modified as show n below, be adopted, and renumbered 
from section 2-514 to 2-518.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The statutory will form is revise d to add an optional self-proving 
 
Page 65 of 253 provision.  The statutory will provision previously existed as MPC section 2-514. 
 
 
2-601  
SCOPE 
In the absence of a finding of a contrary intention, the rules of construction in this part control the construction of a 
will. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  The new language of Section 2-601 reflects the broad theme of the new 
UPC to discern the intent of the testat or and a willingness to look outside th e four corners of the will itself to 
determine an intent that would rebut the statutory rules of construction.  
 
 
2-602  
WILL MAY PASS ALL PROPERTY A ND AFTER-ACQUIRED PROPERTY 
A will may provide for the passage of all property the testat or owns at death and all property acquired by the estate 
after the testator’s death. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  The removal of the second sentence (“A devise of pr operty conveys all 
the estate of a devisor unless it appear s by his will that he intended to convey a lesser estate.”) from MPC section 2-
604 is not intended to create an inference that Maine is ch anging a long-standing presumption that a devise passes the 
testator’s full intere st in the property.   
 
 
2-603  
ANTILAPSE; DECEASED DEVISEE; CLASS GIFTS 
(a) [Definitions.] In  this section: 
(1) “Alternative devise” means a devise  that is expressly created by the will and, under the terms of the will, 
can take effect instead of another devise  on the happening of one or more events, including survival of  the testator or 
failure to survive the testator, whether an event is e xpressed in condition-precedent, condition-subsequent, or any 
other form.  A residuary clause constitu tes an alternative devise with respect to a nonresidua ry devise only if the will 
specifically provides that, upon lapse or failure, the nonresiduary devise, or nonresiduary devises in general, pass 
under the residuary clause.   
(2) “Class member” includes an individual who fails to survive the testator but w ho would have taken under a 
devise in the form of a class gift had he [or she] survived the testator.   
(3) “Descendant of a grandparent”, as used in su bsection (b), means an in dividual who qualifies as a 
 
Page 66 of 253 descendant of a grandparent of the testator or of the donor of a power of appointment under the (i) rules of 
construction applicable to a class gift created in the testator’s  will if the devise or exercise of the power is in the form 
of a class gift or (ii) rules for intestate succession if the devi se or exercise of the power is not in the form of a class 
gift.   
(4) “Descendants”, as used in the ph rase “surviving descendants” of a de ceased devisee or class member in 
subsections (b)(1) and (2), mean the descendants of a deceas ed devisee or class member who would take under a class 
gift created in the testator’s will.   
(5) “Devise” includes an alternative devise, a devise in  the form of a class gift, a nd an exercise of a power of 
appointment.   
(6) “Devisee” includes (i) a class member if the devise is in the form of a cl ass gift, (ii) an i ndividual or class 
member who was deceased at the time the te stator executed his [or her] will as we ll as an individual or class member 
who was then living but who failed to survive the testator, and (iii) an ap pointee under a power of appointment 
exercised by the testator’s will.   
(7) “Stepchild” means a child of the surviving, deceased, or  former spouse of the testator or of the donor of a 
power of appointment, and not of  the testator or donor.   
(8) “Surviving”, in the phrase “surviving devisees” or “surviving descendants”, mean s devisees or descendants 
who neither predeceased the testator nor are deemed to have predeceased  the testator under Section 2-702.   
(9) “Testator” includes the donee of a pow er of appointment if the power is ex ercised in the test ator’s will.   
(b) [Substitute Gift.] If a devisee fails to survive the testator and is a grandparent, a descendant of a 
grandparent, or a stepchild of either th e testator or the donor of a power of appointment exercised by the testator’s 
will, the following apply: 
 (1) Except as provided in paragraph (4 ), if the devise is not in the form  of a class gift and the deceased 
devisee leaves surviving descenda nts, a substitute gift is creat ed in the devisee’s surviving descendants.  They take per 
capita at each generationby representation the property to which the devisee woul d have been entitled had the devisee 
survived the testator.   
(2) Except as provided in paragraph (4),  if the devise is in the form of a class gift, other than a devise to 
“issue,” “descendants,” “heirs of the body,”  “heirs,” “next of kin,” “relatives,”  or “family,” or a class described by 
language of similar import, a substitute gift is created in  the surviving descendants of  any deceased devisee.  The 
property to which the devisees would have  been entitled had all of them survived  the testator passes to the surviving 
devisees and the surviving descendants of  the deceased devisees.  Each survivi ng devisee takes the share to which he 
[or she] would have been entitled had the deceased devisees  survived the testator.  Each  deceased devisee’s surviving 
descendants who are substituted for the deceased devisee ta ke per capita at each genera tionby representation the share 
to which the deceased devisee would have been entitled ha d the deceased devisee survived the testator.  For the 
purposes of this paragraph, “deceased devise e” means a class member who failed to survive the testator and left one or 
more surviving descendants.   
(3) For the purposes of Section 2-601, words of survivor ship, such as in a devise to an individual “if he 
survives me,” or in a devise to “my surviving children,”  are, in the absence of a dditional evidence, a sufficient 
 
Page 67 of 253 indication of an intent contrary to the application of this section.   
(4) If the will creates an a lternative devise with respect  to a devise for which a substitute gift is created by 
paragraph (1) or (2), the subs titute gift is superseded by the alternative devise if:   
(A) the alternative devise is in the form  of a class gift and one or more member s of the class is en titled to take under 
the will; or  (B) the alternative devise is not in the form of a class gift and the expressly designate d devisee of the alternative 
devise is entitled to take under the will.   
(5) Unless the language creating a power of appointment expressly excludes the substitution of the descendants 
of an appointee for the appointee, a surv iving descendant of a deceased appoint ee of a power of appointment can be 
substituted for the appointee under this  section, whether or not the descenda nt is an object of the power.   
(c) [More Than One Substitute Gift; Which One Takes.] If, under subsection (b), su bstitute gifts are created 
and not superseded with respect to more than one devise and the devises are alte rnative devises, one to the other, the 
determination of which of the substitute gifts takes effect is resolved as follows: 
(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the devised property passes under the primary substitute gift.   
(2) If there is a younger-generation de vise, the devised property passes unde r the younger-generat ion substitute 
gift and not under the prim ary substitute gift.   
(3) In this subsection:   
(A) “Primary devise” means the devise that would have take n effect had all the deceased devisees of the alternative 
devises who left surviving desce ndants survived the testator.   
(B) “Primary substitute gift” means the substitute gift created with respect to the primary devise.   
(C) “Younger-generation devis e” means a devise that (i) is to a descendant of  a devisee of the primary devise, (ii) is an 
alternative devise with respect to the pr imary devise, (iii) is a devise for which a substitute gift is created, and (iv) 
would have taken effect had all the deceas ed devisees who left surviving descendants survived the testator except the 
deceased devisee or devisees of the primary devise.   (D) “Younger-generation substitute gift” means the substitute gift created with respect to the younger-generation 
devise.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  The phrase “by representation” in the UPC has been changed to “per 
capita at each generation” in the MPC.  The phrase “by repr esentation” is synonymous with “per stirpes”.  See section 
2-709. Maine has long considered inheritance by right of repr esentation to be synonymous with  inheritance per stirpes. 
Fiduciary Trust Co. v. Hope Wheel er Brown, 131 A.2d 191 (Me. 1957).   
 Maine has reversed the presumption of  paragraph (b)(3) of the UPC, which created a rebuttable presumption that 
using words of survivorship, such as a de vise to an individu al “if he survives me,” or in a devise to “my surviving 
children,” are not, in the absence of additional evidence, a suffi cient indication of an intent contrary to the application 
of the anti-lapse provisions.   Under the MPC words of survivorship will create a rebuttable presumption of the 
testator’s intent to not have  the anti-lapse provisions apply.  For example, in a devise to “my surviving children,”, if 
 
Page 68 of 253 the testator had three children, X, Y and Z, and child X pred eceased the testator leaving GC1 and GC2, the devise will 
be distributed in e qual shares to Y and Z, with no distribution to GC1 and GC2. 
 
  
2-604  
FAILURE OF TESTAME NTARY PROVISON 
(a) Except as provided in Section 2-603, a devise, other than a residuary devise, that fails for any reason 
becomes a part of the residue. 
(b) Except as provided in Section 2- 603, if the residue is devised to two or more persons, the share of a 
residuary devisee that fails for any reas on passes to the other residuary devisee,  or to other resi duary devisees in 
proportion to the interest of each in the remaining part of the residue.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  The language does not constitute a substantive change  to Maine law. 
 
 
2-605 
Increase in Securities; accessions 
(a) If a testator executes a will that devises securities and the testator then owned securities  that meet the description in 
the will, the devise includes additional s ecurities owned by the testator  at death to the extent the additional securities 
were acquired by the testator after the will was executed as a result of the testator’s ownership of the described securities and are securities of  any of the following types: 
(1) securities of the same organizati on acquired by reason of action initiated by the organization or any successor, 
related, or acquiring organizati on, excluding any acquired by exer cise of purchase options;  
(2) securities of another or ganization acquired as a result of a merg er, consolidation, reor ganization, or other 
distribution by the organization or any successor, related, or acquiring organization; or  
(3) securities of the same orga nization acquired as a result of a plan of reinvestment.   
(b) Distributions in cash before d eath with respect to a described secu rity are not part of the devise. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  The language does not constitute a substantive change  to Maine law. 
 
 
2-606  
NONADEMPTION OF SPECIFIC DEVISES; UNPAI D PROCEEDS OF SALE, CONDEMNATON, OR 
INSURANCE; SALE BY CONSERVATOR OR AGENT 
(a) A specific devisee has a right to sp ecifically devised property in the testat or’s estate at th e testator’s death 
 
Page 69 of 253 and to: 
(1) any balance of the purchase pric e, together with any security agr eement, owed by a purchaser at the 
testator’s death by reason of  sale of the property;  
(2) any amount of a condemnation award for the taking of the property unpaid at death;  
(3) any proceeds unpaid at death on fire or casualty insurance on or other rec overy for injury to the property;  
(4) any property owned by the testator at death and acquire d as a result of foreclosure,  or obtained in lieu of 
foreclosure, of the security interest for a specifically devised obligation;  
(5) any real property or tangible pers onal property owned by the testator at death which the testator acquired as 
a replacement for specifically devised real pr operty or tangible personal property; and  
(6) if not covered by paragraphs (1) through (5), a pecuniary devise equal to the value as of its date of 
disposition of other specifically devised property disposed of during the testator’s lifetime but only to the extent it is 
established that ademption would be incons istent with the testator’s manifested pl an of distribution or that at the time 
the will was made, the date of dispos ition or otherwise, the testator di d not intend ademption of the devise. 
(b) If specifically devised property is sold or mortgaged by a conservato r or by an agent acting within the 
authority of a durable power of attorn ey for an incapacitated principal, or a condemnation award, insurance proceeds, 
or recovery for injury to the property is  paid to a conservator or to an agent acting within the authority of a durable 
power of attorney for an incapacitated pr incipal, the specific devisee has the righ t to a general pecuniary devise equal 
to the net sale price, the amount of th e unpaid loan, the condemnation award, the in surance proceeds, or the recovery.   
(c) The right of a specific devise e under subsection (b) is reduced by any right the devisee has under 
subsection (a). 
(d) For the purposes of the references in subsection (b) to a conservator, subsection (b) does not apply if, after 
the sale, mortgage, condemnation, casualty, or recovery, it wa s adjudicated that the testat or’s incapacity ceased and 
the testator survived the adjudication for at least one year. 
(e) For the purposes of the references in subsection (b ) to an agent acting within the authority of a durable 
power of attorney for an incapacitate d principal, (i) “incapacitated principal” means a principal who is an 
incapacitated person, (ii) no adjudication of incapacity before death is necessary, and (iii) th e acts of an agent within 
the authority of a durable power of attorney are presumed to be for an incapacitated principal.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  Subparagraphs (a)5 and (a)(6) reflect an adoption of the “i ntent” theory of 
ademption in certain circumstances. 
 
 
2-607  
NONEXONERATION 
A specific devise passes subject to any mortgage interest existing at the date of death, without right of exoneration, 
regardless of a general directive in the will to pay debts.  
 
 
Page 70 of 253 Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  The language does not cons titute a substantive cha nge to Maine law.  The 
same provision previously existed as section 2-609. 
 See section 3-814 empowering the personal representative to pay an encumbrance under some circumstances. The last 
sentence of that section makes it clea r that payment of the encumbrance does not increase the right of the specific 
devisee. The present section governs the substantive rights of the devisee. Th e common law rule of exoneration of the 
specific devise is abolished by this sec tion, and the contrary  rule is adopted. 
 
 
2-608  
EXERCISE OF POWER OF APPOINTMENT 
In the absence of a requirement that a power of appointment be exercised by a re ference, or by an express or specific 
reference, to the power, a genera l residuary clause in a will, or a will making general disposition of all of the testator’s 
property, expresses an intenti on to exercise a power of appointment held by the testator only if (i) the power is a 
general power exercisable in favor of the powerholder’s estate and the creating inst rument does not contain an 
effective gift if the power is not exerci sed or (ii) the testator’s will manifest s an intention to include the property 
subject to the power.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  If the document creating a power of  appointment does not require a 
specific reference to the power in order for it to be exercised, the general rule remains unchanged in stating that a 
general residuary clause is not  effective to exercise the pow er unless the testator’s will ma nifests an intention to have 
the residuary clause include the property subject to the pow er.  This section adds one circumstance where a residuary 
clause will be presumed to include the property subject to the power  of appointment - - if “the power is a general 
power and the creating instrument does not contai n a gift if the power is not exercised.”   
 
 
2-609  
ADEMPTION BY SATISFACTION 
(a) Property a testator gave in  his or her lifetime to a person is treated as a satisfaction of a devise in whole or 
in part, only if (i) the will pr ovides for deduction of the gift, (ii) the test ator declared in a contemporaneous writing 
that the gift is in satisfaction of the devise or that its valu e is to be deducted from the va lue of the devise, or (iii) the 
devisee acknowledged in writing that the gift is in satisfaction of the devise or  that its value is to be deducted from the 
value of the devise.   
(b) For purposes of partial satisfactio n, property given during lifetime is valu ed as of the time the devisee came 
into possession or enjoyment of the property or at  the testator’s death, whichever occurs first. 
(c) If the devisee fails to survive the te stator, the gift is treated as a full or  partial satisfaction of the devise, as 
 
Page 71 of 253 appropriate, in applying Sec tions 2-603 and 2-604, unless the testator’s contemporane ous writing provides otherwise.  
 
 
2-701  
SCOPE 
In the absence of a finding of a contrary intention, the rules of construction in this part control the construction of a 
governing instrument.  The rules of construc tion in this part apply to a governing instrument of any type, except as the 
application of a particular section is limited by its terms to a specific t ype or types of pr ovision or governing 
instrument.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The rules of construction in this pa rt apply to governi ng instruments of 
any type – not just wills. 
  
2-702  
REQUIREMENT OF SURV IVAL BY 120 HOURS. 
 (a) [Requirement of Survival by 120  Hours Under Probate Code.] For the purposes of this [code], except as 
provided in subsection (d), an individua l who is not established by clear and c onvincing evidence to have survived an 
event, including the death of another individual, by 120 hours is deemed to have predeceased the event. 
(b) [Requirement of Survival by 120  Hours under Governing Instrument.]  Except as provided in subsection 
(d), for purposes of a provision of a governing instrument th at relates to an individual surviving an event, including 
the death of another individual, an individual who is not esta blished by clear and convincing evidence to have 
survived the event, by 120 hours is deem ed to have predeceased the event. 
(c) [Co-owners With Right of Survivorship; Requirem ent of Survival by 120 Hours.] Except as provided in 
subsection (d), if (i) it is not establ ished by clear and convincing evidence that  one of two co-owners with right of 
survivorship survived the ot her co-owner by 120 hours, one-half of the prope rty passes as if one had survived by 120 
hours and one-half as if the other had su rvived by 120 hours and (ii) there are mo re than two co-owners and it is not 
established by clear and convincing eviden ce that at least one of them surviv ed the others by 120 hours, the property 
passes in the proportion that one bears to  the whole number of co-owners.  Fo r the purposes of this subsection, “co-
owners with right of survivorship” incl udes joint tenants, tenants by the entiretie s, and other co-owners of property or 
accounts held under circumstances that entitles one or more to  the whole of the property or  account on the death of the 
other or others. 
(d) [Exceptions.] Survival by 120 hours is no t required if: 
(1) the governing instrument contains language dealing explicitly with s imultaneous deaths or deaths in a 
common disaster and that language is ope rable under the facts of the case;  
(2) the governing instrument expressl y indicates that an individual is not required to survive an event, 
 
Page 72 of 253 including the death of anothe r individual, by any specified period or expressly requires th e individual to survive the 
event by a specified period; but survival  of the event or the specified peri od must be established by clear and 
convincing evidence; 
(3) the imposition of a 120-hour requir ement of survival would cause a nonve sted property interest or a power 
of appointment to fail to qualify for va lidity under Section 2-901(a)(1 ), (b)(1), or (c)(1) or to become invalid under 
Section 2-901(a)(2), (b)(2), or (c)(2);  but survival must be established by clear and convinci ng evidence; or  
(4) the application of a 120-hour requirement of survival  to multiple governing instruments would result in an 
unintended failure or duplication of a disposition; but survival  must be established by clear  and convincing evidence.   
(e) [Protection of Payors and Other Third Parties.] 
(1) A payor or other third party is no t liable for having made a payment or transferred an item of property or 
any other benefit to a beneficiary desi gnated in a governing instrument who, under this section, is not entitled to the 
payment or item of property, or for having taken any other action in good faith reliance on the beneficiary’s apparent 
entitlement under the terms of the governi ng instrument, before the payor or othe r third party receiv ed written notice 
of a claimed lack of entitlement under this section.  A payor or other third party is liable  for a payment made or other 
action taken after the payor or other th ird party received written notice of a cl aimed lack of entitlement under this 
section.   
(2) Written notice of a claimed lack of  entitlement under paragraph (1) must be  mailed to the payor’s or other 
third party’s main office or hom e by registered or certified mail, return re ceipt requested, or served upon the payor or 
other third party in the same manner as a summons in a civ il action.  Upon receipt of writt en notice of a claimed lack 
of entitlement under this section, a payor or other third part y may pay any amount owed or transfer or deposit any item 
of property held by it to or with the court having jurisdiction of the probate proceedings relating to the decedent’s 
estate, or if no proceedings have been  commenced, to or with the court having jurisdiction of probate proceedings 
relating to decedents’ estates loca ted in the county of the decedent’s residen ce.  The court shall ho ld the funds or item 
of property and, upon its determination under this section, shall order disbursement in accordance with the 
determination.  Payments, transfers, or de posits made to or with the court discha rge the payor or othe r third party from 
all claims for the value of amounts paid to or items of property transferred to or de posited with the court.   
(f) [Protection of Bona Fi de Purchasers; Personal Liability of Recipient.] 
(1) A person who purchases property fo r value and without notice, or who r eceives a payment or other item of 
property in partial or full satisfaction of  a legally enforceable obligation, is ne ither obligated under  this section to 
return the payment, item of property, or benefit nor is liable unde r this section for the amount of the payment or the 
value of the item of property or benef it.  But a person who, not for value, recei ves a payment, item of property, or any 
other benefit to which the person is not en titled under this section is obligated to  return the payment, item of property, 
or benefit, or is personally liable for the amount of the payment or the value of the item of property or benefit, to the 
person who is entitled to  it under this section.   
(2) If this section or any part of th is section is preempted by federal law w ith respect to a payment, an item of 
property, or any other benefit covered by this section, a person who, not for va lue, receives the payment, item of 
property, or any other benefit to which the person is not entitled unde r this section is obligated  to return the payment, 
 
Page 73 of 253 item of property, or benefit, or is pers onally liable for the amount of the paymen t or the value of the item of property 
or benefit, to the person who would have been entitled to it were this section or part of this section not preempted.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section includes what was formerly the Uniform Simultaneous 
Death Act in section 2-805. 
2-703  
CHOICE OF LAW AS TO MEANING AND EFFECT OF GOVERNING INSTRUMENT 
The meaning and legal effect of a govern ing instrument is determined by the lo cal law of the state selected in the 
governing instrument, unless the application of that law is contrary to the provisions relating to the elective share 
described in Part 2, the provisions relati ng to exempt property and allowances de scribed in Part 4, or any other public 
policy of this state otherwise applicable to the disposition.  
 
 
 
2-704  
POWER OF APPOINTMENT; COMPLIANCE WI TH SPECIFIC REFERENCE REQUIREMENT 
A powerholder’s substantial compliance w ith a formal requirement of appointme nt imposed in a governing instrument 
by the donor, including a requirement that the instrument exercising the power of appoi ntment make reference or 
specific reference to the power is sufficient if:  
(1) the powerholder knows of and inte nds to exercise the power; and 
(2) the powerholder’s manner of attempted exercise does not impair a material purpose of the donor in imposing 
the requirement.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section is new, with no previ ous counterpart in the Maine Probate 
Code. 
  
2-705  
CLASS GIFTS CONSTRUED TO ACCORD WITH INTESTATE SUCCESSION; EXCEPTIONS 
 (a) [Definitions.] In this section: 
(1) “Adoptee” has the meaning se t forth in Section 2-115.   
(2) “Child of assisted reproduction” has the meaning set forth in Section 2-120.   
(3) “Distribution date” means the date when an immediate or postpone d class gift takes e ffect in possession or 
enjoyment.   
(4) “Functioned as a parent of the adoptee” has the m eaning set forth in Section 2-115, substituting “adoptee” 
 
Page 74 of 253 for “child” in that definition.   
(5) “Functioned as a parent of the child” ha s the meaning set forth in Section 2-115.   
(6) “Genetic parent” ha s the meaning set forth in Section 2-115.   
(7) “Gestational child” has the mean ing set forth in Section 2-121.   
(8) “Relative” has th e meaning set forth in Section 2-115.   
(b) [Terms of Relationship.] A class gi ft that uses a term of relationship to identify the class members includes 
a child of assisted reproduction, a gesta tional child, and, except as otherwise pr ovided in subsections (e) and (f), an 
adoptee and a child born to parents who ar e not married to each other, and thei r respective descendants if appropriate 
to the class, in accordance with the ru les for intestate succession regarding pare nt-child relationships.  For the purpose 
of determining whether a contrary in tention exists under Section 2-701, a provi sion in a governing instrument that 
relates to the inclusion or excl usion in a class gift of a child  born to parents who are not married to each other but does 
not specifically refer to a child of as sisted reproduction or a ge stational child does not appl y to a child of assisted 
reproduction or a gestational child. 
(c) [Relatives by Marriage.] Terms of relationship in a governing instrument that do not differentiate 
relationships by blood from those by marriage, such as uncles,  aunts, nieces, or nephews, are construed to exclude 
relatives by marriage, unless: 
(1) when the governing instrument was executed, the cl ass was then and foreseeabl y would be empty; or  
(2) the language or circumstances otherwise establish that  relatives by marriage were in tended to be included.   
(d) [Half-Blood Relatives.] Terms of  relationship in a governing instru ment that do not differentiate 
relationships by the half blood from t hose by the whole blood, such as brothe rs, sisters, nieces, or nephews, are 
construed to include both  types of relationships. 
(e) [Transferor Not Genetic Parent.] In construing a dis positive provision of a transfer or who is not the genetic 
parent, a child of a genetic pare nt is not considered the child of that genetic parent unless the genetic parent, a relative 
of the genetic parent, or the spouse or surviving spouse of the gene tic parent or of a relativ e of the genetic parent 
functioned as a parent of the child before the child reached [18] years of age. 
(f) [Transferor Not Adoptive Parent.] In construing a dispositive provision of a transferor who is not the 
adoptive parent, an adoptee is not considered  the child of the a doptive parent unless: 
(1) the adoption took place before the adoptee reached [18] years of age;  
(2) the adoptive parent was the adoptee’ s stepparent or fo ster parent; or  
(3) the adoptive parent functioned as a parent of the adoptee before the adoptee reached [18] years of age.   
(g) [Class-Closing Rules.] The following rules a pply for purposes of the class-closing rules: 
(1) A child in utero at a part icular time is treated as liv ing at that time if the child  lives 120 hours after birth.   
(2) If a child of assisted reproduction or a gestational ch ild is conceived posthumously  and the distribution date 
is the deceased parent’s death, the child is treated as living on the distributi on date if the child lives 120 hours after 
birth and was in utero not later than 36 months after the deceased parent’s death or born not later than 45 months after 
the deceased parent’s death.   
(3) An individual who is in the process of being adopted when the class closes is treated as adopted when the 
 
Page 75 of 253 class closes if the adoption is subsequently granted.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section establishes a compre hensive reformulation of rules of 
construction for class gifts that identify the recipient by reference to a relationship to another individual.   
 
 
2-706  
LIFE INSURANCE; RETIREMENT PLAN; ACCOUN T WITH POD DESIGNATION; TRANSFER-ON-
DEATH REGISTRATION; DECEASED BENEFICIARY. 
(a) [Definitions.] In  this section: 
(1) “Alternative beneficiary designat ion” means a beneficiary designation that is expressly created by the 
governing instrument and, under the terms of  the governing instrument, can take e ffect instead of another designation 
on the happening of one or more events, including survival of  the decedent or failure to survive the decedent, whether 
an event is expressed in condition-precedent,  condition-subsequent, or any other form. 
(2) “Beneficiary” means the beneficiary of a beneficiar y designation under which the beneficiary must survive 
the decedent and includes (i) a class memb er if the beneficiary designation is in the form of a class gift and (ii) an 
individual or class member who was deceased at the time the beneficiary designation was executed as well as an 
individual or class member who was then living but who failed to survive the dece dent, but excludes a joint tenant of a 
joint tenancy with the ri ght of survivorship and a party to  a joint and surv ivorship account. 
(3) “Beneficiary designation”  includes an alternative beneficiary de signation and a beneficiary designation in 
the form of a class gift. 
(4) “Class member” includes an individual who fails to survive the decedent but w ho would have taken under a 
beneficiary designation in the fo rm of a class gift had he [or she] survived the decedent. 
(5) “Descendant of a grandparent”, as used in su bsection (b), means an in dividual who qualifies as a 
descendant of a grandparent of the deceden t under the (i) rules of construction app licable to a class gift created in the 
decedent’s beneficiary designation if the bene ficiary designation is in the form of a class gift or (ii) rules for intestate 
succession if the beneficiary designation is not in the form of a class gift.   
(6) “Descendants”, as used in the phra se “surviving descendants” of a deceas ed beneficiary or class member in 
subsections (b)(1) and (2), mean the descendants of a d eceased beneficiary or class me mber who would take under a 
class gift created in the beneficiary designation.   
(7) “Stepchild” means a child of the decedent’s surviving, deceased, or former spouse, and not of the decedent. 
(8) “Surviving”, in the phrase “surviving beneficiaries”  or “surviving descendants” , means beneficiaries or 
descendants who neither predeceased th e decedent nor are deemed to have predeceased the decedent under Section 2-
702. 
(b) [Substitute Gift.] If a beneficiary fails to survive the decedent and is a grandparent, a descendant of a 
grandparent, or a stepchild of th e decedent, the following apply: 
 
Page 76 of 253 (1) Except as provided in paragraph (4),  if the beneficiary designa tion is not in the form of a class gift and the 
deceased beneficiary leaves surviving descendants, a subs titute gift is created in the beneficiary’s surviving 
descendants.  They take per capita at each generationby re presentation the property to which the beneficiary would 
have been entitled had the beneficiary survived the decedent. 
(2) Except as provided in paragraph (4), if the beneficiary designation is in th e form of a class gift, other than a 
beneficiary designation to “issue, ” “descendants,” “heirs of the body,” “heirs,” “next of kin,” “relatives,” or “family,” 
or a class described by language of simila r import, a substitute gift is created  in the surviving descendants of any 
deceased beneficiary.  The property to whic h the beneficiaries would have been en titled had all of them survived the 
decedent passes to the surviving beneficiaries and the surv iving descendants of the deceas ed beneficiaries.  Each 
surviving beneficiary takes the share to  which he [or she] would have been entitled had the deceased beneficiaries 
survived the decedent.  Each deceased beneficiary’s su rviving descendants who are substituted for the deceased 
beneficiary take per capita at each ge nerationby representation the share to wh ich the deceased beneficiary would have 
been entitled had the deceased beneficiary survived the decedent.  For the purposes of this paragraph, “deceased 
beneficiary” means a class member who failed to survive th e decedent and left one or more surviving descendants. 
(3) For the purposes of Section 2-701, words of survi vorship, such as in a bene ficiary designation to an 
individual “if he survives me,” or in  a beneficiary designation to “my survivi ng children,” are, in the absence of 
additional evidence, a sufficient indication of an inte nt contrary to the applic ation of this section. 
(4) If a governing instrument creates an alternative beneficiary designation with respect to a beneficiary 
designation for which a substitute gift is  created by paragraph (1) or (2), the substitute gift is superseded by the 
alternative beneficiary designation if:   
(A) the alternative beneficiary designation is in the form of a class gift and one or more members of the class is 
entitled to take; or 
(B) the alternative beneficiary designation is not in the form of a class gift and the expressly designated 
beneficiary of the alternative benefici ary designation is entitled to take. 
(c) [More Than One Substitute Gift; Which One Takes.] If, under subsection (b), substitute gifts are created and not 
superseded with respect to more than one beneficiary designation and the beneficiary designations are alternative 
beneficiary designations, one to th e other, the determination of which of the substitute gifts takes effect is resolved as 
follows: 
(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the prop erty passes under the primary substitute gift. 
(2) If there is a younger-generation beneficiary de signation, the property passe s under the younger-generation 
substitute gift and not under the primary substitute gift. 
(3) In this subsection: (A) “Primary beneficiary designation” means the benefici ary designation that would ha ve taken effect had all 
the deceased beneficiaries of the alternative beneficiary designations who left surviv ing descendants survived the 
decedent. 
(B) “Primary substitute gift” means the substitute gift created with respect to the primary beneficiary 
designation. 
 
Page 77 of 253 (C) “Younger-generation benefici ary designation” means a beneficiary desi gnation that (i) is to a descendant 
of a beneficiary of the primary beneficiar y designation, (ii) is an alternative beneficiary desi gnation with respect to the 
primary beneficiary designation, (i ii) is a beneficiary designation for which a substitute gift is cr eated, and (iv) would 
have taken effect had all the deceased beneficiaries who left surviving de scendants survived the decedent except the 
deceased beneficiary or beneficiaries of  the primary beneficiary designation. 
(D) “Younger-generation substi tute gift” means the substitute gift  created with respect to the younger-
generation benefici ary designation. 
(d) [Protection of Payors.] 
(1) A payor is protected from liability in making paym ents under the terms of the beneficiary designation until 
the payor has received written notice of  a claim to a substitute gift under th is section.  Payment made before the 
receipt of written notice of a claim to a substitute gift under this sec tion discharges the payor, but not the recipient, 
from all claims for the amounts paid.  A payor is liable for a payment made af ter the payor has re ceived written notice 
of the claim.  A recipient is liable for a payment recei ved, whether or not written not ice of the claim is given. 
(2) The written notice of the claim mu st be mailed to the payor’s main office or home by registered or certified 
mail, return receipt requested, or serv ed upon the payor in the same manner as a summons in a civil action.  Upon 
receipt of written noti ce of the claim, a payor may pay any amount owed  by it to the court havi ng jurisdic tion of the 
probate proceedings relating to the decedent’s estate or, if  no proceedings have been co mmenced, to the court having 
jurisdiction of probate proceedings relating to decedents’ esta tes located in the county of the decedent’s residence.  
The court shall hold the funds and, upon its determination under this section, shall order disbursement in accordance with the determination.  Payment made  to the court discharges  the payor from all clai ms for the amounts paid. 
(e) [Protection of Bona Fi de Purchasers; Personal Liability of Recipient.] 
(1) A person who purchases property fo r value and without notice, or who r eceives a payment or other item of 
property in partial or full satisfaction of  a legally enforceable obligation, is ne ither obligated under  this section to 
return the payment, item of property, or benefit nor is liable unde r this section for the amount of the payment or the 
value of the item of property or benef it.  But a person who, not for value, recei ves a payment, item of property, or any 
other benefit to which the person is not en titled under this section is obligated to  return the payment, item of property, 
or benefit, or is personally liable for the amount of the payment or the value of the item of property or benefit, to the 
person who is entitled to  it under this section. 
(2) If this section or any part of th is section is preempted by federal law w ith respect to a payment, an item of 
property, or any other benefit covered by this section, a person who, not for va lue, receives the payment, item of 
property, or any other benefit to which the person is not entitled unde r this section is obligated  to return the payment, 
item of property, or benefit, or is pers onally liable for the amount of the paymen t or the value of the item of property 
or benefit, to the person who would have been entitled to it were this section or part of this section not preempted.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section parallels section 2- 603 and extends that comprehensive 
revision of the antilapse statute into  the area of “beneficiary designati ons” as defined in UPC section 1-201. 
 
 
Page 78 of 253 The phrase “by representation” in the UPC has been change d to “per capita at each generation” in the MPC.  The 
phrase “by representation” is synonym ous with “per stirpes”.  See sect ion 2-709. Maine has long considered 
inheritance by right of representation to be synonymous with inheritance pe r stirpes. Fiduciary  Trust Co. v. Hope 
Wheeler Brown, 131 A.2d 191 (Me. 1957).  Maine has reversed the presumption of  paragraph (b)(3) of the UPC, which created a rebuttable presumption that 
using words of survivorship, such as a be neficiary designation to an individual “if he survives me,” or in a beneficiary 
designation to “my surviving children,” are not, in the ab sence of additional evidence, a sufficient indication of an 
intent contrary to the application of the anti-lapse provisi ons.   Under the MPC words of  survivorship will create a 
rebuttable presumption of the testator’s in tent to not have the anti-lapse provisions  apply.  For example, in a devise to 
“my surviving children,” if the testator had three children, X, Y and Z, and child X predeceased the testator leaving 
GC1 and GC2, the devise will be distri buted in equal shares to Y and Z, with no distribution to GC1 and GC2. 
 
 
2-707  
SURVIVORSHIP WITH RESPECT TO FUTURE INTE RESTS UNDER TERMS OF TRUST; SUBSTITUTE 
TAKERS. 
(a) [Definitions.] In  this section: 
(1) “Alternative future interest” means an expressly create d future interest that can take effect in possession or 
enjoyment instead of another future intere st on the happening of one or more even ts, including survival of an event or 
failure to survive an event, whether an event is expresse d in condition-precedent, condition-subsequent, or any other 
form.  A residuary clause in a will does not create an alternat ive future interest with respect  to a future interest created 
in a nonresiduary devise in the will, wh ether or not the will specifically provides that lapsed or failed devises are to 
pass under the residuary clause. 
(2) “Beneficiary” means the beneficiary of  a future interest and includes a class member if the future interest is 
in the form of a class gift. 
(3) “Class member” includes an individual who fails to survive the distribution date  but who would have taken 
under a future interest in the form of a class gift had he [or she] survived the distribution date. 
(4) “Descendants”, in the phrase “surviving descendant s” of a deceased beneficiary or class member in 
subsections (b)(1) and (2), mean the descendants of a d eceased beneficiary or class me mber who would take under a 
class gift created in the trust. 
(5) “Distribution date,” with respect to  a future interest, means the time when the future interest is to take 
effect in possession or enjoyment.  The distribution date ne ed not occur at the beginning or end of a calendar day, but 
can occur at a time durin g the course of a day. 
(6) “Future interest” includes an altern ative future interest and a future interest in the form of a class gift. 
(7) “Future interest under the terms of a trust” means a fu ture interest that was crea ted by a transfer creating a 
trust or to an existing trust or by an ex ercise of a power of appointment to an existing trust, directing the continuance 
 
Page 79 of 253 of an existing trust, designating a beneficiary of an existing trust, or creating a trust. 
(8) Surviving”, in the phrase “surviving beneficiaries”  or “surviving descendants” , means beneficiaries or 
descendants who neither predeceased the distribution date no r are deemed to have predeceased the distribution date 
under Section 2-702. 
(b) [Survivorship Required; Substitute Gift.] A future interest under the te rms of a trust is contingent on the 
beneficiary’s surviving the distribution da te.  If a beneficiary of a future inte rest under the terms of a trust fails to 
survive the distribution da te, the following apply: 
(1) Except as provided in paragraph (4), if the future interest is not in the form of a class gift and the deceased 
beneficiary leaves surviving descendants, a substitute gift is created in the bene ficiary’s surviving descendants.  They 
take per capita at each generationby representation the propert y to which the beneficiary would have been entitled had 
the beneficiary survived the distribution date. 
(2) Except as provided in paragraph (4), if the future interest is in the form  of a class gift, other than a future 
interest to “issue,” “descendant s,” “heirs of the body,”  “heirs,” “next of kin,” “relat ives,” or “family,” or a class 
described by language of similar import, a substitute gift is created in the surviving descendants of any deceased 
beneficiary.  The property to which th e beneficiaries would have been ent itled had all of them survived the 
distribution date passes to the survivi ng beneficiaries and the surviving descenda nts of the deceased beneficiaries.  
Each surviving beneficiary takes the share to which he [or she] would have been entitled had the deceased 
beneficiaries survived the distribution date.  Each deceased  beneficiary’s surviving descendants who are substituted 
for the deceased beneficiary take per capita at each ge nerationby representation the sh are to which the deceased 
beneficiary would have been entitled had the deceased benefi ciary survived the distribution date.  For the purposes of 
this paragraph, “deceased beneficiary” means a class member who failed to survive the dist ribution date and left one 
or more surviving descendants. 
(3) For the purposes of Section 2-701, words of survivor ship attached to a future interest are not, in the 
absence of additional evidence, a sufficient indication of an intent contrary to the application of this section.  Words of 
survivorship include words of survivorship that relate to th e distribution date or to an ear lier or an unspecified time, 
whether those words of survivorship are expressed in c ondition-precedent, condition-subs equent, or any other form. 
(4) If the governing instrument  creates an alternative future interest with  respect to a future interest for which a 
substitute gift is created by paragraph (1) or (2), the substitute gift is superseded  by the alternative future interest if:   
(A) the alternative future interest is in the form of a cl ass gift and one or more memb ers of the class is entitled 
to take in possession or enjoyment; or  
(B) the alternative future interest is not in the form of  a class gift and the expres sly designated beneficiary of 
the alternative future interest is entitl ed to take in possession or enjoyment. 
(c) [More Than One Substitute Gift; Which One Takes.] If, under subsection (b), su bstitute gifts are created 
and not superseded with respect to more than one future intere st and the future interests are alternative future interests, 
one to the other, the determination of which of the s ubstitute gifts takes effect is resolved as follows: 
(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the prop erty passes under the primary substitute gift. 
(2) If there is a younger-generation fu ture interest, the property passes un der the younger-gener ation substitute 
 
Page 80 of 253 gift and not under the pr imary substitute gift. 
(3) In this subsection: (A) “Primary future interest” means the future interest  that would have taken effect had all the deceased 
beneficiaries of the alternative future interests who le ft surviving descendants surv ived the distribution date. 
(B) “Primary substitute gift” means th e substitute gift created with resp ect to the primary future interest. 
(C) “Younger-generation futu re interest” means a future in terest that (i) is to a desc endant of a beneficiary of 
the primary future interest, (ii) is an a lternative future interest with respect to  the primary future interest, (iii) is a 
future interest for which a substitute gi ft is created, and (iv) would have taken effect had all the deceased beneficiaries 
who left surviving descendants survived the distribution da te except the deceased beneficiary or beneficiaries of the 
primary future interest. 
(D) “Younger-generation substi tute gift” means the substitute gift  created with respect to the younger-
generation future interest. 
(d) [If No Other Takers, Property Passes  Under Residuary Clause or to Tran sferor’s Heirs.] Except as provided 
in subsection (e), if, after the applicati on of subsections (b) and (c ), there is no surviving ta ker, the property passes in 
the following order: 
(1) if the trust was created in a nonresiduary devise in th e transferor’s will or in a codicil to the transferor’s 
will, the property passes under the residua ry clause in the transferor’s will; fo r purposes of this section, the residuary 
clause is treated as creating a future interest under the terms of a trust. 
(2) if no taker is produced by the app lication of paragraph (1),  the property passes to the transferor’s heirs 
under Section 2-711. 
(e) [If No Other Takers and If Futu re Interest Created by Exercise of Power of Appointment.] If, after the 
application of subsections (b) a nd (c), there is no surviving taker and if the future interest was created by the exercise 
of a power of appointment: 
(1) the property passes under the dono r’s gift-in-default clause, if any, wh ich clause is trea ted as creating a 
future interest under the terms of a trust; and  
(2) if no taker is produced by the app lication of paragraph (1),  the property passes as  provided in subsection 
(d).  For purposes of subsection (d), “transferor” means the donor if the po wer was a nongeneral power and means the 
donee if the power wa s a general power.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section parallels section 2- 603 and extends that comprehensive 
revision of the antilapse statute into the area of future interest s under the terms of a trust.   
 The phrase “by representation” in the UPC has been change d to “per capita at each generation” in the MPC.  The 
phrase “by representation” is synonymous w ith “per stirpes”.  See section 2-709.  
 Maine has reversed the presumption of  paragraph (b)(3) of the UPC, which created a rebuttable presumption that 
using words of survivorship attached to  a future interest are not, in the ab sence of additional evidence, a sufficient 
 
Page 81 of 253 indication of an intent contrary to the application of the anti-lapse provisions.   Under the MPC, words of survivorship 
will create a rebuttable presumption of the testator’s in tent to not have the anti-lapse provisions apply.   
 
 
2-708  
CLASS GIFTS TO “DESCENDANTS,” “ISSUE,” OR “HEIRS OF THE BODY”; FORM OF 
DISTRIBUTION IF NONE SPECIFIED  
If a class gift in favor of “descenda nts,” “issue,” or “heirs of the body” doe s not specify the manner in which the 
property is to be distributed among th e class members, the property is dist ributed among the class members who are 
living when the interest is to take effect in possession or enjoyment, in such shares as they would receive, under the 
applicable law of intestate su ccession, if the designated ancestor had then  died intestate owning the subject matter of 
the class gift.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section is new and had no pr evious counterpart in the MPC. 
 
 
2-709  
REPRESENTATION; PER CAPITA AT EACH GENERATION; PER STIRPES 
SECTION 2-709.  REPRESENTATION; PER CAPIT A AT EACH GENERATI ON; PER STIRPES; 
REPRESENTATION 
 
(a) [Definitions.] In  this section: 
(1) “Deceased child” or “deceased des cendant” means a child or a descendant who either predeceased the 
distribution date or is deemed to have predeceased the distribution date under Section 2-702.   
(2) “Distribution date,” with respect to an interest, means the time when the interest is to take effect in 
possession or enjoyment.  The distribution date need not o ccur at the beginning or end of a calendar day, but can occur 
at a time during the course of a day.   
(3) “Surviving ancestor,” “surviving child,” or “surviving descendant” means an ancestor, a child, or a 
descendant who neither predeceased the distribution date nor is deemed to ha ve predeceased the distribution date 
under Section 2-702.   
(b) [Representation; Per Capita at Ea ch Generation.] If an applicable stat ute or a governing instrument calls for 
property to be distributed “by representation” or “per capita at each genera tion,” the property is divided into as many 
equal shares as there are (i) surviving descendants in the ge neration nearest to the designat ed ancestor which contains 
one or more surviving descendants (ii) and deceased descendants in the same ge neration who left surviving 
descendants, if any.  Each surviving descendant in the nearest generation is allocated one share.  The remaining 
shares, if any, are combined and then divided in the same manner among the su rviving descendants of the deceased 
 
Page 82 of 253 descendants as if the surviving descendants who were allocated a share and their surviving descendants had 
predeceased the distribution date. 
(c) [Per Stirpes; Representation.] If a governing instrument calls for property to be distributed “per stirpes” or 
“by representation,” the property is divi ded into as many equal shares as ther e are (i) surviving children of the 
designated ancestor and (ii) d eceased children who left surv iving descendants.  Each surviving child, if any, is 
allocated one share.  The share of each deceased child with surviving descendants is divided in the same manner, with 
subdivision repeating at each succeeding generation until the property is fully allocated among surviving descendants. 
(d) [Deceased Descendant With No Surviving Descendant  Disregarded.] For the purposes of subsections (b) 
and (c), an individual who is deceased and left no surviving descendant is  disregarded, and an in dividual who leaves a 
surviving ancestor who is a descen dant of the designated ancestor  is not entitled to a share. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The phrase “by representation” in  Maine is synonymous with “per 
stirpes.”   
  
2-710  
WORTHIER-TITLE DOCTRINE ABOLISHED 
The doctrine of worthier title is abolis hed as a rule of law and as a rule of construction.  Language in a governing 
instrument describing the beneficiaries of  a disposition as the transferor’s “hei rs,” “heirs at law,” “next of kin,” 
“distributees,” “relatives,” or “famil y,” or language of similar import, does not create or presumptively create a 
reversionary interest  in the transferor.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The doctrine of worthier  title, as articulated in Randall v. Marble, 69 Me. 
310, 313 (1879), is abolished.    
 
 
2-711  
INTERESTS IN “HEIRS” AND LIKE 
If an applicable statute or a governing in strument calls for a present or future distribution to or cr eates a present or 
future interest in a designated individual’s “heirs,” “heirs at  law,” “next of kin,” “relatives ,” or “family,” or language 
of similar import, the property passes to those persons, includ ing the state, and in such shares as would succeed to the 
designated individual’s intestat e estate under the intestate su ccession law of the designated  individual’s domicile if the 
designated individual died when the dis position is to take effect in possess ion or enjoyment.  If the designated 
individual’s surviving spouse is  living but is remarried at the time the dis position is to take eff ect in possession or 
enjoyment, the surviving spouse is not an heir of the designated individual.  
 
 
Page 83 of 253 Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section is new and had no prev ious counterpart in the MPC.    
 
 
2-801  
RESERVED 
§ 2-801.  Reserved . 
 
 
 
2-802  
EFFECT OF DIVORCE, ANNULMENT, AND DECREE OF SEPARATION 
(a) An individual who is divorced from the decedent or  whose marriage to the deced ent has been annulled is 
not a surviving spouse unless, by virtue of a subsequent marri age, he or she is married to  the decedent at the time of 
death.  A decree of separation th at does not terminate the status of husband and wife is not a divorce for purposes of 
this section. 
(b) For purposes of Parts 1, 2, 3 and 4 of this article, and of Section 3-203, a surviving spouse does not include:
(1) an individual who obtains or consents to a final decree or judgment of divorce from the decedent or an 
annulment of their marriage, which decree or judgment is not  recognized as valid in this state, unless subsequently 
they participate in a marriage ceremony pur porting to marry each to the other or live together as husband and wife;  
(2) an individual who, following an invalid decree or  judgment of divorce or annulment obtained by the 
decedent, participates in a marriage ceremony with a third individual; or  
(3) an individual who was a party to a valid proceedi ng concluded by an order pur porting to terminate all 
marital property rights.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law . 
 
 
2-803  
EFFECT OF HOMICIDE ON INTES TATE SUCCESSION, WILLS, TR USTS, JOINT ASSETS, LIFE 
INSURANCE, AND BENEFICIARY DESIGNATIONS. 
(a) Definitions. In this section: (1) “Disposition or appointment of prope rty” includes a transfer of an item of  property or any other benefit to a 
beneficiary designated in a governing instrument.   
(2) “Governing instrument” means a governing instrument executed by the decedent.   
(3) “Revocable,” with respect to a disposition, appointment, provision, or  nomination, means one under which 
the decedent, at the time of or immediately before death, was alone empowered, by law or under the governing 
 
Page 84 of 253 instrument, to cancel the designation in  favor of the killer, whether or not the decedent was then empowered to 
designate himself or herself in place of his or her killer and whether or not the decedent then had capacity to exercise 
the power.   
(b) Forfeiture of Statutory Benefits. An individual who feloniously and intentionally kills the decedent forfeits 
all benefits under this article with respect to the decedent’s estate, including an intestate share, an  elective share, an 
omitted spouse’s or child’s share, a homestead allowance, exempt property, and a family allowance.  If the decedent 
died intestate, the decedent’s intestate estate passes as  if the killer disclaimed his or her intestate share. 
(c) Revocation of Benefits Under Governing Instruments. The felonious and intentiona l killing of the decedent: 
(1) revokes any revocable (i) disposi tion or appointment of property made by the decedent to the killer in a 
governing instrument, (ii) provision in a governing inst rument conferring a genera l or nongeneral power of 
appointment on the killer, and (iii) no mination of the killer in a governing instrument, nomi nating or appointing the 
killer to serve in any fiduciary or re presentative capacity, includi ng a personal representative, executor, trustee, or 
agent; and  
(2) severs the interests of the deceden t and killer in property held by them at the time of the killing as joint 
tenants with the right of survivorship [or as community property with the ri ght of survivorship], transforming the 
interests of the decedent and killer into equal tenancies in common.   
(d) Effect of Severance. A severance under subsection (c)(2) does not affect any third-part y interest in property 
acquired for value and in good faith reliance on an apparent  title by survivorship in the killer unless a writing 
declaring the severance has been noted, re gistered, filed, or recorded in records appropriate to the kind and location of 
the property which are relied upon, in the ordinary course of transactions involving su ch property, as evidence of 
ownership. 
(e) Effect of Revocation. Provisions of  a governing instrument are given effect  as if the killer disclaimed all 
provisions revoked by this section or, in the case of a revoked nomination in a fiduc iary or representative capacity, as 
if the killer predeceased the decedent. 
(f) Wrongful Acquisition of Property. A wrongful acquisition of propert y or interest by a ki ller not covered by 
this section must be treated in acco rdance with the principle that a killer  cannot profit from  his [or her] wrong. 
(g) Felonious and Intentional Killing; How Determine d. After all right to app eal has been exhausted, a 
judgment of conviction establishing crimin al accountability for the felonious and intentional killing of the decedent 
conclusively establishes the convicted indi vidual as the decedent’s killer for purpos es of this section.  In the absence 
of a conviction, the court, upon the petiti on of an interested person, must determ ine whether, under the preponderance 
of evidence standard, the individual w ould be found criminally accountable for the felonious and intentional killing of 
the decedent.  If the court determines that, under that standard, the individual  would be found criminally accountable 
for the felonious and intentional killing of the decedent, the determination conclu sively establishes that individual as 
the decedent’s killer for purposes of this section. 
(h) Protection of Payors a nd Other Third Parties. 
(1) A payor or other third party is no t liable for having made a payment or transferred an item of property or 
 
Page 85 of 253 any other benefit to a beneficiary designa ted in a governing instrument affected by an intentional a nd felonious killing, 
or for having taken any other action in good faith reliance on the validity of the governing instrument, upon request 
and satisfactory proof of the decedent’s death, before the payor or other third party received written notice of a 
claimed forfeiture or revocation under this section.  A payor or  other third party is liable for a payment made or other 
action taken after the payor or other thir d party received written notice of a claime d forfeiture or revocation under this 
section.   
(2) Written notice of a claimed forfeiture or revocation under paragraph (1) must be mailed to the payor’s or 
other third party’s main office or home by registered or certified mail, return  receipt requested, or served upon the 
payor or other third party in the same manner as a summons  in a civil action.  Upon recei pt of written notice of a 
claimed forfeiture or revocation under this section, a payor or  other third party may pay a ny amount owed or transfer 
or deposit any item of property held by it to or with the c ourt having jurisdiction of the pr obate proceedings relating to 
the decedent’s estate, or if no proceedings have been comm enced, to or with the court having jurisdiction of probate 
proceedings relating to decedents’ estates located in the county of the decedent’s  residence.  The court shall hold the 
funds or item of property and, upon its determination under this  section, shall order disburse ment in accordance with 
the determination.  Payments, transfers, or deposits made to or with the court discharge th e payor or other third party 
from all claims for the value of amounts paid to or items of prope rty transferred to or depos ited with the court.   
(i) Protection of Bona Fide Purchase rs; Personal Liability of Recipient. 
(1) A person who purchases property fo r value and without notice, or who r eceives a payment or other item of 
property in partial or full satisfaction of  a legally enforceable obligation, is ne ither obligated under  this section to 
return the payment, item of property, or benefit nor is liable unde r this section for the amount of the payment or the 
value of the item of property or benef it.  But a person who, not for value, recei ves a payment, item of property, or any 
other benefit to which the person is not en titled under this section is obligated to  return the payment, item of property, 
or benefit, or is personally liable for the amount of the payment or the value of the item of property or benefit, to the 
person who is entitled to  it under this section.   
(2) If this section or any part of th is section is preempted by federal law w ith respect to a payment, an item of 
property, or any other benefit covered by this section, a person who, not for va lue, receives the payment, item of 
property, or any other benefit to which the person is not entitled unde r this section is obligated  to return the payment, 
item of property, or benefit, or is pers onally liable for the amount of the paymen t or the value of the item of property 
or benefit, to the person who would have been entitled to it were this section or part of this section not preempted.  
 
 
 
NONE (MAINE PROPOSED 18A M.R.S.A. § 2-803A) 
EFFECT OF CRIMINAL CONVICTION ON IN TESTATE SUCCESSION, WI LLS, JOINT ASSETS, 
BENEFICIARY DESIGNATIONS AND OTHER PROPER TY ACQUISITION WHEN RESTITUTION IS 
OWED TO THE DECEDENT 
 
Page 86 of 253 Effect of criminal conviction on intest ate succession, wills, joint assets, beneficiary designations and other property 
acquisition when restitution is owed to the decedent  
 
A person who has been convicted of a crime of which the decedent was a victim is not  entitled to the following 
benefits to the extent that the benefits do not exceed th e amount of restitution the person owes to the decedent as a 
result of the sentence for the crime:] 
(a).   Any benefits under the deced ent's will or under this Article;  
 
(b).   Any property owned jointly with the decedent;  
 (c).   Any benefit as a beneficiary of a bond, life insurance policy or other contractual arrangem ent in which the 
principal obligee or the person upon whose life th e policy is issued is the decedent; and  
 
(d).   Any benefit from any acquisition of pr operty in which the decedent had an interest.  
 
 
 
2-804 
REVOCATION OF PROBATE AND NONPROBATE TRANSFERS BY DIVORCE; NO REVOCATION BY 
OTHER CHANGES OF CIRCUMSTANCES. 
(a) Definitions. In this section: (1) “Disposition or appointment of prope rty” includes a transfer of an item of  property or any other benefit to a 
beneficiary designated in a governing instrument.   
(2) “Divorce or annulment” means any divorce or annulment , or any dissolution or decl aration of invalidity of 
a marriage, that would exclude the spouse as a surviving spouse within the meaning of Section 2-802.  A decree of 
separation that does not termin ate the status of husband and wife is not a divorce for purposes of this section.   
(3) “Divorced individual” incl udes an individual whose ma rriage has been annulled.   
(4) “Governing instrument” means a governing instrument executed by th e divorced individual before the 
divorce or annulment of his or her marri age to his or her former spouse.   
(5) “Relative of the divor ced individual’s former spouse” means an individual who is rela ted to the divorced 
individual’s former spouse by blood, adoption, or affinity and who, after the divorce or annul ment, is not related to the 
divorced individual by blood, a doption, or affinity.   
(6) “Revocable,” with respect to a disposition, appointment, provision, or  nomination, means one under which 
the divorced individual, at the time of the divorce or annulment, was al one empowered, by law or under the governing 
instrument, to cancel the designation in fa vor of his or her former spouse or fo rmer spouse’s relative, whether or not 
the divorced individual was th en empowered to designate himself or herself in place of his or her former spouse or in 
 
Page 87 of 253 place of his or her former spouse’s relative and whether or  not the divorced individual then had the capacity to 
exercise the power.   
(b) Revocation Upon Divorce. Except as provided by th e express terms of a governing instrument, a court 
order, or a contract relating to the divi sion of the marital estate made between th e divorced individuals before or after 
the marriage, divorce, or annulment, the divorce or annulment of a marriage: 
(1) revokes any revocable  (A) disposition or appointment of property made by a di vorced individual to his or  her former spouse in a 
governing instrument and any disposition or appointment create d by law or in a governing inst rument to a relative of 
the divorced individual’s former spouse,  
(B) provision in a governing instrument conferring a general or nongeneral power of appointment on the 
divorced individual’s former spouse or on a relative of the divorced individual’s former spouse, and  
(C) nomination in a governing instrument, nominating a divorced individu al’s former spouse or a relative of 
the divorced individual’s former spous e to serve in any fiduciary or repres entative capacity, in cluding a personal 
representative, executor, trustee, cons ervator, agent, or guardian; and  
(2) severs the interests of the former  spouses in property held by them at the time of the divorce or annulment 
as joint tenants with the right of surv ivorship [or as community property with the right of survivorship], transforming 
the interests of the former spouses into equal tenancies in common.   
(c) Effect of Severance. A severance under subsection (b)(2) does not affect a ny third-party interest in property 
acquired for value and in good faith reliance on an apparent title  by survivorship in the surv ivor of the former spouses 
unless a writing declaring the severance has been noted, registered, filed, or r ecorded in records appropriate to the 
kind and location of the property which ar e relied upon, in the ordinary  course of transactions involving such property, 
as evidence of ownership. 
(d) Effect of Revocation. Provisions of a governing instrument are given e ffect as if the former spouse and 
relatives of the former spouse disclaimed all provisions re voked by this section or, in the case of a revoked nomination 
in a fiduciary or representative capacity, as if the former  spouse and relatives of the former spouse died immediately 
before the divorce or annulment. 
(e) Revival if Divorce Nullified. Provisions revoked solely by this section are revived by the divorced 
individual’s remarriage to the former spouse or by a nullification of the divorce or annulment. 
(f) No Revocation for Other Change of Circumstances. No change of circumstances other than as described in 
this section and in Secti on 2-803 effects a revocation. 
(g) Protection of Payors a nd Other Third Parties. 
(1) A payor or other third party is no t liable for having made a payment or transferred an item of property or 
any other benefit to a beneficiary designated in a govern ing instrument affected by a divorce, annulment, or 
remarriage, or for having taken any other action in good faith reliance on the validity of the governing instrument, 
before the payor or other third party received written notice of the divorce, annulment, or remarriage.  A payor or 
other third party is liable for a payment made or other acti on taken after the payor or othe r third party received written 
notice of a claimed forfeiture or revocation under th is section.   
 
Page 88 of 253 (2) Written notice of the divorce, annulment, or remarri age under subsection (g)(1) must be mailed to the 
payor’s or other third party’s main office or home by register ed or certified mail, return receipt requested, or served 
upon the payor or other third party in the same manner as a summons in a civil action.  U pon receipt of written notice 
of the divorce, annulment, or remarriage, a payor or other third party may pay a ny amount owed or transfer or deposit 
any item of property held by it to or with the court havi ng jurisdiction of the probate proceedings relating to the 
decedent’s estate or, if no proceedings have been commenc ed, to or with the court having jurisdiction of probate 
proceedings relating to decedents’ estates located in the county of the decedent’s  residence.  The court shall hold the 
funds or item of property and, upon its determination under th is section, shall order dis bursement or transfer in 
accordance with the determination.  Payments , transfers, or deposits made to or with the court discharge the payor or 
other third party from all claims for th e value of amounts paid to or items of property transferred to or deposited with 
the court.   
(h) Protection of Bona Fide Purchase rs; Personal Liability of Recipient. 
(1) A person who purchases property from a former spous e, relative of a former spouse, or any other person 
for value and without notice, or who rece ives from a former spouse, relative of a former spouse, or any other person a 
payment or other item of property in part ial or full satisfaction of a legally enfo rceable obligation, is neither obligated 
under this section to retu rn the payment, item of property, or benefit nor  is liable under this sec tion for the amount of 
the payment or the value of the item of pr operty or benefit.  But a former spouse,  relative of a former spouse, or other 
person who, not for value, received a payment, item of pr operty, or any other benefit to which that person is not 
entitled under this section is obligated to return the payment,  item of property, or benefit, or is personally liable for the 
amount of the payment or the value of the item of property or  benefit, to the person who is  entitled to it under this 
section.   
(2) If this section or any part of th is section is preempted by federal law w ith respect to a payment, an item of 
property, or any other benefit covered by this section, a former spouse, relative  of the former spouse, or any other 
person who, not for value, received a payment, item of pr operty, or any other benefit to which that person is not 
entitled under this section is obligated to return that paymen t, item of property, or benef it, or is personally liable for 
the amount of the payment or the value of  the item of property or benefit, to the person who would have been entitled 
to it were this section or part  of this section not preempted.  
 
 
 
§ 2-805 
REFORMATION TO CORRECT MISTAKES. 
The court may reform the terms of a governing instrument , even if  unambiguous, to conform the terms to the 
transferor’s intention if  it is proved by clear and convi ncing evidence what the transferor ’s intention was and that the 
terms of the governing instrument were affected by a mi stake of fact or law, whether expression or inducement.  
 
 
Page 89 of 253 Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This Section is new, with no previo us counterpart in the MPC.  This 
Section constitutes a substantial change to Maine law, but provides consistency between the Maine Trust Code (18B M.R.S.A. §415) and Maine la ws that govern wills.   
 
 
§ 2-806 
MODIFICATION TO ACHIEVE TRANSFEROR’S TAX OBJECTIVES 
To achieve the transferor’s tax objectiv es, the court may modify the terms of a governing instrument in a manner that 
is not contrary to the transferor’s probable intention.  The court may provide  that the modifica tion has retroactive 
effect.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section is new, with no prev ious counterpart in the MPC, but it 
provides consistency between the Maine Trust Code (18B  M.R.S.A. §416) and Maine la ws that govern wills. 
 
 
NONE (CURRENTLY MPC 18A M.R.S.A. 2-807) 
ACTIONS FOR WRONGFUL DEATH 
[There is no UPC Section, The following reflects ch anges to the current Maine Wrongful Death statute ] 
 
(a).    Whenever the death of a person shall be caused by a wrongful act, neglect or defa ult, and the act, neglect or 
default is such as would, if death ha d not ensued, have entitled the party in jured to maintain an  action and recover 
damages in respect thereof, then the pe rson or the corporation that would have  been liable if death had not ensued 
shall be liable for damages as provid ed in this section, notw ithstanding the death of th e person injured and although 
the death shall have been caused under such circumstances as shall amount to a felony.  
 
B)  Every wrongful death action must be brought by and in  the name of the personal re presentative or special 
administrator of the deceased person, and  shall be distri butable, after payment for fune ral expenses and the costs of 
recovery including attorney fees, directly to the decedent’ s heirs without becoming part of the probate estate, except 
as may be specifically provided below.  The amount reco vered in every wrongful death action, except as specifically 
provided below, is for the exclusive bene fit of the surviving spouse if no minor ch ildren, of the children if no surviving 
spouse, one-half for the exclusi ve benefit of the surviving spouse and one- half for the exclusive be nefit of the minor 
children to be divided equally among th em if there are both surviving spouse and minor children and to the deceased's 
heirs to be distributed to  the individuals and in the proportions as provided in 18A M.R.S.A. §2-102 and §2-103  if 
there is neither surviving spouse nor minor children. The jury may give damage s as it determines a fair and just 
compensation with reference to the pecuniary injuries result ing from the death.  Damages are payable to the estate of 
the deceased person only  if the jury sp ecifically makes an award   and in add ition shall give such damages that will 
 
Page 90 of 253 compensate the estate of the deceased person for payable to the estate for re asonable expenses of medical, surgical 
and hospital care and treatment and for reas onable funeral expenses. ;o r if in the case of a se ttlement, the settlement 
documents specifically  provide for such an  allocation to the estate for the same.  In addition, the jury may give 
damages not exceeding $500,000 for the loss of comfort, soci ety and companionship of the deceased, including any 
damages for emotional distress arising fr om the same facts as those constituti ng the underlying claim, to the persons 
for whose benefit the action is brought.  The jury may also give punitive damages not exceeding $250,000.  An action 
under this section must be commenced within 2 years afte r the decedent’s death.  If a claim under this section is 
settled without an action having been co mmenced, the amount paid in settlement must be distributed as provided in 
this subsection.  A settlement on behalf of minor children is not valid unless approved by the court, as provided in 
Title 14, section 1605.  
(c).    Whenever death ensues following a period of cons cious suffering, as a result of personal injuries due to the 
wrongful act, neglect or default of any person, the person who caused the personal injuries resulting in such conscious 
suffering and death shall, in addition to the action at co mmon law and damages recovera ble therein, be liable in 
damages in a separate count in the same action for such death, brought, commenced and dete rmined and subject to the 
same limitation as to the amount recoverable for such deat h and exclusively for the bene ficiaries in the manner set 
forth in subsection (b), separately found, but in such cases  there shall be only one rec overy for the same injury.  
 (d).    Any action under this section brought against a governmental entity under Title 14, sections 8101 to 8118, shall 
be limited as provided in those sections.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law on 
wrongful death claims.  It does, however , affect the procedures for distributi on of the proceeds from wrongful death 
claims, and ties the beneficiaries to those named in the Maine intestacy statutes.   
UPC 2-901 / To be: 33 M.R.S.A. § 101  
STATUTORY RULE AGAINST PERPETUITIES 
Section 2-901  33 M.R.S.A. § 101. STATUTORY RULE AGAINST PERPETUITIES. 
 
(a)Validity of Nonvested Propert y Interest.  A nonvested property interest is invalid unless: 
(1) when the interest is created, it is certain to vest  or terminate no later than 21 years after the death of 
an individual then alive; or (2) the interest either vests or terminat es within 90 years after its creation. 
(b)Validity of General Power of Appoin tment Subject to a Condition Precedent.  A general power of  appointment not 
presently exercisable because of a c ondition precedent is invalid unless: 
(1)when the power is created, the co ndition precedent is certain to be  satisfied or becomes impossible 
to satisfy no later than 21 years after the death of an individu al then alive; or 
(2)the condition precedent either is satisfied or beco mes impossible to satisfy within 90 years after its 
 
Page 91 of 253 creation. 
(c)Validity of Nongeneral or Testamenta ry Power of Appointment.  A nongenera l power of appointment or a general 
testamentary power of appoi ntment is invalid unless: 
(1)when the power is created, it is certain to be irrevocably exercised or otherwise to terminate no later 
than 21 years after the death of an individual then alive; or 
(2)the power is irrevocably exer cised or otherwise terminates w ithin 90 years afte r its creation. 
(d)Possibility of Post-death Child Disregarded.  In determ ining whether a nonvested propert y interest or a power of 
appointment is valid under subsection (a)(1), (b)(1), or (c)(1),  the possibility that a child will be born to an individual 
after the individual's death is disregarded. (e)Effect of Certain "L ater-of" Type Language.   If, in measuring a period from the creation of a trust or other property 
arrangement, language in a governing instru ment (i) seeks to disallow the vesti ng or termination of any interest or 
trust beyond, (ii) seeks to postpone the vesting or termination of  any interest or trust until, or (iii) seeks to operate in 
effect in any similar fashion upon, the later of (A) the expi ration of a period of time no t exceeding 21 years after the 
death of the survivor of specified lives in being at the creation of  the trust or other proper ty arrangement or (B) the 
expiration of a period of time that exceeds or might exceed 21 y ears after the death of the surv ivor of lives in being at 
the creation of the trust or othe r property arrangement, that language is inoperative to the extent it produces a period of 
time that exceeds 21 years after the death of  the survivor of the specified lives.  
 
 
 
None.  MPC Current 33 M.R.S.A. § 101  
APPLICATION OF RULE 
None / Repeal current Ma ine Statue 33 M.R.S.A. §  101 
 
 
 
2-902; To be: 33 M.R.S.A. § 102  
WHEN NON VESTED PROPERTY INTEREST  OR POWER OF APPOINTMENT CREATED 
SECTION 2-902§ 102.  WHEN NONVESTED PROPERTY  INTEREST OR POWER OF APPOINTMENT 
CREATED. 
 
(a) Except as provided in subsections  (b) and (c) and in Section 2-905(a) 105(a), the time of creation of a 
nonvested property interest or a power of appointment is determined under ge neral principles of property law. 
(b) For purposes of [Subpart] 1 of this [part]this chapte r, if there is a person who alone can exercise a power 
created by a governing instrument to b ecome the unqualified beneficial owner of  (i) a nonvested property interest or 
(ii) a property interest subj ect to a power of appointment described in Section 101(b) or (c), the nonvested property 
 
Page 92 of 253 interest or power of appointment is created when the power to become the unqualified beneficial owner terminates.  
[For purposes of [Subpart] 1 of this [part], a joint power w ith respect to community prope rty or to marital property 
under the Uniform Marital Property Act held by individuals married to each other is a power exercisable by one 
person alone.](c) For purposes of [Subpart] 1 of this [part] this chapter, a nonvested prope rty interest or a power of 
appointment arising from a tran sfer of property to a previous ly funded trust or other exis ting property arrangement is 
created when the nonvested property inte rest or power of appointment in th e original contri bution was created.  
 
 
 
NONE. MPC CURRENT 33 M.R.S.A. § 102
AGE MAY BE REDUCED TO 21 
None / Repeal current Main e Statute 33 M.R.S.A. § 102  
 
 
 
UPC 2-903 / TO BE: 33 M.R.S.A. § 103  
REFORMATION 
SECTION 2-903§ 103.  REFORMATION.   
Upon the petition of an interested person, a court shall reform a disposition in the manner that most closely 
approximates the transferor’s manifested plan of dist ribution and is within the 90 years allowed by Section 2-
901101(a)(2), 2-901101(b)(2), or 2-901101(c)(2) if: 
(1) a nonvested property interest or a power of appointment beco mes invalid under Section 2-901101 
(statutory rule against perpetuities);  
(2) a class gift is not but might become invalid under Section 2-901101 (statutory rule  against perpetuities) and 
the time has arrived when the share of any class member  is to take effect in po ssession or enjoyment; or  
             (3) a nonvested property interest that is  not validated by Section 2-901101(a )(1) can vest bu t not within 90 
years after its creation.  
 
 
 
UPC 2-904 / TO BE: 33 M.R.S.A. § 104  
EXCLUSION FROM STATUTORY RULE AGAINST PERPETUITIES 
SECTION 2-904§ 104. EXCLUSIONS FROM STAT UTORY RULE AGAINST  PERPETUITIES.  
 
Section 2-901101 (statutory rule agai nst perpetuities) does not apply to: 
 
 
Page 93 of 253 (1) a nonvested property interest or a power of appointment arising out of a nondonative transfer, except a 
nonvested property interest or a power  of appointment arising out of  
(A) a premarital or po stmarital agreement,  
(B) a separation or divorce settlement,  (C) a spouse’s election,  (D) a similar arrangement arising out of a prospective, existing, or prev ious marital relationship between the 
parties,  
(E) a contract to make or not to revoke a will or trust,  (F) a contract to exercise or not to  exercise a power of appointment,  
(G) a transfer in satisfacti on of a duty of support, or  
(H) a reciprocal transfer;  (2) a fiduciary’s power relating to the administration or management of  assets, including the power of a 
fiduciary to sell, lease, or mortgage  property, and the power of a fiduciary to determine principal and income;  
(3) a power to appoint a fiduciary;  (4) a discretionary power of a trustee to distribute princi pal before termination of a trust to a beneficiary having 
an indefeasibly vested interest in the income and principal;  
(5) a nonvested property interest held  by a charity, government, or government al agency or subdivision, if the 
nonvested property interest is preceded by an interest held by another charity, government, or governmental agency or 
subdivision;  
(6) a nonvested property interest in or  a power of appointment with resp ect to a trust or other property 
arrangement forming part of a pension, profit-sharing, stock bonus, health, disability, deat h benefit, income deferral, 
or other current or deferred benefit plan  for one or more employees, independent contractors, or their beneficiaries or 
spouses, to which contributions are made for the purpose of dist ributing to or for the benefit of the participants or their 
beneficiaries or spouses the property, income, or principal in the trus t or other property arrangement, except a 
nonvested property interest or a power of appointment that is created by an electi on of a participant or a beneficiary or 
spouse; or  
(6) a property interest, power of appointment, or arra ngement that was not subject to the common-law rule 
against perpetuities or is  excluded by another statute of this state; or 
(7) a trust in which the govern ing instrument states that the rule agains t perpetuities does not apply to the trust 
and under which the trustee or other person to whom the pow er is properly granted or delegated has the power under 
the governing instrument, applic able statute or common law to  sell, mortgage or lease pr operty for any period of time 
beyond the period that is required for an interest created unde r the governing instrument to vest. This subdivision shall 
apply to all trusts created by will or inter vivos agreement executed or amended on or after September 18, 1999, and to 
all trusts created by exercise  of power of appointment granted under inst ruments executed or amended on or after 
September 18, 1999.   
 
 
 
Page 94 of 253  
UPC 2-905 / TO BE: 33 M.R.S.A. § 105  
APPLICATION 
SECTION 2-905§ 105. PROSPECTIVE APPLICATION.  
 
(a) Nonvested property interest or a power of appointment created prior to  effective date of this chapter. 
(1) Except as provided in the first sentence of section 106, this chap ter shall not be construed to 
invalidate or modify the terms of any limitation which would have been valid prior to August 20, 
1955. 
(2) This chapter shall apply only to inter vivos inst ruments taking effect after August 20, 1955, to wills 
where the testator dies afte r August 20, 1955, and to appointments made after August 20, 1955, 
including appointments by inter vivo s instruments or wills under power s created before said August 
20th.  
(3) Section 104(7) shall apply to all trusts create d by will or inter vivos agreement executed or 
amended on or after September 18, 1999, and to a ll trusts created by ex ercise of power of 
appointment granted under instruments execute d or amended on or after September 18, 1999.  
(b) Nonvested property interest or a power  of appointment created on or after effective date of  this chapter. 
(1) Except as extended by subsection (b2) , Subpart 1 of this partchapter applies to a nonvested property 
interest or a power of appointment that is created on or after the eff ective date of Subpart 1 of this 
part chapter.  For purposes  of this section, a nonvested property  interest or a power of appointment 
created by the exercise of a power of appointme nt is created when th e power is irrevocably 
exercised or when a revocable exercise becomes irrevocable. 
(2) If a nonvested property interest or a power of appointment was create d before the effective date of 
Subpart 1 of this partthis chapte r and is determined in a judicial proceeding, commenced on or after 
the effective date of Subpart 1 of th is partthis chapter, to violate th is state’s rule ag ainst perpetuities 
as that rule existed before the effective date of Subpart 1 of this partthis  chapter, a court upon the 
petition of an interested person may reform th e disposition in the manner that most closely 
approximates the transferor’s manifested plan of di stribution and is within the limits of the rule 
against perpetuities applicable wh en the nonvested property interest  or power of appointment was 
created.  
 
 
 
NONE. TO BE: 33 M.R.S.A. § 106  
CONTINGENT INTERESTS 
33 M.R.S.A. §106.  Contingent interests. 
 
Page 95 of 253  
A fee simple determinable in land or a fee simple in land subject to a right of entry fo r condition broken shall become 
a fee simple absolute if the specified contingency does not occur within 30 year s from the date when such fee simple 
determinable or such fee simple subject to a right of entr y becomes possessory. If such contingency occurs within said 
30 years the succeeding interest, which may be  an interest in a person other than the person creating the interest or his 
heirs, shall become possessory or the ri ght of entry exercisable notwithstanding th e rule against perpetuities. But if a 
fee simple determinable in land or a fee simple in land subject  to a right of entry for condition broken is so limited that 
the specified contingency must occur, if at all, within the period of the rule against perp etuities, said interests shall 
take effect as limited. This section shall not apply wher e both such fee simple determinable and such succeeding 
interest, or both such fee simple and such right of entry are for public, charita ble or religious pur poses; nor shall it 
apply to a deed, gift or grant to the St ate or any political subdivision thereof.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comment  The language does not contain a substantive change to Maine law . 
 
 
NONE / TO BE: 33 M.R.S.A. § 107  
APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS 
§107. Application of provisions  
This chapter shall apply to bot h legal and equitable interests.  
 
 
 
2-906 TO BE: 33 M.R.S.A. § 108 
SUPERSESSION AND REPEAL 
SECTION 2-906.§108.  [SUPERSESSION.][ AND REPEAL.] Subpart 1 of this partThis chapter [supersedes the 
rule of the common law known as the rule against perpetui ties] and it [repeals and replaces  Title 33, Chapter 5(list 
statutes to be repealed)].  
 
 
 
2-907 
HONORARY TRUSTS; TRUSTS FOR PETS. 
 (a) [Honorary Trust.] Subject to subsec tion (c), if (i) a trust is for a specific lawful noncharitable purpose or 
for lawful noncharitable purposes to be se lected by the trustee and (ii) there is no definite or definitely ascertainable 
beneficiary designated, the trust may be pe rformed by the trustee for [21] years but  no longer, whether or not the terms 
 
Page 96 of 253 of the trust contempl ate a longer duration. 
(b) [Trust for Pets.] Subject to this  subsection and subsection (c), a trust for the care of a designated domestic 
or pet animal is valid.  The trust term inates when no living animal is covere d by the trust.  A governing instrument 
must be liberally construed to bring the transfer within this subsection, to presume agai nst the merely precatory or 
honorary nature of the disposition, and to  carry out the general intent of th e transferor.  Extrinsic evidence is 
admissible in determining the transferor’s intent. 
(c) [Additional Provisions Applicable to Honorary Trusts an d Trusts for Pets.] In addition to the provisions of 
subsection (a) or (b), a trust covere d by either of those subsections is subject to the following provisions: 
(1) Except as expressly provided otherw ise in the trust instrument, no porti on of the principal or income may 
be converted to the use of th e trustee or to any use other than for the trust’s purposes or  for the benefit of a covered 
animal.   
(2) Upon termination, the trustee sha ll transfer the unexpended trust prope rty in the following order:   
(A) as directed in th e trust instrument;  
(B) if the trust was created in a nonresiduary clause in th e transferor’s will or in a codicil to the transferor’s 
will, under the residuary clause in the transferor’s will; and  
(C) if no taker is produced by the ap plication of subparagrap h (A) or (B), to the transferor’s heirs under 
Section 2-711.   
(3) For the purposes of Section 2-707, the residuary clau se is treated as creating a future interest under the 
terms of a trust.   
(4) The intended use of the principal or income can be enforced by an in dividual designated for that purpose in 
the trust instrument or, if none, by an individual appointed by a court upon a pplication to it by an  individual.   
(5) Except as ordered by the court or required by the tr ust instrument, no filing, repor t, registration, periodic 
accounting, separate maintenance of funds, appointment, or fee is required by reas on of the existence of the fiduciary 
relationship of the trustee.   
(6) A court may reduce the amount of the property transfe rred, if it determines that that amount substantially 
exceeds the amount required for the intended use.  The amoun t of the reduction, if any, passes as unexpended trust 
property under subs ection (c)(2).   
(7) If no trustee is designated or no de signated trustee is willing or able to serve, a court shall name a trustee.  
A court may order the transfer of the prope rty to another trustee, if required to assure that the intended use is carried 
out and if no successor trustee is designated in the trust inst rument or if no designated su ccessor trustee agrees to serve 
or is able to serve.  A court may also make such other orde rs and determinations as shall be advisable to carry out the 
intent of the transferor an d the purpose of this section.]  
 
 
 
2-1001  
DEFINITIONS 
 
Page 97 of 253 SECTION 2-1001.  DEFINITIONS.  In this [part:] 
(1) “International will” means a will executed in conformity with Sections 2-1002 through 2-1005. 
(2) “Authorized person” and “person authorized to act in connection with international wills” mean a person 
who by Section 2-1009, or by the laws of th e United States including members of the diplomatic and consular service 
of the United States designated by Foreign Service Regul ations, is empowered to supervise the execution of 
international wills.  
 
 
 
2-1002  
INTERNATIONAL WILLS; VALIDIDY 
 (a) A will shall be valid as regards form, irrespective pa rticularly of the place where it is made, of the location 
of the assets and of the nationality, domic ile, or residence of the testator, if it is  made in the form of an international 
will complying with the requirements of this [part]. 
(b) The invalidity of the will as an in ternational will shall not affect its formal validity as a will of another 
kind. 
(c) This [part] shall not apply to the form of testamentary dispositions made by two or more persons in one 
instrument. 
 
 
 
2-1003  
INTERNATIONAL WILLS; REQUIREMENTS 
(a) The will shall be made in writing.  It need not be written by the testator  himself.  It may be written in any 
language, by hand or by any other means. 
(b) The testator shall declare in the presence of two w itnesses and of a person author ized to act in connection 
with international wills that the docume nt is his will and that he knows the cont ents thereof.  The testator need not 
inform the witnesses, or the authorized  person, of the contents of the will. 
(c) In the presence of the witn esses, and of the authorized  person, the testator shall si gn the will or, if he has 
previously signed it, shall acknowledge his signature. 
(d) When the testator is unable to sign, the absence of his signature does not affect the validity of the 
international will if the testator indicates the reason for his inability to sign and the authorized person makes note 
thereof on the will.  In these cases, it is permissible for a ny other person present, including the authorized person or 
one of the witnesses, at the direction of the testator to sign the testator’s name for him, if the authorized person makes 
note of this also on the will, but it is not required  that any person sign the testator’s name for him. 
(e) The witnesses and the authorized person shall there a nd then attest the will by signi ng in the presence of the 
 
Page 98 of 253 testator. 
 
 
 
2-1004  
INTERNATIONAL WILL; OT HER POINTS OF FORM. 
 (a) The signatures shall be placed at the end of the will.  If the will consists of severa l sheets, each sheet will 
be signed by the testator or, if he is unable to sign, by the person signing on his behalf or, if there is no such person, by 
the authorized person.  In additi on, each sheet shall be numbered. 
(b) The date of the will shall be the date of its signature by the authori zed person.  That date shall be noted at 
the end of the will by the authorized person. 
(c) The authorized person shall ask the testator whet her he wishes to make a declaration concerning the 
safekeeping of his will.  If so and at th e express request of the testator the place where he intends to have his will kept 
shall be mentioned in the certifi cate provided for in Section 2-1005. 
(d) A will executed in compliance with  Section 2-1003 shall not be invalid merely because it does not comply 
with this section.  
 
 
 
2-1005  
INTERNATIONAL WI LL; CERTIFICATE 
The authorized person shall attach to the will a certificate to be signed by him establishing that the 
requirements of this [part] for valid execution of an inte rnational will have been complied with.  The authorized 
person shall keep a copy of the certificate and deliver another to the testator .  The certificate shall be substantially in 
the following form: 
CERTIFICATE 
(Convention of October 26, 1973) 
1.  I, ____________________ (name, address and capacity), a pe rson authorized to act in connection with 
international wills 
2.  Certify that on ________ (date) at __________ (place) 
3.  (testator) ____________________ (name, address, date and place of birth) in my presence and that of the witnesses 
4.  (a)____________________ (name, address, date and place of birth) 
     (b)____________________ (name, address, date and place of bi rth) has declared that the attached document is his 
will and that he knows the contents thereof. 
5.  I furthermore certify that: 
6.  (a) in my presence and in that of the witnesses 
 
Page 99 of 253            (1) the testator has signed the w ill or has acknowledged his signature previously affixed. 
                *(2) following a declaration of the testator stating th at he was unable to sign his will for the following reason 
_____ 
               I have mentioned this declaration on the will 
                      *the signature has been affixed by ____________________  
(name, address) 
7.  (b) the witnesses and I have signed the will; 
8.  *(c) each page of the will has been signed by ____________ and numbered; 
9.  (d) I have satisfied myself as to  the identity of the testator and of  the witnesses as designated above; 
10.  (e) the witnesses met the conditions requisite to ac t as such according to the law under which I am acting; 
11.  *(f) the testator has requested me to include the fo llowing statement concerning th e safekeeping of his will: 
           _________________________ 
           _________________________ 
*To be completed if appropriate 
12.  PLACE 
13.  DATE 
14.  SIGNATURE and, if necessary, SEAL  
 
 
 
2-1006  
INTERNATIONAL WILL; EF FECT OF CERTIFICATE 
In the absence of evidence to the cont rary, the certificate of the authorized  person shall be conclusive of the 
formal validity of the instrument as a will under this [part].  The absence or irregularity of a certificate sh all not affect 
the formal validity of a will under this [part].  
 
 
 
2-1007  
INTERNATIONAL WI LLS; REVOCATION 
  The international will shall be subject to the ordinary rules of revocation of wills. 
 
 
 
2-1008  
SOURCE AND CONSTRUCTION 
 
Page 100 of 253 Sections 2-1001 through 2-1007 derive from Annex to Convention of October 26, 1973, Providing a Uniform 
Law on the Form of an International Will.  In interpreti ng and applying this [part], regard shall be had to its 
international origin and to the need  for uniformity in its interpretation.  
 
 
 
2-1009  
PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO ACT IN RELATIONSH IP TO INTERNATIONAL  WILL; ELIGIBLIITY; 
RECOGNATION BY AUTHORIZING AGENCY. 
Individuals who have been admitted to practice law before  the courts of this state and who are in good standing 
as active law practitioners in this state, are hereby declared to be authorized persons in relation to international wills.  
 
 
 
2-1010 
INTERNATIONAL WILL INFO RMATION REGISTRATION  
The [Secretary of State] shall establish a registry system by which authorized persons may register in a central information 
center, information regarding the execution of international wills, keeping that info rmation in strictest confidence until the death 
of the maker and then making it available to any person desi ring information about any will who presents a death certificate or  
other satisfactory evidence of the testator’s death to the center.   Information that may be received, preserved in confidence u ntil 
death, and reported as indicated is limited to the name, social -security or any other individual-identifying number established  by 
law, address, and date and place of birth of the testator, and the intended place of deposit or safekeeping of the instrument 
pending the death of the maker.  The [Secretary of State], at the request of the authorized pe rson, may cause the information i t 
receives about execution of any international will to be transmitte d to the registry system of another jurisdiction as identifi ed by 
the testator, if that other system adheres to rules protecti ng the confidentiality of the information similar to those establis hed in 
this state.] 
 
2-1102 
DEFINITIONS 
(1) “Disclaimant” means the person to whom a discla imed interest or power would have passed had the 
disclaimer not been made.   
(2) “Disclaimed interest” means the in terest that would have passed to th e disclaimant had the disclaimer not 
 
Page 101 of 253 been made.   
(3) “Disclaimer” means the re fusal to accept an interest in  or power over property.   
(4) “Fiduciary” means a personal representative, trust ee, agent acting under a power  of attorney, or other 
person authorized to act as a fiduciary with respect to the property of another person.   
(5) “Jointly held property” means property held in the name of two or more persons under an arrangement in 
which all holders have concurrent intere sts and under which the last surviving holder is entitled to  the whole of the 
property.   
(6) “Person” means an indi vidual, corporation, business trust, esta te, trust, partnership, limited liability 
company, association, joint venture, government; government al subdivision, agency, or instrumentality; public 
corporation, or any other lega l or commercial entity.   
(7) “State” means a state of the United States, the District of Columb ia, Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin 
Islands, or any territory or insular po ssession subject to the jurisdiction of th e United States.  The term includes an 
Indian tribe or band, or Alas kan native village, recognized by federal la w or formally acknowledged by a state.   
(8) “Trust” means:   (A) an express trust, charitable or noncharitable, with additions thereto, whenever and however created; and  
(B) a trust created pursuant to a statute, judgment, or d ecree which requires the trust to be administered in the 
manner of an express trust.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section is new, with no previous counterpart in the MPC . 
 
 
2-1103 
SCOPE 
This part applies to disclaimers of any intere st in or power over pr operty, whenever created. 
 
 
 
2-1104 
PART SUPPLEMENTED BY OTHER LAW. 
(a) Unless displaced by a provision of this part, the pr inciples of law and equity supplement this part. 
(b) This part does not limit any right of a person to wa ive, release, disclaim, or renounce an interest in or 
power over property under a la w other than this part. 
 
 
 
2-1105 
 
Page 102 of 253 POWER TO DISCLAIM; GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; WHEN IRREVOCABLE 
(a)  A person may disclaim, in whole or part, any in terest in or power over pr operty, including a power of 
appointment.  A person may disclaim the interest or power even if its creator imposed a spendthrift provision or 
similar restriction on transfer  or a restriction or limita tion on the right to disclaim. 
 (b)  Except to the extent a fiduc iary’s right to disclaim is e xpressly restricted or limited by another statute of this state 
or by the instrument creating the fiduciary  relationship, a fiduciary may disclaim, in  whole or part, any interest in or 
power over property, including a power of  appointment, whether acting in a pe rsonal or represen tative capacity.  A 
fiduciary may disclaim the interest or power even if its creator imposed a spendthrift pr ovision or similar restriction 
on transfer or a restriction or limitation on the right to discla im or an instrument other than  the instrument that created 
the fiduciary relationship imposed a restrict ion or limitation on the right to disclaim. 
 (c)  To be effective, a disclaimer must be in a writing or other record, declare the disclaim er, describe the interest or 
power disclaimed, be signed by the person making the disclaim er, and be delivered or filed in the manner provided in 
Section 2-1112.  In this subsection: (1) “record” means information that is inscribed on a tangibl e medium or that is stored  in an electronic or other 
medium and is retrievable in perceivable form; and  
(2) “signed” means, with present intent to authen ticate or adopt a record, to;  
(A) execute or adopt a tangible symbol; or  
(B) attach to or logical ly associate with the record an elec tronic sound, symbol, or process.   
 (d)  A partial disclaimer may be expressed as a fraction, pe rcentage, monetary amount, term of years, limitation of a 
power, or any other interest or estate in the property. 
 (e)  A disclaimer becomes irrevocable when it is delivered or filed pursuan t to Section 2-1112 or when it becomes 
effective as provided in Sections 2-1 106 through 2-1111, whicheve r occurs later. 
(f)  A disclaimer made under this part is  not a transfer, assi gnment, or release. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section removes ambiguity un der previous Maine law regarding 
delivery. 
  
2-1106 
DISCLAIMER OF INTE REST IN PROPERTY. 
(a)  In this section: 
(1) “Future interest” means an interest that takes effect in  possession or enjoyment, if at all, later than the time 
 
Page 103 of 253 of its creation.  
(2) “Time of Distribution” means the time when a disclaim ed interest would have taken effect in possession or 
enjoyment. 
 (b)  Except for a disclaimer governed by Section 2-1107 or  2-1108, the following rules apply to a disclaimer of 
an interest in property: 
(1) The disclaimer takes effect as of the time the instru ment creating the interest b ecomes irrevocable, or, if the 
interest arose under the la w of intestate succession, as of th e time of the intestate’s death.   
(2) The disclaimed interest passes acc ording to any provision in the instru ment creating the interest providing 
for the disposition of the interest, should it be discla imed, or of disclaimed in terests in general.   
(3) If the instrument does not contai n a provision described in  paragraph (2), the fo llowing rules apply:   
(A) If the disclaimant is not an individual, the disclaim ed interest passes as if th e disclaimant did not exist. 
(B) If the disclaimant is an individual, except as otherwise provided in subpara graphs (C) and (D), the 
disclaimed interest passes as if the disclaimant had died immediately before the time of distribution.   
(C) If by law or under the instrument, th e descendants of the disc laimant would share in the disclaimed interest 
by any method of representation had the disclaimant died be fore the time of distributi on, the disclaimed interest 
passes only to the descendants of  the disclaimant who survive the time of distribution.   
(D) If the disclaimed interest would pass to the disclaiman t’s estate had the disclaiman t died before the time of 
distribution, the disclaimed interest inst ead passes by representation to the descendants of the disclaimant who survive 
the time of distribution.  If no descendant  of the disclaimant survives the time of distribution, the disclaimed interest 
passes to those persons, including the stat e but excluding the disclaimant, and in such shares as would succeed to the 
transferor’s intestate estate under the in testate succession law of the transferor’s domicile had the transferor died at the 
time of distribution.  However, if the tran sferor’s surviving spouse is living but is remarried at the time of distribution, 
the transferor is deemed to have died  unmarried at the time of distribution. 
(4) Upon the disclaimer of a preceding interest, a future interest held by a person other than the disclaimant 
takes effect as if the disclaimant had died or ceased to exist immediately befo re the time of distribution, but a future 
interest held by the disclaimant is not accelerated in possession or enjoyment. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law, but 
removes existing ambiguities and adds clarity an d direction. 
 
 
2-1107 
DISCLAIMER OF RIGHTS OF SURVIVOR SHIP IN JOINTLY HELD PROPERTY. 
(a)  Upon the death of a holder of join tly held property, a surviving holder may disclaim, in whole or part, the 
greater of: 
 
Page 104 of 253 (1) a fractional share of the propert y determined by dividing the number on e by the number of joint holders 
alive immediately before the deat h of the holder to whose death the disclaimer relates; or  
(2) all of the property except that part of the value of the entire interest attri butable to the contribution 
furnished by the disclaimant. 
(b)  A disclaimer under subsection (a) ta kes effect as of the death of the holder of jointly held property to 
whose death the disclaimer relates. 
(c)  An interest in jointly held property disclaimed by a surviving holde r of the property passes as if the 
disclaimant predeceased the holder to whose death the disclaimer relates. 
 
 Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section removes ambiguity und er previous Maine law and adds 
clarity. 
 
  
2-1108 
DISCLAIMER OF INTEREST BY TRUSTEE 
If a trustee disclaims an interest in property that otherw ise would have become trust property, the interest does not 
become trust property.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section is new, with no pr evious counterpart in the MPC. 
 
 
2-1109 
DISCLAIMER OF POWER OF APPOINTMENT OR OT HER POWER NOT HELD IN FIDUCIARY CAPACITY. 
If a holder disclaims a power of appointment or other pow er not held in a fiduciary  capacity, the following rules 
apply: (1) If the holder has not exercised the power, the disclaimer takes effect as of the time the instrument creating the 
power becomes irrevocable.   (2) If the holder has exercised the power and the disclaimer  is of a power other than a presently exercisable general 
power of appointment, the disclaimer takes effect im mediately after the last ex ercise of the power.   
(3) The instrument creating the power is  construed as if the power expired when the disclaimer became effective.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section is new, with no pr evious counterpart in the MPC. 
 
2-1110  
DISCLAIMER BY APPOINTEE, OBJECT, OR TAKE R IN DEFAULT OF EXERCISE OF POWER OF 
 
Page 105 of 253 APPOINTMENT.  
(a) A disclaimer of an interest in prop erty by an appointee of a power of appoi ntment takes effect as of the time the 
instrument by which the holder exer cises the power becomes irrevocable. 
 
(b) A disclaimer of an interest in prop erty by an object or taker in default of an exercise of a power of appointment 
takes effect as of the time the instrume nt creating the power becomes irrevocable.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section is new, with no previous counterpart in the MPC . 
 
 
2-1111 
DISCLAIMER OF POWER HELD  IN FIDUCIARY CAPACITY. 
(a)  If a fiduciary disclaims a power held in a fiduciary capacity which has not been exercised, the disclaimer takes 
effect as of the time the instrument creating the power becomes irrevocable. 
 (b)  If a fiduciary disclaims a power held in a fiduciary cap acity which has been exercised, the disclaimer takes effect 
immediately after the last  exercise of the power. 
 (c)  A disclaimer under this section is e ffective as to another fiduciary if the disclaimer so provides and the fiduciary 
disclaiming has the authority to bind the estate, trus t, or other person for whom  the fiduciary is acting. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section is new, with no pr evious counterpart in the MPC. 
 
 
2-1112 
DELIVERY OR FILING. 
(a) In this section, “beneficiary designa tion” means an instrument, other than  an instrument creating a trust, 
naming the beneficiary of: (1) an annuity or insurance policy; 
(2) an account with a designation for payment ; 
(3) a security registered in beneficiary form; 
(4) a pension, profit-sharing, retirement, or ot her employment-related benefit plan; or  
(5) any other nonprobate transfer at death 
(b) Subject to subsections (c) through (l), delivery of a disclaimer may be a ffected by personal delivery, first-class 
mail, or any other method likely to result in its receipt. 
(c) In the case of an interest created unde r the law of intestate succ ession or an interest cr eated by will, other than 
 
Page 106 of 253 an interest in a testamentary trust: 
(1) a disclaimer must be delivered to  the personal representative of th e decedent’s estate, or the special 
administrator of the d ecedent’s estate; or  
(2) if no personal representa tive is then serving, it must be file d with the Probate Court court having 
jurisdiction to appoint the personal representative.   
(d) In the case of an interest in a testamentary trust: 
(1) a disclaimer must be delivered to th e trustee the serving, or if no trust ee is then serving, to the personal 
representative of the decedent’s estate; or 
(2) if no trustee or personal re presentative is then serving, it must be filed with the Probate Court having 
jurisdiction to enforce the trust. 
(e) In the case of an interest in an inter vivos trust: 
(1) a disclaimer must be delivered to the trustee then serving; 
(2) if no trustee is then serving, it must be filed with the Probate Court having  jurisdiction to en force the trust; 
or 
(3) if the disclaimer is made before the time the instru ment creating the trust beco mes irrevocable, it must be 
delivered to the settlor of a revocable tr ust or the transferor of the interest. 
(f) In the case of an interest crea ted by a beneficiary designation which is disclaimed before the time the 
designation becomes irrevocable, the disclaimer must be delivered to  the person making the beneficiary 
designation.  In the case of an inte rest created by a beneficiary designa tion which is disclaimed after the 
designation becomes irrevocable: (1) the disclaimer of an interest in pe rsonal property must be delivered to the person obligated to distribute the 
interest; and 
(2) the disclaimer of an interest  in real property must be recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds 
of the county where the real property that is the subject of the disc laimer is located. 
(g) In the case of a disclaimer by a surv iving holder of jointly held property, th e disclaimer must be delivered to 
the person to whom the disclaimed interest passes. 
(h) In the case of a disclaimer by an obj ect or taker in default of exercise of a power of appointment at any time 
after the power was created: (1) the disclaimer must be delivered to  the holder of the power or to the fiduciary acting unde r the instrument 
that created the power; or 
(2) if no fiduciary is then serving, it must be filed w ith the Probate Court having authority to appoint the 
fiduciary. 
(i) In the case of a disclaimer by an appoint ee of a nonfiduciary power of appointment:  
(1) the disclaimer must be delivered to the holder, the personal representative  of the holder’s estate or to the 
fiduciary under the instrument that created the power; or 
(2) if no fiduciary is then serving, it must be filed w ith the Probate Court having authority to appoint the 
fiduciary 
 
Page 107 of 253 (j) In the case of a disclaimer by a fiduciary of a power over a trust or estate, the disclaimer must be delivered as 
provided in subsection (c), (d), or (e), as if th e power disclaimed were an  interest in property.  
(k) In the case of a disclaimer of a power by an agent, th e disclaimer must be deliver ed to the principal or the 
principal’s representative. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The section no longer contains a 9 month time limit on disclaimers . 
 
 
2-1113  
WHEN DISCLAIMER BA RRED OR LIMITED.  
(a)  A disclaimer is barred by a writte n waiver of the right to disclaim. 
(b)  A disclaimer of an interest in property is barred if any of the followi ng events occur before the disclaimer 
becomes effective: (1) the disclaimant accepts the inte rest sought to be disclaimed;  
(2) the disclaimant voluntarily assigns, conveys, encumbers, ple dges, or transfers the interest  sought to be disclaimed 
or contracts to do so; or  (3) a judicial sale of the interest sought to be disclaimed occurs.   
(c)  A disclaimer, in whole or part, of the future exercise of a power held in a fiduciary capacity is not barred by its 
previous exercise. (d)  A disclaimer, in whole or part, of the future exercise of a power not held in a fidu ciary capacity is not barred by 
its previous exercise unless the power is exercisable in favor of the disclaimant. 
(e)  A disclaimer is barred or limited if so provided by law other than this part. 
(f)  A disclaimer of a power over property which is barred by this section is ineffec tive.  A disclaimer of an interest in 
property which is barred by this section ta kes effect as a transfer of the interest disclaimed  to the persons who would 
have taken the interest under this part  had the disclaimer not been barred.  
 
 
 
2-1114 
TAX QUALIFIED DISCLAIMER.   
Notwithstanding any other provision of this pa rt, if as a result of a disclaimer or transfer the disclaimed or transferred 
interest is treated pursuant to the provisions of Title 26 of the United St ates Code, as now or hereafter amended, or 
any successor statute thereto, and the regulations promulgate d thereunder, as never havi ng been transferred to the 
disclaimant, then the disclaimer or transfer is effective as a disc laimer under this part. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
Page 108 of 253  
 
2-1115 
RECORDING OF DISCLAIMER.   
If an instrument transferring an interest  in or power over property subject to a disclaimer is required or permitted by 
law to be filed, recorded, or registere d, the disclaimer may be so filed, record ed, or registered.  Except as otherwise 
provided in Section 2-1112(g)(2),  failure to file, record, or  register the disclaimer does not affect its validity as 
between the disclaimant and persons to whom the propert y interest or power passes by reason of the disclaimer.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
2-1116 
SECTION 2-1116.  APPLICATION TO EXISTING RELATIONSHIPS. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 2-1113, an interest in or power over pr operty existing on the effective date of 
this part as to which the time for delivering or filing a di sclaimer under law superseded by this part has not expired 
may be disclaimed after the effective date of this part.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
2-1117 
RELATION TO ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES IN  GLOBAL AND NATIONAL COMMERCE ACT  
This part modifies, limits, and supersedes the federal El ectronic Signatures in Global a nd National Commerce Act (15 
U.S.C. Section 7001, et seq.) but does not modify, limit, or supersede Section 101(c) of th at act (15 U.S.C. Section 
7001(c)) or authorize electronic delivery of any of the notices described in S ection 103(b) of that act (15 U.S.C. 
Section 7003(b)).  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section is new, with no previ ous counterpart in the Maine Probate 
Code. 
  
§3-101  
DEVOLUTION OF ESTATE AT DEATH; RESTRICTIONS 
The power of a person to leave property by will, and the ri ghts of creditors, devisees, an d heirs to his property are 
subject to the restrictions and limitations contained in this code to facilitate the prompt set tlement of estates.  Upon 
 
Page 109 of 253 §3-101  
DEVOLUTION OF ESTATE AT DEATH; RESTRICTIONS 
the death of a person, his real and personal property devolves to the persons to whom it is devised by his last will or to 
those indicated as substitutes for them in cases involvi ng lapse, renunciation, or other circumstances affecting the 
devolution of testate estate, or in the absence of testamentary disposition, to his heirs, or to those indicated as 
substitutes for them in cases involving renunciation or othe r circumstances affecting devol ution of intestate estates, 
subject to homestead allowance, exempt property and family allowance, to right s of creditors, elective share of the 
surviving spouse and to administration. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law 
 
 
§3-102 
NECESSITY OF ORDER OF PROBATE FOR WILL 
Except as provided in Section 3-1201, to be effective to prove the transfer of any property or  to nominate an executor, 
a will must be declared to be valid by an order of informal probate by the Registrar, or an adjudication of probate by 
the court. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-103   
NECESSITY OF APPOINTMENT FOR ADMINISTRATION 
Except as otherwise provided in Article IV, to acquire the powers and undertake the duties and liabilities of a personal 
representative of a decedent, a person must be appointed by order of the court or Registrar, qualify and be issued 
letters.  Administration of an estate is commenced by the issuance of letters. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-104  
CLAIMS AGAINST DECEDENT; NECESSITY OF ADMINISTRATION 
No proceeding to enforce a claim against the estate of a decedent or his successors may be revived or commenced 
before the appointment of a personal re presentative.  After the appointment a nd until distribution a ll proceedings and 
actions to enforce a claim against th e estate are governed by the procedur e prescribed by this article.  After 
distribution a creditor whose claim has not  been barred may recover from the di stributees as provided in Section 3-
 
Page 110 of 253 §3-104  
CLAIMS AGAINST DECEDENT; NECESSITY OF ADMINISTRATION 
1004 or from a former personal representa tive individually liable as provided in Section 3-1005.  This section has no 
application to a proceeding by a secured cr editor of the decedent to enforce his right  to his security except as to any 
deficiency judgment which might be sought therein. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-105 
PROCEEDINGS AFFECTING DEVOLUTION AND ADMI NISTRATION; JURISDICTION OF SUBJECT 
MATTER 
Persons interested in decedents’ esta tes may apply to the Registrar for determination in the informal proceedings 
provided in this article, and ma y petition the court for orders in formal proceedings within the court’s jurisdiction 
including but not limited to those describe d in this article.  The court has excl usive jurisdiction of formal proceedings 
to determine how decedents’ estates subject  to the laws of this state are to be  administered, expended and distributed.  
The court has concurrent jurisdiction of  any other action or proceeding concerni ng a succession or to which an estate, 
through a personal representative, may be a party, including actions to determine title to property alleged to belong to 
the estate, and of any action or proceedi ng in which property distributed by a pe rsonal representative  or its value is 
sought to be subjected to rights of cred itors or successors of the decedent. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-106 
PROCEEDINGS WITHIN THE JURISDICTION OF COURT; SERVICE; JURISDICTION OVER 
PERSONS 
In proceedings within the exclusive juri sdiction of the court where notice is requi red by this code or by rule, and in 
proceedings to construe probated wills or  determine heirs which concern estates that have not been and cannot now be 
opened for administration, interested persons may be bound by th e orders of the court in respect to property in or 
subject to the laws of this state by no tice in conformity with Section 1-401.  An order is binding as to all who are 
given notice of the proceeding though less th an all interested pe rsons are notified. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
 
Page 111 of 253 §3-107 
SCOPE OF PROCEEDINGS; PROCEED INGS INDEPENDENT; EXCEPTION 
Unless supervised administration as de scribed in Part 5 is involved,  
(1) each proceeding before the court or Registrar is indepe ndent of any other proceeding involving the same estate;  
(2) petitions for formal orders of the court may combine various requests for reli ef in a single proceeding if the orders 
sought may be finally granted without delay.  Except as re quired for proceedings which ar e particularly described by 
other sections of this article, no petition is defective b ecause it fails to embrace all matte rs which might then be the 
subject of a final order;  (3) proceedings for probate of wills or adjudications of no will may be combined  with proceedings for appointment of 
personal representatives; and  (4) a proceeding for appointment of a personal representative is concluded by an order making or declining the 
appointment. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-108 
PROBATE, TESTACY AND APPOINTMENT PR OCEEDINGS; ULTIMATE TIME LIMIT 
(a) No informal probate or appointment proceeding or formal testacy or appointment proceeding, other than a 
proceeding to probate a will previously probated at the testator’s domicile and appointment proceedings relating to an 
estate in which there has been a prio r appointment, may be commenced more than three years af ter the decedent’s 
death, except: (1) if a previous proceeding was dismi ssed because of doubt about the fact of  the decedent’s death, appropriate 
probate, appointment or testacy proceedings may be ma intained at any time thereafter upon a finding that the 
decedent’s death occurred before the initiation of the prev ious proceeding and the applicant or petitioner has not 
delayed unduly in initiating th e subsequent proceeding;  
(2) appropriate probate, appointment or testacy proceedings may be maintained in  relation to the esta te of an absent, 
disappeared or missing person for whose es tate a conservator has b een appointed, at any time within three years after 
the conservator becomes able to establis h the death of the protected person;  
(3) a proceeding to contest an informally probated will and to  secure appointment of the person with legal priority for 
appointment in the event the contest is successful, may be commenced within the later of  twelve months from the 
informal probate or three years from the decedent’s death;  (4) an informal appointment or a fo rmal testacy or appointment proceedi ng may be commenced thereafter if no 
proceedings concerning the succession or estate administ ration has occurred within th e three year period after 
decedent’s death, but the personal represen tative has no right to possess estate assets as provided in Section 3-709 
beyond that necessary to confirm title ther eto in the successors to the estate and claims other than expenses of 
 
Page 112 of 253 administration may not be presen ted against the estate; and  
(5) a formal testacy proceeding may be commenced at any time after three years from the decedent’s death for the 
purpose of establishing an instrument to direct or control the ownership of prope rty passing or dist ributable after the 
decedent’s death from one other than the decedent when the pr operty is to be appointed by the terms of the decedent’s 
will or is to pass or be distributed as a part of the decedent’s estate or its transf er is otherwise to be controlled by the 
terms of the decedent’s will.   (b) These limitations do not apply to proceedings to constr ue probated wills or determine heirs of an intestate.   
(c) In cases under subsection (a)(1) or (2), the date on which a testacy or appoint ment proceeding is properly 
commenced shall be deemed to be the date of the decedent’s death for purposes of other limitations provisions of this 
code which relate to  the date of death. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-109 
STATUTES OF LIMITATION ON DECEDENT’S CAUSE OF ACTION 
No statute of limitation running on a cause of action belonging to a decedent which had not been barred as of the date 
of his death, shall apply to bar a cause  of action surviving the decedent’s death sooner than four months after death.  A 
cause of action which, but for this section, would have been  barred less than four months  after death, is barred after 
four months unless tolled. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
  
§3-110 
DISCOVERY OF PROPERTY 
UPC has no such provision 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-201 
VENUE FOR FIRST AND SUBSEQUENT ESTATE PROCEEDINGS; LOCATION OF PROPERTY 
(a) Venue for the first informal or formal testacy or  appointment proceedings after a decedent’s death is: 
(1) in the county where the decedent had his domicile at the time of his death; or  
 
Page 113 of 253 §3-201 
VENUE FOR FIRST AND SUBSEQUENT ESTATE PROCEEDINGS; LOCATION OF PROPERTY 
(2) if the decedent was not domiciled in this state, in any county where prope rty of the decedent was located at the 
time of his death.   (b) Venue for all subsequent proceedings within the exclusive jurisdiction of the court is in the place where the initial 
proceeding occurred, unless the initial proceeding has been tr ansferred as provided in Sec tion 1-303 or subsection (c). 
(c) If the first proceeding wa s informal, on application of an interested person and after notice to the proponent in the 
first proceeding, the court, upon finding that venue is elsewher e, may transfer the proceedi ng and the file to the other 
court. (d) For the purpose of aiding determina tions concerning location of assets whic h may be relevant in cases involving 
non-domiciliaries, a debt, other than one evidenced by investment  or commercial paper or ot her instrument in favor of 
a non-domiciliary is located where the debtor  resides or, if the debtor  is a person other than an  individual, at the place 
where it has its principal office.  Comm ercial paper, investment paper and ot her instruments are located where the 
instrument is.  An interest in property held in  trust is located where the trustee may be sued. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-202 
APPOINTMENT OR TESTACY PROC EEDINGS; CONFLICTING CLAI M OF DOMICILE IN ANOTHER 
STATE 
If conflicting claims as to the domicile of a decedent ar e made in a formal testacy or appointment proceeding 
commenced in this state, and in a testacy or appointment proceeding after notice pending at  the same time in another 
state, the court of this state must stay, dismiss, or pe rmit suitable amendment in, the proceeding here unless it is 
determined that the local proceeding was commenced before the proceeding elsewhere.  The determination of 
domicile in the proceeding first commenced must be accep ted as determinative in the proceeding in this state. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-203 
PRIORITY AMONG PERSONS SEEKING APPOIN TMENT AS PERSONAL  REPRESENTATIVE 
(a) Whether the proceedings are formal or informal, pe rsons who are not disqualified have priority for 
appointment in the following order: 
(1) the person with priority as determined by a probated will including a person nominated by a power conferred in a will;  
 
Page 114 of 253 (2) the surviving spouse of the decedent who is a devisee of  
the decedent;  (3) other devisees of the decedent;  (4) the surviving spouse of the decedent;  (5) other heirs of the decedent;  (6) 45 days after the death of the decedent, any creditor.   
(b) An objection to an appointment can be made only in form al proceedings.  In case of objection the priorities stated 
in subsection (a) apply except that (1) if the estate appears to be more th an adequate to meet exemptions and co sts of administration but inadequate to 
discharge anticipated unsecured claims, the court, on pe tition of creditors, may appoint any qualified person;  
(2) in case of objection to appointment of a person other than one whose prior ity is determined by will by an heir or 
devisee appearing to have a s ubstantive interest in the esta te, the court may appoint a pers on who is acceptable to heirs 
and devisees whose interests in the esta te appear to be worth in total more than half of the probable distributable 
value, or, in default of this  accord any suitable person.   
(c) A person entitled to lette rs under paragraphs (2) through (5) of subs ection (a) above, and a person aged 18 and 
over who would be entitled to letter s but for his age, may nominate a qualified person to act as personal 
representative.  Any person aged 18 and over may renounce his right to nominate or to an appointment by appropriate 
writing filed with the court.  When two or more persons  share a priority, those of them who do not renounce must 
concur in nominating another to act fo r them, or in applying for appointment. 
(d) Conservators of the estate s of protected persons, or if there is no co nservator, any guardia n except a guardian ad 
litem of a minor or incapacitate d person, may exercise the same right to nomi nate, to object to an other’s appointment, 
or to participate in determining the preference of a majority  in interest of the heirs a nd devisees that the protected 
person or ward would have if qualified for appointment. (e) Appointment of one who does not ha ve priority, including priority re sulting from renunciation or nomination 
determined pursuant to this section, may be made only in fo rmal proceedings.  Before appointing one without priority, 
the court must determine that those having priority alt hough given notice of the proceedi ngs have failed to request 
appointment or to nominate another for appointment, and that administration is necessary. (f) No person is qualified to serve as a personal representative who is: 
(1) under the age of 18;  
(2) a person whom the court finds unsuitable in formal proceedings.   (g) A personal representative appointed by a court of the decedent’s domicile has pr iority over all ot her persons except 
where the decedent’s will nominates different persons to be personal representative in this state and in the state of 
domicile.  The domiciliary personal representative may nomina te another, who shall have the same priority as the 
domiciliary personal representative. 
(h) This section governs priority for a ppointment of a successor personal repr esentative but does not apply to the 
selection of a special administrator. 
 
 
Page 115 of 253 Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-204 
DEMAND FOR NOTICE OF ORDER OR FILI NG CONCERNING DECEDENT’S ESTATE 
Any person desiring notice of any order or  filing pertaining to a decedent’s esta te in which he has a financial or 
property interest, may file a demand for notice with the court at any time after the death of the decedent stating the 
name of the decedent, the nature of his interest in the estate, and the demandant’s  address or that of his attorney.  The 
clerk shall mail a copy of the demand to the personal repres entative, if one has been a ppointed.  After filing of a 
demand, no order or filing to which the demand relates sha ll be made or accepted without notice as prescribed in 
Section 1-401 to the demandant or his attorney.  The validity  of an order which is issued or filing which is accepted 
without compliance with this requirement shall not be aff ected by the error, but the petitioner receiving the order or 
the person making the filing may be liable for any damage cau sed by the absence of notice.  The requirement of notice 
arising from a demand under this provision may be wa ived in writing by the demanda nt and shall cease upon the 
termination of his interest in the estate. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-301 
INFORMAL PROBATE OR APPOINTMENT PR OCEEDINGS; APPLICATION; CONTENTS 
(a) Applications for informal probate or informal appointment  shall be directed to the Re gistrar, and verified by the 
applicant to be accurate and complete  to the best of his knowledge and be lief as to the following information:  
(1) Every application for informal probate of a will or for in formal appointment of a personal representative other than 
a special or successor representative , shall contain the following:   
(A) a statement of the interest of the applicant;  (B) the name, and date of death of the decedent, his age, and the county and state of his domicile at the time of death, 
and the names and addresses of the spouse, children, heirs an d devisees and the ages of any who are minors so far as 
known or ascertainable with reason able diligence by the applicant;  
(C) if the decedent was not domiciled in the state at the time of his death, a statement showing venue;  
(D) a statement identifying and indicating the address of any personal representative of the decedent appointed in this 
state or elsewhere whose appointment has not been terminated;  (E) a statement indicating whether the applicant has receiv ed a demand for notice, or is aware of any demand for 
notice of any probate or appointment pr oceeding concerning the decedent that may have been filed in this state or 
elsewhere; and  (F) that the time limit for informal probate or appointment as provided in this article ha s not expired either because 
 
Page 116 of 253 three years or less have passed since the decedent’s death, or, if more than three years from death have passed, 
circumstances as described by Section 3-108 have o ccurred authorizing tardy probate or appointment. 
(2) An application for informal probate of a will shall st ate the following in addition to the statements required by 
paragraph (1):   (A) that the original of the d ecedent’s last will is in the possession of the c ourt, or accompanies the application, or that 
an authenticated copy of a will probated in anot her jurisdiction accompanies the application;  
(B) that the applicant, to the best  of his knowledge, believes the will  to have been validly executed;  
(C) that after the exercise of reasonabl e diligence, the applicant is unaware of  any instrument revoking the will, and 
that the applicant believes th at the instrument which is the subject of th e application is the decedent’s last will.   
(3) An application for informal appointme nt of a personal representative to admi nister an estate under a will shall 
describe the will by date of execution and state the time and place of probate or the pending application or petition for 
probate.  The application for appointment shall adopt the stat ements in the application or petition for probate and state 
the name, address and priority for appointment of the person whose appointment is sought.   (4) An application for informal appointment of an administra tor in intestacy shall state in addition to the statements 
required by paragraph (1):   (A) that after the exercise of  reasonable diligence, the app licant is unaware of any unre voked testamentary instrument 
relating to property having a situs in th is state under Section 1-301, or, a statement why any such instrument of which 
he may be aware is not being probated;  
(B) the priority of the pers on whose appointment is sought and the names of  any other persons having a prior or equal 
right to the appointment  under Section 3-203.   
(5) An application for appointment of a personal representative to  succeed a personal repres entative appointed under a 
different testacy status shall refer to the order in the most recent testacy proceeding, state the name and address of the 
person whose appointment is sought and of the person whose appointment will be terminated if the application is 
granted, and describe the priority of the applicant.   (6) An application for appointment of a personal representative to  succeed a personal repres entative who has tendered 
a resignation as provided in 3-610(c), or  whose appointment has been terminated  by death or removal, shall adopt the 
statements in the application or petition which led to the appointment of the pers on being succeeded except as 
specifically changed or corrected, state the name and address of the person w ho seeks appointment as successor, and 
describe the priority of the applicant.   
 (b) By verifying an application for informal probate or in formal appointment, the applicant submits personally to the 
jurisdiction of the court in any proceeding for relief from fraud relating to the application, or for perjury, that may be 
instituted against him. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
 
Page 117 of 253 §3-302 
INFORMAL PROBATE; DUTY OF REGIST RAR; EFFECT OF INFORMAL PROBATE 
Upon receipt of an application requesti ng informal probate of a will, the Regi strar, upon making the findings required 
by Section 3-303 shall issue a written statement of inform al probate if at least 120 hours have elapsed since the 
decedent’s death.  Informal probate is conclusive as to a ll persons until superseded by an order in a formal testacy 
proceeding.  No defect in the applicati on or procedure relating thereto which leads to informal probate of a will 
renders the probate void. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-303 
INFORMAL PROBATE; PROOF AND FINDINGS REQUIRED 
(a) In an informal proceeding for original probate of a will, the Registrar shall determine whether: 
(1) the application is complete;  (2) the applicant has made oath or affirma tion that the statements contained in the application are true to the best of his 
knowledge and belief;  
(3) the applicant appears from the a pplication to be an interested pers on as defined in S ection 1-201(23);  
(4) on the basis of the statements in  the application, venue is proper;  
(5) an original, duly executed and apparently unrevoked will is in the Registrar’s possession;  
(6) any notice required by Section 3-204 has been given and that the application is no t within Section 3-304; and 
(7) it appears from the application that the tim e limit for original probate has not expired.   
(b) The application shall be de nied if it indicates that a pe rsonal representative has been  appointed in another county 
of this state or except as provided in subsection (d) below, if it appears that this or another will of the decedent has 
been the subject of a previous probate order. (c) A will which appears to have the required signatures and which contains an attestation clause showing that 
requirements of execution under Section 2-502, 2-503 or 2-506 ha ve been met shall be proba ted without further proof.  
In other cases, the Registrar may assume execution if the w ill appears to have been properly executed, or he may 
accept a sworn statement or affidavit of  any person having knowledge of the circumstances of execution, whether or 
not the person was a witness to the will. (d) Informal probate of a will which has been previously probated elsewhere may be granted at any time upon written 
application by any interested pe rson, together with deposit of an authentic ated copy of the will and of the statement 
probating it from the office or co urt where it was first probated. 
(e) A will from a place which does not provide  for probate of a will af ter death and which is not eligible for probate 
under subsection (a) above, may be probated in this state upon  receipt by the Registrar of a duly authenticated copy of 
the will and a duly authenticated certificat e of its legal custodian that the copy f iled is a true copy and that the will has 
 
Page 118 of 253 become operative under the law of the other place. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-304 
INFORMAL PROBATE; UNAVAILAB LE IN CERTAIN CASES.  
Applications for informal probate which relate to one or more of a known series  of testamentary instruments (other 
than a will and one or more codicils thereto) the latest of which does not e xpressly revoke the earlier, shall be 
declined. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-305 
INFORMAL PROBATE; REGISTRAR NOT SATISFIED  
If the Registrar is not satisfied that a w ill is entitled to be probat ed in informal proceedings because of failure to meet 
the requirements of Sections 3-303 and 3-304 or any other reason, he may decline the application.  A declination of 
informal probate is not an adjudication and does not preclude formal probate proceedings. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-306 
INFORMAL PROBATE; NOTICE REQUIREMENTS 
(a) The moving party must give notice as described by Sec tion 1-401 of his application fo r informal probate to any 
person demanding it pursuant to Section 3-204, and to any pe rsonal representative of the decedent whose appointment 
has not been terminated.  No other notice of informal probate  is required. If the decedent was 55 years of age or older, 
the moving party shall give notice as de scribed in section 1-401 to the Depart ment of Health and Human Services.  No 
other notice of informal  probate is required. 
[(b) If an informal probate is granted, within 30 days thereaf ter the applicant shall give written information of the probate t o the 
heirs and devisees.  The information shall include the name and address of the applicant, the name and location of the court 
granting the informal probate, and the date of the probate.  Th e information shall be delivered or sent by ordinary mail to eac h of 
the heirs and devisees whose address is reasonably available to the applicant.  No duty to give information is incurred if a 
personal representative is appointed who is re quired to give the written information requi red by Section 3-705.  An applicant’s  
failure to give information as required by this section is a breach of his duty to th e heirs and devisees but does not affect t he 
validity of the probate.] 
 
Page 119 of 253 * This paragraph becomes subsection (a) if optional subsection (b) is accepted.
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language (in this chosen UP C option) does not constitute a 
substantive change to Maine law. 
  
§3-307  
INFORMAL APPOINTMENT PROCEE DINGS; DELAY IN ORDER; DUTY OF REGISTRAR; EFFECT 
OF APPOINTMENT 
(a) Upon receipt of an application for informal appointme nt of a personal representa tive other than a special 
administrator as provided in Section 3-614, if at least 120 hou rs have elapsed since the decedent’s death, the Registrar, 
after making the findings required by Section 3-308, sha ll appoint the applicant su bject to qualification and 
acceptance; provided, that if the decedent  was a non-resident, the Registrar shall delay the order of appointment until 
30 days have elapsed since death unless the personal repr esentative appointed at the decedent’s domicile is the 
applicant, or unless the decedent’s will directs that hi s estate be subject to the laws of this state. 
(b) The status of personal representative and the powers and duties pertaining to the o ffice are fully established by 
informal appointment.  An appointment, and the office of  personal representative creat ed thereby, is subject to 
termination as provided in Sections 3-608 through 3-612, but is not subject to  retroactive vacation. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-308 
INFORMAL APPOINTMENT PROCEEDING S; PROOF AND FINDINGS REQUIRED 
(a) In informal appointment proceedings, the Registrar must determine whether: 
(1) the application for informal appointment of a personal representative is complete;  
(2) the applicant has made oath or affirma tion that the statements contained in the application are true to the best of his 
knowledge and belief;  (3) the applicant appears from the a pplication to be an interested pers on as defined in S ection 1-201(23);  
(4) on the basis of the statements in  the application, venue is proper;  
(5) any will to which the requested appoi ntment relates has been formally or in formally probated; but this requirement 
does not apply to the appointment of a special administrator;  (6) any notice required by Section 3-204 has been given;  (7) from the statements in the application, the person whos e appointment is sought has priority entitling him to the 
appointment.   (b) Unless Section 3-612 controls, the appl ication must be denied if  it indicates that a persona l representative who has 
 
Page 120 of 253 not filed a written statement of resignation as provided in  Section 3-610(c) has been a ppointed in this or another 
county of this state, that (unless the applicant is the domiciliary personal repres entative or his nominee) the decedent 
was not domiciled in this stat e and that a personal representa tive whose appointment has not been terminated has been 
appointed by a court in the state of domicile, or that other requirements of this section have not been met. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-309 
INFORMAL APPOINTMENT PROCEEDI NGS; REGISTRAR NOT SATISFIED 
If the Registrar Register is not satisf ied that a requested informal appointment  of a personal repr esentative should be 
made because of failure to meet the requirements of Sec tions 3-307 and 3-308, or for any other reason, he may decline 
the application.  A declination of informal appointment is  not an adjudication and does not preclude appointment in 
formal proceedings. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-310 
INFORMAL APPOINTMENT PROCEEDI NGS; NOTICE REQUIREMENTS  
The moving party must give notice as desc ribed by Section 1-401 of his intention to seek an appointment informally:  
(i) to any person demanding it pursuant to Section 3-204; and (ii) to any pers on having a prior or  equal right to 
appointment not waived in writing and f iled with the court.  No other notice of  an informal appointment proceeding is 
required. If the decedent was 55 years of age or older, the moving party shall give notice as described in section 1-401 
to the Department of Health and Human Services.  No ot her notice of informal appointment proceeding is required. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-311 
INFORMAL APPOINTMENT UNAV AILABLE IN CERTAIN CASES 
If an application for informal appoint ment indicates the existence of a possi ble unrevoked testam entary instrument 
which may relate to property subject to the laws of this st ate, and which is not filed fo r probate in this court, the 
Registrar Register shall decline the application. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
Page 121 of 253  
 
§3-312 
UNIVERSAL SUCCESSION; IN GENERAL 
The heirs of an intestate or the residuary devisees under a w ill, excluding minors and incapacitated, protected, or unascertain ed 
persons, may become universal successors to  the decedent’s estate by assuming personal liability for (i) taxes, (ii) debts of t he 
decedent, (iii) claims against the deceden t or the estate, and (iv) distributions due other heirs, devisees, and persons entitl ed to 
property of the decedent as provided in  Sections 3-313 through 3-322. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine has chosen not to adopt Univ ersal Succession, as detailed in UPC 
§312 et seq.    
Note to Revisor:  Though Maine has chosen not to adopt universal  succession, please rese rve §3-312 through §3-322.  
 
 
§3-313 
UNIVERSAL SUCCESSION; APPLICATION; CONTENTS 
(a)  An application to become universal successors by the heirs of an intestate or  the residuary devisees under a will must be 
directed to the Registrar, signed by each applicant, and verified  to be accurate and complete to the best of the applicant's 
knowledge and belief as follows: 
 
(1)  An application by heirs of an intestate must contain the statements required by Section 3 -301(a)(1) and (4)(i) and state that 
the applicants constitute all the heirs other than minor s and incapacitated, protected, or unascertained persons. 
 
(2)  An application by residuary devisees under a will must be combined with a petition for informal probate if the will has no t 
been admitted to probate in this State and must  contain the statements required by Section 3 -301(a)(1) and (2). If the will has 
been probated in this state, an application by residuary  devisees must contain the statements required by Section 3 -301 (a) (2) 
(iii). An application by residuary devisees must state that th e applicants constitute the residuary devisees of the decedent ot her 
than any minors and incapacitated, protected, or unascertained pe rsons. If the estate is partially intestate, all of the heirs other 
than minors and incapacitated, protected, or un ascertained persons must join as applicants. 
 
(b)  The application must state whether letters of administra tion are outstanding, whether a petition for appointment of a pers onal 
representative of the decedent is pending in any court of this st ate, and that the applicants waive their right to seek appoint ment 
of a personal representative. 
 
(c )   The application may describe in general terms the asset s of the estate and must state that the applicants accept respons ibility 
for the estate and assume personal liability for (1) taxes, (2) debt s of the decedent, (3) claims against the decedent or the e state 
and (4) distributions due other heirs, de visees, and persons entitled to property of the decedent as provided in Sections 3 -316 
through 3 -322. 
 
Page 122 of 253  
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine has chosen not to adopt Univer sal Succession, as detailed in UPC §312 et 
seq. 
 
§3-314 
UNIVERSAL SUCCESSION; PROOF AND FINDINGS REQUIRED 
(a)  The [Registrar] shall grant the application if: 
(1)  the application is complete in accordance with Section 3 ‑313; 
(2)  all necessary persons have joined and have verified that the statements contained therein are true, to the best knowledge and 
belief of each; 
(3)  venue is proper; 
(4)  any notice required by Section 3 ‑204 has been given or waived; 
(5)  the time limit for original probate or appointment pro ceedings has not expired and the applicants claim under a will; 
(6)  the application requests informal probate of a will,  the application and findings conform with Sections 3 ‑301(a)(2) and 
3‑303(a)(c)(d) and (e) so the will is admitted to probate;  and 
(7)  none of the applicants is a minor or an incapacitated or protected person. 
(b)  The [Registrar] shall deny the applicati on if letters of administration are outstanding. 
(c)  Except as provided in Section 3 ‑322, the [Registrar] shall deny the application if any creditor, heir, or devisee who is 
qualified by Section 3 ‑605 to demand bond files an objection.   
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine has chosen not to adopt Univ ersal Succession, as detailed in UPC 
§312 et seq.  
 
 
§3-315 
UNIVERSAL SUCCESSION; DUTY OF REGISTRAR;  EFFECT OF STATEMENT OF UNIVERSAL 
SUCCESSION 
Upon receipt of an application under Section 3 ‑313, if at least 120 hours have elap sed since the decedent's death, the 
Registrar, upon granting the application, shall issue a writte n statement of universal succession describing the estate as 
set forth in the application and stating that the applicants  
(i) are the universal successors to the assets of the estate as provided in Section 3 ‑312,  
(ii) (ii) have assumed liability for the obligations of the decedent, and  
(iii) (iii) have acquired the powers and liabilities of universal successo rs.  The statement of universal 
succession is evidence of the universal successors' title to the assets of the estate.  Upon its issuance, 
the powers and liabilities of universal successors provided in Sections 3 ‑316 through 3 ‑322 attach 
and are assumed by the applicants.  
 
 
Page 123 of 253 Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine has chosen not to adopt Univ ersal Succession, as detailed in UPC 
§312 et seq.  
§3-316 
UNIVERSAL SUCCESSION; UNIVERSAL SUCCESSORS’ POWERS 
Upon the [Registrar's] issuance of a statement of universal succession: 
 (1)  Universal successors have full powe r of ownership to deal with  the assets of the estate subject to the limitations 
and liabilities in this [Act].  The universal successors sh all proceed expeditiously to settle and distribute the estate 
without adjudication but if necessary may invoke the jurisdiction of the cour t to resolve questions concerning the 
estate. 
(2)  Universal successors have the same powers as dist ributees from a personal repres entative under Sections 3 ‑908 
and 3‑909 and third persons with whom they deal  are protected as provided in Section 3 ‑910. 
(3)  For purposes of collecti ng assets in another state w hose law does not provide for uni versal succession, universal 
successors have the same standing a nd power as personal representatives or distributees in this State. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine has chosen not to adopt Univ ersal Succession, as detailed in UPC 
§312 et seq.  
 
 
§3-317 
UNIVERSAL SUCCESSION; UNIVERSAL SUCCESSORS ’ LIABILITY TO CREDITORS, OTHER HEIRS, 
DEVISEES AND PERSONS ENTITLED TO DECEDE NT’S PROPERTY;  LIABILITY OF OTHER 
PERSONS ENTITILED TO PROPERTY 
(a)  In the proportions and subject to limits expressed in Section 3 ‑321, universal successors a ssume all liabilities of 
the decedent that were not discharged by reason of death and lia bility for all taxes, claims against the decedent or the 
estate, and charges properly incurred af ter death for the preservation of the esta te, to the extent those items, if duly 
presented, would be valid claims against the decedent's estate. 
(b)  In the proportions an d subject to the limits expressed in Section 3 ‑321, universal successors are personally liable 
to other heirs, devisees, and persons en titled to property of the decedent for th e assets or amounts that would be due 
those heirs, were the estate administer ed, but no allowance having priority over de visees may be claimed for attorney's 
fees or charges for preservation of the estate in excess of reasonable amounts properly incurred. 
(c)  Universal successors are entitled to their interests in the estate as heirs or devise es subject to priority and 
abatement pursuant to Section 3 ‑902 and to agreement pursuant to Section 3 ‑912. 
(d)  Other heirs, devisees, and persons to whom assets have  been distributed have the sa me powers and liabilities as 
distributees under Sections 3 ‑908, 3‑909, and 3 ‑910. 
(e)  Absent breach of fiduciary obligations or express unde rtaking, a fiduciary's liability  is limited to the assets 
received by the fiduciary.  
 
Page 124 of 253  
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine has chosen not to adopt Univ ersal Succession, as detailed in UPC 
§312 et seq.    
 
 
§3-318 
UNIVERSAL SUCCESSION; UNIVERSAL SUCCESSO RS’ SUBMISSION TO JURISDICTION; WHEN 
HEIRS OR DEVISEES MAY NOT SEEK ADMINISTRATION . 
(a)  Upon issuance of the statement of  universal succession, the universal succe ssors become subject to the personal 
jurisdiction of the Courts of this state in any proceeding that may be instituted re lating to the estate or to any liability 
assumed by them. 
(b)  Any heir or devisee who voluntarily joins in an application under Section 3 ‑313 may not subsequently seek 
appointment of a personal representative. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine has chosen not to adopt Univ ersal Succession, as detailed in UPC 
§312 et seq.    
 
 
§3-319 
UNIVERSAL SUCCESSION; DUTY OF UNIVERSAL  SUCCESSORS; INFORMATION TO HEIRS AND 
DEVISEES. 
Not later than thirty days after issu ance of the statement of universal succe ssion, each universal successor shall inform 
the heirs and devisees who did not join in the applicati on of the succession without administration. The information 
must be delivered or be sent by ordinary mail to each of the heirs and devisees whose address is reasonably available 
to the universal successors. The information must include  the names and addresses of  the universal successors, 
indicate that it is being sent to persons who have or may ha ve some interest in the estate , and describe the court where 
the application and statement of universal  succession has been filed. The failure of a universal successor to give this 
information is a breach of duty to the persons concerned but does not affect th e validity of the appr oval of succession 
without administration or the powers or liabilities of the universal successors. A universal successor may inform other 
persons of the succession without administration by delivery or by ordinary  first class mail.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine has chosen not to adopt Univ ersal Succession, as detailed in UPC 
§312 et seq.    
 
 
§3-320 
 
Page 125 of 253 UNIVERSAL SUCCESSION; UNIVERSAL SUCCESSO RS’ LIABILITY FOR RESTITUTION TO ESTATE . 
If a personal representative is  subsequently appointed, univers al successors are personally liable for restitution of any 
property of the estate to which they are not entitled as heirs or devisees of the decedent and their liability is the same 
as a distributee under Section 3 ‑909, subject to the provi sions of Sections 3 ‑317 and 3 ‑321 and the limitations of 
Section 3 ‑1006. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine has chosen not to adopt Univ ersal Succession, as detailed in UPC 
§312 et seq.    
 
 
§3-321 
UNIVERSAL SUCCESSION; LIABILITY OF UNIVE RSAL SUCCESSORS FOR CLAIMS, EXPENSES, 
INTESTATE SHARES AND DEVISEES. 
The liability of universal successors is subject to any defenses that would have  been available to the decedent. Other 
than liability arising from fraud, conversion, or other wrongf ul conduct of a universal successor, the personal liability 
of each universal successor to any credito r, claimant, other heir, devisee, or person entitled to decedent's property may 
not exceed the proportion of the claim that the universal suc cessor's share bears to the share of all heirs and residuary 
devisees. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine has chosen not to adopt Univ ersal Succession, as detailed in UPC 
§312 et seq.   
 
 
§3-322 
UNIVERSAL SUCCESSION; REMEDIES OF CREDITORS, OTHER HEIRS, DEVISEES OR PERSONS ENTITLED 
TO DECEDENT’S PROPERTY 
In addition to remedies otherw ise provided by law, any creditor, heir, devisee,  or person entitled to decedent’s property quali fied 
under Section 3-605, may demand bond of universal successors.  If the demand for bond precedes the granting of an application 
for universal succession, it must be treated as an objection unde r Section 3-314(c) unless it is withdrawn, the claim satisfied , or 
the applicants post bond in an amount sufficient to protect th e demandant.  If the demand for bond follows the granting of an 
application for universal succession, the universal successors, w ithin 10 days after notice of the demand, upon satisfying the 
claim or posting bond sufficient to protect the demandant, ma y disqualify the demandant from seeking administration of the 
estate. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine has chosen not to adopt Univer sal Succession, as detailed in UPC §312 et 
seq.   
 
 
Page 126 of 253  
§3-401 
FORMAL TESTACY PROCEEDINGS;  NATURE; WHEN COMMENCED.  
A formal testacy proceeding is litigation to determine wh ether a decedent left a valid will.  A formal testacy 
proceeding may be commenced by an intere sted person filing a petition as descri bed in Section 3-402(a) in which he 
requests that the court, after notice and hearing, enter an order probating a will, or  a petition to set aside an informal 
probate of a will or to prevent informal probate of a will which is the subject of  a pending application, or a petition in 
accordance with Section 3-402(b) for an orde r that the decedent died intestate. 
A petition may seek formal probate of a will without rega rd to whether the same or a conflicting will has been 
informally probated.  A formal testacy proceeding may, but need not, involve a request for appointment of a personal 
representative. During the pendency of a formal testacy proceeding, the Re gistrar shall not act upon any application for informal 
probate of any will of the decedent or any application for informal appointment  of a personal representative of the 
decedent. Unless a petition in a formal testacy pr oceeding also requests confirmation of the previous informal appointment, a 
previously appointed personal represen tative, after receipt of notice of th e commencement of a formal probate 
proceeding, must refrain from exercising his power to make any further distribution of the estate during the pendency 
of the formal proceeding.  A petitioner who seeks the appointment of a different personal representative in a formal 
proceeding also may request an order re straining the acting persona l representative from exercising any of the powers 
of his office and requesting the appointment of a special administrator.  In the abse nce of a request, or if the request is 
denied, the commencement of a formal proceeding has no ef fect on the powers and duties of a previously appointed 
personal representative other than  those relating to distribution. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-402  
FORMAL TESTACY OR APPOINTMENT PROCEEDINGS; PETITION; CONTENTS
(a) Petitions for formal probate of a will,  or for adjudication of intestacy with or without request for appointment of a 
personal representative, must be directed  to the court, request a judicial or der after notice and hearing and contain 
further statements as indicated in this section and contain such other informati on and be in such form as the Supreme 
Judicial Court may by rule provide.   A petition for formal probate of a will 
(1) requests an order as to the testacy of the decedent in relation to a particul ar instrument which may or may not have 
been informally probated and determining the heirs,  (2) contains the statements required fo r informal applications as stated in  the six subparagra phs under Section 3-
301(a)(1), the statements required by subparagrap hs (B) and (C) of Sec tion 3-301(a)(2), and  
 
Page 127 of 253 (3) states whether the original of the last will of the decedent is in the po ssession of the court or accompanies the 
petition.   If the original will is neither in th e possession of the court nor accompanies th e petition and no authenticated copy of a 
will probated in another jurisdiction accompanies the petition, th e petition also must state the contents of the will, and 
indicate that it is lost, destr oyed, or otherwise unavailable. 
(b) A petition for adjudication of intestacy  and appointment of an administrator in intestacy must request a judicial 
finding and order that the decedent left no will and dete rmining the heirs, contain the statements required by 
paragraphs (1) and (4) of Section 3-3 01(a) and indicate whether supervised ad ministration is sought and contain such 
other information and be in such form as the Supreme Judi cial Court may by rule provide.  A petition may request an 
order determining intestacy and heirs w ithout requesting the appointment of an  administrator, in which case, the 
statements required by subparagraph (B) of Section 3-301(a)(4) above may be omitted. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-403  
FORMAL TESTACY PROCEEDINGS; NO TICE OF HEARING ON PETITION. 
(a) Upon commencement of a formal testacy proceeding, the c ourt shall fix a time and place of hearing.  Notice shall 
be given in the manner prescribed by Section 1-401 by the petiti oner to the persons herein  enumerated and to any 
additional person who has filed a demand fo r notice under Section 3-204 of this c ode.   Notice shall be given to the 
following persons:  the surviving spouse, children, and other heirs of the decedent, the devisees and executors named 
in any will that is being, or has been, probated, or offered for informal or form al probate in the county, or that is 
known by the petitioner to have been proba ted, or offered for informal or formal  probate elsewhere, and any personal 
representative of the deceden t whose appointment has not been terminated. If the decedent was 55 years of age or 
older, the petitioner shall give notice as  described in section 1-401 to the Depart ment of Health and Human Services.  
Notice may be given to other persons.   In addition, the petitioner shall give notice by publica tion to all unknown 
persons and to all known persons whose a ddresses are unknown who have any intere st in the matters being litigated. 
(b) If it appears by the petition or otherw ise that the fact of the death of the alleged decedent may be in doubt, or on 
the written demand of any interested pe rson, a copy of the notice of the heari ng on said petition shall be sent by 
registered mail to the alleged decedent at  his last known address.  The court sh all direct the petitioner to report the 
results of, or make and report back concerning, a reasonabl y diligent search for the alleged decedent in any manner 
that may seem advisable, including any or all of the following methods: 
(1) by inserting in one or more suitable periodicals a not ice requesting information from  any person having knowledge 
of the whereabouts of the alleged decedent;  
(2) by notifying law enforcement officials a nd public welfare agencies in appropria te locations of the disappearance of 
the alleged decedent;  
 
Page 128 of 253 (3) by engaging the services of an investigator.   
The costs of any search so directed sha ll be paid by the petitioner if there is no administration or by the estate of the 
decedent in case there is administration.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law.  
 
 
§3-404 
FORMAL TESTACY PROCEEDINGS; WRI TTEN OBJECTIONS TO PROBATE.   
Any party to a formal proceeding who opposes the probate of  a will for any reason shall state in his pleadings his 
objections to probate of the will. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
M.R.S.A.  § 3-405  
FORMAL TESTACY PROCEEDINGS; UNCON TESTED CASES; HEARINGS AND PROOF  
If a petition in a testacy proceeding is unopposed, the court may order probate or intestacy on the strength of the 
pleadings if satisfied that the conditio ns of Section 3-409 have been met, or  conduct a hearing in open court and 
require proof of the matters necessary to support the orde r sought.  If evidence concerning execution of the will is 
necessary, the affidavit or testimony of one of any attesting witnesses to the instrume nt is sufficient.  If the affidavit or 
testimony of an attesting witness is no t available, execution of the will may be  proved by other evidence or affidavit. 
 
The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-406 
FORMAL TESTACY PROCEEDI NGS; CONTESTED CASES  
In a contested case in which the proper execution of  a will is at issue, the following rules apply: 
(1) If the will is self-proved pursuan t to Section 2-504, the will satisfies th e requirements for execution without the 
testimony of any attesting witness, upon filing the will and the acknowledgment and affidavits annexed or attached to 
it, unless there is evidence of fraud or forg ery affecting the acknowle dgment or affidavit. 
(2) If the will is notarized pursuant to  Section 2-502(a)(3)(B), but not self-pr oved, there is a rebu ttable presumption 
that the will satisfies the requireme nts for execution upon filing the will.   
(3) If the will is witnessed pursuant to Section 2-502(a)(3)(A), but not notari zed or self-proved, the testimony of at 
least one of the attesting witnesses is required to establish proper execution if the witness is within this state, 
 
Page 129 of 253 competent, and able to testify.  Prope r execution may be established by other ev idence, including an affidavit of an 
attesting witness.  An attestation clause  that is signed by the attesting witne sses raises a rebuttable presumption that 
the events recited in the clause occurred.   
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-407 
FORMAL TESTACY PROCEEDINGS; B URDENS IN CONTESTED CASES   
In contested cases, petitioners who seek to establish intest acy have the burden of esta blishing prima facie proof of 
death, venue, and heirship.  Proponents of a will have the burd en of establishing prima facie proof of due execution in 
all cases, and, if they are also petitioners, prima facie proof of death and venue.  Contestants of a will have the burden of establishing lack of testamentary in tent or capacity, undue influence, fraud, duress, mistake or revocation.  Parties 
have the ultimate burden of persuasion as to matters with re spect to which they have the in itial burden of proof.  If a 
will is opposed by the petition for probate of a later will re voking the former, it shall be determined first whether the 
later will is entitled to probate, and if a will is opposed by a petition for a declaration of intestacy, it shall be 
determined first whether the will is entitled to probate. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-408 
FORMAL TESTACY PROCEEDING S; WILL CONSTRUCTION; EFFECT OF FINAL ORDER IN 
ANOTHER JURISDICTION  
A final order of a court of another state determining test acy, the validity or construction of a will, made in a 
proceeding involving notice to and an opportunity for cont est by all interested pers ons must be accepted as 
determinative by the courts of this state if it includes, or is based upon, a finding that the decedent was domiciled at 
his death in the state wh ere the order was made. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-409 
FORMAL TESTACY PROCEEDING S; ORDER; FOREIGN WILL 
After the time required for any notice has expired, upon proof of  notice, and after any hearing that may be necessary, 
if the court finds that the testator is dead, venue is  proper and that the proceeding was commenced within the 
 
Page 130 of 253 limitation prescribed by Section 3-108, it shall determine the decedent’s domicile at death, his heirs and his state of 
testacy.  Any will found to be valid and unrevoked shall be formally probated.  Termination of any previous informal 
appointment of a personal representative, which may be appropr iate in view of the relief requested and findings, is 
governed by Section 3-612.  The petition shall be dismissed or appropriate am endment allowed if the court is not 
satisfied that the alleged decedent is dead.  A will from a place which does not provide for probate of a will after 
death, may be proved for probate in this  state by a duly authenticated  certificate of its lega l custodian that the copy 
introduced is a true copy and that the will has be come effective under the law of the other place. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-410 
FORMAL TESTACY PROCEEDINGS; PROBA TE OF MORE THAN ONE INSTRUMENT   
If two or more instruments are offered for probate before a final order is entered in a fo rmal testacy proceeding, more 
than one instrument may be pr obated if neither expressly re vokes the other or contains provisions which work a total 
revocation by implication.  If more than  one instrument is probated, the order sh all indicate what pr ovisions control in 
respect to the nomination of an executo r, if any.  The order may, but need not , indicate how many provisions of a 
particular instrument are affected by the other instrument.  After a final order in a testac y proceeding has been entered, 
no petition for probate of any other instrument of the deced ent may be entertained, except  incident to a petition to 
vacate or modify a previous probate order and subject to the time limits of Section 3-412. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-411 
FORMAL TESTACY PROCEEDI NGS; PARTIAL INTESTACY 
If it becomes evident in the course of a formal testacy pr oceeding that, though one or more  instruments are entitled to 
be probated, the decedent’s estate is or may be partially intestate, the court shall ente r an order to that effect. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-412 
FORMAL TESTACY PROCEEDINGS; EFFECT OF ORDER; VACATION. 
Subject to appeal and subject to vacation as provided in th is section and in Section 3- 413, a formal testacy order under 
Sections 3-409 to 3-411, including an order that the decedent le ft no valid will and determining heirs, is final as to all 
 
Page 131 of 253 persons with respect to all issues conc erning the decedent’s estate that the cour t considered or might have considered 
incident to its rendition relevant to th e question of whether the decedent left a valid will, and to the determination of 
heirs, except that: (1) The court shall entertain a petition for modification or vacati on of its order and probate of another will of the 
decedent if it is shown that the pr oponents of the later-offered will:   
(A) were unaware of its existence at th e time of the earlier proceeding; or  
(B) were unaware of the earlier proceeding and were given no notice thereof, except by publication.   
(2) If intestacy of all or part of the estate has been ordered, the determination of heirs of the decedent may be 
reconsidered if it is shown that  one or more persons were omitted from the determination and it is also shown that the 
persons were unaware of their relationship to the decedent, were unaware of his death or were given no notice of any 
proceeding concerning his esta te, except by publication.   
(3) A petition for vacation under paragraph (1 ) or (2) must be filed prior to the earlier of the following time limits:   
(A) if a personal representative has been appointed for the estate, the time of entry of any order approving final 
distribution of the estate, or, if  the estate is closed by statement, six mont hs after the filing of the closing statement;  
(B) whether or not a personal representati ve has been appointed for the estate of  the decedent, the time prescribed by 
Section 3-108 when it is no longer possible to initiate an or iginal proceeding to probate a will of the decedent; or  
(C) twelve months after the entry of  the order sought to be vacated.   
(4) The order originally rendered in the testacy proceedi ng may be modified or vacated, if appropriate under the 
circumstances, by the order of proba te of the later-offered will or th e order redetermining heirs.   
(5) The finding of the fact of death is conclusive as to the alleged decedent onl y if notice of the hearing on the petition 
in the formal testacy proceeding was sent by registered or certified mail addressed to the alleged decedent at his last 
known address and the court finds that a se arch under Section 3-403(b) was made.   
If the alleged decedent is not dead, even  if notice was sent and search was made, he may recover estate assets in the 
hands of the personal representative.  In  addition to any remedies available to  the alleged decedent by reason of any 
fraud or intentional wrongdoing, the alleged decedent may recover any estate or it s proceeds from distributees that is 
in their hands, or the value of distributions received by th em, to the extent that any r ecovery from distributees is 
equitable in view of all of the circumstances. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-413 
FORMAL TESTACY PROCEEDINGS; VACAT ION OF ORDER FOR OTHER CAUSE 
For good cause shown, an order in a formal testacy proceedi ng may be modified or vacated within the time allowed 
for appeal. 
 
 
Page 132 of 253 § 3-413 
FORMAL TESTACY PROCEEDINGS; VACAT ION OF ORDER FOR OTHER CAUSE 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
   
§ 3-414 
FORMAL PROCEEDINGS CONCERNING APPOIN TMENT OF PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE 
(a) A formal proceeding for adjudication regarding the prio rity or qualification of one who is an applicant for 
appointment as personal representative, or of one who previously has been appointed personal representative in 
informal proceedings, if an issue concer ning the testacy of the decedent is or may be involved, is governed by Section 
3-402, as well as by this section.  In othe r cases, the petition shall contain or adopt the stat ements required by Section 
3-301(1) and describe the question relating to priority or qualification of the pe rsonal representative  which is to be 
resolved.  If the proceeding precedes a ny appointment of a personal representativ e, it shall stay any pending informal 
appointment proceedings as well as a ny commenced thereafter.  If the pro ceeding is commenced after appointment, 
the previously appointed pers onal representative, after recei pt of notice thereof, shall refrain from exercising any 
power of administration except as nece ssary to preserve the estate or unless the court orders otherwise. 
(b) After notice to interested persons, in cluding all persons interest ed in the administration of  the estate as successors 
under the applicable assumption concerning testacy, any previously appointe d personal representative and any person 
having or claiming priority for appointment as personal repr esentative, the court shall de termine who is entitled to 
appointment under Section 3-203, make a proper appointment and, if appropriate , terminate any prior appointment 
found to have been improper as provided  in cases of removal under Section 3-611. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-501 
SUPERVISED ADMINISTRATION; NATURE OF PROCEEDING  
Supervised administration is a single in rem proceeding to secure complete administration and settlement of a 
decedent’s estate under the continuing authority of th e court which extends until entry of an order approving 
distribution of the estate a nd discharging the personal representative, or other order terminating the proceeding.  A 
supervised personal representativ e is responsible to the court,  as well as to the interested  parties, and is subject to 
directions concerning the estate made by the court on its own motion or on  the motion of any interested party.  Except 
as otherwise provided in this part, or as otherwise ordere d by the court, a supervised personal representative has the 
same duties and powers as a personal re presentative who is not supervised. 
 
Page 133 of 253  
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-502 
SUPERVISED ADMINISTRATION; PETITION; ORDER   
A petition for supervised administration may be filed by any interested person or by a pers onal representative at any 
time or the prayer for supervised administration may be join ed with a petition in a testacy or appointment proceeding.  
If the testacy of the decedent and the priority and qualificat ion of any personal repres entative have not been 
adjudicated previously, the petition for s upervised administration sha ll include the matters required of a petition in a 
formal testacy proceeding and the notice requirements and pro cedures applicable to a formal testacy proceeding apply.  
If not previously adjudicated, the court shall adjudicate the testacy of the decedent an d questions relating to the 
priority and qualifications of the personal representative in any case involv ing a request for supervised administration, 
even though the request for s upervised administration may be denied.  Af ter notice to interest ed persons, the court 
shall order supervised administra tion of a decedent’s estate:   
(1) if the decedent’s will directs superv ised administration, it shall be ordered unl ess the court finds that circumstances 
bearing on the need for supervised administration have ch anged since the execution of the will and that there is no 
necessity for supervised administration;  (2) if the decedent’s will directs uns upervised administration, supervised ad ministration shall be ordered only upon a 
finding that it is necessary for protection of  persons interested in the estate; or  
(3) in other cases if the court fi nds that supervised administration is necessary under the circumstances. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-503 
SUPERVISED ADMINISTRATION; EFFECT ON OTHER PROCEEDINGS. 
(a) The pendency of a proceeding for supervised administ ration of a decedent’s estate stays action on any informal 
application then pending  or thereafter filed. 
(b) If a will has been previously probat ed in informal proceedings, the effect of  the filing of a petition for supervised 
administration is as provided for form al testacy proceedi ngs by Section 3-401. 
(c) After he has received noti ce of the filing of a pe tition for supervised administrati on, a personal representative who 
has been appointed previously shall not exercise his power to  distribute any estate.  The f iling of the petition does not 
affect his other powers and duties unless the court restricts the exercise of a ny of them pending full hearing on the 
petition. 
 
 
Page 134 of 253 Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-504 
SUPERVISED ADMINISTRATION; POWERS OF PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE  
Unless restricted by the court, a supervis ed personal representative has, without interim orders approving exercise of a 
power, all powers of personal representa tives under this code, but he shall not exercise his power to make any 
distribution of the estate without pr ior order of the court.  Any other restriction on the power of a personal 
representative which may be ordered by the court must be endorsed on his letters of appointment and, unless so 
endorsed, is ineffective as to persons dealing in  good faith with the pe rsonal representative. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-505 
SUPERVISED ADMINISTRATION; INTERIM ORDE RS; DISTRIBUTION AND CLOSING ORDERS  
Unless otherwise ordered by the court, supervised administ ration is terminated by orde r in accordance with time 
restrictions, notices and contents of orders prescribed for proceedings unde r Section 3-1001.  Interim orders approving 
or directing partial distributions or gr anting other relief may be issued by the court at any time during the pendency of 
a supervised administration on the ap plication of the persona l representative or any interested person. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-601 
QUALIFICATION  
Prior to receiving letters, a personal re presentative shall qualify by filing with  the appointing court any required bond 
and a statement of acceptance of the duties of the office. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-602 
ACCEPTANCE OF APPOINTMENT; CO NSENT TO JURISDICTION   
By accepting appointment, a personal representative submits  personally to the jurisdiction of the court in any 
proceeding relating to the estate that may be instituted by any interested person.  Notice of any proceeding shall be 
 
Page 135 of 253 delivered to the personal representative , or mailed to him by ordinary first cla ss mail at his address as listed in the 
application or petition for appointment or  as thereafter reported to the court a nd to his address as then known to the 
petitioner. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-603 
BOND NOT REQUIRED WITHOUT COURT ORDER, EXCEPTIONS 
No bond is required of a personal repres entative appointed in informal pro ceedings, except (i) upon the appointment 
of a special administrator; (ii) when an  executor or other personal representative is appointed to admi nister an estate 
under a will containing an e xpress requirement of bond or (iii) when bond is required under S ection 3-605.  Bond may 
be required by court order at the time of appointment of a personal representa tive appointed in any formal proceeding 
except that bond is not required of a pe rsonal representative appointed in formal  proceedings if the will relieves the 
personal representative of bond, unless bond ha s been requested by an interested part y and the court is satisfied that it 
is desirable, or as provided in section 3-619, subsection (g).  Bond required by any will may be dispensed with in 
formal proceedings upon determination by the court that it  is not necessary.  No bond is required of any personal 
representative who, pursuant to statute, has deposited cash or collateral with an agency of this state to secure 
performance of his duties. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute substantive change to former Maine 
section 3-603, with the exception of Main e’s retained exemption for a “public administration” (for estates without 
heirs and for whom no estate administ ration has commenced, as detailed in s ections 3-619(g)). Also, former Maine 
section 3-603 had exemption level of $200.  
  
§3-604  
BOND AMOUNT; SECURITY; PROC EDURE; REDUCTION.   
If bond is required and the provisions of the will or order do not spec ify the amount, unless stated in his application or 
petition, the person qualifying shall file a statement under oath with the Registrar indicating his best estimate of the 
value of the personal estate of the de cedent and of the income expected from the personal and real estate during the 
next year, and he shall execute and file a bond with the Regist rar, or give other suitable s ecurity, in an amount not less 
than the estimate.  The Registrar shall determine that the bond is duly executed by a corpor ate surety, or one or more 
individual sureties whose performance is secured by pledge of personal propert y, mortgage on real property or other 
adequate security.  The Registrar may permit the amount of th e bond to be reduced by the value of assets of the estate 
deposited with a domestic financial institution (as define d in Section 6-101) in a manner that prevents their 
 
Page 136 of 253 unauthorized disposition.  On petition of the personal representative or another interested person the court may excuse 
a requirement of bond, increase or reduce the amount of th e bond, release sureties, or permit the substitution of 
another bond with the same  or different sureties. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
     
§ 3-605 
DEMAND FOR BOND BY INTERESTED PERSON 
Any person apparently having an interest  in the estate worth in excess of $5,000, or any creditor having a claim in 
excess of $5,000, may make a written dema nd that a personal representative gi ve bond.  The demand must be filed 
with the Registrar and a copy mailed to the personal representative, if appoin tment and qualification have occurred.  
Thereupon, bond is required, but the requirement ceases if th e person demanding bond ceases to be interested in the 
estate, or if bond is excused as provided in Section 3-603 or  3-604.  After he has received  notice and until the filing of 
the bond or cessation of the requirement of bond, the personal repres entative shall refrain from exercising any powers 
of his office except as necessary to preser ve the estate.  Failure of the personal representative to meet a requirement of 
bond by giving suitable bond within 30 days  after receipt of notice is cause for his remova l and appointment of a 
successor personal representative. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The threshold financial interest for requesting a bond is increased 
from$1000 to $5000. 
§3-606 
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF BONDS. 
(a) The following requirements and provisions ap ply to any bond required by this part: 
 (1) Bonds shall name the State of Maine as  obligee for the benefit of the persons interested in the es tate and shall be 
conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the fi duciary of all duties according to law.  
(2) Unless otherwise provided by the terms of the approved bond, sureties are jointly a nd severally liable with the 
personal representative and with each other.  The a ddress of sureties shall be stated in the bond.   
(3) By executing an approved bond of a pe rsonal representative, the su rety consents to the ju risdiction of the probate 
court which issued letters to the primary obligor in any pr oceedings pertaining to the fiduciary duties of the personal 
representative and naming the surety as a party.  Notice of any proceeding shall be  delivered to the surety or mailed to 
 
Page 137 of 253 him by registered or certified mail at his address as listed w ith the court where the bond is filed and to his address as 
then known to the petitioner. (4) On petition of a successor pe rsonal representative, any othe r personal representative of  the same decedent, or any 
interested person, a proceeding in  the court may be initiated ag ainst a surety for breach of the obligation of the bond of 
the personal repr esentative.   
(5) The bond of the personal representative is not void afte r the first recovery but may be proceeded against from time 
to time until the whole penalty is exhausted. (b) No action or proceeding may be commenced against the surety on any matter as to which an action or proceeding 
against the primary obligor is ba rred by adjudication or limitation. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-607  
ORDER RESTRAINING PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE. 
(a) On petition of any person who appears to have an interest  in the estate, the court by temporary order may restrain a 
personal representative from performing sp ecified acts of admi nistration, disbursement or distribution, or exercise of 
any powers or discharge of any duties of his office, or make any other orde r to secure proper performance of his duty, 
if it appears to the court that the personal representati ve otherwise may take some action which would jeopardize 
unreasonably the interest of the appli cant or of some other interested pe rson.  Persons with whom the personal 
representative may transact bus iness may be made parties. 
(b) The matter shall be set for hearing w ithin 10 days unless the parties otherwis e agree.  Notice as the court directs 
shall be given to the personal represen tative and his attorney of record, if  any, and to any other parties named 
defendant in the petition. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute substantive change to former Maine 
section 3-607, as Maine does not adopt UP C §607(b) (additional requ irement that a court schedule a hearing within 10 
days).  
  
§ 3-608 
TERMINATION OF APPOINTMENT; GENERAL   
Termination of appointment of a personal representative o ccurs as indicated in Sectio ns 3-609 to 3-612 inclusive.  
Termination ends the right and power pertaining to the office of personal representative as  conferred by this code or 
any will, except that a personal representative, at any time pr ior to distribution or until re strained or enjoined by court 
order, may perform acts necessary to pr otect the estate and may deliver the a ssets to a successor representative.  
 
Page 138 of 253 Termination does not discharge a personal re presentative from liability for transa ctions or omissions occurring before 
termination, or relieve him of the duty to preserve assets subject to his control,  to account therefor and to deliver the 
assets.  Termination does not affect th e jurisdiction of the court over the personal representative, but terminates his 
authority to represent the estate in  any pending or future proceeding. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-609  
TERMINATION OF APPOINTMENT; DEATH OR DISABILITY  
The death of a personal representative or  the appointment of a conservator for th e estate of a personal representative, 
terminates his appointment.  Until appointment and qualificati on of a successor or special representative to replace the 
deceased or protected representative, the representative  of the estate of the d eceased or protected personal 
representative, if any, has the duty to protect the estate possessed and being admi nistered by his decedent or ward at 
the time his appointment terminates has the power to perf orm acts necessary for protecti on and shall account for and 
deliver the estate assets to a successo r or special personal representative upon his appointment and qualification. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-610 
TERMINATION OF APPOINTMENT; VOLUNTARY 
(a) An appointment of a personal representative terminates as provided in Section 3-1003, one  year after the filing of a 
closing statement. (b) An order closing an estate as provided in Section 3-1001 or 3-1002 term inates an appointment of a personal 
representative. (c) A personal representative may resign his position by filing a written statement of resignation with the Registrar after he has given at least 15 days written notice to the persons known to be interested in the esta te.  If no one applies 
or petitions for appointment of a successor representative wi thin the time indicated in the notice, the filed statement of 
resignation is ineffective as a termina tion of appointment, and in any event is  effective only upon the appointment and 
qualification of a successor representative and delivery of the assets to him. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-611 
 
Page 139 of 253 TERMINATION OF APPOINTMENT BY  REMOVAL; CAUSE; PROCEDURE 
(a) A person interested in the estate may petition for remova l of a personal representative for cause at any time.  Upon 
filing of the petition, the cour t shall fix a time and place for hearing.  Noti ce shall be given by the petitioner to the 
personal representative, and to other pe rsons as the court may order.  Except as otherwise ordered as provided in 
Section 3-607, after receipt of  notice of removal proceedings, the personal representative shall not act except to 
account, to correct maladministration or pr eserve the estate.  If removal is orde red, the court also shall direct by order 
the disposition of the assets remaining in the name of, or under the control of, the personal representative being 
removed. (b) Cause for removal exists when removal would be in the best  interests of the estate, or if it is shown that a personal 
representative or the person seeking hi s appointment, intentionally misrepresent ed material facts in the proceedings 
leading to his appointment, or that th e personal representative has disregarde d an order of the court, has become 
incapable of discharging the duties of his office, or has mism anaged the estate or failed to perform any duty pertaining 
to the office.  Unless the decedent’s w ill directs otherwise a personal represen tative appointed at the decedent’s 
domicile, incident to securi ng appointment of himself or his nominee as ancillary personal representative, may obtain 
removal of another who was appointed personal representative in this state to admi nister local assets.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law.  
 
 
§ 3-612  
TERMINATION OF APPOINTMENT; CHANGE OF TESTACY STATUS 
Except as otherwise ordered in formal proceedings, the prob ate of a will subsequent to the appointment of a personal 
representative in intestacy or under a will which is superseded  by formal probate of another will, or the vacation of an 
informal probate of a will subsequent to the appointment of the personal representative thereunder, does not terminate 
the appointment of the personal repres entative although his powers may be re duced as provided in Section 3-401.  
Termination occurs upon appointment in informal or fo rmal appointment proceedings of a person entitled to 
appointment under the later assumption c oncerning testacy.  If no request for new appointment is made within 30 days 
after expiration of time for appeal from the order in fo rmal testacy proceedings, or from the informal probate, 
changing the assumption concerning testacy, the previously  appointed personal represen tative upon request may be 
appointed personal representative under the subsequently probated will, or as  in intestacy as the case may be. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-613 
SUCCESSOR PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE   
 
Page 140 of 253 Parts 3 and 4 of this article govern pr oceedings for appointment of a personal representative to succeed one whose 
appointment has been terminated.  After appointment a nd qualification, a successor personal representative may be 
substituted in all actions and proceedings to which the former personal representative  was a party, and no notice, 
process or claim which was given or served upon the former  personal representative need  be given to or served upon 
the successor in order to preserve an y position or right the pers on giving the notice or fili ng the claim may thereby 
have obtained or preserved with referen ce to the former personal representative .  Except as otherwise ordered by the 
court, the successor personal representati ve has the powers and dutie s in respect to the continued administration which 
the former personal representative would have ha d if his appointment had not been terminated. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-614 
SPECIAL ADMINISTRATOR ; APPOINTMENT   
A special administrato r may be appointed: 
(1) informally by the Registrar on the appl ication of any interested person when necessary to protect the estate of a 
decedent prior to the appointment of a ge neral personal representative,  or if a prior appointment has been terminated 
as provided in Section 3-609; (2) in a formal proceeding by order of the court on the peti tion of any interested person  and finding, after notice and 
hearing, that appointment is necessary to  preserve the estate or to secure its proper administ ration including its 
administration in circumstances where a ge neral personal representative cannot or sh ould not act.  If it appears to the 
court that an emergency exists, appoint ment may be ordered without notice. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-615 
SPECIAL ADMINISTRATOR; WHO MAY BE APPOINTED 
(a) If a special administrator is to be appointed pendi ng the probate of a will which is the subject of a pending 
application or petition for probate, the person named executor in  the will shall be appointed if available, and qualified. 
(b) In other cases, any proper person ma y be appointed special administrator. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-616 
 
Page 141 of 253 SPECIAL ADMINISTRATOR; A PPOINTED INFORMALLY; POWERS AND DUTIES   
A special administrator appointed by the Registrar in informal proceedings pursu ant to Section 3-614(1) has the duty 
to collect and manage the assets of th e estate, to preserve them and to account  therefor and to deliver them to the 
general personal representative upon his qualification.  The special admini strator has the power of a personal 
representative under the code n ecessary to perform his duties. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-617   
SPECIAL ADMINISTRATOR; FORMAL PR OCEEDINGS; POWER AND DUTIES.  
A special administrator appointed by orde r of the court in any formal proceedi ng has the power of a general personal 
representative except as limited in the appointment and duties as prescribed  in the order.  The appointment may be for 
a specified time, to perform particular acts or on other terms as the court may direct. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
§ 3-618  
TERMINATION OF APPOINTMENT;  SPECIAL ADMINISTRATOR  
The appointment of a special administrato r terminates in accordance with the pr ovisions of the order of appointment, 
or on the appointment of a general persona l representative.  In other cases, the appointment of a special administrator 
is subject to termination as provi ded in Sections 3-608 through 3-611. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§3-619 
PUBLIC ADMINSTRATORS 
(a).   The Governor shall appoint in each county for a term  of 4 years, unless sooner removed, a public administrator 
who shall, upon petition to th e court and after notice and he aring, be appointed to administer the estates of persons 
who die intestate within the county, or who die intestate elsewhere leav ing property within th e county, and who are 
not known to have within the state any heirs who can lawfully inhe rit the estate, and for whom no other administration 
has been commenced. The public administrator shall have the same powers and duties of  a personal representative 
under supervised administration as provi ded in section 3-504, and except as pr ovided in subsection (g), shall give 
bond as provided for other personal re presentatives in cases of  ordinary administration under sections 3-603 through 
3-606. If any person entitled to appointment as personal representative under section 3-203 shall, prior to the 
appointment of the public administrator, file a petition for informal or formal appointment as personal representative, 
 
Page 142 of 253 the court shall withhold any appointment of the public administrator pend ing denial of the petition for the appointment 
of the private personal representative. 
 (b).   The public administrator may be allowed fees and compensation for his services as in the case of ordinary 
administration as provided in sections 3-719, 3-720 and 3-72 1, except that no fee for his ow n services shall be paid 
without prior approva l by the court. 
 (c).   Pending the appointment of th e public administrator, and in the abse nce of any local administration or any 
administration by a domiciliary fore ign personal representative under sections 4-204 and 4-205, the public 
administrator may proceed to conserve the property of the estate when it appears necessary or expedient. 
 (d).   If, before the estate of such  deceased in the hands of the public admini strator is fully settled, any last will and 
testament of the decedent is granted informal or formal  probate, or if any person entitled under section 3-203 to 
appointment as personal representative  is informally or formally appo inted, the appointment of the public 
administrator is terminated as provided in section 3-608, and he  shall account for and deliver th e assets of the estate to 
the private personal representative as provided therein, or to the successors under the will as provided by law if no 
private personal representa tive has been appointed. 
 (e).   When there are assets, other than real property, remaining in the hands of such  public administrator after the 
payment of the decedent's debts and all costs of admi nistration and no heirs have been discovered, the public 
administrator must be ordered by the j udge to deposit them with th e Treasurer of State, who shall receive them and 
dispose of them according to Title 33, chapter 41. These assets must, for the purposes  of Title 33, chapter 41, be 
presumed unclaimed when the judge orders the public admi nistrator to deposit them with the Treasurer of State. 
 (f).   In all cases where a public administrator is appoint ed, the register shall immediat ely send to the Treasurer of 
State a copy of the petition a nd the decree thereon, and in all cases where the public admi nistrator is ordered to pay the 
balance of the estate as provided in s ubsection (e) the judge shall give notice to  the county treasure r of the amount and 
from what estate it is receivable. If the public administrator negl ects for 3 months after th e order of the judge to 
deposit the money, the county treasurer sh all petition the cour t for enforcement of the order or bring a civil action 
upon any bond of the public administrator for the recovery  thereof. The records a nd accounts of the public 
administrator shall be au dited annually by the Offi ce of the State Auditor. 
 (g).   Estates administered under this section having a value at the decedent's death not exceeding $200 5,000 shall be 
exempt from all notice and filing costs and from giving bond. The cost of notice shall be paid by the court. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The UPC has no section concer ning public administration. 
 
 
§ 3-701  
TIME OF ACCRUAL OF DUTIES AND POWERS   
The duties and powers of a personal re presentative commence upon his appoi ntment.  The powers of a personal 
representative relate back in time to give acts by the person appoi nted which are beneficial to the estate occurring 
prior to appointment the same effect as those occurring ther eafter.  Prior to appointment , a person named executor in a 
 
Page 143 of 253 will may carry out written instructions of the decedent relating to his body,  funeral and burial arrangements.  A 
personal representative may ratify and accept acts on behalf of th e estate done by others where the acts would have 
been proper for a personal representative. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-702  
PRIORITY AMONG DIFFERENT LETTERS   
A person to whom general letters are fi rst issued has exclusive authority under the letters  until his appointment is 
terminated or modified.  If, through error, general letter s are afterwards issued to another, the first appointed 
representative may recover any property of the estate in the hands of the repr esentative subsequently appointed, but 
the acts of the latter done in good faith before notice of the first letters, are not void for want of validity of 
appointment. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-703 
GENERAL DUTIES; RELATION AND LIABILITY TO PERSONS INTERESTED IN ESTATE; STANDING 
TO SUE 
(a) A personal representative is a fiduci ary who shall observe the st andards of care applicable to trustees.  A personal 
representative is under a duty to settle and distribute the estate of the decede nt in accordance with  the terms of any 
probated and effective will and this code and as expeditiously a nd efficiently as is consistent with the best interests of 
the estate.  He shall use the authority conferred upon him by this code, the terms of the w ill, if any, and any order in 
proceedings to which he is party for th e best interests of successo rs to the estate.  A pe rsonal representative is a 
fiduciary who shall observe the standards of care applicable to trustees as described in Title 18-B, sections 802, 803, 
805, 806 and 807 and Title 18-B, ch apter 9, except as follows. 
(1). A personal representative, in deve loping an investment strategy, shall take into account the e xpected duration of 
the period reasonably required to effect distribution of the estate's assets.  
(2). Except as provided in se ction 3-906, subsection (a), paragraphs (1) a nd (2), a personal representative may make 
distribution of an estate's assets in cash  or in kind, in accordance with the devisees' best inte rests, and is not required 
either to liquidate the estate's assets or to preserve them for distribution.  
(3). If all devisees whose devi ses are to be funded from the residue of an estate agree, in a wr itten instrument signed 
by each of them and presented to the personal representative, on an investment manager to direct the investment of the 
estate's residuary assets, the personal representative may, but  need not, rely on the investment advice of the investment 
 
Page 144 of 253 manager so identified or delegate the investment management of the estate's residuary asse ts to such manager and, in 
either case, may pay reasonable compensation to the manager from the residue of the estate. A personal representative 
who relies on the advice of, or delegates management disc retion to, an investment mana ger in accordance with the 
terms of this section is not liable for the investment perf ormance of the assets invested in the discretion of, or in 
accordance with the advice of, such investment manager.  
(b) A personal representative sh allmay not be surcharged for acts of admini stration or distributi on if the conduct in 
question was authorized at the time.  S ubject to other obligations of administration, an info rmally probated will is 
authority to administer and distribute the estate according to its terms.  An order of appointment of a personal 
representative, whether issued in informal  or formal proceedings, is authority to distribute apparently intestate assets 
to the heirs of the decedent if , at the time of distribution, the personal repr esentative is not aware of a pending testacy 
proceeding, a proceeding to vacate an order entered in an  earlier testacy proceeding, a formal proceeding questioning 
his appointment or fitness to continue, or a supervised ad ministration proceeding.  This section does not affect the 
duty of the personal representative to admi nister and distribute the estate in accordance with the rights of claimants 
whose claims have been allowed, the surviving spouse, a ny minor and dependent children  and any pretermitted child 
of the decedent as described elsewhere in this Code. (c) Except as to proceedings which do not survive the death of  the decedent, a personal representative of a decedent 
domiciled in this state at his death has the same standing to sue and be sued in  the courts of this state and the courts of 
any other jurisdiction as his deceden t had immediately prior to death. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to former Maine 
law. 
  
§ 3-704 
PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE TO PROCEED WITHOUT COURT ORDER; EXCEPTION   
A personal representative shall proceed e xpeditiously with th e settlement and distribution of a decedent’s estate and, 
except as otherwise specified or ordered in regard to a s upervised personal representativ e, do so without adjudication, 
order, or direction of the court, but he may invoke the jurisd iction of the court, in proceed ings authorized by this code, 
to resolve questions concerning th e estate or its administration. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-705  
DUTY OF PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVES:  INFORMATION TO HEIRS AND DEVISEES   
Not later than 30 days after his appointment every personal re presentative, except any special  administrator, shall give 
 
Page 145 of 253 information of his appointment to the heirs and devisees, including, if there has been no formal testacy proceeding and 
if the personal representative was appointed on the assumpti on that the decedent died inte state, the devisees in any 
will mentioned in the application for appointment of a pers onal representative and, in any case where there has been 
no formal testacy proceedings, to the devisees in any pur ported will whose existence and the names of the devisees 
thereunder are known to the personal repr esentative.  The information shall be delivered or sent by ordinary mail to 
each of the heirs and devisees whose address is reasonably available to the personal repr esentative.  The duty does not 
extend to require information to persons  who have been adjudicated in a prior formal testacy proceeding to have no 
interest in the estate.  The information shall include the name  and address of the personal representative, indicate that 
it is being sent to persons who have or may have some inte rest in the estate being administered, indicate whether bond 
has been filed, and describe the court wher e papers relating to the estate are on f ile. The information shall state that the 
estate is being administered by the pe rsonal representative under the Maine Pr obate Code without supervision by the 
court but that recipients are entitled to information rega rding the administration from th e personal representative and 
can petition the court in any matter relating to the esta te, including distribution of assets and expenses of 
administration.  The personal representative ’s failure to give this information is  a breach of his duty to the persons 
concerned but does not affect the valid ity of his appointment, his powers or ot her duties.  A pers onal representative 
may inform other persons of his appointment  by delivery or ordinary first class mail. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section adds the UPC’s addi tional information requirements from 
the personal representati ve to heirs (including intestate he irs) and devisees in any will mentioned in the application for 
appointment.   Also, this section removes former Maine section 3-705 requirements that the persona l representative provide 
information to heirs and devisees “in any purported will whose existence . . . [was] known to the personal 
representative.”  
  
§ 3-706 
DUTY OF PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE; INVENTORY AND APPRAISEMENT   
Within three months after his appointment, a personal repres entative, who is not a special administrator or a successor 
to another representative who has previ ously discharged this duty, shall prepare and file or furnish mail an inventory 
of property owned by the decedent at the tim e of his death, listing it with reasona ble detail, and indicating as to each 
listed item, its fair market value as of the date of the decedent’s death, and the type and amount of any encumbrance 
that may exist with reference to any item.  The inventory shal l also include a sche dule of credits of the decedent, with 
the names of the obligors, the amounts due, a description of the nature of the obligation, and the amount of all such 
credits, exclusive of expenses and risk of settlement or collection.  
The personal representative shall furnis h send a copy of the inventory to intere sted persons who request it.  He may 
also file the original of the inventory with the court.   
 
Page 146 of 253 When an inventory has not been filed or furnished as requi red under this section and an interested party makes a prima 
facie case that property that should have  been inventoried is now missing, the pe rsonal representati ve has the burden 
of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the specific property would properl y be excluded from the 
inventory.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-707 
EMPLOYMENT OF APPRAISERS 
The personal representative may employ a qualified and disint erested appraiser to assist him in ascertaining the fair 
market value as of the date of the decedent’s death of all as sets as of the date of the de cedent's death; but shall employ 
an appraiser for determining the value of real estate or securities not regularly traded on r ecognized exchanges. of any 
asset the value of which may be subject to reasonable doubt.  Differe nt persons may be employed to appraise different 
kinds of assets included in the estate.  The names and addr esses of any appraiser shall be indicated on the inventory 
with the item or items he appraised. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section tracks the UPC and now  requires appraisal of “any asset the 
value of which may be subject to reasonable doubt.” 
  
§ 3-708   
DUTY OF PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE; SUPPLEMENTARY INVENTORY   
If any property not included in the or iginal inventory comes to the knowledge of a personal repres entative or if the 
personal representative learns that the value or description indicated in th e original inventory fo r any item is erroneous 
or misleading, he shall make a supplementary inventory or ap praisement showing the market  value as of the date of 
the decedent’s death of the new item or the revised market valu e or descriptions, and the appr aisers or other data relied 
upon, if any, and file it with th e court if the or iginal inventory was filed, or furn ish copies thereof or information 
thereof to persons interest ed in the new information. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ -3-709  
DUTY OF PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE; POSSESSION OF ESTATE 
Except as otherwise provided by a decedent’s will, every personal representative has a right to, and shall take 
 
Page 147 of 253 possession or control of the decedent’s property, except that  any real property or tangible personal property may be 
left with or surrendered to the person presumptively entitl ed thereto unless or until, in the judgment of the personal 
representative, possession of the property by him will be necessary for purposes of administration.  The request by a personal representative for delivery of any property possessed by an heir or de visee is conclusive evidence, in any 
action against the heir or devisee for possession thereo f, that the possession of the property by the personal 
representative is necessary for purposes of administration.  The personal represen tative shall pay taxes on, and take all 
steps reasonably necessary for the mana gement, protection and preservation of, the estate in his possession.  He may 
maintain an action to recover possession of pr operty or to determine the title thereto. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-710  
POWER TO AVOID TRANSFERS   
The property liable for the payment of unsecured debts of a decedent includes all proper ty transferred by him by any 
means which is in law void or voidable as against his creditor s, and subject to prior liens, the right to recover this 
property, so far as necessary for the payment of unsecured debts of the decedent, is ex clusively in the personal 
representative.  The personal representati ve is not required to institute such an action unless requested by creditors, 
who must pay or secure the cost  and expenses of litigation.  
  
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law.   
§ 3-711  
POWERS OF PERSONAL REPR ESENTATIVES; IN GENERAL 
Until termination of his appointment a personal representati ve has the same power over the title to property of the 
estate that an absolute owner would have, in trust however, fo r the benefit of the creditors and others interested in the 
estate.  This power may be exercised wit hout notice, hearing, or  order of court. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section removes the requireme nt under former Maine section 3-711 
that the personal representative provide a ten-day notice for sale of real estate. 
 
 
§ 3-712   
IMPROPER EXERCISE OF POWER;  BREACH OF FIDUCIARY DUTY   
If the exercise of power concerning the es tate is improper, the personal representati ve is liable to interested persons for 
damage or loss resulting from breach of his fiduciary duty to the same extent as a trustee of an express trust.  The 
rights of purchasers and others dealing with a personal representative shall be determined as provided in Sections 3-
 
Page 148 of 253 713 and 3-714. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-713  
SALE, ENCUMBRANCE OR TRAN SACTION INVOLVING CONFLICT OF INTEREST; VOIDABLE; 
EXCEPTIONS   
Any sale or encumbrance to the personal representative, his spouse, agent or attorney, or any corporation or trust in 
which he has a substantive beneficial inte rest, or any transaction wh ich is affected by a substantive conflict of interest 
on the part of the personal representa tive, is voidable by any person interest ed in the estate except one who has 
consented after fair disclosure, unless (1) the will or a contract entered into by the decedent expressly au thorized the transaction; or  
(2) the transaction is approved by the c ourt after notice to interested persons. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-714  
PERSONS DEALING WITH PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE; PROTECTION   
A person who in good faith either assists a personal representative or deals with him for value is protected as if the 
personal representative properly exerci sed his power.  The fact that a person knowingly deal s with a personal 
representative does not alone require the pe rson to inquire into the exis tence of a power or the propriety of its exercise.  
Except for restrictions on powers of supervised personal re presentatives which are endorse d on letters as provided in 
Section 3-504 no provision in any will or order of court purpo rting to limit the power of a personal representative is 
effective except as to persons with actual knowledge thereof.  A person is not bound to see to the proper application of 
estate assets paid or delivered to a personal representati ve.  The protection here expres sed extends to instances in 
which some procedural irregularity or ju risdictional defect occurred in proceedings  leading to the i ssuance of letters, 
including a case in which the alleged decedent is found to be alive.  The protection here expressed is not by 
substitution for that provided by comparab le provisions of the laws relating to commercial transactions and laws 
simplifying transfers of s ecurities by fiduciaries. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-715 
 
Page 149 of 253 TRANSACTIONS AUTHORIZED FOR PERSONAL  REPRESENTATIVES; EXCEPTIONS   
Except as restricted or otherwise prov ided by the will or by an order in a formal proceeding and subject to the 
priorities stated in Section 3-902, a pers onal representative, acting reasonably for the benefit of the interested persons, 
may properly: (1) retain assets owned by the decedent pending distribution or liquidation includ ing those in which the representative 
is personally interested or which are otherwise improper for trust investment; 
(2) receive assets from fiduciaries, or other sources; (3) perform, compromise or refuse performance of the deceden t’s contracts that continue as obligations of the estate, 
as he may determine under the circumstances.  In performing  enforceable contracts by the decedent to convey or lease 
land, the personal representative, among ot her possible courses of action, may: 
(A) execute and deliver a deed  of conveyance, for cash payment of all sums  remaining due, or the purchaser’s note for 
the sum remaining due secured by a mortgage  or deed of trust on the land; or  
(B) deliver a deed in escrow with direc tions that the proceeds, when paid in acco rdance with the escrow agreement, be 
paid to the successors of the decedent, as designated in the escrow agreement;  
(4) satisfy written charitable pledges of the decedent irrespective of whether the pledges constituted binding 
obligations of the decedent or were prope rly presented as claims if, in the judgm ent of the personal representative, the 
decedent would have wanted the pledges completed under the circumstances; (5) if funds are not needed to meet debts and expenses currently payable and are not immediately distributable, deposit 
or invest liquid assets of the estate , including moneys received from the sale  of other assets, in federally insured 
interest-bearing accounts, readily marketable secured loan arrangements or other prudent investments which would be 
reasonable for use by trustees generally; (6) acquire or dispose of an asset, includi ng land in this or another state, for cash or on credit, at public or private sale; 
and manage, develop, improve, exchange, partition, cha nge the character of, or abandon an estate asset; 
(7) make ordinary or extraordinary repa irs or alterations in buildings or othe r structures, demolish any improvements, 
raze existing or erect new party walls or buildings; (8) subdivide, develop or dedicate land to public use; make or obtain the vacat ion of plats and adjust boundaries; or 
adjust differences in valuation on exchange or partition by giving or receiving considerat ions; or dedicate easements 
to public use without consideration; (9) enter for any purpose into a lease as le ssor or lessee, with or without option to purchase or renew, for a term within 
or extending beyond the pe riod of administration; 
(10) enter into a lease or arrangement fo r exploration and removal of minerals or other natural resources or enter into a 
pooling or unitization agreement; (11) abandon property when, in the opinion of the personal representative, it is valuel ess, or is so encumbered, or is in 
condition that it is of no benefit to the estate; 
(12) vote stocks or other securities in  person or by general or limited proxy; 
(13) pay calls, assessments, and other sums chargeable or  accruing against or on account of securities, unless barred 
by the provisions relating to claims; 
 
Page 150 of 253 (14) hold a security in the name  of a nominee or in other form without disclo sure of the interest of the estate but the 
personal representative is liable for any act of the nominee in connection with  the security so held; 
(15) insure the assets of the estate against damage, loss a nd liability and himself against liability as to third persons; 
(16) borrow money with or without securi ty to be repaid from the estate asse ts or otherwise; and advance money for 
the protection of the estate; (17) effect a fair and reasonable compromise with any de btor or obligor, or extend, re new or in any manner modify 
the terms of any obligation owi ng to the estate.  If the personal representa tive holds a mortgage, pl edge or other lien 
upon property of another person, he may, in lieu of foreclosure, accept a conveyance or transfer of encumbered assets 
from the owner thereof in satisfaction of the indebtedness secured by lien; (18) pay taxes, assessments, compensation of the persona l representative, and other expenses incident to the 
administration of the estate; (19) sell or exercise stock subs cription or conversion ri ghts; consent, directly or throu gh a committee or other agent, to 
the reorganization, consolidation, merger , dissolution, or liquidation of a corpor ation or other bu siness enterprise; 
(20) allocate items of income or expe nse to either estate income or princi pal, as permitted or provided by law; 
(21) employ persons, including attorneys, a uditors, investment advisors, or agents, even if they are a ssociated with the 
personal representative, to advi se or assist the personal repr esentative in the performance of his administrative duties; 
act without independent inve stigation upon their recommenda tions; and instead of acting personally, employ one or 
more agents to perform any act of admini stration, whether or not discretionary; 
(22) prosecute or defend claims, or pro ceedings in any jurisdiction for the protec tion of the estate and of the personal 
representative in the pe rformance of his duties; 
(23) sell, mortgage, or lease any real or  personal property of the estate or any in terest therein for cash, credit, or for 
part cash and part credit, and with or  without security for unpaid balances; 
(24) continue any unincorporated business or venture in whic h the decedent was engaged at the time of his death (i) in 
the same business form for a period of not more than 4 m onths from the date of appo intment of a general personal 
representative if continuation is a reas onable means of preserving the value of the business including good will, (ii) in 
the same business form for any additional period of time th at may be approved by order of the court in a formal 
proceeding to which the persons interested  in the estate are partie s; or (iii) throughout the period of administration if 
the business is incorporated by the personal representative an d if none of the probable dist ributees of the business who 
are competent adults object to its inco rporation and reten tion in the estate; 
(25) incorporate any business or venture in which the decedent was engaged at the time of his death; (26) provide for exoneration of the personal representative fr om personal liability in any contract entered into on 
behalf of the estate; (27) satisfy and settle claims and distribu te the estate as provided in this code. 
(28) exercise any power described in Title 18-A M.R.S.A.   §1-111 relating to compliance with environmental laws. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law.  
Additional reference in §§(28) simply  provides a reference to applicab le fiduciary section in Art. 1. 
 
Page 151 of 253  
 
§ 3-716   
POWERS AND DUTIES OF SUCCESSOR PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE   
A successor personal representative has th e same power and duty as the original personal representative to complete 
the administration and distribution of th e estate, as expeditiously as possible,  but he shall not exercise any power 
expressly made personal to the executor named in the will. 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-717 
CO-REPRESENTATIVES; WHEN JO INT ACTION REQUIRED   
If two or more persons are a ppointed co-representatives and unless the will provides otherwise, the concurrence of all 
is required on all acts connected with the administration a nd distribution of the estate.  This restriction does not apply 
when any co-representative receives a nd receipts for property due the estate , when the concurrence of all cannot 
readily be obtained in the time reasonab ly available for emergency action necessary  to preserve the estate, or when a 
co-representative has been delegated to act for the others .  Persons dealing with a co -representative if actually 
unaware that another has been appointed to serve with him or if advised by the personal representative with whom 
they deal that he has authority to act alone for any of the reasons mentioned he rein, are as fully protected as if the 
person with whom they dealt had been  the sole personal representative. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-718 
POWERS OF SURVIVING PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE  
Unless the terms of the will otherwise provide, every pow er exercisable by personal co-representatives may be 
exercised by the one or more remaining af ter the appointment of one or more is terminated, and if one of two or more 
nominated as co-executors is not appo inted, those appointed may exercise all the powers incident to the office. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
§ 3-719  
COMPENSATION OF PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE   
A personal representative is entitled to reasonable compensation for his services.  If a will provides for compensation 
of the personal representative and there is no contract with the decedent regarding compensation, he may renounce the 
provision before qualifying and be entitle d to reasonable compensation.  A pers onal representative also may renounce 
 
Page 152 of 253 his right to all or any part of th e compensation.  A written renunciation of fee may be filed with the court. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-720  
EXPENSES IN ESTATE LITIGATION   
If any personal representative or person nominated as pers onal representative defends or  prosecutes any proceeding in 
good faith whether successful or not, he  is entitled to receive from the es tate his necessary expenses and 
disbursements including reasonabl e attorneys’ fees incurred. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-721  
PROCEEDINGS FOR REVIEW OF EMPLOYMENT  OF AGENTS AND COMPENSATION OF 
PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVES AN D EMPLOYEES OF ESTATE   
After notice to all interested persons or on petition of an in terested person or on appropriate motion if administration is 
supervised, the propriety of employme nt of any person by a personal represen tative including any a ttorney, auditor, 
investment advisor or other specialize d agent or assistant, the reasonablene ss of the compensation of any person so 
employed, or the reasonableness of the compensation determined by the personal representative for his own services, 
may be reviewed by the court.  Any person who has receiv ed excessive compensation from an estate for services 
rendered may be ordered to make appropriate refunds. 
(b) Factors to be considered as guides in determin ing the reasonableness of a fee include the following: 
(1). The time and labor required, the nove lty and difficulty of the questions invol ved, and the skill re quisite to perform 
the service properly;  
(2). The likelihood, if apparent to the personal representative, that the accepta nce of the particular employment will 
preclude the person employed from other employment;  
(3). The fee customarily charged in  the locality for similar services; 
(4). The amount involved and the results obtained;  
(5). The time limitations imposed by the person al representative or by the circumstances;  
(6). The experience, reputation and ability  of the person performing the services. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
 
Page 153 of 253 § 3-801 
NOTICE TO CREDITORS 
(a) Unless notice has already been given under this secti on, a personal representative upon appointment [may] shall 
publish a notice to creditors once a week for three two succes sive weeks in a newspaper of  general circulation in the 
county announcing the appointment and the personal representative’s address and notifying creditors of the estate to 
present their claims within four months  after the date of the fi rst publication of the noti ce or be forever barred. 
(b) A personal representative may give written notice by mail or other delivery to  a creditor, notifyi ng the creditor to 
present his [or her] claim within four months after the published notice, if gi ven as provided in subsection (a), or 
within 60 days after the mailing or other delivery of the notice, whichever is later, or be forever barred.  Written notice must be the notice described in subs ection (a) above or a similar notice. 
(c) The personal representative is not liable to a creditor or  to a successor of the decedent for giving or failing to give 
notice under this section. 
 
  
§ 3-802 
STATUTES OF LIMITATIONS. 
 (a) Unless an estate is insolvent, the personal representa tive, with the consent of all successors whose interests would 
be affected, may waive any defense of lim itations available to the estate.  If th e defense is not waived, no claim barred 
by a statute of limitations at the time of the decedent’s death may be allowed or paid.   
(b) The running of a statute of limitations  measured from an event other than d eath or the giving of notice to creditors 
is suspended for four months after the decedent’s death, but resumes thereafter as to claims not barred by other 
sections.   (c) For purposes of a statute of limitations, the presentation of a claim pu rsuant to Section 3-804 is equivalent to 
commencement of a proceeding on the claim. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-803  
LIMITATIONS ON PRESENTATION OF CLAIMS 
(a) All claims against a decedent’s estate which arose before  the death of the decedent, including claims of the state 
and any political subdivision thereof, whether due or to  become due, absolute or contingent, liquidated or 
unliquidated, founded on contract, tort, or other legal basis, if not barred earl ier by another statute of limitations or 
non-claim statute, are barred against the estate, th e personal representative, the he irs and devisees, and nonprobate 
transferees of the decedent, unless presen ted within the earlier of the following: 
 
Page 154 of 253 (1) one year Nine months after the decedent’s death; or 
(2) the time provided by Section 3-801(b) for creditors who are given actual not ice, and within th e time provided in 
Section 3-801(a) for all cred itors barred by publication.   
(b) A claim described in subsection (a) which is barred by the non-claim statute of  the decedent’s domicile before the 
giving of notice to creditors in this  state is barred in this state. 
(c) All claims against a decedent’s estate which arise at or after the death of the decedent, including claims of the state 
and any subdivision thereof, whether due or to become due, absolute or contingent, liquidated or unliquidated, 
founded on contract, tort, or othe r legal basis, are barred against the estate, the personal represen tative, and the heirs 
and devisees of the decedent , unless presented as follows: 
(1) a claim based on a contract with th e personal representative, w ithin four months after performance by the personal 
representative is due; or (2) any other claim, within the later of four months after it aris es, or at the time specified in subsection (a)(1).   
(d) Nothing in this section affects or prevents: (1) any proceeding to enforce any mortgage, ple dge, or other lien upon property of the estate;  
(2) to the limits of the insurance protection only, any proceedi ng to establish liability of the decedent or the personal 
representative for which he is pr otected by liability insurance; or 
(3) collection of compensation for serv ices rendered and reimbursement for e xpenses advanced by the personal 
representative or by the attorney or accountant for the person al representative of the estate.   
 
 
 
§ 3-804  
MANNER OF PRESENTATION OF CLAIMS  
Claims against a decedent’s esta te may be presented as follows: 
(1) The claimant may deliver or mail to  the personal representative a written statement of the claim indicating its 
basis, the name and address of the claimant, and the amount claimed or may file a written statement of the claim, in 
the form prescribed by rule, with the cler k of the court.  The claim is deemed pr esented on the first to occur of receipt 
of the written statement of claim by the pe rsonal representative, or the filing of the claim with the court.  If a claim is 
not yet due, the date when it will become due shall be stated.  If the claim is c ontingent or unliquidated, the nature of 
the uncertainty shall be stated.  If the claim is secured, the se curity shall be described.  Fa ilure to describe correctly the 
security, the nature of any uncertainty, and the due date of a claim not yet due does no t invalidate the presentation 
made.   (2) The claimant may commence a proceeding against the personal representative in any court where the personal 
representative may be subjected to jurisdiction, to obt ain payment of his claim against the estate, but the 
commencement of the proceeding must occur within the tim e limited for presenting the claim.  No presentation of 
claim is required in regard to matters claimed in proceed ings against the decedent which were pending at the time of 
 
Page 155 of 253 his death.   
(3) If a claim is presented under paragraph (1), no proceedi ng thereon may be commenced more than 60 days after the 
personal representative has mailed a notice of disallowance; but, in the case of a claim which is not presently due or 
which is contingent or unli quidated, the personal representa tive may consent to an extension of the 60 day period, or 
to avoid injustice the court, on petit ion, may order an extensio n of the 60 day period, but in no event shall the 
extension run beyond the applicable  statute of limitations.   
(4).   When a decedent's estate has not been commenced at the time a claimant wishes to present a claim, a claim is 
deemed presented when the claimant files with the cler k of the court a written stat ement of claim meeting the 
requirements of subsection (1) and a demand for notice purs uant to section 3-204. The pr ovisions of subsection (3) 
apply upon the appointment of a personal representative. 
 
 
 
§ 3-805 
CLASSIFICATION OF CLAIMS 
(a) If the applicable assets of the estate  are insufficient to pay all claims in full, the personal representative shall make 
payment in the following order: 
(1) costs and expenses of administration;  (2) reasonable funeral expenses;  (3) debts and taxes with pref erence under federal law;  
(4) Medicaid benefits recoverable unde r Title 22, section 14, s ubsection 2-I and reasonable and necessary medical and 
hospital expenses of the last illn ess of the decedent, including compensation of persons attending him;  
(5) debts and taxes with preference u nder other laws of this state;  
(6) all other claims. (b) No preference shall be given in the payment of any claim over any other clai m of the same class, and a claim due 
and payable shall not be entitled to a preference over claims not due. 
 
 
 
§ 3-806 
ALLOWANCE OF CLAIMS 
(a) As to claims presented in the manner described in Section 3-804 within the time limit prescribed in 3-803, the 
personal representative may mail a notice to  any claimant stating that the claim has been disallowed.  If, after allowing 
or disallowing a claim, the personal re presentative changes his decision con cerning the claim, he shall notify the 
claimant.  The personal represen tative may not change a disallowance of a cl aim after the time for the claimant to file 
a petition for allowance or to commen ce a proceeding on the claim has run a nd the claim has been barred.  Every 
 
Page 156 of 253 claim which is disallowed in whole or in part by the personal representative is barred so far as not allowed unless the 
claimant files a petition for allowance in  the court or commences a proceeding ag ainst the personal representative not 
later than 60 days after the mailing of the notice of disallowa nce or partial allowance if the notice warns the claimant 
of the impending bar.  Failure of the personal representative to mail notice to a claimant of action on his claim for 60 
days after the time for original presen tation of the claim has expired has th e effect of a notice of allowance. 
(b) After allowing or disallowing a clai m the personal representative may change the allowance or disallowance as 
hereafter provided.  The personal represen tative may prior to payment change the allowance to a disallowance in 
whole or in part, but not afte r allowance by a court order or judgment or an order directi ng payment of the claim.  He 
shall notify the claimant of the change to disallowance, and the disallowed claim is then s ubject to bar as provided in 
subsection (a).  The personal representative may change a disa llowance to an allowance, in whole or in part, until it is 
barred under subsection (a); after it is barred, it may be allowed and paid only if the estate is solvent and all successors 
whose interests would be affected consent. 
(c) Upon the petition of the personal repr esentative or of a claimant in a pr oceeding for the purpose, the court may 
allow in whole or in part any claim or claims presented to the personal represen tative or filed with  the clerk of the 
court in due time and not barred by subsection (a).  Notice in this proceeding shall be given to the claimant, the 
personal representative and those other pe rsons interested in the estate as the court may direct by order entered at the 
time the proceeding is commenced. (d) A judgment in a proceeding in another court against a personal representative to enforce a claim against a 
decedent’s estate is an allowance of the claim. (e) Unless otherwise provided in any judgment in another court entered against the pers onal representative, allowed 
claims bear interest at the legal rate for the period commencing 60 days after the time for original presentation of the 
claim has expired unless based on a cont ract making a provision for interest, in  which case they bear interest in 
accordance with that provision.  ).    Unless otherwise provided in any judgment  in another court entered against the 
personal representative, allowed claims b ear prejudgment interest at  the rate specified in Title 14, section 1602-B for 
the period commencing 60 days after the time for original presentation of th e claim has expired unless based on a 
contract making a provision for interest, in which case they bear interest in accordance with that provision. 
(1). Interest may not accrue on any allowed claims, however a llowed, against an insolvent estate, except to the extent 
that insurance coverage or other nonprobate  assets are available to pa y the claim in full. This paragraph is effective for 
estates of decedents who die on or after October 1, 1997.  
(2). To the extent that an allowed claim against an inso lvent estate is secured by pr operty, the value of which, as 
determined under section 3-809, is greater than the amount of the claim, the holde r of the claim may receive interest 
on the principal amount of the claim and any reasonable f ees, costs or charges provided for under an agreement under 
which the claim arose. This paragraph is effective for estates of decedents who di e on or after October 1, 1997 
 
 
 
§ 3-807  
 
Page 157 of 253 PAYMENT OF CLAIMS 
(a) Upon the expiration of the earlier of the time limitations  provided in Section 3-803 for the presentation of claims, 
the personal representative shall proceed to pay the claims allowed agai nst the estate in the order of priority 
prescribed, after making provision for homestead, family a nd support allowances, for claims already presented that 
have not yet been allowed or whose allowance has been a ppealed, and for unbarred claims that may yet be presented, 
including costs and expenses of administration.  By petit ion to the court in a proceeding for the purpose, or by 
appropriate motion if the administration is supervised, a claimant whose clai m has been allowed but not paid may 
secure an order directing the pe rsonal representative to pay th e claim to the extent funds of the estate are available to 
pay it. (b) The personal representative at any time may pay any just claim that has not  been barred, with or without formal 
presentation, but is personally liable to  any other claimant whose claim is a llowed and who is injured by its payment 
if: (1) payment was made before the expira tion of the time limit stated in subsecti on (a) and the personal representative 
failed to require the payee to give ad equate security for the re fund of any of the paymen t necessary to pay other 
claimants; or  (2) payment was made, due to negligence or  willful fault of the pers onal representative, in such manner as to deprive 
the injured claimant of priority 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-808  
INDIVIDUAL LIABILITY OF PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE 
(a) Unless otherwise provided in the c ontract, a personal representa tive is not individually lia ble on a contract properly 
entered into in his fiduciary capacity in the course of ad ministration of the estate unl ess he fails to reveal his 
representative capacity and identi fy the estate in the contract. 
(b) A personal representative is individually liable for obliga tions arising from ownership or control of the estate or 
for torts committed in the course of administration of the estate only if he is personally at fault. (c) Claims based on contracts entered in to by a personal representativ e in his fiduciary capacit y, on obligations arising 
from ownership or control of the estate or on torts committe d in the course of estate administration may be asserted 
against the estate by proceeding against the personal repr esentative in his fiduciary capacity, whether or not the 
personal representative is i ndividually liable therefor. 
(d) Issues of liability as between the estate and the personal representative individually may be determined in a 
proceeding for accounting, surcharge or indemnification or other appropriate proceeding. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
Page 158 of 253 § 3-809 
SECURED CLAIMS   
Payment of a secured claim is upon the basis of the amount a llowed if the creditor surrenders his security; otherwise 
payment is upon the basis of one of the following: (1) if the creditor exhausts his security before receiving payment, unl ess precluded by other law upon the amount of 
the claim allowed less the fair value of the security; or  
(2) if the creditor does not have the ri ght to exhaust his security or has no t done so, upon the amount of the claim 
allowed less the value of the security determined by conve rting it into money according to  the terms of the agreement 
pursuant to which the security was de livered to the creditor, or by the cr editor and personal representative by 
agreement, arbitration, compromise or litigation. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-810  
CLAIMS NOT DUE AND CONTINGENT  OR UNLIQUIDATED CLAIMS 
(a) If a claim which will become due at a future time or a contingent or unliquidated claim, becomes due, or certain, 
before the distribution of the estate, and if the claim has been allowed or establ ished by a proceeding it is paid in the 
same manner as presently due and abso lute claims of the same class. 
(b) In other cases the personal representa tive or, on petition of the personal repr esentative or the claimant in a special 
proceeding for the purpose, the court, may provide for payment as follows: (1) if the claimant consents, he may be  paid the present or agr eed value of the claim, taking any uncertainty into 
account;  (2) arrangement for future payment or possible payment on the happening of the contingency or on liquidation may be 
made by creating a trust, giving a mo rtgage, obtaining a bond or security from a distributee or otherwise. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
   
§ 3-811  
COUNTERCLAIMS   
In allowing a claim the personal repr esentative may deduct any counterclai m which the estate has against the 
claimant.  In determining a claim against an estate a court shall reduce the amount allowed by the amount of any 
counterclaims and, if the counterclaims ex ceed the claim, render a judgment against the claimant in the amount of the 
 
Page 159 of 253 excess.  A counterclaim, liquidated or unliquidated, may arise from a transacti on other than that upon which the claim 
is based.  A counterclaim may give rise  to relief exceeding in amount or diffe rent in kind from that sought in the 
claim. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-812  
EXECUTION AND LEVIES PROHIBITED   
No execution may issue upon nor may any levy be made agains t any property of the estate under any judgment against 
a decedent or a personal representative, but this secti on shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of 
mortgages, pledges or liens upon real or personal property in  an appropriate proceeding. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-813  
COMPROMISE OF CLAIMS   
When a claim against the estate has been presented in a ny manner, the personal represen tative may, if it appears for 
the best interest of the estate, compromise the claim, whet her due or not due, absolute or contingent, liquidated or 
unliquidated. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-814   
ENCUMBERED ASSETS   
If any assets of the estate are encumbered by mortgage , pledge, lien or other secu rity interest, the personal 
representative may pay the encumbrance or any part thereof, renew or extend a ny obligation secured by the 
encumbrance or convey or transfer the asse ts to the creditor in satisfa ction of his lien, in whol e or in part, whether or 
not the holder of the encumbrance has presented a claim, if it appears to be for the best interest of the estate.  Payment 
of an encumbrance does not increase th e share of the distributee entitled to  the encumbered assets unless the 
distributee is entitle d to exoneration. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
Page 160 of 253  
§ 3-815  
ADMINISTRATION IN MORE THAN ONE STATE;  DUTY OF PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE 
(a) All assets of estates being administer ed in this state are subject  to all claims, allowances and charges existing or 
established against the personal representative wherever appointed. (b) If the estate either in this stat e or as a whole is insufficient to cove r all family exemptions and allowances 
determined by the law of the decedent’s domicile, prior ch arges and claims after satis faction of the exemptions, 
allowances and charges, each claimant whose claim has been allowed either in this state or elsewhere in 
administrations of which the personal repr esentative is aware, is entitled to r eceive payment of an equal proportion of 
his claim.  If a preference or security in  regard to a claim is allowed in anothe r jurisdiction but not in this state, the 
creditor so benefited is to receive dividends from local assets only upon the balance of  his claim after deducting the 
amount of the benefit. (c) In case the family exemptions and allowances, prior char ges and claims of the entire es tate exceed the total value 
of the portions of the estate be ing administered separately and this state is not the state of the dece dent’s last domicile, 
the claims allowed in this state shall be paid their proportion if local assets  are adequate for the purpose, and the 
balance of local assets shall be transferred to the domiciliar y personal representative.  If local assets are not sufficient 
to pay all claims allowed in this state the amount to which they are entitled, lo cal assets shall be marshalled so that 
each claim allowed in this state is paid its proportion as far as possible, after taking into account all dividends on 
claims allowed in this state from assets in other jurisdictions. 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-816  
FINAL DISTRIBUTION TO DOMI CILIARY REPRESENTATIVE   
The estate of a non-resident decedent being administered by a personal representative appointed  in this state shall, if 
there is a personal representative of th e decedent’s domicile willing to receive it, be distributed to the domiciliary 
personal representative for the benefit of the successors of  the decedent unless (i) by virtue of the decedent’s will, if 
any, and applicable choice of law rules,  the successors are identif ied pursuant to the local law of this state without 
reference to the local law of the decedent’s domicile; (ii) the personal representative of this state, after reasonable 
inquiry, is unaware of the existence or identity of a domi ciliary personal representative; or (iii) the court orders 
otherwise in a proceeding for a closing order under Sect ion 3-1001 or incident to the closing of a supervised 
administration.  In other cases, distribution of the estate of  a decedent shall be made in accordance with the other parts 
of this article. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
Page 161 of 253  
3-817 
SURVIVAL OF ACTIONS 
(a). No personal action or cause of action is lost by the death of either party, but  the same survives for and against the 
personal representative of the deceased, except that actions  or causes of action for the recovery of penalties and 
forfeitures of money under penal statut es do not survive the death of the de fendant. A personal representative may 
seek relief from a judgment in an action to which the deceased  was a party to the same extent that the deceased might 
have done so.  
(b). When the only plaintiff or defendant dies while an act ion that survives is pending, or  after its commencement and 
before entry of judgment, his personal representative may appear and enter the action or a ny appeal that has been 
made, and suggest on the record the death of the party. If the personal representa tive does not appear within 90 days 
after his appointment, he may be cite d to appear, and after due notice judg ment may be entered against him by 
dismissal or default if no such appearance is made 
(c). When either of several plaintiffs or defendants in an  action that survives  dies, the death may be suggested on the 
record, and the personal representative of  the deceased may appear or be cited to  appear as provided in subsection (b). 
The action may be further prosecuted or defended by the surv ivors and the personal represen tative jointly or by either 
of them. The survivors, if any, on both side s of the action may testify as witnesses 
(d). When a judgment creditor dies before the first execution issues or before an executi on issued in his lifetime is 
fully satisfied, such execution may be issued or be effec tive in favor of the deceased judgment creditor's personal 
representative, but no execution shall issue or be effective beyond the time within which it would have been effective 
or issued if the pa rty had not died.  
(e). An execution issued under subsecti on (d) shall set forth the fact that th e judgment creditor has died since the 
rendition of the judgment and that the substituted party is  the personal representative of the decedent's estate.  
(f). The personal representative proceedi ng under this section shall be liable, a nd shall hold any recovered property or 
award, in his representative capacity, except as otherwise provided in section 3-808. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The UPC has no section con cerning survival of actions. 
 
 
3-818 
DAMAGES LIMITED TO ACTUAL DAMAGES 
In any tort action against the personal re presentative of a decedent's estate, in  his representative capacity, the plaintiff 
can recover only the value of the goods taken or damage actually sustained. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  UPC has no section concerning damages limited to actual damages. 
 
 
Page 162 of 253  
§ 3-901 
SUCCESSORS’ RIGHTS IF NO ADMINISTRATION 
In the absence of administrati on, the heirs and devisees are entitled to the estate in ac cordance with the terms of a 
probated will or the laws of intestat e succession. Devisees may establish title by the probated will to devised property. 
Persons entitled to property by homestead allowance, exemption or intestacy may establish title thereto by proof of the 
decedent's ownership, his death, and their relationship to the decedent. Successors take subject to all charges incident 
to administration, including the claims of creditors and allowances of surviv ing spouse and dependent children, and 
subject to the rights of  others resulting from abatement, retainer, advancement, and ademption. 
 
 
 
§ 3-902 
DISTRIBUTION; ORDER IN WHICH ASSETS APPROPRIATED; ABATEMENT 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) and except as prov ided in connection with the share of the surviving spouse 
who elects to take an elective share, shar es of distributees abate, without any preference or priority as between real 
and personal property, in the following order:  (1) property not disposed of  by the will; (2) residuary devises; 
(3)general devises; (4) specific devises.   For purposes of abatement, a genera l devise charged on any specific property 
or fund is a specific devise to the exte nt of the value of the property on which it is charged, and upon the failure or 
insufficiency of the property on which it is charged, a general devise to the extent of th e failure or insufficiency.  
Abatement within each classification is in proportion to the amounts of property each of the beneficiaries would have 
received if full distribution of the property had b een made in accordance with  the terms of the will. 
(b)  If the will expresses an order of ab atement, or if the testamentary plan or the express or implied purpose of the 
devise would be defeated by the order of abatement stated in subsection (a), the shares of the distributees abate as may 
be found necessary to give effect to the intention of the testator. 
(c)  If the subject of a pref erred devise is sold or used incident to administration, abatement shall be achieved by 
appropriate adjustments in, or contribution from, other interests in the remaining assets. 
 
 
 
§ 3-902-A 
DISTRIBUTION; ORDER IN WHICH ASSETS APPROPRIATED; ABATEMENT .  ((addendum for 
adoption in community property states)  
 
Page 163 of 253 [(a) and (b) as above.] 
 
(c)  If an estate of a decedent consis ts partly of separate property and part ly of community property, the debts and 
expenses of administration shall be apportioned and charge d against the different kinds of property in proportion to 
the relative value thereof. 
 
[(d) same as (c) in common law state.]] 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Not being a community property st ate, Maine does not adopt UPC §3-
902-A . 
§ 3-903 
RIGHTS OF RETAINER 
The amount of a non-contingent indebtedness of a successor to the esta te if due, or its present value if not due, shall be 
offset against the successor's interest; but the successor ha s the benefit of any defense which would be available to 
him in a direct proceeding for recovery of  the debt.  Such debt constitutes a lie n on the successor's interest in favor of 
the estate, having priority over any attachment or  transfer of the interest by the successor. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-904 
INTEREST ON GENERAL PECUNIARY DEVISE 
General pecuniary devises bear interest at the legal rate of  5% beginning one year after the first appointment of a 
personal representative until payment, unless a contrary intent is indicated by the will. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section removes language allowing a lower than 5% rate for 
underproductive property.   
  
§ 3-905 
PENALTY CLAUSE FOR CONTEST 
A provision in a will purporti ng to penalize any interested  person for contesting the wi ll or instituting other 
proceedings relating to the estate is unenforceable if probable cause exists for instituting proceedings. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
Page 164 of 253  
§ 3-906 
DISTRIBUTION IN KIND;  VALUATION; METHOD 
(a)  Unless a contrary intention is indicated by the will, the distributable assets of a decedent's estate shall be 
distributed in kind to the extent possible through application of the following provisions: 
(1) A specific devisee is entitle d to distribution of the thing devised to him, and a spouse  or child who has selected 
particular assets of an estate as provided in Section 2-403 2-402 shall receive the items selected. 
(2) Any homestead or family allowance or devise of a stat ed sum of money may be satis fied in kind, in the personal 
representative's discretion,  provided 
(i) the person entitled to the paymen t has not demanded payment in cash; 
(ii) the property distributed in kind is valued at fair market value as of the date of it s distribution, and 
(iii) no residuary devisee has requested th at the asset in question remain a part of the residue of the estate or if, a 
residuary devisee has requested that the asset to be distributed re main a part of the residue of the estate, there are 
insufficient other assets to which no resi duary devisee has made such a request to permit satisfaction of the estate's 
obligations and funding of all pecuniary devises made under the decedent's will.. 
(3) For the purpose of valuation under pa ragraph (2) securities regular ly traded on recognized ex changes, if distributed 
in kind, are valued at the price for the la st sale of like securities traded on the business day pr ior to distribution, or if 
there was no sale on that day, at the median between amounts bid and offere d at the close of that day. Assets 
consisting of sums owed the decedent or the estate by solven t debtors as to which there is no known dispute or defense 
are valued at the sum due with accrued in terest or discounted to the date of di stribution. For assets which do not have 
readily ascertainable values, a valuation as of a date not more than 30 days prior to the date of distribution, if 
otherwise reasonable, controls . For purposes of facilitati ng distribution, the pe rsonal representative may ascertain the 
value of the assets as of the time of the proposed distri bution in any reasonable way, including the employment of 
qualified appraisers, even if  the assets may have been previously appraised. 
(4) The residuary estate shall be di stributed in any equitable manner.  may be distributed by the personal 
representative in cash or in kind, in accordance with the best interests of  the residuary devisees. Residuary assets may 
be distributed, at the personal representati ve's discretion, in pro rata or non pro ra ta shares; except that  residuary assets 
not distributed pro rata must be valued as of the date on which they are distributed.  
(b) After the probable charges against the estate are known, th e personal representative may mail or deliver a proposal 
for distribution to all persons who have a right to object to the proposed distri bution. The right of any distributee to 
object to the proposed distribution on the ba sis of the kind or value of asset he is to receive, if not waived earlier in 
writing, terminates if he fails to object in writing received by the personal re presentative within 30 days after mailing 
or delivery of the proposal. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
 
Page 165 of 253  
§ 3-907 
DISTRIBUTION IN KIND; EVIDENCE 
If distribution in kind is made, the pe rsonal representative shall execute an instrument or deed of distribution 
assigning, transferring or releasing the asse ts to the distributee as evidence of the distributee ’s title to the property. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute substantive change Maine law  
 
 
§ 3-908 
DISTRIBUTION; RIGHT OR TITLE OF DISTRIBUTEE 
Proof that a distributee has received an in strument or deed of distribution of a ssets in kind, or payment in distribution, 
from a personal representative, is conclusive evidence that th e distributee has succeeded to th e interest of the estate in 
the distributed assets, as against all persons interested in the estate, except that the personal representative may recover 
the assets or their value if the distribution was improper. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-909 
IMPROPER DISTRIBUTION; LIABILITY OF DISTRIBUTEE 
Unless the distribution or payment no longer can be questio ned because of adjudication, estoppel, or limitation, a 
distributee of property improperly distributed or paid, or a cl aimant who was improperly pa id, is liable to return the 
property improperly received and its inco me since distribution if he has the pr operty. If he does not have the property, 
then he is liable to return the value as  of the date of dispositio n of the property improperly received and its income and 
gain received by him. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
§ 3-910 
Purchasers From Distributees Protected 
If property distributed in kind or a security interest therein is acquired for value by a purchaser from or lender to a 
distributee who has received an instrument  or deed of distribution from the pers onal representative, or is so acquired 
by a purchaser from or lender to a transfer ee from such distributee, the purchaser or  lender takes title free of rights of 
any interested person in the estate and in curs no personal liability to the estate, or to any interested  person, whether or 
not the distribution was proper or sup ported by court order or the authority of the personal representative was 
terminated before execution of the instrument or deed.  This section protects a purchaser from or lender to a 
 
Page 166 of 253 distributee who, as personal representative, has executed a deed of distribution to himself, as well as a purchaser from 
or lender to any other distribu tee or his transferee.  To be protected unde r this provision, a purchaser or lender need 
not inquire whether a personal represen tative acted properly in making the dist ribution in kind, even if the personal 
representative and the distributee are the same person, or whether the authority of the personal representative had 
terminated before the distribution.  Any recorded instrument described in this  section on which a state documentary 
fee is noted pursuant to stamp "Maine Real  Estate Transfer Tax Paid"  shall be prima facie evidence that such transfer 
was made for value. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-911 
PARTITION FOR PURPOSE OF DISTRIBUTION 
When two or more heirs or devisees ar e entitled to distribution of  undivided interests in any real or personal property 
of the estate, the personal representative or one or more of the heirs or devisees may petition the Court prior to the 
formal or informal closing of the estate, to make partition. After notice to the in terested heirs or devisees, the Court 
shall partition the property in the same manner as provide d by the law for civil actions of partition. The Court may 
direct the personal representative to se ll any property which cannot be partiti oned without prejudice to the owners and 
which cannot conveniently be allotted to any one party. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-912 
PRIVATE AGREEMENTS AMONG SUCCESSORS TO DECEDENT BINDING ON PERSONAL 
REPRESENTATIVE 
Subject to the rights of  creditors and taxing authorities, competent succ essors may agree among themselves to alter the 
interests, shares, or amounts to which th ey are entitled under the will of the deced ent, or under the laws of intestacy, in 
any way that they provide in a wri tten contract executed by a ll who are affected by its provisions. The personal 
representative shall abide by the terms of the agreement subject to his obliga tion to administer the estate for the 
benefit of creditors, to pay a ll taxes and costs of administration, and to ca rry out the responsibilities of his office for 
the benefit of any successors of the decedent who are not par ties. Personal representatives of  decedents' estates are not 
required to see to the performance of trusts  if the trustee thereof is another pers on who is willing to accept the trust.  
Accordingly, trustees of a testamentary trust are successors  for the purposes of this sec tion. Nothing herein relieves 
trustees of any duties owed to beneficiaries of trusts. 
 
 
Page 167 of 253 Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-913 
DISTRIBUTIONS TO TRUSTEE 
(a) Before distributing to a trus tee, the personal representative  may require that the trust be  registered if the state in 
which it is to be administered provides for registration and that the trustee in form the beneficiaries as provided in 
Section 7-303. 
(b) If the trust instrument does not excuse the trustee from giving bond, the personal representative may petition the 
appropriate Court to require that the tr ustee post bond if he apprehends that dist ribution might jeopardize the interests 
of persons who are not able to protect themselves, a nd he may withhold distributi on until the Court has acted. 
(c) No inference of negligence on the part of the personal representative shall be drawn from his failure to exercise the 
authority conferred by s ubsections (a) and (b). 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
§ 3-914 
DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED ASSETS 
(a) If an heir, devisee or claimant can not be found, the personal representative shall distribute the share of the missing 
person to his conservator, if any, otherwise to the [state treasurer] , to become a part of the [s tate escheat fund]. it must 
be disposed of according to Title 33, chapter 41. 
 
(b)  The money received by [state treasurer] shall be paid to the person entitled on proof of  his right thereto or, if the 
[state treasurer] refuses or fa ils to pay, the person may petition the Court which appointed the personal representative, 
whereupon the Court upon notice to the [state treasurer]  may determine the person entitle d to the money and order the 
[treasurer] to pay it to him. No interest is allowed there on and the heir, devisee or clai mant shall pay all costs and 
expenses incident to the proceeding. If no petition is made to the [court] within 8 years after payment to the [state 
treasurer], the right of  recovery is barred. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law.. 
 
 
§ 3-915 
DISTRIBUTION TO PERSON UNDER DISABILITY 
(a) A personal representative may discharge his obligati on to distribute to any pers on under legal disability by 
 
Page 168 of 253 distributing in a manner expressly provided in the will. 
(b) Unless contrary to an express provision in the will, the personal representative may discharge his obligation to 
distribute to a minor or person under othe r disability as authorized by Secti on 5-104 or any other statute. If the 
personal representative knows that a conservator has been  appointed or that a proceeding for appointment of a 
conservator is pending, the personal re presentative is authorized to di stribute only to the conservator. 
(c) If the heir or devisee is under disability other than minority, the personal representative is auth orized to distribute 
to: (1) an attorney in fact w ho has authority under a power of attorney to receive property for that person; or 
(2) the spouse, parent or other close re lative with whom the person under disability resides if  the distribution is of 
amounts not exceeding $10,000 a year, or property not exceed ing $10,000 in value, unless the court authorizes a 
larger amount or greater value. Persons receiving money or property for the disabled pers on are obligated to apply th e money or property to the 
support of that person, but may not pay themselves except by  way of reimbursement for out-of-pocket expenses for 
goods and services necessary for the support of the disabled  person. Excess sums must be preserved for future support 
of the disabled person. The personal repr esentative is not responsib le for the proper application of money or property 
distributed pursuant to this subsection. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section adds options and gui dance to former Maine section 3-915 
when making a distribution to  a person under disability. 
 
 
3-916  [referenced as “UPC Part 9A” in UPC]  
UNIFORM ESTATE TAX APPORTIONMENT ACT (2003) 
SECTION 3-9A-101.  Short Title.  This part may be cited as the Uniform Estate Tax Apportionment Act. 
SECTION 3-9A-102.  Definitions.  In this part: 
(1) “Apportionable estate” means the value of  the gross estate as finally determined  for purposes of the estate tax to be 
apportioned reduced by: 
(A) any claim or expense allowable as a deduction for purposes of the tax;  
(B) the value of any interest in property that, for purposes of  the tax, qualifies for a mari tal or charitable deduction or 
otherwise is deductible or is exempt; and  
(C) any amount added to the decedent’s gross estate beca use of a gift tax on transf ers made before death.   
(2) “Estate tax” means a federal, state, or foreign tax impos ed because of the death of an  individual and interest and 
penalties associated with the tax.  The term does not incl ude an inheritance tax, income  tax, or generation-skipping 
transfer tax other than a generation- skipping transfer tax incurred on a dir ect skip taking effect at death. 
(3) “Gross estate” means, with resp ect to an estate tax, all interests in property subject to the tax. 
(4) “Person” means an indivi dual, corporation, business trus t, estate, trust, partners hip, limited liability company, 
 
Page 169 of 253 association, joint venture, public corp oration, government, governmental subdivi sion, agency, or instrumentality, or 
any other legal or commercial entity. 
(5) “Ratable” means apportioned or  allocated pro rata according to  the relative values of interests to which the term is 
to be applied.  “Ratably” has a corresponding meaning. 
(6) “Time-limited interest” means an interest in property which terminates on a lapse of  time or on the occurrence or 
nonoccurrence of an event or which is subjec t to the exercise of discretion that co uld transfer a benefi cial interest to 
another person.  The term does not include a cotenanc y unless the cotenancy itsel f is a time-limited interes 
(7) “Value” means, with respect to an in terest in property, fair market value as  finally determined for purposes of the 
estate tax that is to be apportioned, re duced by any outstanding debt secured by the interest without reduction for taxes 
paid or required to be paid or for any special valuation adjustment. 
SECTION 3-9A-103.  Apportionment by Wi ll or Other Dispositive Instrument. 
(a) Except as otherwise provi ded in subsection (c), th e following rules apply: 
(1) To the extent that a provision of a decedent’s will expressly and unambiguously directs the apportionment of an 
estate tax, the tax must be apportioned accordingly.   
(2) Any portion of an estate tax not appor tioned pursuant to paragraph (1) must be  apportioned in accordance with any 
provision of a revocable trust of which the decedent was th e settlor which expressly and unambiguously directs the 
apportionment of an estate tax.  If conflicting apportionment provisions app ear in two or more revocable trust 
instruments, the provision in the most recently dated in strument prevails.  For purpos es of this paragraph:   
(A) a trust is revocable if it was revocable immediately after the trust instrument was executed, even if the trust 
subsequently becomes irrevocable; and  
(B) the date of an amendment to a re vocable trust instrument is the date of the amended instrument only if the 
amendment contains an apportionment provision.   
(3) If any portion of an estate tax is  not apportioned pursuant to paragraph (1 ) or (2), and a provision in any other 
dispositive instrument expressly and una mbiguously directs that any interest  in the property disposed of by the 
instrument is or is not to be applied to the payment of th e estate tax attributable to the interest disposed of by the 
instrument, the provision controls the appor tionment of the tax to that interest.   
(b) Subject to subsection (c), and unle ss the decedent expressly and unambiguously  directs the contrary, the following 
rules apply: 
(1) If an apportionment provision directs that a person receiving an interest in pr operty under an instrument is to be 
exonerated from the responsibility to pay an estate tax that would otherwise be a pportioned to the interest,  
(A) the tax attributable to the exonera ted interest must be apportioned among the other persons receiving interests 
passing under the instrument, or  
(B) if the values of the other interests are less than the tax attributable to the exonerated interest, the deficiency must 
be apportioned ratably among the other pe rsons receiving inte rests in the apportionable esta te that are not exonerated 
from apportionment of the tax.   
(2) If an apportionment provision directs th at an estate tax is to be  apportioned to an interest in property a portion of 
which qualifies for a marital or charitable deduction, the estate  tax must first be apportioned ratably among the holders 
 
Page 170 of 253 of the portion that does not qualify for a marital or ch aritable deduction and then ap portioned ratably among the 
holders of the deductible portion to th e extent that the value of the nondedu ctible portion is insufficient.   
(3) Except as otherwise provide d in paragraph (4), if an apportionment provision direct s that an estate tax be 
apportioned to property in which one or mo re time-limited interests exist, other than interests in specified property 
under Section 3-9A-107, the tax must be a pportioned to the principal of  that property, regardless of the deductibility of 
some of the interests in that property.   
(4) If an apportionment provision directs th at an estate tax is to be  apportioned to the holders of  interests in property in 
which one or more time-limited interests exist and a charity ha s an interest that otherwise qualifies for an estate tax 
charitable deduction, the tax must first be apportioned, to the extent f easible, to interests in pr operty that have not been 
distributed to the persons entitle d to receive the interests.   
(c) A provision that apportions an estate tax is ineffective to the extent that it increases the tax appo rtioned to a person 
having an interest in the gross estate over which the d ecedent had no power to transf er immediately before the 
decedent executed the instrument in which the apportionment direction was made.  For purposes of this subsection, a 
testamentary power of appointment is a power to tr ansfer the property that is subject to the power. 
SECTION 3-9A-104.  Statutory Appo rtionment of Estate Taxes.  To the extent that apportionment of an estate tax 
is not controlled by an instrument desc ribed in Section 3-9A-103 and except as  otherwise provided in Sections 3-9A-
106 and 3-9A-107, the following rules apply: 
(1) Subject to paragraphs (2), (3), and (4), the estate tax is  apportioned ratably to each person that has an interest in the 
apportionable estate.   
(2) A generation-skipping transfer  tax incurred on a direct sk ip taking effect at death is charged to the person to which 
the interest in propert y is transferred.   
(3) If property is included in the dece dent’s gross estate because of Sectio n 2044 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 or any similar estate tax provision, th e difference between the tota l estate tax for which th e decedent’s estate is 
liable and the amount of estate tax for which the decedent’s es tate would have been liable if the property had not been 
included in the decedent’s gross estate is apportioned rata bly among the holders of inte rests in the property.  The 
balance of the tax, if any, is apportioned ratably to each othe r person having an interest in the apportionable estate.   
(4) Except as otherwise provi ded in Section 3-9A-103(b)(4) and except as  to property to which Section 3-9A-107 
applies, an estate tax apportioned to persons holding intere sts in property subject to a tim e-limited interest must be 
apportioned, without further apportionment, to the princi pal of that property.   
SECTION 3-9A-105.  Credits and Deferrals.  Except as otherwise provided in  Sections 3-9A-106 and 3-9A-107, 
the following rules apply to credits and deferrals of estate taxes: 
(1) A credit resulting from the payment of gift taxes or from estate taxe s paid on property previously taxed inures 
ratably to the benefit of a ll persons to which the esta te tax is apportioned.   
(2) A credit for state or foreign estate taxes inures ratably to the benefit of all persons to which the estate tax is 
apportioned, except that the amount of a credit for a state or foreign tax paid by a beneficiary of the property on which 
the state or foreign tax was imposed, directly or by a ch arge against the property, inur es to the benefit of the 
beneficiary.   
 
Page 171 of 253 (3) If payment of a portion of an estate  tax is deferred because of  the inclusion in the gross estate of a particular 
interest in property, the benefit of the deferral inures ratably to the persons to which the es tate tax attributable to the 
interest is apportioned.  The burden of any interest charges incurred on a deferra l of taxes and the benefit of any tax 
deduction associated with the accrual or payment of the interest charge is allocated ratably among the persons 
receiving an interest  in the property.   
SECTION 3-9A-106.  Insulated Pr operty:  Advancement of Tax. 
(a) In this section: 
(1) “Advanced fraction” means a fraction that has as its numerator the amount of th e advanced tax and as its 
denominator the value of the interests in insulate d property to which that tax is attributable.   
(2) “Advanced tax” means the aggregate amount of estate tax attributable to interests in  insulated property which is 
required to be advanced by uninsulated  holders under subsection (c).   
(3) “Insulated property” means property subject to a time-limited interest which is included in the apportionable estate 
but is unavailable for payment of an estate tax because of impossibility or impracticability.   
(4) “Uninsulated holder” means a person who ha s an interest in uninsulated property.   
(5) “Uninsulated property” means property included in th e apportionable estate other than insulated property.   
(b) If an estate tax is to be advan ced pursuant to subsection (c ) by persons holding interests in uninsulated property 
subject to a time-limited interest other than property to which Section 3-9A- 107 applies, the tax must be advanced, 
without further apportionment,  from the principal of the uninsulated property. 
(c) Subject to Section 3-9A-109(b) and (d ), an estate tax attributable to in terests in insulated property must be 
advanced ratably by uninsulated holders.  If the value of an interest in uninsulated proper ty is less than the amount of 
estate taxes otherwise required to be adva nced by the holder of that interest, th e deficiency must be advanced ratably 
by the persons holding interests in prope rties that are excluded from the a pportionable estate under Section 3-9A-
102(1)(B) as if those interests were in uninsulated property. 
(d) A court having jurisdiction to determin e the apportionment of an estate tax may require a beneficiary of an interest 
in insulated property to pay all or part of the estate tax otherwise apportioned to the interest if the court finds that it 
would be substantively more equitable for that beneficiary to bear the tax liability  personally than for that part of the 
tax to be advanced by uninsulated holders. 
(e) When a distribution of insulated property is made, each uninsulated holde r may recover from the distributee a 
ratable portion of the advanced fraction of  the property distributed.  To the exte nt that undistributed insulated property 
ceases to be insulated, each uninsulat ed holder may recover from the property  a ratable portion of the advanced 
fraction of the total undistributed property. 
(f) Upon a distribution of insulated prope rty for which, pursuant to subsection (d),  the distributee becomes obligated to 
make a payment to uninsulated holders, a court may award an  uninsulated holder a recordab le lien on the distributee’s 
property to secure the distributee’s ob ligation to that uninsulated holder. 
SECTION 3-9A-107.  Apportionment and Reca pture of Special El ective Benefits. 
(a) In this section: 
(1) “Special elective benefit” means a reduction in  an estate tax obtained by an election for:   
 
Page 172 of 253 (A) a reduced valuation of specified propert y that is included in the gross estate;  
(B) a deduction from the gross estate, othe r than a marital or charitable deducti on, allowed for specified property; or  
(C) an exclusion from the gross estate of specified property.   
(2) “Specified property” means property for which an elec tion has been made for a special elective benefit.   
(b) If an election is made for one or mo re special elective benefits, an initial apportionment of a hypot hetical estate tax 
must be computed as if no election for any of those benefits had been made.  The aggregate reduction in estate tax 
resulting from all elections made must  be allocated among holders of intere sts in the specified property in the 
proportion that the amount of de duction, reduced valuation, or ex clusion attributable to each holder’s interest bears to 
the aggregate amount of deductions, redu ced valuations, and exclusions obtain ed by the decedent’s estate from the 
elections.  If the estate tax initially apportioned to the holder of an interest in specified pr operty is reduced to zero, any 
excess amount of reduction reduces ratably the estate tax apportioned to other pe rsons that receive interests in the 
apportionable estate. 
(c) An additional estate tax imposed to recapture all or part of a special elective benefit mu st be charged to the persons 
that are liable for the additional tax under the law providing for the recapture. 
SECTION 3-9A-108.  Securing Payment of Estate T ax from Property in Possession of Fiduciary. 
(a) A fiduciary may defer a distribution of property until the fi duciary is satisfied that adequate provision for payment 
of the estate ta x has been made. 
(b) A fiduciary may withhold from a distri butee an amount equal to the amount of es tate tax apportioned to an interest 
of the distributee. 
(c) As a condition to a distribution, a fi duciary may require the distributee to pr ovide a bond or other security for the 
portion of the estate tax appor tioned to the distributee. 
SECTION 3-9A-109.  Collection of  Estate Tax by Fiduciary. 
(a) A fiduciary responsible for payment of  an estate tax may collect from any pe rson the tax apportioned to and the tax 
required to be advanced by the person. 
(b) Except as otherwise provide d in Section 3-9A-106, any estate tax due fr om a person that cannot be collected from 
the person may be collected by the fiduciary from other persons in the following order of priority: 
(1) any person having an interest in  the apportionable estate which is  not exonerated from the tax;  
(2) any other person having an interest in the apportionable estate; 
(3) any person having an intere st in the gross estate.   
(c) A domiciliary fiduciary may recover from an ancillary personal representative the estate tax apportioned to the 
property controlled by the anci llary personal representative. 
(d) The total tax collected from a person pursuant to this  part may not exceed the value of the person’s interest. 
SECTION 3-9A-110.  Righ t of Reimbursement. 
(a) A person required under Section 3-9A -109 to pay an estate tax greater than  the amount due from the person under 
Section 3-9A-103 or 3-9A-104 has a right to reimbursement from another person to the extent that the other person 
has not paid the tax required by Secti on 3-9A-103 or 3-9A-104 and a right to reimbursement ratably from other 
persons to the extent that each has not contributed a portion of the amount collected  under Section 3-9A-109(b). 
 
Page 173 of 253 (b) A fiduciary may enforce the right of reimbursement under s ubsection (a) on behalf of the person that is entitled to 
the reimbursement and shall take reasonable st eps to do so if reque sted by the person. 
SECTION 3-9A-111.  Action to Determine or Enforce Part.  A fiduciary, transferee, or beneficiary of the gross 
estate may maintain an action for declaratory judgment  to have a court determine and enforce this part. 
SECTION 3-9A-112.  Reserved. 
SECTION 3-9A-113.  Reserved.  
SECTION 3-9A-114.  Delayed Application. 
(a) Sections 3-9A-103 through 3-9A-107 do not apply to the estate of a deceden t who dies on or within three years 
after the effective date of this part, no r to the estate of a decedent who dies mo re than three years after the effective 
date of this part if the decedent cont inuously lacked testamentary capacity from  the expiration of th e three-year period 
until the date of death. 
(b) For the estate of a decedent who dies on or after the eff ective date of this part to which Sections 3-9A-103 through 
3-9A-107 do not apply, estate taxe s must be apportioned pursuant to the law in  effect immediately before the effective 
date of this part. 
SECTION 3-9A-115.  Effective Date.  This part takes effect _______. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section adds UETAA amendmen ts to former Maine section 3-916. 
Note to Revisor:   Sub-sections may need to be re -initialed and/or re-num bered.  Also, date that  section is effective 
needs to be added in the blank spa ce at the very end of the section. 
 
 
§ 3-1001 
FORMAL PROCEEDINGS TERMINAT ING ADMINISTRATION; TESTA TE OR INTESTATE; ORDER 
OF GENERAL PROTECTION 
(a) A personal representative or any interested person may pe tition for an order of complete settlement of the estate.  
The personal representative may petition at any time, and a ny other interested person may petition after one year from 
the appointment of the origin al personal representative except that no pe tition under this section may be entertained 
until the time for presenting claims which arose prior to the death of the decedent has expired.  The petition may 
request the court to determine testacy, if  not previously determined, to consider  the final or compel or approve an 
accounting and distribution, to construe a ny will or determine heirs and adjudicate  the final settlement and distribution 
of the estate.  After notice to all interested persons and h earing the court may enter an or der or orders, on appropriate 
conditions, determining the persons enti tled to distribution of th e estate, and, as circumst ances require, approving 
settlement and directing or approving  distribution of the estate and disc harging the personal representative from 
further claim or demand of any interested person. 
(b) If one or more heirs or devisees were omitted as partie s in, or were not given notice of, a previous formal testacy 
proceeding, the court, on proper petition fo r an order of complete settlement of the estate under this section, and after 
 
Page 174 of 253 notice to the omitted or unnotified persons and other interested part ies determined to be interested on the assumption 
that the previous order con cerning testacy is conclusive as to those given notice of the earlier proceeding, may 
determine testacy as it affects the omitted persons and confirm or alter the previous order of testacy as it affects all 
interested persons as appropriate in the light of the new proofs.  In the absence of objection by an omitted or 
unnotified person, evidence received in the original testac y proceeding shall constitute prima facie proof of due 
execution of any will previously admitted to probate, or of  the fact that the decedent le ft no valid will if the prior 
proceedings determined this fact. 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
3-1002 
FORMAL PROCEEDINGS TERMI NATING TESTATE ADMINISTRAT ION; ORDER CONSTRUING 
WILL WITHOUT ADJUDICATING TESTACY. 
A personal representative administering an estate under an informally probated will or any devisee under an 
informally probated will may petition for an order of settleme nt of the estate which wi ll not adjudicate the testacy 
status of the decedent.  The personal representative ma y petition at any time, and a de visee may petition after one 
year, from the appointment of the original personal repr esentative, except that no peti tion under this section may be 
entertained until the time for presenting claims which aros e prior to the death of the decedent has expired.  The 
petition may request the court to consid er the final account or compel or appr ove an accounting and distribution, to 
construe the will and adjudicate final sett lement and distribution of the estate.  After notice to all devisees and the 
personal representative and hearing, the court may enter an order or orders, on appropriate conditions, determining the 
persons entitled to distribution of the estate under the will, and, as circumst ances require, approving settlement and 
directing or approving distribu tion of the estate and discha rging the personal representa tive from further claim or 
demand of any devisee who is a party to the proceeding and those he represents.  If it appear s that a part of the estate 
is intestate, the proceedings shall be dismissed or am endments made to meet the provisions of Section 3-1001. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
3-1003 
CLOSING ESTATES; BY SWORN STATEMEN T OF PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE. 
(a) Unless prohibited by order of the c ourt and except for estates being administered in s upervised administration 
proceedings, a personal representative may close an estate by filing with the court no earlier  than six months after the 
date of original appointment of a general personal represen tative for the estate, a verified  statement stating that the 
personal representative, or a previo us personal representative, has: 
(1) determined that the time limited for pres entation of creditors’ claims has expired; 
 
Page 175 of 253 (2) fully administered the estate of the decedent by making paym ent, settlement, or other disposition of all claims that 
were presented, expenses of administra tion and estate, inheritance and other d eath taxes, except as specified in the 
statement, and that the assets of the estate have been distributed to the pe rsons entitled.  If any claims remain 
undischarged, the statement must state whether the personal representative ha s distributed the es tate subject to 
possible liability with the agr eement of the distributees, or state in detail other arrangements that have been made to 
accommodate outstanding liabilities; and (3) sent a copy of the statement to all distributees of the estate to all persons who would ha ve a claim to succession 
under the testacy status upon which the pers onal representative is authorized to proceed a nd to all creditors or other 
claimants of whom the personal represen tative is aware whose claims are neither  paid nor barred and has furnished a 
full account in writing of the personal re presentative’s administration to the di stributees whose interests are affected 
thereby.   (b) If no proceedings involving the pe rsonal representative are pending in th e court one year after the closing 
statement is filed the appointment of th e personal represen tative terminates. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section removes the requirement  that the personal representative 
also provide a closing statement to “a ll persons who would have a claim under the testacy status,” meaning persons 
who, for various reasons, were affected by ad emption, abatement, mistake, or fraud.   
 
 
3-1004 
LIABILITY OF DISTRIBUTEES TO CLAIMANTS 
After assets of an estate have been distributed and subject to Section 3-1006, an undischarged  claim not barred may be 
prosecuted in a proceeding against one or more distributees.  No distributee shall be lia ble to claimants for amounts 
received as exempt property, homestead or family allowances , or for amounts in excess of the value of his distribution 
as of the time of distribution.  As between distributees, each shall bear the cost of satisf action of unbarred claims as if 
the claim had been satisfied in the cour se of administration.  Any distributee who shall have failed to notify other 
distributees of the demand made upon him by the claimant in sufficient time to permit them to join in any proceeding 
in which the claim was asserted against him loses hi s right of contribution ag ainst other distributees. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
3-1005 
LIMITATIONS ON PROCEEDINGS AGAINST PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE 
Unless previously barred by adjudication and except as provid ed in the closing statement, the rights of successors and 
of creditors whose claims have not othe rwise been barred against the personal re presentative for breach of fiduciary 
 
Page 176 of 253 duty are barred unless a proceeding to assert the same is co mmenced within six months af ter the filing of the closing 
statement.  The rights thus barred do  not include rights to recover from a personal representative for fraud, 
misrepresentation, or inadequate disclosure rela ted to the settlement of the decedent’s estate. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change Maine law. 
 
 
3-1006 
LIMITATIONS ON ACTIONS AND PR OCEEDINGS AGAINST DISTRIBUTEES 
Unless previously adjudicated in a formal testacy proceedi ng or in a proceeding settling the accounts of a personal 
representative or otherwise barr ed, the claim of a claimant to recover from a distributee who is liab le to pay the claim, 
and the right of an heir or devisee, or of a successor persona l representative acting in the heirs’ or devisee’s behalf, to 
recover property improperly di stributed or its value from a ny distributee is forever barred at the later of 3 years after 
the decedent's death or one year after the time of its distribu tion thereof, but all claims of creditors of the decedent, are 
barred one year 9 months after the decedent's death. This se ction does not bar an action to recover property or value 
received as a result of fraud. 
 
 
 
3-1007 
CERTIFICATE DISCHARGING LIENS SECURING FIDUCIARY PERFORMANCE 
After his appointment has terminated, the personal represen tative, his sureties, or any successor of either, upon the 
filing of a verified application showing so far as is know n by the applicant, that no act ion concerning the estate is 
pending in any court, is entitle d to receive a certificate from the Registrar that the persona l representative appears to 
have fully administered the estate in  question.  The certificate evidences disc harge of any lien on any property given 
to secure the obligation of the person al representative in lieu of bond or a ny surety, but does not preclude action 
against the personal representative or the surety. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change Maine law. 
 
 
3-1008 
SUBSEQUENT ADMINISTRATION 
If other property of the estate is discovered after an esta te has been settled and the pers onal representative discharged 
or after one year after a closing stat ement has been filed, the court upon peti tion of any interest ed person and upon 
notice as it directs may appoint the same or a successor personal representative to ad minister the subsequently 
 
Page 177 of 253 discovered estate.  If a new appointment is made, unless the court orders otherwis e, the provisions of this Code apply 
as appropriate; but no claim previously barred may be asserted in the subsequent administration. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change Maine law. 
 
 
3-1101 
EFFECT OF APPROVAL OF AGREEMENTS INVO LVING TRUSTS, INALIENABLE INTERESTS, OR 
INTERESTS OF THIRD PERSONS 
A compromise of any controversy as to admission to probate of any instrument offered for formal probate as the will 
of a decedent, the construction, validity, or  effect of any governing instrument, the rights or interests in the estate of 
the decedent, of any successor, or the ad ministration of the estate, if approved in a formal proceeding in the court for 
that purpose, is binding on all the pa rties thereto including those unborn, unascer tained or who could not be located.  
An approved compromise is binding even though it may affect  a trust or an inalienable interest.  A compromise does 
not impair the rights of creditors or of taxing authorities who are not parties to it. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section expands its referen ce under former Maine section 3-1101 
from “any probated will” to “a ny governing instrument.”  
 
 
3-1102 
PROCEDURE FOR SECURING COURT  APPROVAL OF COMPROMISE 
The procedure for securing court approval of a compromise is as follows: 
(1) The terms of the compromise shall be set forth in  an agreement in writing which shall be executed by all 
competent persons and parents or legal guardians who have both actual custody and legal responsibility for a minor 
child acting for any minor child having beneficial interest s or having claims which will or may be affected by the 
compromise.  Execution is not required by any person whose id entity cannot be ascertained or whose whereabouts is 
unknown and cannot reasonabl y be ascertained.   
(2) Any interested person, incl uding the personal repr esentative, if any, or a trustee, then may su bmit the agreement to 
the court for its approval and for execution by the personal re presentative, the trustee of every affected testamentary 
trust, and other fiduciaries  and representatives.   
(3) After notice to all interested persons  or their representatives, including th e personal representative of any estate 
and all affected trustees of tr usts, the court, if it finds that  the contest or controversy is in good faith and that the effec t 
of the agreement upon the interests of persons represented by fiduciaries or  other representatives is just and 
reasonable, shall make an order approving the agreement and directing all fiduciaries subj ect to its jurisdiction to 
execute the agreement.  Minor children represented only by th eir parents may be bound only if  their parents join with 
 
Page 178 of 253 other competent persons in execution of the compromise.  Upon the making of the orde r and the execution of the 
agreement, all further disposition of the estate is  in accordance with the terms of the agreement. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
3-1201 
COLLECTION OF PERSONAL PROPERTY BY AFFIDAVIT 
(a) Thirty days after the death of a decedent, any person indebted to the d ecedent or having possession of tangible 
personal property or an instrument ev idencing a debt, obligation, stock or chos e in action belonging to the decedent 
shall make payment of the indebtedness or deliver the tang ible personal property or an instrument evidencing a debt, 
obligation, stock or chose in action to a person claiming to be the successor of the dece dent upon being presented an 
affidavit made by or on behalf of the successor stating that: 
(1) the value of the entire estate , wherever located, less liens and en cumbrances, does not exceed $5025,000; and 
(2) 30 days have elapsed since the death of the decedent; and 
(3) no application or petition for the appointment of a persona l representative is pending or has been granted in any 
jurisdiction; and  (4) the claiming successor is entitled to pa yment or delivery of the property.   
(b) A transfer agent of any security shall change the registered ownership on the books of a corporation from the 
decedent to the successor or successors upon the presentati on of an affidavit as provided in subsection (a). 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Former Maine section 3-1201 set affidavit amount at $20,000 and 
included “tangibles,” thereby including a ll accounts of financial institutions. 
 
 
3-1202 
EFFECT OF AFFIDAVIT 
The person paying, delivering, transferring, or issuing personal property or the evidence thereof pursuant to affidavit 
is discharged and released to the same extent as if he dea lt with a personal representative of the decedent.  He is not 
required to see to the applic ation of the personal property or evidence thereof or to inquire into the truth of any 
statement in the affidavit.  If any pers on to whom an affidavit is delivered refu ses to pay, deliver, transfer, or issue any 
personal property or evidence thereof, it may be recovered or its payment, delivery, transfer, or issuance compelled 
upon proof of their right in a proceeding brought for the purpose by or on behalf of the persons entitled thereto.  Any 
person to whom payment, delivery, transfer or issuance is  made is answerable and accountable therefor to any 
personal representative of the estate or to  any other person having a superior right. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
Page 179 of 253  
3-1203 
SMALL ESTATES; SUMMARY ADM INISTRATIVE PROCEDURE 
If it appears from the inventory and appr aisal that the value of the entire esta te, less liens and encumbrances, does not 
exceed homestead allowance, exempt property, family allowa nce, costs and expenses of  administration, reasonable 
funeral expenses, and reasonabl e and necessary medical and hos pital expenses of the last illness of the decedent, the 
personal representative, without giving noti ce to creditors, may immediately disbur se and distribute the estate to the 
persons entitled thereto and file a closi ng statement as provid ed in Section 3-1204. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
3-1204 
SMALL ESTATES; CLOSING BY SWORN STAT EMENT OF PERSONAL  REPRESENTATIVE 
(a) Unless prohibited by order of the court and except for esta tes being administered by supervised personal 
representatives, a personal representative may close an es tate administered under the su mmary procedures of Section 
3-1203 by filing with the court, at any time after disburseme nt and distribution of the es tate, a verified statement 
stating that: (1) to the best knowledge of the personal representative, the value of the entire estate, less liens and encumbrances, 
did not exceed homestead allowance, exempt property, fam ily allowance, costs and expenses of administration, 
reasonable funeral expenses, and reasonable, necessary medical and hospital expenses of the last illness of the decedent;  (2) the personal representative has fully administered the estate by disbursing and distribu ting it to the persons entitled 
thereto; and  (3) the personal representative has sent a copy of the clos ing statement to all distributee s of the estate and to all 
creditors or other claimants of whom he  is aware whose claims ar e neither paid nor barred, and has furnished a full 
account in writing of his administration to the distributees whose inte rests are affected.   
(b) If no actions or proceedings involving the personal re presentative are pending in th e court one year after the 
closing statement is filed, the appointment of the personal representative terminates. 
(c) A closing statement filed under this section has the same effect  as one filed under Section 3-1003. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
None 
SOCIAL SECURITY PAYMENTS 
 
Page 180 of 253 If, (1) not less than 30 days after the deat h of a Maine resident entitl ed, at the time of his death, to a monthly benefit or 
benefits under Title II of the Social Secu rity Act, all or part of the amount of su ch benefit or benefits not in excess of 
$1,000 is paid by the United States to the surviving spouse, on e or more of the deceased's children, or descendants of 
his deceased children, the deceased's father or mother, or the deceased's brother or sister, preference being given in the 
order named if more than one request for payment shall have  been made by or for such individuals, upon an affidavit 
made and filed with the Department of Health and Human Se rvices by the surviving spouse or other relative by whom 
or on whose behalf request for payment is made, and (2) th e affidavit shows the date of  death of the deceased, the 
relationship of the affiant to the deceased, that no persona l representative for the dece ased has been appointed and 
qualified, and that, to the affiant's knowledge , there exists at the time of filing of the affidavit, no relative of a closer 
degree of kindred to the deceased than the affiant, then such payment pursuant to the affidavit shall be deemed to be a 
payment to the legal representative of the decedent and, rega rdless of the truth or falsity  of the statements made 
therein, shall constitute a full discharg e and release of the United States from any further claim for such payment to 
the same extent as if such payment had been made to  the personal representative of the decedent's estate.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments
 
  
4-101 
DEFINITIONS 
(1) “local administration” means admi nistration by a personal representative appointed in this state pursuant to 
appointment proceedings described in [Article] III.   (2) “local personal representa tive” includes any personal repres entative appointed in this st ate pursuant to appointment 
proceedings described in [Article] III and excludes foreign personal representatives who acquire the power of a local 
personal representative purs uant to Section 4-205.   
(3) “resident creditor” means a person do miciled in, or doing business in this st ate, who is, or could be, a claimant 
against an estate of a non-resident decedent.   
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
4-201 
PAYMENT OF DEBT AND DELIVERY OF PROPER TY TO DOMICILIARY FOREIGN PERSONAL 
REPRESENTATIVE WITHOUT LOCAL ADMINISTRATION 
At any time after the expiration of 60 days from the death of  a nonresident decedent, any pe rson indebted to the estate 
of the nonresident decedent or having possession or control of personal property, or of an instrument evidencing a 
 
Page 181 of 253 debt, obligation, stock or chose in action belonging to the es tate of the non-resident decede nt may pay the debt, deliver 
the personal property, or the instrument  evidencing the debt, obligation, stock or chose in action, to the domiciliary 
foreign personal representative of the nonresident decedent upon being presented with proof of his appointment and 
an affidavit made by or on behalf of the representative stating: 
(1) the date of the death of  the nonresident decedent,  
(2) that no local administration, or application or petition therefor, is pend ing in this state,  
(3) that the domiciliary foreign personal representative is entitl ed to payment or delivery.   
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
4-202 
PAYMENT OR DELIVERY DISCHARGES 
Payment or delivery made in good faith on the basis of the pr oof of authority and affidavi t releases the debtor or 
person having possession of the personal property to the same extent as if payment or delivery had been made to a 
local personal representative.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
4-203 
RESIDENT CREDITOR NOTICE 
Payment or delivery under Section 4-201 may not be made if a resident creditor of the nonresident decedent has 
notified the debtor of the nonresident decedent or the pe rson having possession of the personal property belonging to 
the nonresident decedent that the debt should not be paid  nor the property delivered to the domiciliary foreign 
personal representative.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
4-204 
PROOF OF AUTHORITY; BOND 
If no local administration or application or petition therefor is pending in this  state, a domiciliary foreign personal 
representative may file with a court in this state in a [county]  in which property belonging to the decedent is located, 
authenticated copies of his appointment  and of any offici al bond he has given.  
 
 
Page 182 of 253 Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section removes the requireme nt under former Maine section 4-204 
that the foreign personal repres entative also must file proof  of current authority.    
 
 
4-205 
POWERS 
A domiciliary foreign personal representa tive who has complied with Section 4-204 may exercise as to assets in this 
state all powers of a local pers onal representative, and may ma intain actions and proceedings  in this state subject to 
any conditions imposed upon nonr esident parties generally.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
4-206 
POWER OF REPRESENTATIVES IN TRANSITION 
The power of a domiciliary foreign pe rsonal representative under Section 4-201 or 4-205 shall be exercised only if 
there is no administration or application therefor pending in this state.  An application or petition for local 
administration of the estate terminates the power of the fo reign personal representative to act under Section 4-205, but 
the local court may allow the foreign personal representative  to exercise limited powers to preserve the estate.  No 
person who before receiving actual noti ce of a pending local administration ha s changed his position in reliance upon 
the powers of a foreign personal representa tive shall be prejudiced by reason of the application or petition for, or grant 
of, local administration.  The local pers onal representative is subject to all dut ies and obligations which have accrued 
by virtue of the exercise of the powers by the foreign pers onal representative and may be  substituted for him in any 
action or proceedings in this state. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
4-207 
ANCILLARY AND OTHER LOCAL ADMINISTR ATIONS; PROVISIONS GOVERNING 
In respect to a nonresident decedent, the provisions of [Ar ticle] III of this [code] govern:  (1) proceedings, if any, in a 
court of this state for probate of the will, appointment, removal, supervisi on, and discharge of the local personal 
representative, and any other order concerning the estate; an d (2) the status, powers, dutie s and liabilities of any local 
personal representative and the rights of  claimants, purchasers, distributees  and others in regard to a local 
administration. 
 
 
Page 183 of 253 Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change Maine law. 
 
 
4-301 
JURISDICTION BY ACT OF FORE IGN PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE 
A foreign personal representative, submits personally to the jurisdiction of the courts of this state in any proceeding 
relating to the estate by (i) filing authenticat ed copies of his appointment as pr ovided in Section 4-204, (ii) receiving 
payment of money or taking delivery of personal propert y under Section 4-201, or (iii ) doing any act as a personal 
representative in this state which would have given the stat e jurisdiction over him as an individual.  Jurisdiction under 
clause (ii) is limited to the money or  value of personal property collected. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
4-302 
JURISDICTION BY ACT OF DECEDENT 
In addition to jurisdiction conf erred by Section 4-301, a foreign personal represen tative is subject to  the jurisdiction of 
the courts of this state to the same extent that his decedent was subject to  jurisdiction immediat ely prior to death. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
4-303 
SERVICE ON FOREIGN PERS ONAL REPRESENTATIVE 
(a) Service of process may be made upon the foreign personal representative by registered or certified mail, addressed 
to his last reasonably ascert ainable address, requesting a return receipt signed by addre ssee only.  Notice by ordinary 
first class mail is sufficient if registered or certified mail se rvice to the addressee is unavailable.  Service may be made 
upon a foreign personal representative in the manner in which service could have been made under other laws of this 
state on either the foreign personal representative  or his decedent immedi ately prior to death. 
(b) If service is made upon a foreign pers onal representative as provided in subsect ion (a), he shall be allowed at least 
[30] days within which to appear or respond. 
Service of process may be made upon the foreign personal representative in such manner as the Supreme Judicial 
Court shall by ru le provide. 
 
 
 
 
Page 184 of 253 4-401 
EFFECT OF ADJUDICATION FOR OR AG AINST PERSONAL REPRESENTATIVE 
An adjudication rendered in any jurisdiction in favor of or  against any personal representative of the estate is as 
binding on the local personal representative as if he were a party to the adjudication. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
5-101 
SHORT TITLE. 
This [article] may be cited as the Uniform Guardianship and Protective Proceedings Act.  
 
 
 
5-102 
DEFINITIONS.  
In this [article]: 
(1) “Conservator” means a person who is appointed by a co urt to manage the estate of a protected person.  The 
term includes a limited conservator. 
(1-A). The "best interest of the minor" is as de termined in Title 19-A, section 1653, subsection 3. 
(2) “Court” means the [designate appr opriate court] any one of the severa l courts of probate of this State 
established as provided in Title 4, sections 201 and 202. 
(3) “Guardian” means a person who has qualified as a gua rdian of a minor or incapa citated person pursuant to 
appointment by a parent or spouse, or by the court.  Th e term includes a limited, emergency, and temporary substitute 
guardian but not a guardian ad litem. 
(4) “ Incapacitated person” means an i ndividual who, for reasons other than being a minor, is unable to receive 
and evaluate information or make or communicate informed d ecisions to such an extent that the individual lacks the 
ability to meet essential requirements for physical healt h, safety, or self-care, even  with reasonably available 
appropriate technological assistance. 
(5) “Legal representative” includes the lawyer for th e respondent, a representative payee, a guardian or 
conservator acting for a respondent in this  state or elsewhere, a tr ustee or custodian of a tr ust or custodianship of 
which the respondent is a beneficiary, a nd an agent designated under a power of attorney, whether for health care or 
property, in which the respondent is  identified as the principal. 
(6) “Minor” means an unemancipated individual  who has not attained [18] years of age. 
(7) “Parent” means a parent whose pare ntal rights have not been terminated. 
(8) “Protected person” means a minor or other individual for whom a conser vator has been appointed or other 
 
Page 185 of 253 protective order has been made. 
(9) “Respondent” means an individual for whom the a ppointment of a guardian or conservator or other 
protective order is sought. 
(10) “Ward” means an individual for wh om a guardian has been appointed.   
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  In the UPC definition of “incapaci tated person,” Maine has inserted 
“informed” before “decisions.”  Lack of capacity to ma ke an “informed” decision is a statutory condition for 
involuntary treatment in a psychiatric hosp ital.  “Informed” consent to treatment is a term used in other healthcare 
contexts.  This change to the uniform  language promotes consistency across Ma ine statutes related to capacity to 
decide or consent. Also in that definition, the Maine has in serted “reasonably available” before “tec hnological assistance.”  There is an 
argument to be made that if technol ogical assistance exists to address functional defi cits, a guardianship or 
conservatorship is not “least restrictive.”  However,  under the UPC language, if th e respondent cannot afford 
technological assistance and if  the assistance is not otherwise available,  the respondent is precluded from getting 
either technological assistance or the protection th at guardianship or conser vatorship would provide. 
“Best interest of the minor” is undefined in the UPC.  Main e retains a definition of best interest of the minor, using 
currently existing criteria in Title 19-A to  promote uniformity across Maine statutes. 
The UPC does not include definitions of “de facto guardian” and “demonstrated l ack of consistent participation,” both 
added to the former Maine Probate Code as part of P. L. 2005 ch. 371, § 2, which law pr ovided rights to adults who 
were caring for minors, but not under c ourt appointment.  The UPC treatment of  persons “other than a parent or 
guardian having care or custody of a minor” provides t hose individuals notice of guardianship proceedings, 
opportunity to object, and potenti al guardianship appointment. 
 
 
5-103 
[RESERVED.] 
 
 
 
5-104 
FACILITY OF TRANSFER. 
(a) Unless a person required to transfer money or pe rsonal property to a minor knows that a conservator has 
been appointed or that a proceeding for appointment of a conservator of the es tate of the minor is pending, the person 
may do so, as to an amount or value not exceeding [$10,000 ] a year, by transferring it to: 
 (1) a person who has the care a nd custody of the minor and with  whom the minor resides;  
 (2) a guardian of the minor;   (3) a custodian under the Uniform Transfers To Minors Act or custodial trustee under the Uniform 
 
Page 186 of 253 Custodial Trust Act; or 
 (4) a financial institution as a deposit in an interest -bearing account or certific ate in the sole name of 
the minor and giving notice of the deposit to the minor; or 
(5) the minor, if married. 
(b) A person who transfers money or property in complian ce with this section is no t responsible for its proper 
application. 
(c) A guardian or other person who receives money or property for a minor under subsection (a)(1) or (2) may 
only apply it to the support, care, education, health, and we lfare of the minor, and may not  derive a personal financial 
benefit except for reimbursement for necessary expenses.  Any excess must be preserved for the future support, care, 
education, health, and welfare of the minor, and any balance must be transf erred to the minor upon emancipation or 
attaining majority. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine adopts the Uniform Probate Code, with a single change to allow 
transfer of funds under this provision to a married minor.  Th is is consistent with other statutes treating married minors 
as adults, such as 22 M.R.S.A. § 1503, which gives married minors authority to give cons ent for healthcare services.  
With the exception of an increase of the permitted transf er amount from $5000 to $10,000, this does not constitute a 
substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
5-105 
DELEGATION OF POWER BY PARENT OR GUARDIAN. 
(a) A parent or a guardian of a minor  or incapacitated person, by a power of attorney, may delegate to another 
person, for a period not exceeding six twelve months, any power  regarding care, custody or property of the minor or 
ward, except the power to cons ent to marriage or adoption. 
(b). Notwithstanding subsection (a), unless otherwise stated in the power of atto rney, if the parent or guardian is a 
member of the National Guard or Reserves of the United States Armed Forces under an order to active duty for a 
period of more than 30 days, a power of attorney that w ould otherwise expire is auto matically extended until 30 days 
after the parent or guardian is no longer under those active duty orders or until an order of the court so provides. 
This subsection applies only if the parent or guardian's service is in support of: 
(1). An operational mission for which members of the reserve components have been ordered to active duty 
without their consent; or 
(2). Forces activated during a period of war declared by Congress or a period of natio nal emergency declared by 
the President or Congress. 
  
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine adopts the UPC, with two exceptions.  First, Maine uses a 
12-month effective period for a power of  attorney rather than the 6-month pe riod in the UPC.  Second, Maine provides 
 
Page 187 of 253 for an automotive extension for parents on active military duty.  Adoption of the UPC removes the requirement under 
former Maine law that a delegation by a court-appointed guardian thr ough a power of attorney be  filed with the court. 
 
 
5-106 
SUBJECT-MATTER JURISDICTION. 
(a) Except to the extent the guardianship is subject to th e [insert citation to Uniform Child Custody Jurisdiction 
and Enforcement Act], the court of this state has jurisdiction over gua rdianship for minors domicil ed or present in this 
state.  The court of this state has jurisdiction over prot ective proceedings for minors domiciled in or having property 
located in this state. 
(b) The court of this state has jurisdiction over guardiansh ip and protective proceedings for an adult individual 
as provided in the [insert citation to  Uniform Adult Guardianship and Prot ective Proceedings Jurisdiction Act.] 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine adopts the UPC language conc erning jurisdiction.  This does not 
change the Probate Court’s role as the exclusive court in the State of Maine with juri sdiction over guardianship and 
protective proceedings for minors and adults, except as that jurisdiction may be reserved specifically to another court.    
NOTE:  Provisions of 4 M.R.S. §253 will have to be amended.
 
 
5-107 
TRANSFER OF JURISDICTION. 
(a) Except as otherwise pr ovided in subsection (b), the following rules apply: 
 (1) After the appointment of a guardian or conserva tor or entry of another pr otective order, the court 
making the appointment or entering the orde r may transfer the proceeding to a court in another [county] in this state or 
to another state if the court is satisfied that a transfer will serve the best interest of the ward or protected person. 
  (2) If a guardianship or protective proceeding is pending in another state or  a foreign country and a 
petition for guardianship or protective proceed ing is filed in a court in this state, the court in this st ate shall notify the 
original court and, after consultation with  the original court, assume or declin e jurisdiction, whichever is in the best 
interest of the ward  or protected person. 
  (3) A guardian, conservator, or like fiduciary ap pointed in another state may petition the court for 
appointment as a guardian or conservator in  this state if venue in this state is or will be establis hed.  The appointment 
may be made upon proof of appointment in the other state and presentation of a certified copy of the portion of the 
court record in the other state specified by the court in this state.  Notice of hearing on the petition, together with a 
copy of the petition, must be given to the ward or protecte d person, if the ward or prot ected person has attained 14 
years of age, and to the persons who would be entitled to notice if the regu lar procedures for appointment of a 
guardian or conservator under this [article ] were applicable.  The court shall make  the appointment in this state unless 
 
Page 188 of 253 it concludes that the appointment would not be in the best interest of the ward or  protected person.  On the filing of an 
acceptance of office appointment and any required bond, the court shall issue appr opriate letters of guardianship or 
conservatorship.  Not later than 14 days  after an appointment, the guardian or conservator shall send or deliver a copy 
of the order of appointment to the ward  or protected person, if the ward or pr otected person has attained 14 years of 
age, and to all persons given notice of the hearing on the petition. 
(b) This section does not apply to a guardianship or protec tive proceeding for an adult individual that is subject 
to the transfer provisions of [insert c itation to Article 3 of the Uniform Adult Guardianship and Protective Proceedings 
Jurisdiction Act (2007)] s ections 5-531 and 5-532. 
 
 
 
5-108 
VENUE. 
(a) Venue for a guardianship proceeding for a minor is in the [county] of this state in which the minor resides 
or is present at the time the proceeding is commenced. 
(b) Venue for a guardianship proceeding for an incapacitated person is in the [county] of  this state in which the 
respondent resides and, if the responde nt has been admitted to an instituti on by order of a court of competent 
jurisdiction, in the [county] in which the court is located.  Venue for the ap pointment of an emergency or a temporary 
substitute guardian of an incapacitated person is also in the [county] in which th e respondent is present. 
(c) Venue for a protective proceeding is in the [county] of  this state in which the respondent resides, whether 
or not a guardian has been appointed in another place or, if the respondent does not reside in this state, in any [county] 
of this state in which property  of the respondent is located. 
(d) If a proceeding under this [article ] is brought in more than one [county]  in this state, the court of the 
[county] in which the proceeding is first brought has the excl usive right to proceed unless that court determines that 
venue is properly in another court or th at the interests of justice otherwise requi re that the proceeding be transferred. 
 
 
 
5-109 
[RESERVED.] 
 
 
 
5-110 
LETTERS OF OFFICE  APPOINTMENT. 
Upon the guardian’s filing of an acceptance of office appoi ntment, the court shall issu e appropriate letters of 
 
Page 189 of 253 guardianship.  Upon the conservator’s filing of an acceptanc e of office appointment and any required bond, the court 
shall issue appropriate letters of cons ervatorship.  Letters of guardianship mu st indicate whether the guardian was 
appointed by the court, a parent, or th e spouse.  Any limitation on the powers of  a guardian or conservator or of the 
assets subject to a conservators hip must be endorsed on the guardi an’s or conservator’s letters. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section expands previous  Maine law by stating content 
requirements for lett ers of appointment. 
 
 
5-111 
EFFECT OF ACCEPTANCE OF APPOINTMENT. 
By accepting appointment, a guardian or conservator submits  personally to the jurisdiction of the court in any 
proceeding relating to the guardianship or conservatorshi p.  The petitioner shall send or deliver notice of any 
proceeding to the guardian or conservator at the guardian’s or  conservator’s address shown in the court records and at 
any other address then k nown to the petitioner. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Language does not constitute a s ubstantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
5-112 
TERMINATION OF OR CHANGE IN GUARDIAN’ S OR CONSERVATOR’S APPOINTMENT. 
(a) The appointment of a guardian or  conservator terminates upon the de ath, resignation, or removal of the 
guardian or conservator or upon termina tion of the guardianship or conservato rship.  A resignation of a guardian or 
conservator is effective wh en approved by the court.  [A parental or spousal appointment as guardian under an 
informally probated will terminates if the will is later denied probate in a formal proceeding. ] Termination of the 
appointment of a guardian or conservator does not affect the liability of either for previ ous acts or the obligation to 
account for money and other assets of  the ward or protected person. 
(b) A ward, protected person, or  person interested in the welfare of a ward or protected person may petition for 
removal of a guardian or conservator on th e ground that removal would be in the be st interest of the ward or protected 
person or for other good cause.  A guardian or conservato r may petition for permission to resign.  A petition for 
removal or permission to resign may include a request fo r appointment of a successor guardian or conservator. 
(c) The court may appoint an additional guardian or c onservator at any time, to serve immediately or upon 
some other designated event, and may appoint a successor guar dian or conservator in the event of a vacancy or make 
the appointment in contemplation of a vacancy, to serve if a vacancy occurs.  An additional or successor guardian or 
conservator may file an accepta nce of appointment at any time after the a ppointment, but not later than 30 days after 
the occurrence of the vacancy or other designated event.  The additional or su ccessor guardian or conservator becomes 
 
Page 190 of 253 eligible to act on the occurrence of the vacancy or designa ted event, or the filing of the acceptance of appointment, 
whichever last occurs.  A successor guardian or conserva tor succeeds to the predecesso r’s powers, and a successor 
conservator succeeds to the predecessor’s title to the protected person’s assets. 
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section adds to Ma ine law explicit authority to appoint contingent co-
guardians or successor guardians or conservators. 
  
5-113 
NOTICE. 
(a) Except as otherwise ordered by th e court for good cause, if notice of a hearing on a petition is required, 
other than a notice for which specific re quirements are otherwise provided, the pe titioner shall give  notice of the time 
and place of the hearing to the person to be notified.  Notic e must be given in compliance with [insert the applicable 
rule of civil procedure]  such manner as the Supreme Judicial Court shal l by rule provide at least 14 days before the 
hearing. 
(b) Proof of notice must be made before or at the hearing and filed in the proceeding. 
(c) A notice under this [article] mu st be given in plain language. 
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section adds a plain langua ge requirement to Maine law, and 
specifies that the petitioner must give the required notices. 
  
5-114 
WAIVER OF NOTICE. 
A person may waive notice by a writing signed by the person or  the person’s attorney a nd filed in the proceeding.  
However, a respondent, ward, or prot ected person may not waive notice.  
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section removes the authority under former Maine law, §5-309(b) 
and §5-405(a), for a ward or protected pers on to waive notice if he or she attend ed the hearing, or if the waiver was 
confirmed by his or her counsel, the guardian ad litem, or the visitor. 
 
 
5-115 
GUARDIAN AD LITEM. 
At any stage of a proceeding, a court may appoint a guardian ad litem if the court determines that representation of the 
interest otherwise would be inadequate .  If not precluded by a conflict of in terest, a guardian ad litem may be 
 
Page 191 of 253 appointed to represent several individuals or interests.  Th e court shall state on the record  the duties of the guardian ad 
litem and its reasons for the appointment. 
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section removes the specific re quirements of former sections §1-112, 
§5-303, and § 5-407 addressing appointment and duties of guardians ad litem in  guardianship and conservatorship 
proceedings.  This section consolidates the appointment sect ions, and gives the court discre tion and a duty to tailor the 
role of the guardian ad litem to the circumstances. 
  
5-116 
REQUEST FOR NOTICE; INTERESTED PERSONS. 
An interested person not otherwise entit led to notice who desires to be notifi ed before any order is made in a 
guardianship proceeding, including a proceeding after the a ppointment of a guardian, or in a protective proceeding, 
may file a request for notice w ith the clerk of the court in which the proc eeding is pending.  The clerk shall send or 
deliver a copy of the request to the gu ardian and to the conservator if one has been appointed.  A request is not 
effective unless it contains a statement s howing the interest of the person making it and the address of that person or a 
lawyer to whom notice is to be given.  The request is e ffective only as to proceedings conducted after its filing.  A 
governmental agency paying or planning to  pay benefits to the respondent or pr otected person is an interested person 
in a protective proceeding. 
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section expands previous Ma ine law by allowing an individual not 
otherwise entitled to notice to receive  notice in a guardianship or a conser vatorship proceeding, provided that the 
individual has provide a stat ement showing the individual’s interest and an address to which notice should be sent. 
 
 
5-117 
MULTIPLE APPOINTMENTS  OR NOMINATIONS. 
If a respondent or other person makes more than one written appointment or nomination of a guardian or a 
conservator, the most recent controls. 
 
  
5-201 
APPOINTMENT AND STATUS OF GUARDIAN. 
A person becomes a guardian of a minor by parental appointment or upon appointment by the court.  The 
guardianship status continues until termin ated, without regard to the location of  the guardian or minor ward.  This 
 
Page 192 of 253 section does not apply to permanency gua rdians appointed in Dist rict Court child protectiv e proceedings. If a minor 
has a permanency guardian, the court may not appoint anothe r guardian without leave of th e District Court in which 
the child protective proceeding is pending. 
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  Maine law (22 M.R.S. § 4038-C) pe rmits District Courts in child 
protective proceedings to appoint a permanency guardian.  The Maine Probate Code departs from the Uniform Probate 
Code to recognize that authority and to assure that the Probate Court does not appoint a guardian without leave of the 
District Court if the District Court has appointed a permanency guardian. 
 
 
5-202 
PARENTAL APPOINTMENT OF GUARDIAN. 
(a) A guardian may be appointed by will or other signed wr iting by a parent for any minor child the parent has 
or may have in the future.  The appointment may specify the desired limitations on the powers to be given to the 
guardian.  The appointing parent may revoke or amend the appointment before confirmation by the court. 
(b) Upon petition of an appointing parent and a finding th at the appointing parent wi ll likely become unable to 
care for the child within [two] years,  and after notice as provided in Sect ion 5-205(a), the court, before the 
appointment becomes effective, may confir m the parent’s selection of a guardian and terminate the rights of others to 
object. 
(c) Subject to Section 5-203, the appointment of a gua rdian becomes effective upon the appointing parent’s 
death, an adjudication that the parent is an incapacitated person, or a written determin ation by a physician who has 
examined the parent that the parent is no longer ab le to care for the child, whichever first occurs. 
(d) The guardian becomes eligible to act upon the filing of an acceptance of appointme nt, which must be filed 
within 30 days after th e guardian’s appointment becomes e ffective.  The guardian shall: 
 (1) file the acceptance of appointme nt and a copy of the will with the court of the [county] in which the 
will was or could be probated or, in the case of another appointing instrument, file the acceptance of appointment and 
the appointing instrument with the court of the [county]  in which the minor resides or is present; and  
 (2) give written notice of the accep tance of appointment to the appoint ing parent, if living, the minor, if 
the minor has attained 14 years of age, and a person othe r than the parent having care  and custody of the minor.   
(e) Unless the appointment was previously confirmed by the court, the notice give n under subsection (d)(2) 
must include a statement of the right of  those notified to terminate the appointment by filing a written objection in the 
court as provided in Section 5-203. 
(f) Unless the appointment was previously confirmed by the court, within 30 days after filing the notice and 
the appointing instrument, a guardian sha ll petition the court for confirmation of  the appointment, giving notice in the 
manner provided in Section 5-205(a). 
(g) The appointment of a guardian by a parent does not s upersede the parental rights of either parent.  If both 
 
Page 193 of 253 parents are dead or have been adjudg ed incapacitated persons, an appointment by the last parent who died or was 
adjudged incapacitated has priority.  An appointment by a pare nt which is effected by filing the guardian’s acceptance 
under a will probated in the stat e of the testator’s domicile is effective in this state. 
(h) The powers of a guardian who timely complies with th e requirements of subsections  (d) and (f) relate back 
to give acts by the guardian which are of benefit to the minor and occurred on or after the date the appointment 
became effective the same effect as those that occurre d after the filing of the acc eptance of the appointment. 
(i) The authority of a guar dian appointed under this section termin ates upon the first to occur of the 
appointment of a guardian by the court or the giving of wr itten notice to the guardian of  the filing of an objection 
pursuant to Section 5-203. 
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  The UPC provisions permitting parental  appointment of a so-called stand-
by guardian are new to Maine law. 
  
5-203 
OBJECTION BY MINOR OR OTHERS TO PARENTAL APPOINTMENT. 
Until the court has confirmed an appointee under Section 5-202, a minor who is the subject of an appointment 
by a parent and who has attained 14 years of age, the other parent, or a person other than a parent  or guardian having 
care or custody of the minor may prevent or terminate the appointment at any time by filing a written objection in the 
court in which the appointing instrument is filed and gi ving notice of the objection to  the guardian and any other 
persons entitled to notice of the acceptance of the appointme nt.  An objection may be wit hdrawn, and if withdrawn is 
of no effect.  The objection does not precl ude judicial appointment of the pers on selected by the parent.  The court 
may treat the filing of an objection as a petition for the appointment of an emergency or a temporary guardian under 
Section 5-204, and proceed accordingly. 
 
  
5-204 
JUDICIAL APPOINTMENT OF GUARDIAN :  CONDITIONS FOR APPOINTMENT. 
(a) A minor or a person interested in the welfare of  a minor may petition for appointment of a guardian. 
(b) The court may appoint a guardian fo r a minor if the court finds the appointment is in the minor’s best 
interest, and: 
 (1) the parents consent;   (2) all parental rights ha ve been terminated; or  
 (3) the parents are unwilling or unable to  exercise their parental rights.   
(c) If a guardian is appointed by a parent pursuant to Se ction 5-202 and the appointment has not been 
 
Page 194 of 253 prevented or terminated under Section 5-203, that appointee has priority for appointment.  However, the court may 
proceed with another appointment upon a finding that the appointee under Section 5-202 has failed to accept the 
appointment within 30 days after notice of the guardianship proceeding. 
(d) If necessary and on petition or motion and whether or not the conditions of subsection (b) have been 
established, the court may appoint a temporary guardian fo r a minor upon a showing that an immediate need exists 
and that the appointment would be in th e best interest of the minor.  Notice in the manner provided in Section 5-113 
must be given to the parents and to a minor who has attained 14 years of age.   Except as otherwise ordered by the 
court, the temporary guardian has th e authority of an unlimited guardian, but the duration of the temporary 
guardianship may not exceed six months.  Within five days  after the appointment, the temporary guardian shall send 
or deliver a copy of the order to all individuals who would be entitled to notice of hearing und er Section 5-205. 
(e) If the court finds that following the procedures of this [part] will likely result in substantial harm to a 
minor’s health or safety and that no othe r person appears to have authority to act in the circumstances, the court, on 
appropriate petition, may appoint an em ergency guardian for the minor.  The duration of the guardian’s authority may 
not exceed [30] days and the guardian may exercise only the powers specified in the order.   Reasonable notice of the 
time and place of a hearing on the petition for appointment of  an emergency guardian must be given to the minor, if 
the minor has attained 14 years of age, to each living pare nt of the minor, and a person having care or custody of the 
minor, if other than a parent.  The court may dispense with  the notice if it finds  from affidavit or testimony that the 
minor will be substantially harmed before a hearing can be held on the petition.  If the guardian is appointed without 
notice, notice of the appointment mu st be given within 48 hours after the appointment and a hearing on the 
appropriateness of the appointment held w ithin [five] days after the appointment. 
(d) If necessary, the court may appoint a temporary guard ian, with the status of an  ordinary guardian of a 
minor, but the authority of a temporary guardian may not last  longer than 6 months, except as provided in subsection 
(e).  
Notice of hearing on the petition for the appointment of a temporary guardian must be served as provided 
under section 5-113 and section 5- 205, except that the notice mu st be given at least 5 days before the hearing, and 
notice need not be given to any person whose addr ess and present whereabouts are unknown and cannot be 
ascertained by due diligence. Upon a showing of good cause, the court may waive service of the notice of hearing on 
any person, other than the minor, if the minor is at least 14 years of age. 
(e) If one of the parents of a minor is a member of th e National Guard or the Reserves of the United States 
Armed Forces under an order to active duty for a period of more than 30 days , a temporary guardianship that would 
otherwise expire is automati cally extended until 30 days afte r the parent is no longer under those active duty orders or 
until an order of the court so provides. This subsection ap plies only if the parent's service is in support of:  
(1). An operational mission for which members of the reserve components have been ordered to active duty 
without their consent; or 
(2). Forces activated during a period of war decl ared by Congress or a period of national emergency 
declared by the Pres ident or Congress. 
(f) A nonconsenting parent whose parental rights have not been terminated is  entitled to court-appointed legal 
 
Page 195 of 253 counsel if indigent. In a contested ac tion, the court may also appoint counsel for any indigent guardian or petitioner 
when a parent or legal custodian has counsel.  
(g) In a proceeding on a petition for j udicial appointment of a guardian, th e court may order a parent to pay 
child support in accordance with Title 19-A, Part 3. When the Department of  Health and Human Services provides 
child support enforcement services, the Commissioner of Health and Human Serv ices may designate employees of the 
department who are not attorneys to re present the department in court if a hearing is held. The commissioner shall 
ensure that appropriate training is provided to all empl oyees who are designated to repr esent the department under this 
paragraph.  
(h) If the court appoints a limited gu ardian, the court shall sp ecify the duties and powers of the guardian, as 
required in section 5-110 and section 5- 206, and any parental rights and responsibil ities retained by the parent of the 
minor. 
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  Maine does not adopt the temporary and emergency guardianship 
language of the UPC.  The existing proce ss in Maine, including authority to issu e orders for transitional arrangements, 
accommodates prompt disposition and appropriate protections for participants in the context of Maine’s part-time 
Probate Courts.  Maine also retains additional protections, previously codified in the last three paragraphs of 18-A 
M.R.S. § 5-204(d), in 5-204(f), (g) and (h), concerning le gal representation for indige nt parents, cost-effective 
participation of child support enforcement agents in gua rdianship proceedings, and spec ifying any parental rights 
retained if a limited guardian is appointed. 
  
5-205 
JUDICIAL APPOINTMENT OF GUARDIAN:  PROCEDURE. 
(a) After a petition for appointment of  a guardian is filed, the court shall schedule a hear ing, and the petitioner 
shall give notice of the time and place of the h earing, together with a c opy of the petition, to: 
 (1) the minor, if the minor has attained 14 years of age and is not the petitioner; 
 (2) any person alleged to have had the primary car e and custody of the minor during the 60 days before 
the filing of the petition;  
 (3) each living parent of the minor  or, if there is none, the adult ne arest in kinship th at can be found; 
 (4) any person nominated as guardian by the minor if the minor has attain ed 14 years of age;  
 (5) any appointee of a parent whose appointment ha s not been prevented or terminated under Section 5-
203; and  
 (6) any guardian or conservator currently acting for the minor in this state or elsewhere.   
(b) The court, upon hearing, shall make the appointment if  it finds that a qualified person seeks appointment, 
venue is proper, the required notices ha ve been given, the conditions of Section 5-204(b) have been met, and the best 
interest of the minor will be served by the appointment.  In other cases, the court may dismiss the proceeding or make 
 
Page 196 of 253 any other disposition of the matter that will  serve the best interest of the minor.   
(c) If the court determines at any stage of the proceedi ng, before or after appointment , that the interests of the 
minor are or may be inadequately repr esented, it may appoint a lawyer to repr esent the minor, givi ng consideration to 
the choice of the minor if the minor  has attained 14 years of age. 
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section adds to the people entitled to notice of a guardianship 
petition, but otherwise does not constitute  a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
5-206 
JUDICIAL APPOINTMENT OF GUARDIAN:  PR IORITY OF MINOR’S NOMINEE; LIMITED 
GUARDIANSHIP. 
(a) The court shall appoint as guardian or co-guardians  a person or persons whose appointment will be in the 
best interest of the minor.  The cour t shall appoint a person or persons no minated by the minor, if the minor has 
attained 14 years of age, unless the court finds the appointme nt will be contrary to the best interest of the minor. 
(b) In the interest of deve loping self-reliance of a ward or for othe r good cause, the court,  at the time of 
appointment or later, on its own motion or on motion of the minor or other interested person, may limit the powers of 
a guardian or co-guardians otherwise granted by this [par t] and thereby create a limite d guardianship.  Following the 
same procedure, the court may grant additional po wers or withdraw powers previously granted. 
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section adds a specific criteri on for limiting the power of guardian in 
the interest of developing self -reliance of a ward, consistent with adult guardianship statut e.  This section removes the 
prohibition under previous Maine law against appointing a guardian who inte nds to remove the minor from the state 
for purposes of adoption, leavi ng the decision as to the minor’s best intere st in the sound disc retion of the court. 
 
 
5-207 
DUTIES OF GUARDIAN. 
(a) Except as otherwise limited by the c ourt, a guardian of a minor ward has the duties and respon sibilities of a 
parent regarding the ward’s support, car e, education, health, and we lfare.  A guardian shall act at all times in the 
ward’s best interest and exercise reasonable care, diligence, and prudence. 
(b) A guardian shall:  (1) become or remain personally acquainted with the ward and maintain sufficient contact with the 
ward to know of the ward’s capacities, limitations, n eeds, opportunities, and phys ical and mental health; 
 (2) take reasonable care of the wa rd’s personal effects and bring a prot ective proceeding if necessary to 
protect other property of the ward; 
 
Page 197 of 253  (3) expend money of the ward whic h has been received by the guardian for the ward’s current needs for 
support, care education, health, and welfare;  
 (4) conserve any excess money of the ward for the wa rd’s future needs, but if a conservator has been 
appointed for the estate of the ward, the guardian shall pay the money at leas t quarterly to the conservator to be 
conserved for the ward’s future needs; 
 (5) report the condition of the ward and account for money and other assets in the guardian’s 
possession or subject to the guardian’s c ontrol, as ordered by the court on applic ation of any person interested in the 
ward’s welfare or as required by court rule; and 
 (6) inform the court of any change in the ward’s custodial dwelling or address. 
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section expands the statutor y duties of a guard ian under previous 
Maine law, requiring the guardian to become and remain acqua inted with a ward, and to in form the court of a change 
in the ward’s address, but this section does not othe rwise constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
5-208 
POWERS OF GUARDIAN. 
(a) Except as otherwise limited by the court, a guardian of a minor ward has the powers of a parent regarding 
the ward’s support, care, edu cation, health, and welfare. 
(b) A guardian may:  (1) apply for and receive money for the support of the ward otherwise payable to the ward’s parent, 
guardian, or custodian under the terms of any statutory system of benefits or in surance or any private contract, devise, 
trust, conservatorshi p, or custodianship;  
 (2) if otherwise consistent with the terms of any order by a court of  competent jurisdiction relating to 
custody of the ward, take custody of the ward and estab lish the ward’s place of cust odial dwelling, but may only 
establish or move the ward’s custodi al dwelling outside the state upon express authori zation of the court;  
 (3) if a conservator for the estate  of a ward has not been appointe d with existing authority, commence a 
proceeding, including an administrative proceeding, or take other appropriate action to compel a person to support the 
ward or to pay money for the benefit of the ward;  
 (4) except as limited by section 8- 506, consent to medical or other ca re, treatment, or service for the 
ward;  
 (5) consent to the marriage of the ward; and   (6) if reasonable under all of the circumstances, delegate to the ward cer tain responsibilities for 
decisions affecting the ward’s well-being.   
(c) The court may specifically authorize the guard ian to consent to the adoption of the ward. 
(d) If co-guardians are appointed, the powers of the guardians are join t and several, unless limited by the 
appointing document. 
 
Page 198 of 253  
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  The Maine amendments to the UPC reconcile it with section 5-806 of the 
Uniform Healthcare Decisions Act (18-A M.R.S. §§ 5-801 – 5-818), which section limits certain health care decision-
making by the guardian. The Maine amendments also assure that people who rely on a co-guardian’s authority to act may rely on the consent 
or action of either co-guardian separately. 
  
5-209 
RIGHTS AND IMMUNITIES OF GUARDIAN. 
(a) A guardian is entitled to reasonable compensation fo r services as guardian and to reimbursement for room, 
board, and clothing provided by the guardia n to the ward, but only as approved by th e court.  If a conservator, other 
than the guardian or a person who is affiliated with the guardian, has been a ppointed for the estate of the ward, 
reasonable compensation and reimbursement to the guardia n may be approved and paid by the conservator without 
order of the court. 
(b) A guardian need not use the guardian’s personal funds for the ward’s expenses.  A guardian is not liable to 
a third person for acts of the ward solely by reason of the gua rdianship.  A guardian is not li able for injury to the ward 
resulting from the negligence or act of  a third person providing medical or ot her care, treatment, or service for the 
ward except to the extent that a parent  would be liable under the circumstances. 
 
 
 
5-210 
TERMINATION OF GUARDIANSHIP; OTHER PROCEEDINGS AFTER APPOINTMENT. 
(a) A guardianship of a minor terminates upon the minor’s death, adoption, emancipation, marriage, or 
attainment of majority or as ordered by the court.   
(b) A ward or a person interested in th e welfare of a ward may petition for any order that is in the best interest 
of the ward.  The petitioner shall give notice of the hearing on th e petition to the ward, if the ward has attained 14 
years of age and is not the petiti oner, the guardian, and any other person as ordered by the court. 
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  Maine adopts the UPC, but retains a pr ovision traditional in Maine that the 
marriage of a minor ward terminates a guardianship. 
    
 
Page 199 of 253 5-211 
TRANSITIONAL ARRANG EMENT FOR MINORS 
In issuing, modifying or terminating an order of guardianship for a minor, the court may enter an order providing for 
transitional arrangements for the minor if the court determ ines that such arrangements will assist the minor with a 
transition of custody and are in the best  interest of the minor. Orders prov iding for transitional arrangements may 
include, but are not limited to, rights of contact, housing, c ounseling or rehabilitation. 
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  The UPC has no provision concerni ng transitional arrangements for 
minors.  This section carries forward the former 18- A M.R.S. § 5-213, enacted in 2011, to support transition 
arrangements in the best interest of  the minor.  See comment for § 5-204. 
 
 
5-301 
Appointment and Status of Guardian.  
A person becomes a guardian of an incapacitated pers on by a parental, or spousal , or domestic partner 
appointment, or upon appointment by the court.  The guardians hip continues until terminated, without regard to the 
location of the guardian or ward. 
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section modifies the UPC to treat domestic partners in a manner 
comparable to their treatment in other sections of the MPC. 
  
5-302 
Appointment of Guardian By Will or Other Writing.  
(a) A parent, by will or other signed writing, may appoint a guardian for an unmarried child who the parent 
believes is an incapacitated person, specify desired limitation s on the powers to be given to the guardian, and revoke 
or amend the appointment before confirmation by the court. 
(b) An individual, by will or othe r signed writing, may appoint a guard ian for the individual’s spouse or 
domestic partner who the appointing spouse or domestic part ner believes is an incapacita ted person, specify desired 
limitations on the powers to be given to the guardian, and revoke or amend the appointment before confirmation by 
the court.   
(c) The incapacitated person, the person having care or custody of the inca pacitated person if other than the 
appointing parent, domestic partner or s pouse, or the adult nearest in kinship to the incapacitated person may file a 
written objection to an appointment, unless the court has co nfirmed the appointment under subsection (d).  The filing 
of the written objection terminates the appointment.  An  objection may be withdrawn and, if withdrawn, is of no 
effect.  The objection does not preclude j udicial appointment of the person selected by the pa rent, domestic partner or 
 
Page 200 of 253 spouse.  Notice of the objection must be given to the guard ian and any other person entitled to notice of the acceptance 
of the appointment.  The court may treat the filing of an objection as a petition for the appointment of an emergency 
guardian under Section 5-312 or for the appointment of a limited or un limited guardian under Section 5-304 and 
proceed accordingly. 
(d) Upon petition of the appointing parent, domestic partne r or spouse, and a finding that the appointing parent, 
domestic partner or spouse will likely become unable to car e for the incapacitated person within [two] years, and after 
notice as provided in this section, th e court, before the appointment become s effective, may confirm the appointing 
parent’s, domestic partner or spouse’ s selection of a guardian and terminat e the rights of others to object.  
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section modifies the UPC to treat domestic partners in a manner 
comparable to their treatment in other sections of th e MPC.  The UPC provisions permitting parental or spousal 
appointment of a so-called stand- by guardian are new to Maine law. 
 
 
5-303 
Appointment of Guardian By Will or Other Writi ng:  Effectiveness; Acceptance; Confirmation.  
(a) The appointment of a guardian under Section 5-302 beco mes effective upon the death of the appointing 
parent, domestic partner or spouse, the adjudication of incap acity of the appointing parent, domestic partner or spouse, 
or a written determination by a physician who has examined the appointing parent, domestic partner or spouse that the 
appointing parent, domestic partner or spouse is no longer ab le to care for the incapac itated person, whichever first 
occurs. 
(b) A guardian appointed under Section 5-302 becomes elig ible to act upon the filing of an acceptance of 
appointment, which must be filed within 30 days after the guardian’s appointment become s effective.  The guardian 
shall: 
 (1) file the notice of acceptan ce of appointment and a copy of the will with the court of the 
[county] in which the will was or could be probated or, in the case of another appointing instrument, file the 
acceptance of appointment and the appoin ting instrument with the court in th e [county] in which the incapacitated 
person resides or is present; and  
 (2) give written notice of the acceptance of appointment to the appointing parent, domestic 
partner or spouse if liv ing, the incapacitated pe rson, a person having care or custody of the incapacitated person other 
than the appointing parent, domestic partner or spouse, and the adult nearest in kinship.   
(c) Unless the appointment was previously confirmed by the court, the notice give n under subsection (b)(2) 
must include a statement of the right of those notified to terminate the appo intment by filing a written objection as 
provided in Section 5-302. 
(d) An appointment effected by filing the guardian’s acceptance under a will probated in the state of the 
testator’s domicile is effective in this state. 
 
Page 201 of 253 (e) Unless the appointment was previously confirmed by the court, within 30 days after filing the notice and 
the appointing instrument, a guardian a ppointed under Section 5-302 sh all file a petition in th e court for confirmation 
of the appointment.  Notice of the filing must be given in the manner provided in Section 5-309. 
(f) The authority of a guar dian appointed under Section 5-302 termin ates upon the appointment of a guardian 
by the court or the giving of written notice to the guardia n of the filing of an objection pursuant to Section 5-302, 
whichever first occurs. 
(g) The appointment of a guardian under this section is not a determination of incapacity. (h) The powers of a guardian who timely complies with th e requirements of subsections  (b) and (e) relate back 
to give acts by the guardian which are of benefit to the incapacitated person  and occurred on or after the date the 
appointment became effective the same effect as those that  occurred after the filing of the acceptance of appointment.  
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  The section modifies the UPC to treat domestic partners in a manner 
comparable to their treatment in other sections of the MPC. 
  
5-304 
Judicial Appointment of  Guardian:  Petition. 
(a) An individual or a person interested in the indi vidual’s welfare may petition for a determination of 
incapacity, in whole or in part, and for the appointmen t of a limited or unlimited guardian, for the individual. 
(b) The petition must set forth the petitioner’s name, residence, current address if different, relationship to the 
respondent, and interest in the appointmen t and, to the extent known, state or cont ain the following with respect to the 
respondent and the relief requested: 
 (1) the respondent’s name, age, pr incipal residence, current street ad dress, and, if different, the address 
of the dwelling in which it is proposed that the re spondent will reside if the appointment is made;  
 (2) the name and address of the respondent’s:     (A) spouse, or if the responde nt has none, an adult with whom  the respondent has resided for 
more than six months before the filing of the petition; and  
  (B) adult children or, if the respondent has none , the respondent’s parents and adult brothers and 
sisters, or if the respondent has none, at  least one of the adults nearest in kinship to the respondent who can be found, 
or, if none, an adult friend if any can be found;  
 (3) the name and address of any person res ponsible for care or cust ody of the respondent;  
 (4) the name and address of any lega l representative of  the respondent;  
 (5) the name and address of any person nominated as guardian by the respondent;  
 (6) the name and address of any proposed guardian and the reason why the proposed guardian should 
be selected;  
 (7) the reason why guardianship is necessary, includi ng a brief description of th e nature and extent of 
 
Page 202 of 253 the respondent’s a lleged incapacity;  
 (8) if an unlimited guardianship is requested, the reason why limited guardians hip is inappropriate and, 
if a limited guardianship is reque sted, the powers to be granted to the limited guardian; and  
              (9) a general statement of the res pondent’s property with an estimat e of its value,  including any 
insurance or pension, and the source and amount of  any other anticipated income or receipts.  
(c)  The person nominated to serve as guardian shall file a plan which, where relevant, shall include, but not be 
limited to, the type of proposed living arrangement for the respondent, how the respondent’s financial needs will be 
met, how the respondent’s medical and other remedial needs will be met, how the respondent’s social needs will be 
met and a plan for the respondent’s conti nuing contact with relatives and friends. 
(d) The respondent must be examined by a physician, a psychologist, or other indi vidual who is qualified to 
evaluate the respondent’s alleged impairment.  The pers on who examines the respondent shall submit a report in 
writing to the court, providi ng diagnoses, a description of  the respondent’s actual mental  and functional limitations, 
and prognoses.  
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section modifies the UPC to a dd subsections (c) and (d), requiring a 
guardianship plan and a certification from  a health care provider, consistent w ith former 18-A M.R.S. § 5-303(a) and 
(b). 
 
 
5-305 
Judicial Appointment of Guardi an:  Preliminaries to Hearing. 
(a) Upon receipt of a petition to esta blish a guardianship, the court shall set a date a nd time for hearing the 
petition and appoint a [visitor].  The duties and reporting requirem ents of the [visitor] are limited to the relief 
requested in the petition.  The [visitor] mu st be an individual havi ng training or experience in the type of incapacity 
alleged. 
Alternative A 
 (b) The court shall appoint a lawyer to re present the respondent in the proceeding if: 
 (1) requested by the respondent;   (2) recommended by the [visitor]; or  
 (3) the court determines that th e respondent needs representation.  
Alternative B 
 (b) Unless the respondent is represented by a lawyer, the court shall appoint a lawyer to represent the 
respondent in the proceeding, regardless of the respondent’s ability to pay. 
End of Alternatives 
(c) The [visitor] shall interview the respondent in person and, to the extent  that the respondent is able to 
understand: 
 
Page 203 of 253  (1) explain to the respondent th e substance of the petition, the natu re, purpose, and effect of the 
proceeding, the respondent’s rights at the hearing, and the general powers and duties of a guardian;  
 (2) determine the respondent’s views about the proposed guardian, the proposed guardian’s powers and 
duties, and the scope and duration of the proposed guardianship;  
 (3) inform the respondent of the right to employ and consult with a lawyer  at the respondent’s own 
expense and the right to request a court-appointe d lawyer; and  
 (4) inform the respondent that all costs and expenses of the proceeding, including respondent’s 
attorney’s fees, will be paid fr om the respondent’s estate.   
(d) In addition to the duties imposed by subsection (c), the [visitor] shall: 
 (1) interview the petitioner and the pr oposed guardian;  
 (2) visit the respondent’s presen t dwelling and any dwelling in whic h the respondent will live if the 
appointment is made;  
 (3) obtain information from any physician or othe r person who is known to have treated, advised, or 
assessed the respondent’s relevant phys ical or mental condition; and  
 (4) make any other investig ation the court directs.   
(e) The [visitor] shall promptly file a report in writing with the court, which must include: 
 (1) a recommendation as to whether a lawyer sh ould be appointed to represent the respondent;  
 (2) a summary of daily functions the respondent can manage without assistance,  could manage with the 
assistance of supportive services or benefits, including use of appropriate technologi cal assistance, and cannot 
manage; 
 (3) recommendations regarding the appropriateness of guardianship, including as to whether less 
restrictive means of interven tion are available, the type of guardianship, and, if a limited guardianship, the powers to 
be granted to the limited guardian; 
 (4) a statement of the qu alifications of the proposed guardian, t ogether with a statement as to whether 
the respondent approves or disapproves of the proposed guardian, and the powers and duties pr oposed or the scope of 
the guardianship; 
 (5) a statement as to whether the proposed dwelling meets the re spondent’s individual needs;  
 (6) a recommendation as to whether a professional evaluation or further ev aluation is necessary; and 
 (7) any other matters the court directs. 
Legislative Note:   Those states that enact Alte rnative B of subsection (b) which requires appointment of counsel for 
the respondent in all proceedings for appointment of a guardian should not enact subsection (e)(1). 
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  Maine adopts UPC Alternative A, perm itting the court to retain discretion 
existing under former Maine law not to appoint a lawyer in uncontested proceedings. 
  
5-306 
 
Page 204 of 253 Judicial Appointment of Guardi an:  Professional Evaluation. 
At or before a hearing under this [part], the court may order a professi onal evaluation of the respondent and 
shall order the evaluation if th e respondent so demands demands or if necessa ry to satisfy the requ irements of section 
5-304(d).  The cost of the evaluation must  be paid from the estate of the alle gedly incapacitated pers on if the court is 
satisfied sufficient funds are available.   If the court orders the evaluation, the respondent  must be examined by a 
physician, psychologist, or othe r individual appointed by the court who is  qualified to evalua te the respondent’s 
alleged impairment.  The examiner shall promptly file a wr itten report with the court.  Unless otherwise directed by 
the court, the report must contain: 
(1) a description of the nature, t ype, and extent of the respondent ’s specific cognitive and functional 
limitations; 
(2) an evaluation of the respondent’s mental and physic al condition and, if appropria te, educational potential, 
adaptive behavior, and social skills; 
(3) a prognosis for improvement and a recommendation as to the appropriate treatm ent or habilitation plan; 
and             (4) the date of any assessment or examination upon which the report is based.  
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section modifies the UPC to grant the court specific authority to 
order the examination required under § 5-304(d) , and so that the costs of evaluation ar e treated as the costs of a visitor, 
a guardian ad litem, or a court-appointed attorney  were treated under former  18-A M.R.S. § 5-303(b). 
 
 
5-307 
Confidentiality of Records. 
The written report of a [visitor] a nd any professional evaluation are c onfidential and must be sealed upon 
filing. but  The person who files the visitor’s report or a professional evaluation must pr ovide notice of filing and a 
copy of the report or evaluation to the re spondent at the time of filing.  Copies of  the report or evaluation are available 
to: 
(1) the court;  (2) the respondent without limitation as to use; 
And, unless the respondent files an objection with the cour t within 10 days of receivi ng a copy of the report or 
evaluation, with a showing of good cause, c opies of the report are available to: 
(3) the petitioner, the [visitor], and the petitioner’s and respon dent’s lawyers, for purpo ses of the proceeding; 
and  
            (4) other persons for su ch purposes as the court may order for good cause.  
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section is new, with no previ ous counterpart in the MPC.  This 
 
Page 205 of 253 section modifies the UPC to provide the respondent with an  opportunity to object to an interested party’s access to 
reports or evaluations that would otherw ise be made available to that party. 
 
  
5-308 
Judicial Appointment of Guardian:  Presence and Rights at Hearing. 
(a) Unless excused by the court for good cause, the proposed guardian shall a ttend the hearing.  TheIn 
contested proceedings, the respondent shal l attend and participate in the hearing, unless excused by the court for good 
cause.  The respondent may present evidence and subpoena witnesses and documents; exam ine witnesses, including 
any court-appointed physician, psychologist , or other individual quali fied to evaluate the alleged impairment, and the 
[visitor]; and otherwise particip ate in the hearing.  The hearing may be held  in a location convenient to the respondent, 
or may be held by telephonic or other electronic conferenci ng, and may be closed upon th e request of the respondent 
and a showing of good cause.  The court may allow any inte rested person to attend a hearing by telephonic or other 
electronic conferencing. 
             (b) Any person may request permission to part icipate in the proceeding.  The c ourt may grant the request, with 
or without hearing, upon determining that the best interest  of the respondent will be se rved.  The court may attach 
appropriate conditions to the participation.  
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section modifies the UPC to re quire the respondent’ s attendance only 
in contested proceedings, to eliminate the requirement that  the respondent “participate” in the hearing, and to allow 
telephonic or other electronic pa rticipation in hearings, in ke eping with the practi ce in most of Maine’s probate courts. 
 
 
5-309 
Notice. 
(a) A copy of a petition for guardianship and notice of th e hearing on the petition must be served personally on 
the respondent.  The notice must (i) include a statement th at the respondent must be phys ically present unless excused 
by the court informing the respondent of the respondent’s right to  attend the hearing in unc ontested proceedings, and 
of the respondent’s obligation to be pr esent at the hearing in contested proceed ings unless excused by the court, (ii) 
inform the respondent of the respondent’s  rights at the hear ing, and (iii) include a descrip tion of the nature, purpose, 
and consequences of an appointment.  A failure to serve th e respondent with a notice substa ntially complying with this 
subsection precludes the court from granting the petition. 
(b) In a proceeding to establish a guard ianship, notice of the hearing must be given to the persons listed in the 
petition.  Failure to give notice under this subsection does not precl ude the appointment of a guardian or the making of 
a protective order. 
 
Page 206 of 253 (c) Notice of the hearing on a petition for an order after appointment of a guardian, to gether with a copy of the 
petition, must be given to the ward, the guard ian, and any other pers on the court directs. 
            (d) A guardian shall give notice of the filing of the guardian’s report, together w ith a copy of the report, to the  
ward and any other person the c ourt directs.  The notice must be delivered or  sent within 14 days after the filing of the 
report.  
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section modifies the UPC for consistency with the Maine 
modifications to UPC § 5-308. 
  
5-310 
Who May Be Guardian:  Priorities. 
(a) Subject to subsection (c), the c ourt in appointing a guardia n shall consider persons otherwise qualified in 
the following order of priority: 
 (1) a guardian, other than a tem porary or emergency guardian, curre ntly acting for the respondent in 
this state or elsewhere;  
 (2) a person nominated as guardian by the res pondent, including the respondent’s most recent 
nomination made in a durable power of  attorney, if at the ti me of the nomination the respondent had sufficient 
capacity to expre ss a preference;  
 (3) an agent appointed by the respondent under [a durable power of attorney for health care] [the 
Uniform Health-Care D ecisions Act(1993)];  
 (4) the spouse or domestic partner of the respondent or an individual nominated by will or other signed 
writing of a deceased spouse or deceased domestic partner;  
 (5) an adult child of the respondent;  
 (6) a parent of the respondent, or an individual no minated by will or other signed writing of a deceased 
parent; and  
 (7) an adult with whom the res pondent has resided for more than si x months before the filing of the 
petition.; and 
 (8) a person nominated by the person who is car ing for the respondent or paying benefits to the 
respondent. 
 (b) With respect to persons having equal priority, the c ourt shall select the one it co nsiders best qualified.  The 
court, acting in the best interest of the respondent, may decline to appoint a person ha ving priority and appoint a 
person having a lower priority or no priority. 
             (c) An owner, operator, or employee of [a long-term-care institution] at which the respondent is receiving care 
may not be appointed as guardian unle ss related to the respondent by bloo d, marriage, or adoption, or unless a 
domestic partner of the respondent.  
 
Page 207 of 253  
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section modifies the UPC to treat domestic partners in a manner 
comparable to their treatment elsewhere in the MPC. The former MPC § 5-311(b)(5) gave prior ity to a “relative” with whom the res pondent has resided.  Adoption of the 
UPC gives priority to an “adult” with whom the respondent has resided.  This se ction carries forward from the former 
MPC § 5-311(b)(6) consideration, as a la st priority for guardianship, of a pe rson nominated by someone who is caring 
for the respondent or is payi ng benefits to the respondent. 
 
 
5-311 
FINDINGS; ORDER OF APPOINTMENT. 
(a) The court may: 
(1) appoint a limited or unlimited guardian or co-guard ians for a respondent only if it finds by clear and 
convincing evidence that:   
 (A) the respondent is an incapacitated person; and  
 (B) the respondent’s identified needs cannot be met by less restrictive means, including use of 
appropriate reasonably available technological assistance; or  
(2) with appropriate findings, treat  the petition as one fo r a protective order under Section 5-401, enter any 
other appropriate order, or dismiss the proceeding. (b) The court, whenever feasible, sha ll grant to a guardian only those power s necessitated by the ward’s limitations 
and demonstrated needs and make appoi ntive and other orders that will enc ourage the development of the ward’s 
maximum self-reliance and independence. (c) Within 14 days after an appointment, a guardian shall se nd or deliver to the ward a nd to all other persons given 
notice of the hearing on the petition a copy of the order of ap pointment, together with a no tice of the right to request 
termination or modification.  
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  See Maine comment to § 5-102. 
 
 
5-312 
EMERGENCY GUARDIAN. 
(a) If the court finds that compliance with the procedures of  this [part] will likely result in substantial harm to the 
respondent’s health, safety, or welfare, a nd that no other person appears to have  authority and willingness to act in the 
circumstances, the court, on petition by a person interested in th e respondent’s welfare, may appoint an emergency 
guardian whose authority may not exceed [60] days 6 months  and who may exercise only the powers specified in the 
order.  A petition for emergency guardianship must be accomp anied by an affidavit that sets forth the factual basis for 
 
Page 208 of 253 the emergency and the specific powers requested by the pro posed guardian.  Immediately upon receipt of the petition 
for an emergency guardianship, the court shall appoint a lawyer to represent th e respondent in the proceeding.  Except 
as otherwise provided in subsection (b),  reasonable notice of the time and place of a hearing on the petition must be 
given to the respondent and the responde nt’s spouse, parents, a dult children, any domestic pa rtner known to the court, 
and any other persons as  the court directs. 
(b) An emergency guardian may be appointed without notice to  the respondent and the respondent’s lawyer and others 
described in subsection (a) only if the court finds from af fidavit or testimony that the respondent will suffer serious, 
immediate and irreparable harm be substa ntially harmed before a hearing on the a ppointment can be held.  If the court 
appoints an emergency guardian without notice to the re spondent, the respondent must be given notice of the 
appointment within 48 hours af ter the appointment.  The court shall hold a hearing on the appr opriateness of the 
appointment within [five] days  after the appointment.   
(b-1) If the court takes acti on to appoint an emergency guardian, then the court, within 2 days, excluding Saturdays, 
Sundays and legal holidays, of taking th e action, shall appoint a visitor or guardi an ad litem to visit the respondent and 
make a report to the court within 10 days  of the appointment of the visitor or  guardian ad litem.  The visitor or 
guardian ad litem shall serve the resp ondent with a copy of the order appoin ting the emergency guardian and shall 
explain the meaning and consequences of  the appointment.  The visitor or guardian ad litem shall inquire of the 
respondent whether that person wishes to  contest any aspect of the emergency guardianship or seek any limitation of 
the emergency guardian’s powers.  The visi tor or guardian ad litem shall advise th e respondent of that person's right to 
be represented in the proceeding by counsel of that pers on's own choice or by counsel appointed by the court. The 
visitor or guardian ad litem shall also interview the em ergency guardian, except in cases where the court itself has 
taken action to exercise the powers of an  emergency guardian. In the report to the court, the visitor or guardian ad 
litem shall inform the court that the respondent has rece ived a copy of the order appo inting the emergency guardian. 
The visitor or guardian ad litem shall a dvise the court if circumstances indicat e the respondent wishes to contest any 
aspect of the emergency guardianship or seek a limita tion of the emergency guardian's powers and whether the 
respondent is already represente d by counsel. The visitor or guardian ad lite m shall also advise the court whether any 
issue exists with respect to whether th e appointment of the emergency guardian is in the respondent's best interest. 
(b-2) If it comes to the court’ s attention, through the report of  the visitor or guardian ad lit em or otherwise, that the 
respondent wishes to contest any asp ect of the emergency guardianship or seek a limitation of the emergency 
guardian’s powers, or that an issue exis ts with respect to whether the emergenc y guardianship is in the respondent’s 
best interest, the court shall hold an  expedited hearing on the a ppropriateness of the appointment within forty (40) 
days after the appointment.  The court may continue the e xpedited hearing if the petitio ner and the attorney for the 
respondent, or, if none, the visitor or the guardian ad litem, agree to such a con tinuance.  The court may continue the 
hearing on its own motion due to circumst ances beyond the control of the court and the parties, provided the hearing is 
held within 60 days of the signing of th e order.  If the appointment of a guar dian is contested by the respondent and 
the person is not already repres ented by an attorney, the court shall appoint counsel to represent the respondent in the 
proceeding.  The cost of the appointment of the visitor, guardia n ad litem or attorney must be paid from the estate of 
the respondent if the court is satisfied th at sufficient funds are available.  At th e hearing, the petitioner has the burden 
 
Page 209 of 253 of showing by clear and convincing evid ence that emergency guardianship conti nues to be necessary to provide the 
person with continuing care, protecti on or support pending a final hearing. 
(b-3) Notice of the expedite d hearing must be served as  provided in section 5-309, ex cept that the notice must be 
given at least 5 days before the expe dited hearing, and notice need not be served on any person whose address or 
present whereabouts is unknown and cannot be ascertained by due diligence.  The court may waive service of the 
expedited hearing on any person, other than the respondent, upon a showing of good cause. 
(c) Appointment of an emergency guardian, with or wit hout notice, is not a determ ination of the respondent’s 
incapacity. (d) The court may remove an emergency guardian at any ti me.  An emergency guardian shall make any report the 
court requires.  In other respects, the provisions of this [article ] concerning guardians apply to an emergency guardian . 
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section adopts the UPC in pa rt, but retains the role under former 
MPC § 5-310-A of the visitor and guardian ad litem in cases  of emergency guardianships.  Given the nature of the 
probate courts in the State of Maine, it is not practical to require the assi gnment of a lawyer immediately upon the 
receipt of a petition for an emergency gua rdian, or to adopt the shortened time limits contained in the UPC.  Partly for 
that reason, Maine continues to require the filing of an affidavit with the pe tition for emergency appointment, setting 
forth the factual basis for the emergenc y and the powers requested, as in form er MPC § 5-310-A.  The role of the 
guardian ad litem and visitor will conti nue to ensure that the respondent’s in terests are represented, without limiting 
the court’s authority to appoint a lawyer for the respondent at a later time on a case-by-case basis. 
 This section carries forward from the former MPC § 5-310-A a heightened standard of harm as the basis for an ex 
parte appointment.   Instead of adopting the s horter time limits contained in the UPC, this se ction integrates provisi ons of the former MPC 
§ 5-310-A providing for emergency appoint ment to be followed by a visit with  a guardian ad litem or visitor. 
 
 
5-313 
TEMPORARY SUBSTITUTE GUARDIAN. 
(a) If the court finds that a guardian is not effectively performing the guardian’s duties and that the welfare of 
the ward requires immediate action, it may appoint a temporary substitute guard ian for the ward for a specified period 
not exceeding six months.  Except as otherwise ordered by the court, a temporary substitute  guardian so appointed has 
the powers set forth in the previous order of appointment.  The authority  of any unlimited or limited guardian 
previously appointed by the court is suspended as long as a temporary subs titute guardian has authority.  If an 
appointment is made without previous notice to the ward or the affected guardian, the court,  within five days after the 
appointment, shall inform the ward  or guardian of the appointment. 
 
Page 210 of 253              (b) The court may remove a temporary subs titute guardian at any time.  A temporary substitute guardian shall 
make any report the court requires.  In other respects, the provisions of this [article ] concerning guardians apply to a 
temporary substitute guardian . 
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section removes the statutory prohibition under previous Maine law 
against a temporary guardian se eking involuntary hospitalizati on of a ward outside the St ate.  However, the court 
retains discretion to impose limits on the authority of a temporary substitute guardian. 
   
5-314 
DUTIES OF GUARDIAN. 
(a) Except as otherwise limited by the court, a guardian shall make deci sions regarding the ward’s support, 
care, education, health, and welf are.  A guardian shall exercise authority on ly as necessitated by the ward’s limitations 
and, to the extent possible, shall enco urage the ward to participate in deci sions, act on the ward’s own behalf, and 
develop or regain the capacity to mana ge the ward’s personal affairs.  A gua rdian, in making decisions, shall consider 
the expressed desires and personal values  of the ward to the extent known to the guardian.  A guardian at all times 
shall act in the ward’s best interest and exer cise reasonable care, di ligence, and prudence. 
(b) A guardian shall:  (1) become or remain personally acquainted with the ward and maintain sufficient contact with the 
ward to know of the ward’s capacities, limitations, n eeds, opportunities, and physic al and mental health;  
 (2) take reasonable care of the wa rd’s personal effects and bring prot ective proceedings if necessary to 
protect the property of the ward;  
 (3) expend money of the ward that has been receiv ed by the guardian for the ward’s current needs for 
support, care, education, health, and welfare;  
 (4) conserve any excess money of the ward for the wa rd’s future needs, but if a conservator has been 
appointed for the estate of the ward, th e guardian shall pay the money to the c onservator, at leas t quarterly, to be 
conserved for the ward’s future needs;  
 (5) immediately notify the court if  the ward’s condition has changed so that the ward is capable of 
exercising rights previously removed; and               (6) inform the court of any change in the ward’s cust odial dwelling or address . 
 
 
 
5-315 
POWERS OF GUARDIAN. 
 
Page 211 of 253 (a) Except as otherwise limited by the court, a guardian may: 
 (1) apply for and receive money payable to the ward  or the ward’s guardian or  custodian for the support 
of the ward under the terms of any statut ory system of benefits or insurance or  any private contra ct, devise, trust, 
conservatorship, or custodianship;  
 (2) if otherwise consistent with the terms of any order by a court of  competent jurisdiction relating to 
custody of the ward, take custody of the ward and estab lish the ward’s place of cust odial dwelling, but may only 
establish or move the ward’s place of dwelling outside this state upon express author ization of the court;  
 (3) if a conservator for the estate  of the ward has not been appointe d with existing authority, commence 
a proceeding, including an administrative proceeding, or take  other appropriate action to compel a person to support 
the ward or to pay money for the benefit of the ward;  
 (4) except as limited by 18-A M.R.S. § 5-806, consent to  medical or other care, tr eatment, or service for 
the ward;  
 (5) consent to the marriage or  [divorce] of the ward; and  
 (6) if reasonable under all of the circumstances, delegate to the ward cer tain responsibilities for 
decisions affecting the ward’s well-being.   
                (b) The court may specifically au thorize the guardian to consent to the adoption of the ward. 
                (c)  If co-guardians are appointed, th e powers of the guardians are join t and several, unless limited by the 
appointing document.  
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  The Maine amendments to the UPC reconcile it with section 5-806 of the 
Uniform Healthcare Decisions Act (18-A M.R.S. §§ 5-801 – 5- 818), which section limits certain health care decisions 
by the guardian.  The Maine amendments also assure that peop le who rely on a co-guardian’ s authority to act may rely 
on the consent or action of e ither co-guardian separately. 
 
 
5-316 
RIGHTS AND IMMUNITIES OF GUARDIAN; LIMITATIONS. 
(a) A guardian is entitled to reasonable compensation for services as guardian based on  the factors set forth in 
section 3-721(b) and to reimbursement for room, board, and clothing provided to  the ward, but only as approved by 
order of the court.  If a conservator, other than the gua rdian or one who is affiliated with the guardian, has been 
appointed for the estate of the war d, reasonable compensation and reimburseme nt to the guardian may be approved 
and paid by the conservator w ithout order of the court. 
(b) A guardian need not use the guardian’s personal funds for the ward’s expenses.  A guardian is not liable to 
a third person for acts of the ward solely by reason of th e relationship.  A guardian who exercises reasonable care in 
choosing a third person providing medical or other care, treatment, or service for the ward is not liable for injury to the 
ward resulting from the wrongful  conduct of the third party. 
 
Page 212 of 253 (c) A guardian, without author ization of the court, may not revoke a pow er of attorney for health care [made 
pursuant to the Uniform Health- care Decisions Act (1993)] of which the ward is  the principal.  If a power of attorney 
for health care [pursuant to the Uniform Health-care Decisions Act (1993)] is in e ffect, absent an order of the court to 
the contrary, a health-care decision of the ag ent takes precedence ove r that of a guardian. 
             (d) A guardian may not initiate the commit ment of a ward to a mental h ealth-care institution psychiatric 
hospital except in accordance with the state’ s procedure for involuntary civil commitment.  
 
Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  Maine has amended subsect ion (d) to refer to a “psychiatric hospital” as 
opposed to a “mental health-care institution”, to confor m to Title 34-B, Section 3863, which addresses involuntary 
civil commitment. 
  
5-317 
REPORTS; MONITORING OF GUARDIANSHIP. 
(a) Within 30 days after appointment, a guardian shall report to the court in writing on the condition of the 
ward and account for money and other assets in the guardian’s possession or subject to the guardian’s control. 
A guardian shall report at least annua lly thereafter and whenever ordered by the court, or as otherwise 
specified by the court or pr ovided by court rule.  A repor t must state or contain: 
 (1) the current mental, physical, a nd social condition of the ward;  
 (2) the living arrangements for all addresse s of the ward during th e reporting period;  
 (3) the medical, educational, voca tional, and other services provide d to the ward and the guardian’s 
opinion as to the adequacy  of the ward’s care;  
 (4) a summary of the guardian’s visits with the ward  and activities on the ward ’s behalf and the extent 
to which the ward has partic ipated in decision-making;  
 (5) if the ward is institutionaliz ed, whether the guardian considers th e current plan for care, treatment, 
or habilitation to be in th e ward’s best interest;  
 (6) plans for future care; and   (7) a recommendation as to the need for continue d guardianship and any recommended changes in the 
scope of the guardianship.   
(b) The court may appoint a [visitor] or guardian ad lite m to review a report, inte rview the ward or guardian, 
and make any other investig ation the court directs. 
(c) The court shall establish a system  for monitoring guardianships, includi ng the filing and review of annual 
reports. Reserved. 
(d) Notwithstanding the requirements of paragraph (a), a gu ardian appointed before the effective date of this 
Act shall be required to report on ly as directed by the court. 
 
 
Page 213 of 253 Maine Probate Code Propose Comments  This section allows the court discreti on to direct the timing of reporting by 
guardians, and allows reporting re quirements for guardianships existing on the effective date of the Act to remain in 
place unless altered by the court.  It also allows courts  to retain systems currently  in place for monitoring. 
 
5-318 
TERMINATION OR MODIFICATION OF GUARDIANSHIP. 
(a) A guardianship terminates upon the death of  the ward or upon order of the court. 
(b) On petition of a ward, a guardian, or another pers on interested in the ward’s welfare, the court may 
terminate a guardianship if the ward no longer needs the assistance or protection of a guardian.  The court may modify 
the type of appointment or powers grante d to the guardian if the extent of prot ection or assistance previously granted 
is currently excessive or insufficient or  the ward’s capacity to provide for suppor t, care, education, health, and welfare 
has so changed as to warrant that action.               (b-1) On petition of the guardian, the court may accept the guardian’s resi gnation and make any other order 
that may be appropriate. 
              (b-2) On petition of the ward or any pers on interested in the ward's welfare, the court may remove a guardian 
and appoint a successor if in th e best interest of the ward. 
              (c) Except as othe rwise ordered by the court for good cause, the court, before terminating a guardianship or 
accepting the resignation of a guardian, shall follow the same procedures to safeguard the rights of the ward as apply 
to a petition for guardianship.  Upon presentation by the pe titioner of evidence establis hing a prima facie case for 
termination, the court shall order th e termination unless it is proven by clear and convincing evidence that 
continuation of the guardianship is in  the best interest of the ward.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The Maine amendments to the UPC include specific resignation 
provisions for the guardian; a provision to allow the ward or others to peti tion for removal of a guardian; and a 
requirement of clear and convincing eviden ce to show that continuing guardianship is in the be st interest of the ward, 
once a prima facie case for te rmination has been made. 
 
 
5-401 
Protective Proceeding 
Upon petition and after notice and hearing, the court may appoint a limite d or unlimited conservator or make 
any other protective order provided in this [par t] in relation to the estate and affairs of: 
(1) a minor, if the court determines that the minor  owns money or property requiring management or 
protection that cannot otherwise be provided or has or may have business affairs that may be put at risk or prevented 
because of the minor’s age, or that money is needed fo r support and education and that  protection is necessary or 
desirable to obtain or  provide money; or 
 
Page 214 of 253 (2) any individual, including a minor, if the court determines that, for reas ons other than age:   
(A) by clear and convincing ev idence, the individual is unable to ma nage property and business affairs because 
of an impairment in the ability to receive and evaluate in formation or make or communicate informed decisions, even 
with the use of appropriate  reasonably available technological assistan ce, or because the individual is missing, 
detained, or unable to return  to the United States; and  
(B) by a preponderance of the evidence,  the individual has property that w ill be wasted or dissipated unless 
management is provided or money is needed for the support, care, education, health, and we lfare of the individual or 
of individuals who are entitled to the i ndividual’s support and that protection is necessary or desirable to obtain or 
provide money. 
(C)  If an allegedly incapacitated adul t files voluntary written consent to the appointment of a conservator with 
the court or appears in court and consen ts to the appointment, unless the court finds the consent suspect, the court may 
appoint a conservator as reque sted upon a finding by a preponde rance of the evidence that the individual is unable to 
manage property and business affairs because of an impairment  in the ability to receive and evaluate information or 
make or communicate informed decisions, even with th e use of appropriate reasona bly available technological 
assistance.  For the purposes of this s ubsection, voluntary written consent is valid  only if the consent was obtained by 
a visitor, a guardian ad litem or an attorney repres enting the allegedly incapacita ted person and the allegedly 
incapacitated person gave the consent outside the presence of the pers on or persons seeking conservatorship. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section adds language about communicating informed consent and 
reasonably available technological assistance consistent with the additions to § 5-102 and the accompanying Maine 
comments. This section adds subsection (C) to Section 2 of the UPC pr ovision in order to retain th e exception to the clear and 
convincing standard under former Main e law, 18-A M.R.S. § 5-401(2), for a c onservatorship to which an allegedly 
incapacitated adult has consented. 
  
5-402 
Jurisdiction Over Business A ffairs of Protected Person 
After the service of notice in a proceeding seeking a conservatorship or other protective order and until 
termination of the proceeding, the court in which the petition is filed has: 
(1) exclusive jurisdiction to determine the need fo r a conservatorship or ot her protective order;  
(2) exclusive jurisdiction to determine how the estate of  the protected person which is  subject to the laws of 
this state must be managed, expended, or distributed to or for the use of the protected person, individuals who are in 
fact dependent upon the protected pe rson, or other claimants; and  
(3) concurrent jurisdiction to determ ine the validity of claims against th e person or estate of the protected 
person and questions of title c oncerning assets of the estate. 
 
Page 215 of 253  
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
5-403 
Original Petition for Appoin tment or Protective Order 
(a) The following may petition for the appointment of a conservator or fo r any other appropriate protective 
order: 
 (1) the person to be protected;   (2) an individual interested in the estate, affairs, or welfare of the person to  be protected, including a 
parent, guardian, or custodian; or  
 (3) a person who would be advers ely affected by lack of effectiv e management of the property and 
business affairs of the pe rson to be protected.   
(b) A petition under subsection (a) must set forth the petitioner’s name, reside nce, current address if different, 
relationship to the respondent, and intere st in the appointment or other protective order, and, to the extent known state 
or contain the following with respect to the respondent and the re lief requested:   
 (1) the respondent’s name, age, pr incipal residence, current street ad dress, and, if different, the address 
of the dwelling where it is proposed that the respo ndent will reside if the appointment is made;  
 (2) if the petition alleges impairme nt in the respondent’s ability to receive and evaluate information, a 
brief description of the natu re and extent of the responde nt’s alleged impairment;  
 (3) if the petition alleges that the respondent is missing, detained, or  unable to return to the United 
States, a statement of the relevant circumstances, including the time and nature of the di sappearance or detention and a 
description of any search or inquiry concerning the responde nt’s whereabouts;  
 (4) the name and address of the respondent’s:     (A) spouse or, if the respondent has none, an adult with whom the respondent has resided for 
more than six months before the filing of the petition; and  
  (B) adult children or, if the respondent has none, the respondent’s pare nts and adult brothers 
and sisters or, if the respondent has none , at least one of the adu lts nearest in kinship to the respondent who can be 
found, or, if none, an adult fr iend if any can be found;  
 (5) the name and address of the person res ponsible for care or cust ody of the respondent;  
 (6) the name and address of any lega l representative of  the respondent;  
 (7) a general statement of the respondent’s prope rty with an estimate of its value, including any 
insurance or pension, and the source and amount of  other anticipated income or receipts; and  
 (8) the reason why a conservatorship or other protective order is in the best interest of the respondent.   
(c) If a conservatorship is re quested, the petition must also set forth to the extent known: 
 (1) the name and address of any proposed conser vator and the reason why the proposed conservator 
 
Page 216 of 253 should be selected;  
 (2) the name and address of any person nominated as conservator by the respondent if the respondent 
has attained 14 years of age; and  
 (3) the type of conservatorshi p requested and, if an unlimited c onservatorship, the reason why limited 
conservatorship is inappropria te or, if a limited conservato rship, the property to be placed under the conservator’s 
control and any limitation on the co nservator’s powers and duties. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  In conjunction with proposed 18-A M.R.S. § 5-404, this requires that 
notice of a protective proceeding be given to an adult friend if any can be found a nd if no family can be found.  This is 
similar to the requirement of former 18-A M.R.S. § 5-405(a-1). 
  
5-404 
Notice 
(a) A copy of the petition and the notice of hearing on a petition for conservatorship or other protective order 
must be served personally on the res pondent, but if the respondent’s wher eabouts is unknown or  personal service 
cannot be made, service on the respondent must be made by [substituted service] [or] [pub lication].  The notice must 
include a statement that the respondent must be physically present unless excused by the court, inform the respondent 
of the respondent’s rights at  the hearing, and, if the appoint ment of a conservator is requ ested, include a description of 
the nature, purpose, and consequences of  an appointment.  A failure to serve th e respondent with a notice substantially 
complying with this subsection preclude s the court from granting the petition. 
(b) In a proceeding to establish a cons ervatorship or for another protective or der, notice of the hearing must be 
given to the persons listed in the pe tition.  Failure to give notice under th is subsection does not preclude the 
appointment of a conservator or the making of another protective order. 
(c) Notice of the hearing on a petition for an order afte r appointment of a conservator or making of another 
protective order, together with  a copy of the petition, must be given to th e protected person, if th e protected person has 
attained 14 years of age and is not missi ng, detained, or unable to return to th e United States, any conservator of the 
protected person’s estate, and any other person as ordered by the court.   
(d) A conservator shall give notice of the filing of  the conservator’s invent ory, report, or plan of 
conservatorship, together with a copy of the inventory, report, or plan of conservatorship to  the protected person if the 
person can be located, has attained 14 years of age, and ha s sufficient mental capacity to understand these matters, and 
to any other person the court di rects.  The notice must be delivered or se nt within 14 days after the filing of the 
inventory, report, or plan  of conservatorship. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section adds language from the former 18-A M.R.S. § 5-418 
limiting obligations to provide notice of f iling of inventories, reports or plans to  people who can be located, are at least 
 
Page 217 of 253 14 years of age, and are able  to understand the filings. 
 
 
5-405 
Original Petition:  Minors; Preliminaries to Hearing 
(a) Upon the filing of a petition to esta blish a conservatorship or for anothe r protective order for the reason that 
the respondent is a minor, the court shall set a date for hearin g.  If the court determines at any stage of the proceeding 
that the interests of the minor are or may be inadequately represented, it may appoint a lawyer to represent the minor, 
giving consideration to the choice of the minor if  the minor has attained 14 years of age.   
(b) While a petition to establish a co nservatorship or for another protectiv e order is pending, after preliminary 
hearing and without notice to others, th e court may make orders to preserve and apply the property of the minor as 
may be required for the support of the mi nor or individuals who are in fact dependent upon the minor.  The court may 
appoint a [master] visitor to assist in that task. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Adoption of this section is not in tended to change the existing Maine 
rule that a lawyer appointed by the c ourt to represent a minor has the power s and duties of a guardian ad litem. 
 
 
5-406 
Original Petition:  Preliminaries to Hearing 
(a) Upon the filing of a petition for a conservatorship or other protectiv e order for a respondent for reasons 
other than being a minor, the court shall set a date for hear ing.  The court shall appoint a [visitor] unless the petition 
does not request the appointment of a conservator and the respondent is repr esented by a lawyer.  The duties and 
reporting requirements of the [visitor] are limited to the relief requested in the petition.  The [visitor] must be an 
individual having training or experience in the type  of incapacity alleged. 
 
Alternative A 
 (b) The court shall appoint a lawyer to re present the respondent in the proceeding if: 
 (1) requested by the respondent;   (2) recommended by the [visitor]; or  
 (3) the court determines that th e respondent needs representation.  
Alternative B 
 (b) Unless the respondent is represented by a lawyer, the court shall appoint a lawyer to represent the 
respondent in the proceeding, regardless of the respondent’s ability to pay. 
 
End of Alternatives 
 
Page 218 of 253 (c) The [visitor] shall interview the respondent in person and, to the extent  that the respondent is able to 
understand: 
 (1) explain to the respondent th e substance of the petition and the nature, purpose, and effect of the 
proceeding;  
 (2) if the appointment of a conservator is request ed, inform the respondent of the general powers and 
duties of a conservator and determine the respondent’s views regarding th e proposed conservator, the proposed 
conservator’s powers and duties, and the scope a nd duration of the proposed  conservatorship;  
 (3) inform the respondent of the respondent’s rights, including the ri ght to employ and consult with a 
lawyer at the respondent’s own expense, and the right to request a court- appointed lawyer; and  
 (4) inform the respondent that all costs and expenses of the proceeding, including respondent’s 
attorney’s fees, will be paid fr om the respondent’s estate.   
(d) In addition to the duties imposed by subsection (c), the [visitor] shall: 
 (1) interview the petitio ner and the proposed conser vator, if any; and  
 (2) make any other investig ation the court directs.   
(e) The [visitor] shall promptly file a report with the court, which must include: 
 (1) a recommendation as to whether a lawyer sh ould be appointed to represent the respondent;  
 (2) recommendations regarding the appropriatene ss of a conservatorship, including whether less 
restrictive means of interven tion are available, the type of conservatorship, and, if a limited conservatorship, the 
powers and duties to be granted the lim ited conservator, and the assets over which the conservator should be granted 
authority;  
 (3) a statement of the qualifica tions of the proposed conservator, together with a statement as to 
whether the respondent approves or disa pproves of the proposed conservator, a nd a statement of the powers and duties 
proposed or the scope of the conservatorship;  
 (4) a recommendation as to whether a professional evaluation or further eval uation is necessary; and  
 (5) any other matters the court directs.   (f) The court may also appoint a physic ian, psychologist, or other individual  qualified to evaluate the alleged 
impairment to conduct an examination of the respondent. 
(g) While a petition to establish a co nservatorship or for another protectiv e order is pending, after preliminary 
hearing and without notice to others, the court may issue orders to preserve a nd apply the property of the respondent 
as may be required for the support of the respondent or in dividuals who are in fact dependent upon the respondent.  
The court may appoint a [master] vi sitor to assist in that task. 
Legislative Note:   Those states that enact Alternative B of  subsection (b) which requires appointment of 
counsel for the respondent in all protective proceedings should not enact subsection (e)(1).   
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section adopts UPC Alternative A, permitting the court to retain 
discretion existing under former Maine law not to  appoint a lawyer in uncontested proceedings. 
 
 
Page 219 of 253  
5-407 
Confidentiality of Records 
The written report of a [visitor] a nd any professional evaluation are c onfidential and must be sealed upon 
filing. but  The person who files the visitor’s report or a professional evaluation must pr ovide notice of filing and a 
copy of the report or evaluation to the re spondent at the time of filing.  Copies of  the report or evaluation are available 
to: 
(1) the court;  (2) the respondent without limitation as to use; 
And, unless the respondent files an objection with the cour t within 10 days of receivi ng a copy of the report or 
evaluation, with a showing of good cause, c opies of the report are available to: 
(3) the petitioner, the [visitor], and the petitioner’s and respon dent’s lawyers, for purpo ses of the proceeding; 
and  
(4) other persons for such purposes as the court may order for good cause. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section modifies UPC § 5-407 to provide the respondent with an 
opportunity to object to an inte rested party’s access to  reports or evaluations that w ould otherwise be made available 
to that party. 
  
5-408 
Original Petition:  Procedure at Hearing 
 (a) Unless excused by the court for good cause, a pr oposed conservator shall a ttend the hearing.  In a 
contested hearing, the The respondent shal l attend and participate in the heari ng, unless excused by the court for good 
cause.  The respondent may present evidence and subpoena witnesses and documents, examine witnesses, including 
any court-appointed physician, psychologist , or other individual quali fied to evaluate the alleged impairment, and the 
[visitor], and otherwise particip ate in the hearing.  The hearing may be held  in a location convenient to the respondent, 
or by telephone or other elec tronic conferencing, and may be  closed upon request of the respondent and a showing of 
good cause. 
(b) Any person may request permission to  participate in the proceeding.  Th e court may grant the request, with 
or without hearing, upon determining that the best interest  of the respondent will be se rved.  The court may attach 
appropriate conditions to  the participation.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine has modified the UPC to re quire the responden t’s attendance only 
in contested proceedings, to eliminate the requirement that  the respondent “participate” in the hearing, and to allow 
telephonic or other electronic pa rticipation in hearings, in ke eping with the practi ce in most of Maine’s probate courts. 
 
Page 220 of 253  
 
5-409 
Original Petition:  Orders 
(a) If a proceeding is brought for the reason that the respondent is a minor,  after a hearing on the petition, upon 
finding that the appointment of a conservator or other protecti ve order is in the best inte rest of the minor, the court 
shall make an appointment or ot her appropriate protective order. 
(b) If a proceeding is brought for reasons other than that the respondent is a mi nor, after a hearing on the 
petition, upon finding that a basis exists fo r a conservatorship or othe r protective order, the c ourt shall make the least 
restrictive order consistent with its findings.  The cour t shall make orders necessita ted by the protected person’s 
limitations and demonstrated needs, in cluding appointive and other orders that  will encourage the development of 
maximum self-reliance and independ ence of the protected person. 
(c) Within 14 days after an appointment, the conser vator shall deliver or send a copy of the order of 
appointment, together with a statement of the right to seek termination or modification, to the protected person, if the 
protected person has attained 14 years of age and is not missin g, detained, or unable to retu rn to the United States, and 
to all other persons give n notice of the petition. 
(d) The appointment of a conservator or the entry of  another protective order is  not a determination of 
incapacity of the protected person. 
 
  
5-410 
Powers of Court 
(a) After hearing and upon determining that a basis for a conservatorship or other protective order exists, the 
court has the following powers, which may be ex ercised directly or th rough a conservator: 
 (1) with respect to a minor for r easons of age, all the powers over th e estate and business affairs of the 
minor which may be necessary for the be st interest of the minor and members of the minor’s immediate family; and 
 (2) with respect to an adult, or to a minor for reasons other than age, for the benefit of the protected 
person and individuals who are in fact dependent on the protected person for s upport, all the powers over the estate 
and business affairs of the protected person which the person could exercise if the person we re an adult, present, and 
not under conservatorship or  other protective order. 
(b) Subject to Section 5-110 requiring endorsement of lim itations on the letters of office appointment, the court 
may limit at any time the powers of a conservator otherw ise conferred and may remove  or modify any limitation. 
 
 
 
 
Page 221 of 253 5-411 
Required Court Approval 
(a) After notice to interested pers ons and upon express author ization of the court,  a conservator may: 
(1) make gifts, except as not  otherwise provided authori zed in Section 5-427(b);  
(2) convey, release, or disclaim contingent and expect ant interests in property, including marital property 
rights and any right of survivorsh ip incident to joint tenancy or tenancy by the entireties;  
(3) exercise or release a power of appointment;  
(4) create a revocable or irrevocable trust of property of the estate, whet her or not the trust extends beyond the 
duration of the conservatorship, or revoke or am end a trust revocable by the protected person;  
(5) exercise rights to elect options an d change beneficiaries under insuran ce policies and annuities or surrender 
the policies and annuities for their cash value;  
(6) exercise any right to an elective share in the estate of the protected person’s de ceased spouse and to 
renounce or disclaim any interest by testate or intestat e succession or by transfer inter vivos; and 
(7) make, amend, or revoke the protected person’s will. 
 (b) A conservator, in making, amending, or revoking the pr otected person’s will, shall comply with [the state’s 
statute for executing wills] Title 18-A , Section 2-502, on the execution of wills. 
(c) The court, in exercising or in approving a conservator’s  exercise of the powers list ed in subsection (a), shall 
consider primarily the decision that th e protected person would have made, to the extent that the decision can be 
ascertained.  The court shall also consider: 
(1) the financial needs of the protected person and the needs of individuals who ar e in fact dependent on the 
protected person for support and the interest of creditors;  
(2) possible reduction of income, estate, i nheritance, or other tax liabilities;  
(3) eligibility for govern mental assistance;  
(4) the protected person’s previous pa ttern of giving or level of support;  
(5) the existing estate plan;  (6) the protected person’s life expectancy and the probabi lity that the conservatorship will terminate before the 
protected person’s death; and  
(7) any other factors the court considers relevant. 
(d) Without authorization of the cour t, a conservator may not revoke or am end a durable power of attorney of 
which the protected person is the principal.   If a durable power of attorney is in effect, absent a court order to the 
contrary, a decision of the agent takes precedence over that of a conservator. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section amends UPC § 5- 411(a)(1) to make it unambiguous. 
This section also removes the provision under previous Maine law (18-A M.R.S. § 5-408(6)(b), enacted by P.L. 2005, 
ch. 12, § DDD-4, as amended by P.L. 2011, ch. 155, § 1) prohibiting courts from authorizing gifts that would hasten a 
protected person’s MaineCare eligibility. 
 
 
Page 222 of 253  
5-412 
Protective Arrangements and Single Transactions 
(a) If a basis is established for a protective order with respect to an individual, th e court, without appointing a 
conservator, may: 
(1) authorize, direct, or ratify any transaction necessary or desirable to achieve any arrangement for security, 
service, or care meeting the foreseeable  needs of the protected person, including: 
 (A) payment, delivery, deposit, or retention of funds or property;  
 (B) sale, mortgage, lease, or  other transfer of property; 
 (C) purchase of an annuity;   (D) making a contract for life ca re, deposit contract, or contract for training and education; or 
 (E) addition to or esta blishment of a suitable trust [, incl uding a trust created under the Uniform 
Custodial Trust Act (1987)]; and 
(2) authorize, direct, or ratify any other contract, trust, will, or transa ction relating to the protected person’s 
property and business affairs, including a settlement of a claim, upon determining th at it is in the best interest of the 
protected person. 
(b) In deciding whether to approve a pr otective arrangement or othe r transaction under this section, the court shall 
consider the factors desc ribed in Section 5-411(c). 
(c) The court may appoint a [master] vis itor to assist in the ac complishment of any protective arrangement or other 
transaction authorized under this secti on.  The [master] visitor ha s the authority conferred by the order and shall serve 
until discharged by order after report to the court. 
 
 Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section removes the provisi on under previous Maine law (18-A 
M.R.S. § 5-409(d), enacted by P.L. 2005, ch. 12, § DDD-6, as  amended by P.L. 2011, ch. 155, § 1) prohibiting courts 
from authorizing gifts that would hasten a protected pe rson’s MaineCare eligibility. 
 
 
5-413 
Who May be Conservator:  Priorities 
(a) Except as otherwise provi ded in subsection (d), the court, in a ppointing a conservato r, shall consider 
persons otherwise qualified in the following order of priority: 
 (1) a conservator, guardian of the estate, or ot her like fiduciary appointed  or recognized by an 
appropriate court of any other jurisdicti on in which the protected person resides; 
 (2) a person nominated as conservator by the respondent, including the re spondent’s most recent 
nomination made in a durable power of a ttorney, if the respondent has attained 14 years of age and at the time of the 
nomination had sufficient capacity  to express a preference; 
 
Page 223 of 253  (3) an agent appointed by the respondent to mana ge the respondent’s property  under a durable power of 
attorney; 
 (4) the spouse of the respondent;  (5) an adult child of the respondent;  (6) a parent of the respondent; and  (7) an adult with whom the res pondent has resided for more than si x months before the filing of the 
petition. 
(b) A person having priority under subsection (a)(1), (4),  (5), or (6) may designate in writing a substitute to 
serve instead and thereby transfer the priority to the substitute. 
(c) With respect to persons having equal priority, the cour t shall select the one it considers best qualified.  The 
court, acting in the best interest of the protected person, may dec line to appoint a person havi ng priority and appoint a 
person having a lower priority or no priority. 
(d) An owner, operator, or employee of [a long-term care facility or institution] at  which the respondent is 
receiving care may not be appointed as  conservator unless related to the res pondent by blood, marriage, or adoption.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section removes “domestic pa rtner” from the priority list for 
consideration as conservator.  The spous al priority now applies to same sex c ouples, and a person who has chosen not 
to marry may be considered later in the priority list as “an adult with whom th e respondent has resided for more than 
six months.” Although this section does not require it,  the court may order the conservator to  notify the court of  any change of 
address. 
  
5-414 
Petition for Order Subsequent to Appointment 
(a) A protected person or a person inte rested in the welfare of a protecte d person may file a petition in the 
appointing court for an order: 
 (1) requiring bond or collateral or additio nal bond or collateral , or reducing bond;  
 (2) requiring an accounting for the administ ration of the protecte d person’s estate;  
 (3) directing distribution;  (4) removing the conservator and appointi ng a temporary or succe ssor conservator;  
 (5) modifying the type of appointment or powers gran ted to the conservator if the extent of protection 
or management previously granted is cu rrently excessive or insufficient or the protected person’s ability to manage the 
estate and business affairs has so ch anged as to warrant the action; or 
 (6) granting other appropriate relief. 
(b) A conservator may petition the a ppointing court for instructions c oncerning fiduciary responsibility. 
 
Page 224 of 253 (c) Upon notice and hearing the petition, the court may give appropriate inst ructions and make any appropriate 
order. 
 
  
5-415 
Bond 
The court may require a conservator to furnish a bond conditioned upon faithful discharge of all duties of the 
conservatorship according to law, with sureties as it may specify.  Unless otherwise dir ected by the court, the bond 
must be in the amount of the aggregate cap ital value of the property of the estate in the conservator’s control, plus one 
year’s estimated income, and minus the value of assets deposited under arrangements requi ring an order of the court 
for their removal and the valu e of any real property that the fiduciary, by express limitation, lacks power to sell or 
convey without court authorization.  The court, in place of sureties on a bond, may accept collateral for the 
performance of the bond, includi ng a pledge of securities or a mortgage of real property. 
The following persons wishing to serv e as conservators are exempt fu rnishing a bond under this section: 
   (1)  A spouse;  
   (2)  A financial institution authorized to do business in this State as defined in Title 9-B, section 131, subsection 17-
A, or their employees; and  
   (3)  A person who is already bonded in the course of the pers on’s business if the bond is su fficient to cover the duties 
of conservator.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section carries forward statutory exceptions to bonding 
requirements found in former Main e law at 18-A MRSA § 5-411(c). 
Although this section does not require it,  the court may order the conservator to  notify the court if the conservator 
moves out of state, and the court may r eassess the need for a bond at that time. 
 
 
5-416 
Terms and Requirements of Bond 
(a) The following rules apply to any bond required: 
(1) Except as otherwise provided by the terms of the bond, sureties and the conservator are jointly and 
severally liable.   
(2) By executing the bond of a conservato r, a surety submits to the jurisdiction of the court that issued letters to 
the primary obligor in any proceeding pertaining to the fiduc iary duties of the conservato r in which the surety is 
named as a party.  Notice of any proceeding must be sent or  delivered to the surety at the address shown in the court 
records at the place where the bond is filed and to any other address th en known to the petitioner.   
 
Page 225 of 253 (3) On petition of a successor conser vator or any interested person, a proceeding may be brought against a 
surety for breach of the obligation of the bond of the conservator.   
(4) The bond of the conservator may be proceeded ag ainst until liability under the bond is exhausted.   
(b) A proceeding may not be brought agai nst a surety on any matter as to whic h an action or proceeding against the 
primary obligor is barred. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Language does not constitute a s ubstantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
5-417 
Compensation and Expenses 
If not otherwise compensated for services rendered, a gua rdian, conservator, lawyer for the respondent, lawyer 
whose services resulted in a protective order or in an or der beneficial to a protected person’s estate, or any other 
person appointed by the court is entitled  to reasonable compensation from the estate.  Compensation may be paid and 
expenses reimbursed without court order.  If the court determines that the compensation is ex cessive or the expenses 
are inappropriate, the excessive or inappropriate amount must be repaid to the estate. 
 The factors set forth in section 3-721 , subsection (b) should be considered in determining the reasonableness of 
compensation under this section. 
 
 
   
5-418 
General Duties of Conservator; Plan 
(a) A conservator, in relati on to powers conferred by this [part] or implicit in the title acquired by virtue of the 
proceeding, is a fiduciary and shall observe the standards of care app licable to a trustee. 
(b) A conservator may exercise author ity only as necessitated by the limita tions of the protected person, and to 
the extent possible, shall encourage the person to participate in decisions, act in the person’s own behalf, and develop 
or regain the ability to manage the person’s estate and business affairs. 
(c) Within 60 days after appointment, a conservator shal l file with the appointing court a plan for protecting, 
managing, expending, and distributing the assets of the prot ected person’s estate.  The plan must be based on the 
actual needs of the person and take into consideration the best interest of the person.  The conservator shall include in 
the plan steps to develop or restore th e person’s ability to manage the person’s property, an estimate of the duration of 
the conservatorship, and projections  of expenses and resources. 
 
Page 226 of 253 (d) In investing an estate, selecting assets of the esta te for distribution, and invoki ng powers of revocation or 
withdrawal available for the use and bene fit of the protected person and exercisa ble by the conservator, a conservator 
shall take into account any estate plan of the person know n to the conservator and may examine the will and any other 
donative, nominative, or other appo intive instrument of the person.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  While former Maine Probate Code  section 5-418 required that a 
conservator provide a copy of  an inventory to protected persons ove r 14 who were capable of understanding, by 
adopting the uniform code, Maine is endor sing a view of conservatorship that mo re clearly encourag es participation 
by the protected person in management of his or her affair s to the maximum extent of the protected person’s ability. 
 
 
5-419 
Inventory; Records 
(a) Within 60 days after appointment, a conservator shal l prepare and file with the appointing court a detailed 
inventory of the estate subject  to the conservatorship, together with an oath or affirmation that the inventory is 
believed to be complete and accurate as far as information permits. 
(b) A conservator shall keep record s of the administration of the esta te and make them available for 
examination on reasonable request of an interested person. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section removes specific pr ovisions under previous Maine law 
concerning sanctions for failure to file an inventory.  The court retains discre tion to impose any appropriate sanctions 
and take other necessary steps based on breach of fiduciary duty. 
   
5-420 
Reports; Appointment of [Visitor]; Monitoring 
(a) A conservator shall report to the court for administration of the estate  annually unless the court otherwise 
directs, upon resignation or removal, upon termination of the c onservatorship, and at other tim es as the court directs.  
An order, after notice and h earing, allowing an intermediate report of a conservator adjudicate s liabilities concerning 
the matters adequately disclosed in the accounting.  An order, after noti ce and hearing, allo wing a final report 
adjudicates all previously unsettled liab ilities relating to the conservatorship. 
(b) A report must state or contain: 
 (1) a list of the assets of the estate under th e conservator’s control a nd a list of the receipts, 
disbursements, and distributions during the period for which the report is made;  
 (2) a list of the services provi ded to the protected person; and  
 
Page 227 of 253  (3) any recommended changes in the plan for the conservatorship as well as a recommendation as to 
the continued need for conservatorship and any recomme nded changes in the scope of the conservatorship.   
(c) The court may appoint a [visitor] to review a report or plan, interview the protect ed person or conservator, 
and make any other investigation the cour t directs.  In connection with a report,  the court may order a conservator to 
submit the assets of the estate to an appropriate ex amination to be made in a manner the court directs. 
(d) The court shall establish a syst em for monitoring conservatorships, including the filing and review of 
conservators’ reports and plans.  Reserved. 
(e) Notwithstanding the preceding provisions  of this Section, a private conservator appointed before January 2, 
2008 shall not be required to submit reports pursuant to subsection (a), but shall only be required to submit such 
periodic reports as may be direct ed in the order of appointment. 
(f) If the conservator fails without good cause to f ile the accounting required by the court, the court may 
require the conservator or th e conservator's surety to pay to the prot ected person’s estate a minimum of $100 and a 
maximum of the amount the court determines is just to co mpensate the estate for any damage resulting from the 
failure to file the accounting. The paymen ts required by this subsection are in addition to any other award or remedy 
available at law or in equity for fi duciary misconduct of the conservator. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section allows courts to retain systems currently in place for 
monitoring, and carries forward from the former 18-A M.R.S. § 5-419(d) penalty provisions related to failure of the 
conservator to file an accounting. 
  
5-421 
Title by Appointment 
(a) The appointment of a cons ervator vests title in the conservator as trustee to all propert y of the protected 
person, or to the part thereof specified in the order, held at the time of appointment or thereafter acquired.  An order 
vesting title in the conservator to only a part of the property of the protected  person creates a conservatorship limited 
to assets specified in the order. 
(b) Letters of conservatorship are evid ence of vesting title of the protected person’s assets in the conservator.  
An order terminating a conservatorship tr ansfers title to assets remaining subj ect to the conservatorship, including any 
described in the order, to the formerly protected person, or the person’s successors. 
(c) Subject to the requirements of other statutes governi ng the filing or recordation of documents of title to land 
or other property, letter s of conservatorship and orders terminating conservatorships may be filed or recorded to give 
notice of title as between the cons ervator and the protected person. 
(d) The appointment of a conservator is not a transfer or  alienation within the meani ng of general provisions of 
any federal or state statute or regulation, insurance policy, pension plan, contra ct, will or trust instrument, imposing 
restrictions upon or penalties for transfer  or alienation by the protec ted person of his rights or interest, but this section 
 
Page 228 of 253 does not restrict the ability of  persons to make specific provision by contra ct or dispositive instrument relating to a 
conservator. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
5-422 
Protected Person’s Interest Inalienable 
(a) Except as otherwise provi ded in subsections (c) and (d), the inte rest of a protected person in property 
vested in a conservator is not  transferrable or assignable by the protected person.  An attempted transfer or assignment 
by the protected person, although ineffective to affect property rights, may give ri se to a claim against the protected 
person for restitution or damages which, subject to presen tation and allowance, may be  satisfied as provided in 
Section 5-429. 
(b) Property vested in a conservator by  appointment and the interest of the protected person in that property are 
not subject to levy, garnishment, or similar process for claims against the protecte d person unless allowed under 
Section 5-429. 
(c) A person without knowledge of the conservatorship who in good faith and for security or substantially 
equivalent value receives delivery from a protected person of  tangible personal property of a type normally transferred 
by delivery of possession, is prot ected as if the protected pers on or transferee had valid title. 
(d) A third party who deals with the pr otected person with respect to property  vested in a conservator is entitled 
to any protection provided in other law.  
 
    
5-423 
Sale, Encumbrance, or Other Transaction Involving Conflict of Interest 
Any transaction involving the conserva torship estate which is affected by a substantial conflict between the 
conservator’s fiduciary and personal inte rests is voidable unless the transacti on is expressly aut horized by the court 
after notice to interested persons.  A transaction affected by a substantial c onflict between personal and fiduciary 
interests includes any sale, encumbrance, or other transact ion involving the conservatorshi p estate entered into by the 
conservator, the spouse, descendant, agent,  or lawyer of a conservator, or a co rporation or other en terprise in which 
the conservator has a substantial beneficial interest. 
 
 
 
Page 229 of 253  
5-424 
Protection of Person Dealing With Conservator 
(a) A person who assists or deals with a conservator in  good faith and for value in any transaction other than 
one requiring a court order under Section 5-410 or 5-411 is protected as though the conser vator properly exercised the 
power.  That a person knowingly deals with a conservator does not  alone require the person to inquire into the 
existence of a power or the propriety of its exercise, but re strictions on powers of conser vators which are endorsed on 
letters as provided in Section 5-110 are effective as to third persons.  A pers on who pays or delivers assets to a 
conservator is not responsible for their proper application. 
(b) Protection provided by this sectio n extends to any procedur al irregularity or juri sdictional defect that 
occurred in proceedings leading to the issuance of letters and is not a substitute for protection provided to persons 
assisting or dealing with a conservator by comparable provisions in other law rela ting to commercial transactions or to 
simplifying transfers of s ecurities by fiduciaries. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
5-425 
Powers of Conservator In Administration 
(a) Except as otherwise qualif ied or limited by the court in its order of  appointment and endorsed on the letters, a 
conservator has all of the powers granted in this section and any a dditional powers granted by law to a trustee in this 
state.   
(b) A conservator, acting reasonably and in an effort to accomplish the purpose of th e appointment, and without 
further court authorization or confirmation, may:   
(1) collect, hold, and retain assets  of the estate, including assets in which the c onservator has a personal 
interest and real property in another state, until the conservator considers that disposition of an asset should be made;  
(2) receive additions to the estate;  (3) continue or participate in the operation of any busin ess or other enterprise;  
(4) acquire an undivided interest in an  asset of the estate in which the co nservator, in any fiduciary capacity, 
holds an undivided interest;  
(5) invest assets of the estate as t hough the conservator were a trustee;  
(6) deposit money of the estate in  a financial institution, including one  operated by the conservator;  
(7) acquire or dispose of an asset of the estate, including real pr operty in another state, for cash or on credit, at 
public or private sale, and manage, deve lop, improve, exchange, partition, change  the character of, or abandon an asset 
of the estate;  
(8) make ordinary or extraordinary repairs or alterations in buildings  or other structures, demolish any 
 
Page 230 of 253 improvements, and raze existing or er ect new party walls or buildings;  
(9) subdivide, develop, or dedicate land to public use,  make or obtain the vacation of plats and adjust 
boundaries, adjust differences in valuati on or exchange or partition by giving or  receiving considerat ions, and dedicate 
easements to public use without consideration;  
(10) enter for any purpose into  a lease as lessor or lessee, with or w ithout option to purchase or renew, for a 
term within or extending beyond the term of the conservatorship;  
(11) enter into a lease or arrangemen t for exploration and removal of mine rals or other natu ral resources or 
enter into a pooling or unitization agreement;  
(12) grant an option involving dispositi on of an asset of the es tate and take an option for the acquisition of any 
asset;  
(13) vote a security, in person or by general or limited proxy;  
(14) pay calls, assessments, and any other sums charg eable or accruing against or on account of securities;  
(15) sell or exercise stock-subs cription or conversion rights;  
(16) consent, directly or through a committee or othe r agent, to the reorganizat ion, consolidation, merger, 
dissolution, or liquidation of a corpor ation or other business enterprise;  
(17) hold a security in the na me of a nominee or in other form without disclosure of the cons ervatorship so that 
title to the security may pass by delivery;  
(18) insure the assets of the estate against damage or loss and the conservato r against liability with respect to a 
third person;  
(19) borrow money, with or without security, to be repa id from the estate or otherwise and advance money for 
the protection of the estate or the pr otected person and for all expenses, lo sses, and liability sustained in the 
administration of the estate or because of the holding or ow nership of any assets, for which the conservator has a lien 
on the estate as against the protec ted person for advances so made;  
(20) pay or contest any claim, settl e a claim by or against the estate or  the protected person by compromise, 
arbitration, or otherwise, and release, in  whole or in part, any claim belonging to the estate to the extent the claim is 
uncollectible;  
(21) pay taxes, assessments, compensation of the conser vator and any guardian, and other expenses incurred in 
the collection, care, administration, and protection of  the estate;  
(22) allocate items of income or expense to income or pr incipal of the estate, as  provided by other law, 
including creation of reserves out of  income for depreciation, obsolescence, or amortization or for depletion of 
minerals or other na tural resources;  
(23) pay any sum distributable to a protected person or individual who is in fact dependent on the protected 
person by paying the sum to the distributee or by paying the sum for the use of the distributee: 
 (A) to the guardian of the distributee; 
 (B) to a distributee’s custodian under [the Main e Uniform Transfers to Minors Act (1983/1986)] or 
custodial trustee under [the Unifor m Custodial Trust Act (1987)] th e laws of another state; or 
 (C) if there is no guardian, custodian, or custodial trustee, to a relative or other person having physical 
 
Page 231 of 253 custody of the distributee;  
(24) prosecute or defend actions, claims, or proceedings in any jurisdiction for the pr otection of assets of the 
estate and of the conservator in the performance of fiduciary duties; and  
 (25) execute and deliver all instrume nts that will accomplish or facilitate the exercise of the powers vested in 
the conservator.; and 
(26) Exercise any powers described in section 1- 111 relating to compliance w ith environmental laws. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section eliminates the pr ovision of prior Maine law giving a 
conservator of the estate of  an unmarried minor, as to whom no one has parental rights, the duties and powers of a 
guardian of the minor, recognizing that a guardia n of the minor can be appointed if needed. 
This section includes language in su bparagraph 23(B) similar to language in  the Maine Uniform Trust Code, 18-B 
M.R.S. § 816(21)(B), which recognizes that Maine has not a dopted the Uniform Custodial Tr ust Act, but other states 
have. 
  
5-426 
Delegation 
(a) A conservator may not delegate to an agent or anot her conservator the entire ad ministration of the estate, 
but a conservator may otherwise delegate the performance of functions that a prudent trustee of comparable skills may delegate under similar circumstances. 
(b) The conservator shall exercise reasonable care, skill, and caution in:  (1) selecting an agent;   (2) establishing the scope and term s of a delegation, consistent with  the purposes and terms of the 
conservatorship;  
 (3) periodically reviewing an agent’s overall performance and compliance with the terms of the 
delegation; and  
 (4) redressing an action or decision of an agent wh ich would constitute a breach  of trust if performed by 
the conservator.   
(c) A conservator who complies with subsections (a) and (b) is not liable to the protected person or to the 
estate for the decisions or actions of the agent to whom  a function was delegated. 
(d) In performing a delegated function, an  agent shall exercise reasonable car e to comply with the terms of the 
delegation. 
(e) By accepting a delegation from a conservator subject to the law of  this state, an agent submits to the 
jurisdiction of the cour ts of this state. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section is new and had no pr evious counterpart in the Maine 
 
Page 232 of 253 Probate Code.  It is analogous to sec tion 807 of the Maine Uniform Trust Code. 
 
 
5-427 
Principles of Distri bution by Conservator 
(a) Unless otherwise specified in th e order of appointment and endorsed on the letters of appointment or 
contrary to the plan filed pursuant to Section 5-418, a conservator may expend or distribute income or principal of the 
estate of the protecte d person without further court authorization or  confirmation for the support, care, education, 
health, and welfare of the protected person and individuals who are in fact  dependent on the protected person, 
including the payment of child or spousal support, in accord ance with the following rules: 
 (1) A conservator shall consider recommendations relating to the approp riate standard of support, care, 
education, health, and welfare for the protected person or an  individual who is in fact  dependent on the protected 
person made by a guardian, if any, and, if the protected  person is a minor, the c onservator shall consider 
recommendations made by a parent.   
 (2) A conservator may not be surcharged for money paid to persons furnishing support, care, education, 
or benefit to a protected person, or an individual who is in fact dependent on the protected person, in accordance with 
the recommendations of a parent or gua rdian of the protected person unless the conservator knows that the parent or 
guardian derives personal financial benefit therefrom, in cluding relief from any pers onal duty of support, or the 
recommendations are not in the best interest of the protected person.   
 (3) In making distributions under this subs ection, the conservator shall consider:   
  (A) the size of the estate, th e estimated duration of the conser vatorship, and the likelihood that 
the protected person, at some future time, may be fully se lf-sufficient and able to manage business affairs and the 
estate;  
  (B) the accustomed standard of  living of the protected  person and individuals who are in fact 
dependent on the protected person; and  
  (C) other money or sources used fo r the support of the protected person.   
 (4) Money expended under this subsection may be pa id by the conservator to any person, including the 
protected person, as reimbursement for expenditures that the conservator might have made, or in advance for services 
to be rendered to the protected pers on if it is reasonable to expect the services will be performed and advance 
payments are customary or reasonably  necessary under the circumstances.   
(b) If the estate is ample to provide for the distribu tions authorized by subsecti on (a), a conservator for a 
protected person other than a minor may make gifts that the protected person mi ght have been expected to make, in 
amounts that do not exceed in the aggregat e for any calendar year 20 pe rcent of the income of th e estate in that year. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The UPC expands distributions perm issible under former Maine law to 
include distributions not only for the hea lth and welfare of the prot ected person but also for others who are in fact 
 
Page 233 of 253 dependent on the protected pe rson without being dependents. 
 
 
5-428 
Death of Protected Person 
[(a)] If a protected person dies, the conservator sha ll deliver to the court for safekeeping any will of the 
protected person which may have come into the conservato r’s possession, inform the personal representative or 
beneficiary named in the will of the delivery, and retain the estate for delivery to the personal representative of the 
decedent or to another person entitled to it.   
[(b) If a personal representative has not been appointed within 40 days after the deat h of a protected person and 
an application or petition for appointment is not before th e court, the conservator may apply to exercise the powers 
and duties of a personal represen tative in order to administer and distribu te the decedent’s estate.  Upon application 
for an order conferring upon the conser vator the powers of a personal repr esentative, after notice given by the 
conservator to  
(1) any person nominated as personal representative  by any will of which the applicant is aware,  
(2) all of the decendent’s heirs, and 
(3) all devisees of the will, if any, 
the court may grant the application upon determining that there is no ob jection and endorse  the letters of 
conservatorship to note that the formerly protected person is  deceased and that the conservator has acquired all of the 
powers and duties of a pers onal representative.   
(c) The issuance of an order under th is section has the effect of an order of appointment of a personal 
representative [as provided in Section 3-308 and [Parts] 6 through 10 of [Article] III].  However, the estate in the 
name of the conservator, after administ ration, may be distributed to  the decedent’s successors without retransfer to the 
conservator as persona l representative.]  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section includes requirements for notice to individuals likely to 
affected by a conservator’s request for authority to  exercise the powers of a personal representative. 
 
   
5-429 
Presentation and Allowance of Claims 
(a) A conservator may pay, or secure by encumbering assets  of the estate, claims agai nst the estate or against 
the protected person arising before or  during the conservatorship upon their pr esentation and allowance in accordance 
with the priorities stated in subsection (d ).  A claimant may present a claim by:   
 
Page 234 of 253  (1) sending or delivering to the conservator a written statement of th e claim, indicating its basis, the 
name and address of the claimant , and the amount claimed; or  
 (2) filing a written statement of the claim, in a form  acceptable to the court, w ith the clerk of court and 
sending or delivering a copy of the statement to the conservator.   
(b) A claim is deemed presented on receipt of the written  statement of claim by the conservator or the filing of 
the claim with the court whichever first occurs.  A pres ented claim is allowed if it is not disallowed by written 
statement sent or delivered by the conser vator to the claimant within 60 days af ter its presentation.  The conservator 
before payment may change an allowance to a disallowance in whole or in part, but not  after allowance under a court 
order or judgment or an  order directing payment of the claim.  The presentation of a claim tolls the running of any 
statute of limitations relating to the cl aim until 30 days after its disallowance. 
(c) A claimant whose claim has not been paid may petiti on the court for determination of the claim at any time 
before it is barred by a statute of limi tations and, upon due proof, procure an or der for its allowance, payment, or 
security by encumbering assets of the estate.  If a pro ceeding is pending against a prot ected person at the time of 
appointment of a conservator or is initi ated against the protected person thereafte r, the moving party shall give to the 
conservator notice of any proceeding that could result in creating a claim against the estate. 
(d) If it appears that the estate is likely to be exhauste d before all existing claims ar e paid, the conservator shall 
distribute the estate in money or in kind in  payment of claims in the following order: 
 (1) costs and expenses of administration;   (2) claims of the federal or state govern ment having priority under other law;  
 (3) claims incurred by the conservator for support,  care, education, health, and welfare previously 
provided to the protected person or  individuals who are in fact de pendent on the prot ected person;  
 (4) claims arising before the conservatorship; and  
 (5) all other claims.   (e) Preference may not be given in the payment of a claim over any other cl aim of the same class, and a claim 
due and payable may not be preferred over a claim not due. 
(f) If assets of the conservatorship are adequate to meet all existing claims, the court, acting in the best interest 
of the protected person, may order the cons ervator to grant a security  interest in the conserva torship estate for payment 
of any or all claims at a future date. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The UPC allows the conservator to di sallow a claim at any time before it 
has been paid.  This is a change from former Maine law. 
 
5-430 
Personal Liability of Conservator 
(a) Except as otherwise agreed, a cons ervator is not personally liable on a contract properly entered into in a 
fiduciary capacity in the course of admini stration of the estate unless the conservator fails to reveal in the contract the 
 
Page 235 of 253 representative capacity a nd identify the estate. 
(b) A conservator is personally liable fo r obligations arising from ownership or  control of property of the estate 
or for other acts or omissions occurring in the course of ad ministration of the estate, including liability for violation of 
environmental law, only if personally at fault. 
(c) Claims based on contracts entered into by a conserva tor in a fiduciary capacit y, obligations arising from 
ownership or control of the estate, and claims based on tort s committed in the course of administration of the estate 
may be asserted against the estate by proceeding against the conservator in a fiduciary capacity, whether or not the 
conservator is person ally liable therefor. 
(d) A question of liability between the estate and the conservator personally may be determined in a 
proceeding for accounting, surcharge, or indemnificati on, or in another appropriate proceeding or action. 
[(e) A conservator is not personall y liable for any environmental conditi on on or injury resulting from any 
environmental condition on land solely by reason of  an acquisition of ti tle under Section 5-421.] 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section addresses environmental liability in conformity with Title 
18-B section 1010, subsection 2. 
  
5-431 
Termination of Proceedings 
(a) A conservatorship terminates upon the death of the protected person or upon order of the court.  Unless 
created for reasons other than that the protected person is a minor, a cons ervatorship created for a minor also 
terminates when the protected person attains majority or is emancipated. 
(b) Upon the death of a protected person, the conservato r shall conclude the administration of the estate by 
distribution to the person’s su ccessors.  The conservator shall file a final report and petiti on for discharge within [30] 
days after distribution. 
(c) On petition of a protected pers on, a conservator, or another person interested in a protected person’s 
welfare, the court may terminate the conservatorship if the protected pers on no longer needs the assistance or 
protection of a conservator.  Termination of the conservato rship does not affect a conserva tor’s liability for previous 
acts or the obligation to account for funds  and assets of the protected person. 
(d) Except as otherwise ordered by th e court for good cause, before termina ting a conservatorship, the court 
shall follow the same procedures to safeguard the right s of the protected person th at apply to a petition for 
conservatorship.  Upon the establishment of a prima facie case for termination, th e court shall order termination unless 
it is proved that continuation of th e conservatorship is in the best interest of the protected person. 
(e) Upon termination of a conservators hip and whether or not formally dist ributed by the conservator, title to 
assets of the estate passes to the formerly protected pers on or the person’s successors.  Th e order of termination must 
provide for expenses of administration a nd direct the conservator to execute appropriate instruments to evidence the 
 
Page 236 of 253 transfer of title or confirm a distribut ion previously made and to file a fi nal report and a peti tion for discharge upon 
approval of the final report. 
(f) The court shall enter a final orde r of discharge upon the approval of the final report and satisfaction by the 
conservator of any other conditions placed by the court on the conservator’s discharge. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section eliminates the list f ound in previous Maine law of reasons 
for terminating conservatorship and adds a requirement that the conservator’s final report be  filed within 30 days after 
distribution. 
  
5-432 
Registration of Guardianship Orders 
If a guardian has been appointed in another state a nd a petition for the appointment of a guardian is not 
pending in this state, the guard ian appointed in the other stat e, after giving noti ce to the appointing court of an intent 
to register, may register the guardianshi p order in this state by filing as a fo reign judgment in a court the Probate 
Court, in any appropriate [county] of this state, certifie d copies of the order and letters of office appointment. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section, by its relocation from Part 5-A into this Part 5, expands 
previous Maine law pertaining to registra tion of guardianship orders so that or ders relating to minors as well as to 
adults may be registered. 
  
5-433 
Registration of Protective Orders 
If a conservator has been appointed in another state and a pet ition for a protective order is not pending in this state, the 
conservator appointed in the othe r state, after giving notice to the appointing court of an inte nt to register, may register 
the protective order in this st ate by filing as a foreign judgment in the Prob ate Court a court of this state, in any 
[county] in which property belonging to th e protected person is located, certifie d copies of the order and letters of 
office appointment and of any bond. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section, by its relocation from Part 5-A into this Part 5, expands 
previous Maine law pertaining to  registration of conservatorshi p orders so that orders rela ting to minors as well as to 
adults are covered, and provides a single procedure for dealing with foreign conservatorships. 
 
5-434 
Effect of Registration 
 
Page 237 of 253 (a) Upon registration of a guardianship or protective order from another stat e, the guardian or conservator may 
exercise in this state all powers author ized in the order of appointment except as prohibited under the laws of this 
state, including maintaining actions and pro ceedings in this state and, if the guardia n or conservator is not a resident of 
this state, subject to any conditi ons imposed upon nonresident parties. 
(b) A court of this state may grant any relief available under this [article] a nd other law of this state to enforce 
a registered order. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section, by its relocation from Part 5-A into this Part 5, expands 
previous Maine law pertaining to the effect  of conservatorship orders so that or ders relating to minors as well as to 
adults are covered, and clarifie s in a single statute the author ity of foreign conservators. 
 
 
None 
UNIFORM ADULT GUARDIANSHIP  AND PROTECTIVE PROCEEDIN GS JURISDICTION ACT  
 
 
None 
PUBLIC GUARDIANSHIP AND CONSERVATORSHIP  
 
 
None 
UNIFORM HEALTH-CARE DECISIONS ACT  
 
 
None 
MAINE UNIFORM POWER OF ATTORNEY ACT 
6-101 
NONPROBATE TRANSFERS ON DEATH 
(a)  A provision for a nonprobate transfer  on death in an insurance policy, c ontract of employment, bond, mortgage, 
promissory note, certificated or unce rtificated security, account agreement, custodial agreement, deposit agreement, 
compensation plan, pension plan, individua l retirement plan, employee benefit pla n, trust, conveyance, deed of gift, 
marital property agreement, or other written instrument of a similar nature  is nontestamentary.  This subsection 
includes a written provision that:  
(1)  Money or other benefits due to, controlled by, or owned by a decedent before death must be paid after the 
decedent’s death to a person whom the decedent designates either in the instrument or in a separate writing, 
 
Page 238 of 253 including a will, executed either before or at  the same time as the instrument, or later; 
(2)  Money due or to become due under the instrument ceases to be payable in the event of death of the promise or 
the promisor before payment or demand; or (3)  Any property controlled by or owned by the decedent before death which is the subject of the instrument 
passes to a person the decedent designates either in the instrument or in a separate writing, including a will, 
executed either before or at the same time as the instrument, or later.  
(b)  Nothing in this section limits the rights of  creditors under other laws of this State. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The section does not c onstitute a substantive change to Maine law.  
Maine has retained paragraph (b) fr om section 6-201 of prior Maine law,  which was a non-uniform provision. 
 
 
6-102 
LIABILITY OF NONPROBATE TRANSFEREES  FOR CREDITOR CLAIMS AND STATUTORY 
ALLOWANCES 
(a)  In this section, “nonprobate tran sfer” means a valid transfer  effective at death, othe r than a transfer of a 
survivorship interest in a joint tenancy of real estate, by a tr ansferor whose last domicile was in this State to the extent 
that the transferor immediately befo re death had power, acting alone, to prevent the transfer by revocation or 
withdrawal and instead to use the propert y for the benefit of the transferor or apply it to discharge claims against the 
transferor’s probate estate. (b)  Except as otherwise provided by stat ute, a transferee of a nonprobate transfer is subject to liability to any probate 
estate of the decedent for allowed claims against decedent’s probate estate and statutory allowances to the decedent’s 
spouse and children to the extent the esta te is insufficient to satis fy those claims and allowances.  The liability of a 
nonprobate transferee may not exceed the value of nonprobate transfers received or  controlled by that transferee.  
(c)  Nonprobate transferees are liable for the insufficien cy described in subsection (b ) in the following order of 
priority: 
(1)  A transferee designated in the decedent’s will or any other gove rning instrument, as provided in the 
instrument; (2)  The trustee of a trust serving as the principal nonproba te instrument in the decedent’s estate plan as shown by 
its designation as devisee of the decedent ’s residuary estate or by other facts or  circumstances, to the extent of the 
value of the nonprobate transf er received or controlled; 
(3)  Other nonprobate transferees, in  proportion to the values received. 
(d)  Unless otherwise provided by the trust instrument, in terests of beneficiaries in all trusts incurring liabilities under 
this section abate as necessary to sati sfy the liability, as if all of the trus t instruments were a single will and the 
interests were devises under it. 
 
Page 239 of 253 (e)  A provision made in one instrument may direct  the apportionment of the liability among the nonprobate 
transferees taking under that or any other governing instrument .  If a provision in one in strument conflicts with a 
provision in another, the later one prevails. (f)  Upon due notice to a nonprobate transf eree, the liability imposed by this sect ion is enforceable in proceedings in 
this State, whether or not the tran sferee is located in this State. 
(g)  A proceeding under this section ma y not be commenced unless the persona l representative of the decedent’s 
estate has received a written demand fo r the proceeding from the surviving spouse or a chil d, to the extent that 
statutory allowances are affected, or a creditor.  If the personal representa tive declines or fails to commence a 
proceeding after demand, a person maki ng demand may commence the proceeding in the name of the decedent’s 
estate, at the expense of the person making the demand and not of the estate.  A personal representative who declines 
in good faith to commence a requested proceeding incurs no personal liability for declining. 
(h)  A proceeding under this section must  be commenced within one year after the decedent’s death, but a proceeding 
on behalf of a creditor whose claim wa s allowed after proceedings challengi ng disallowance of the claim may be 
commenced within 60 days after final allowance of the claim. (i)  Unless a written notice asse rting that a decedent’s prob ate estate is nonexistent or  insufficient to pay allowed 
claims and statutory allowances has been received from  the decedent’s personal repres entative, the following rules 
apply: 
(1)  Payment or delivery of assets by a financial instituti on, registrar, or other obligor, to a nonprobate transferee in 
accordance with the terms of the governing instrument controlling the transfer re leases the obligor from all claims 
for amounts paid or assets delivered. (2)  A trustee receiving or controlling a nonprobate transf er is released from liabil ity under this section with 
respect to any assets distributed to th e trust’s beneficiaries.  Each benefici ary to the extent of the distribution 
received becomes liable for the amount of the trustee’s liability attributable  to assets received by the beneficiary. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Section 6-102 is a new section but th e concepts for the most part were 
previously included in various sections  of Maine law, includi ng the Maine Trust Code.  The new section serves a 
useful function of addressing these issues in a comprehensive way and es tablishing an order of priority in the 
procedure for enforcing claims against va rious non probate assets.  One significan t change from prior Maine law is to 
shorten the time period for bringing a clai m under this section from two years afte r the decedent’s date of death to one 
year.  This section does not supersede existing law that insulates death benefits in life insurance contracts, retirement 
plans or IRAs from creditors’ claims. 
  
6-201 
DEFINITIONS 
(1)  “Account” means a contract of deposit between a de positor and a financial institu tion, and includes a checking 
 
Page 240 of 253 account, savings account, certificate of  deposit, and share account.   
(2)  “Agent” means a person authorized to  make account transactions for a party. 
(3)  “Beneficiary” means a person named as one to wh om sums on deposit in an account are payable on request 
after death of all parties or for wh om a party is named as trustee. 
(4)  “Financial institution” means an organization author ized to do business under state or federal laws relating to 
financial institutions, and includes a bank, trust company, savings bank, building and loan association, savings and 
loan company or associ ation, and credit union. 
(5)  “Multiple-party account” means an account payable on reque st to one or more of two or more parties, whether 
or not a right of survivorship is mentioned. (6)  “Party” means a person who, by the terms of an account, has a present righ t, subject to request, to payment 
from the account other than as  a beneficiary or agent. 
(7)  “Payment” of sums on deposit incl udes withdrawal, payment to a party or  third person pursuant to a check or 
other request, and a pledge of sums on deposit by a party, or a set-off, reduction, or other disposition of all or part 
of an account pursuant to a pledge. (8)  “P.O.D. designation” mean s the designation of (i) a beneficiary in an  account payable on request to one party 
during the party’s lifetime and on the part y’s death to one or more beneficiarie s, or to one or more parties during 
their lifetimes and on death of all of them to one or more beneficiaries, or (ii) a beneficiary in an account in the 
name of one or more parties as truste e for one or more beneficiaries if the relationship is established by the terms 
of the account and there is no subject of the trust other than the sums on deposit in the account, whether or not 
payment to the beneficiary is mentioned. (9)  “Receive,” as it relates to notice to a financial institution, means receipt in the office or branch office of the 
financial institution in which the account is established, but if the terms of the account re quire notice at a particular 
place, in the place required. (10)  “Request” means a request for payment comply ing with all terms of th e account, including special 
requirements concerning necessary signatu res and regulations of the financial in stitution; but, for purposes of this 
[part], if terms of the account condition payment on a dvance notice, a request for payment is treated as 
immediately effective and a notice of intent to withdraw is treated as a request for payment; 
(11)  “Sums on deposit” means the balance payable on an account, including interest and dividends earned, 
whether or not included in the current balance, and a ny deposit life insurance proc eeds added to the account by 
reason of death of a party; (12)  “Terms of the account” includes the deposit agreemen t and other terms and conditi ons, including the form, of 
the contract of deposit.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine adopts the UPC wording to coordinate definitions and consolidate 
the application of POD accounts and so called “Totten Trusts” into the comp rehensive framework of POD accounts 
through appropriate definitions of “Ben eficiary”, “Party”, “POD designation” .  The term “joint account” used 
throughout this section under Maine law is replaced with “m ultiple party” account and other accounts previously 
 
Page 241 of 253 designated under Maine law as multiple party accounts are addressed through definitions of “POD Designation” and 
“Beneficiary” as well as othe r provisions of the UPC.  
 
 
6-202 
LIMITATION ON SCOPE OF PART 
This [part] does not apply to: 
(1)  an account established for a pa rtnership, joint venture, or other or ganization for a business purpose,  
(2)  an account controlled by one or  more persons as an agent or trus tee for a corporation, unincorporated 
association, or charitable or  civic organization, or  
(3)  a fiduciary or trust account in which the relationship is established ot her than by the terms of the account. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
6-203 
TYPES OF ACCOUNT; EXISTING ACCOUNTS 
(a)  An account may be for a single party or multiple parties.   A multiple-party account may be with or without a right 
of survivorship between the parties.  Subject to Section 6-212(c), either a single-party account or a multiple-party 
account may have a POD designation, an agency designation, or both. 
(b)  An account established before, on, or after the effective date of this [part], whether in the form prescribed in 
Section 6-204 or in any other form, is either a single-party account or a multiple-party account, with or without right of survivorship, and with or without a POD designation or an agency designati on, within the meaning of this [part], 
and is governed by this [part].  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section is new and had no prev ious counterpart in the MPC.  It 
coordinates with the adopti on of forms under UPC §6-204 and sets out cl early the options when an account is 
established. 
  
6-204 
FORMS 
 (a) A contract of deposit that cont ains provisions in substa ntially the following form establishes the type of 
account provided, and the account is governed by the provisions of this [part] applicable to an account of that type: 
UNIFORM SINGLE-OR MULTIP LE-PARTY ACCOUNT FORM 
PARTIES [Name One or More Parties]: 
 
Page 242 of 253 _____________________________ 
OWNERSHIP [Select One And Initial]:  SINGLE-PARTY ACCOUNT 
 MULTIPLE-PARTY ACCOUNT 
Parties own account in propor tion to net contributions unless there is  clear and convinci ng evidence of a 
different intent. 
RIGHTS AT DEATH [Select One And Initial]:  SINGLE-PARTY ACCOUNT 
At death of party, ownership passe s as part of party’s estate. 
 SINGLE-PARTY ACCOUNT WITH PO D (PAY ON DEATH) DESIGNATION 
[Name One Or More Beneficiaries]: 
______________________________ 
At death of party, ownership passes to POD bene ficiaries and is not pa rt of party’s estate. 
 MULTIPLE-PARTY ACCOUNT WITH  RIGHT OF SURVIVORSHIP 
At death of party, ownership passes to surviving parties. 
 MULTIPLE-PARTY ACCOUNT WITH RIGHT OF SURVIVORSHIP AND PO D (PAY ON DEATH) 
DESIGNATION 
[Name One Or More Beneficiaries]: 
______________________________ 
At death of last surviving party, ow nership passes to POD beneficiaries a nd is not part of last surviving 
party’s estate. 
 MULTIPLE-PARTY ACCOUNT WITHOUT RIGHT OF SURVIVORSHIP 
At death of party, deceased party’s ownership passes as part of d eceased party’s estate. 
AGENCY (POWER OF ATTORNEY ) DESIGNATION [Optional] 
Agents may make account transactions  for parties but have no ownershi p or rights at death unless named 
as POD beneficiaries. [To Add Agency Designation To Acc ount, Name One Or More Agents]: 
______________________________ 
[Select One And Initial]: ______AGENCY DESIGNATION SURVIVES DISABI LITY OR INCAPACITY OF PARTIES 
______AGENCY DESIGNATION TERMINATES ON DISABI LITY OR INCAPACI TY OF PARTIES 
(b) A contract of deposit that does not contain provisions  in substantially the form provided in subsection (a) is 
governed by the provisions of this [part] applicable to the type of account that most nearly conforms to the depositor’s 
intent.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section is new and had no prev ious counterpart in the MPC.  The 
mechanics of this form should encourage the depositor and fina ncial institution to consider the rights of a party to the 
 
Page 243 of 253 account during lifetime and the distribution of the account after a party’s death.  Since the form is not required to 
make the terms of the multiple-party account effective, it o ffers flexibility and a helpful alternative for depositors.  
 
  
6-205 
DESIGNATION OF AGENT 
(a)  By a writing signed by all parties,  the parties may designate as agent of  all parties on an account a person other 
than a party. (b)  Unless the terms of an agency desi gnation provide that the aut hority of the agent termin ates on disability or 
incapacity of a party, the agent’s authority survives disabi lity and incapacity.  The agent may act for a disabled or 
incapacitated party until the authority of the agent is terminated. (c)  Death of the sole party or last survivi ng party terminates the authority of an agent.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  This section is new and had no previ ous counterpart in the MPC.  This 
section allows financial inst itutions to offer an option to depositors who seek the convenience of an agency 
relationship but intend the proceeds of account to pass according to the depositor’s will or to  the depositor’s heirs after 
death.  While not supplanting the comprehensive Maine Unif orm Power of Attorney Law, 18-A M.R.S.A. §5-901 et 
seq., this section offers a limited agency  role for specific financial accounts.  
 
 
6-206 
APPLICABILITY OF PART 
The provisions of [Subpart] 2 concerni ng beneficial ownership as between parties or as between parties and 
beneficiaries apply only to c ontroversies between those pers ons and their creditors and other successors, and do not 
apply to the right of those persons to payment as determined by the terms of the account.  [Subpart] 3 governs the 
liability and set-off rights of financial inst itutions that make paym ents pursuant to it. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
6-211 
OWNERSHIP DURING LIFETIME 
(a)  In this section, “net contribution”  of a party means the sum of all deposits  to an account made by or for the party, 
less all payments from the account made to or for the party which have not been paid to or applied to the use of 
another party and a proportionate share of any charges de ducted from the account, plus a proportionate share of any 
 
Page 244 of 253 interest or dividends earned, whether or not included in th e current balance.  The term includes deposit life insurance 
proceeds added to the account by reason of death of the party whose net contribution is in question. 
(b)  During the lifetime of all parties, sums deposited into an account belong to the par ties in proportion to the net 
contribution of each, unless there is clear  and convincing evidence of a different intent. As between parties married to 
each other, in the absence of proof ot herwise, the net contribution of each is presumed to be an equal amount. 
(c)  A beneficiary in an account havi ng a POD designation has no right to sums  on deposit during the lifetime of any 
party. (d) An agent in an account with an agency design ation has no beneficial right to sums on deposit.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  In the absence of proof otherw ise, subparagraph (b) creates a 
presumption, as between parties married to each other, that  the net contribution of each is presumed to be an equal 
amount.   
  
6-212  
RIGHTS AT DEATH  
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this [part], on death of a party sums on deposit in a multiple-party account belong 
to the surviving party or part ies.  If two or more parties survive and one  is the surviving spouse of the decedent, the 
amount to which the decedent, immediately before death, wa s beneficially entitled under Section 6-211 belongs to the 
surviving spouse.  If two or more parties survive and none  is the surviving spouse of the decedent, the amount to 
which the decedent, immediately before death, was beneficial ly entitled under Section 6-211 belongs to the surviving 
parties in equal shares, and augments the proportion to which each survivor, imme diately before the decedent’s death, 
was beneficially entitled under Section 6-211, and the right of survivorship continues between the surviving parties. 
(b)  In an account with a POD designation:   
(1)  On death of one of two or mo re parties, the rights in sums on deposit are governed by subsection (a). 
 (2) On death of the sole party or the last survivor of two or more parties, sums on deposit belong to the 
surviving beneficiary or benefi ciaries.  If two or more beneficiaries surv ive, sums on deposit belong to them in equal 
and undivided shares, and there is no right  of survivorship in the event of death of a bene ficiary thereafter.  If no 
beneficiary survives, sums on deposit belong to the estate of the last surviving party. 
(c)  Sums on deposit in a single-party account without a POD designation, or in a multiple-party account that, by the 
terms of the account, is without right of survivorship, are not affected by d eath of a party, but the amount to which the 
decedent, immediately before death, was beneficially en titled under Section 6-211 is tr ansferred as part of the 
decedent’s estate.  A POD designation in a multiple-party acc ount without right of survivor ship is ineffective.  For 
purposes of this section, desi gnation of an account as a tena ncy in common establishes that the account is without 
right of survivorship. (d)  The ownership right of a surviving pa rty or beneficiary, or of the decedent’s estate, in sums on deposit is subject 
 
Page 245 of 253 to requests for payment made by a party before the party’s death, whether paid by the financial institution before or 
after death, or unpaid.  The surviving part y or beneficiary, or the decedent’s estate , is liable to the payee of an unpaid 
request for payment.  The liability is limited to a proportionate share of the am ount transferred under  this section, to 
the extent necessary to discha rge the request for payment. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  Maine law is revised to delete the right to rebut the presumption that 
amounts held in a joint account pass to the surviving joint tenant.  Prior Maine law permitted the personal 
representative of an estate to claim proceeds passed to the estate if there were “clear and convincing evidence of a 
different intention at the time the account [was] created.”  The section includes the presumption that the deceased spouse ’s interest in a multiparty account passes to surviving 
spouse.  In most cases, any other party to  a multiparty account with spouses is a child of the spouses and the intent is 
to pass the interest after death to that child bu t not to increase a child’s lifetime interest.   
 Subsection (d) is new to Maine law and clarifies a surviving party’s interest  in a multiple-party  account can be 
reduced by outstanding checks or other w ithdrawals by the deceased party which were made prior to death.  Such 
reductions might also include repayment of any automatic de posit, such as Social Security payment, or automatic 
withdrawals for bills of a decedent. 
 
 
6-213 
ALTERATION OF RIGHTS 
(a)  Rights at death of a party under S ection 6-212 are determined by the terms of  the account at the death of the party.  
A party may alter the terms of the account by a notice signe d by the party and given to the financial institution to 
change the terms of the account or to stop or vary payment under the terms of the account.  To be effective, the notice 
must be received by the financial in stitution during the party’s lifetime. 
(b)  A right of survivorship arising from the express te rms of the account, Section 6- 212, or a POD designation, may 
not be altered by will.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
6-214 
ACCOUNTS AND TRANSFERS NONTESTAMENTARY 
Except as provided in [Part] 2 of [Ar ticle] II (elective share of surviving s pouse) or as a consequence of, and to 
the extent directed by, Section 6-215, a transfer resulting from the application of Sect ion 6-212 is effective by reason 
 
Page 246 of 253 of the terms of the account involved and this  [part] and is not testamentary or s ubject to [Articles] I through IV (estate 
administration). 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments  The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. T 
 
   
6-215 
RESERVED 
 
 
 
6-216 
COMMUNITY PROPERTY AND TE NANCY BY THE ENTIRETIES 
(a)  A deposit of community property in an account does not alter the community char acter of the property or 
community rights in the property, but a right of survivorship  between parties married to each other arising from the 
express terms of the account or Section 6-212 may not be altered by will. (b)  This [part] does not affect the law governing tenancy by the entireties. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments Maine has chosen not to adopt UPC §6-216 because Maine does not 
recognize either community property  or tenancies by the entireties. 
 
 
6-221 
AUTHORITY OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTION 
A financial institution may enter into a contract of de posit for a multiple-party account to the same extent it 
may enter into a contract of deposit fo r a single-party account, and may provide  for a POD designation and an agency 
designation in either a single-pa rty account or a multiple-party  account.  A financial institution need not inquire as to 
the source of a deposit to an account or as to the proposed application of a payment from an account. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law 
other than incorporating the agen cy designation adopted in Secti ons 6-205 and related sections. 
 
 
6-222 
 
Page 247 of 253 PAYMENT ON MULTIPLE-PARTY ACCOUNT 
A financial institution, on request, may pay sums on deposit in a multiple-party account to:   
(1)  one or more of the parties, whet her or not another party is disabled, incapacitated, or deceased when payment 
is requested and whether or not the party ma king the request survives another party; or 
(2)  the personal representative, if any, or, if there is none , the heirs or devisees of a deceased party if proof of 
death is presented to the financial institution showing that  the deceased party was the survivor of all other persons 
named on the account either as a party or beneficiary, unless the account is without right of survivorship under 
Section 6-212. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
6-223 
PAYMENT ON POD DESIGNATION 
A financial institution, on request, may pay sums on deposit in an account with a POD designation to:   
(1)  one or more of the parties, wh ether or not another party is disable d, incapacitated, or deceased when the 
payment is requested and whether or not  a party survives another party;  
(2)  the beneficiary or beneficiaries, if proof of death is presented to the financial institution showing that the 
beneficiary or beneficiaries survived all persons named as parties; or  
(3)  the personal representative, if any, or, if there is none , the heirs or devisees of a deceased party, if proof of 
death is presented to the financial institution showing that  the deceased party was the survivor of all other persons 
named on the account either as  a party or beneficiary.  
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments The second clause in subsection (1) serves as additional protection to 
financial institutions.  
  
6-224 
PAYMENT TO DESIGNATED AGENT 
A financial institution, on request of an agent under an agency designation for an account, may pay to the 
agent sums on deposit in the account, whether or not a party is  disabled, incapacitated, or deceased when the request is 
made or received, and whether or not the authority of the agen t terminates on the disability or incapacity of a party. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments This section is new and had no previ ous counterpart in the MPC.  It 
coordinates with the adoption by Maine of Uniform Probate Code UPC §6-205. 
 
 
Page 248 of 253 6-225 
PAYMENT TO MINOR 
If a financial institution is required or permitted to make  payment pursuant to this [part] to a minor designated 
as a beneficiary, payment may be made pursuant to  the Uniform Transfers to  Minors Act (1983/1986). 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments This section is new and had no previ ous counterpart in the MPC.  The 
section provides for the efficient and ec onomical transfer of funds to a minor.  The cost and delay associated with 
probate court proceedings to a ppoint a guardian or conservator can be substa ntial, compared with the need to provide 
for the efficient and economical transfer  of an account and the protections unde r Uniform Transfers to Minors Act are 
sufficient. 
  
6-226 
DISCHARGE 
(a)  Payment made pursuant to this [p art] in accordance with the terms of  the account discharges the financial 
institution from all claims for amounts so paid, whether or not the payment is cons istent with the beneficial ownership 
of the account as between part ies, beneficiaries, or their successors.  Pa yment may be made whether or not a party, 
beneficiary, or agent is disabled, in capacitated, or deceased when paymen t is requested, received, or made. 
(b)  Protection under this section does not  extend to payments made after a fina ncial institution has received written 
notice from a party, or from the personal representative, surviv ing spouse or heir or devisee of a deceased party, to the 
effect that payments in accordance with the terms of th e account, including one having an agency designation, should 
not be permitted, and the financial institution has had a reason able opportunity to act on it when the payment is made.  
Unless the notice is withdrawn by the person giving it, the su ccessor of any deceased party must concur in a request 
for payment if the financial institution is to be protected  under this section.  Unless a fi nancial institution has been 
served with process in an action or proceeding, no other no tice or other information shown to have been available to 
the financial institution affects its ri ght to protection under this section.   
(c)  A financial institution that receives written notice pursua nt to this section or otherwis e has reason to believe that a 
dispute exists as to the rights of the parties may refuse, without liability, to  make payments in accordance with the 
terms of the account. (d)  Protection of a financial institution under this section do es not affect the rights of parties in disputes between 
themselves or their successors concerning the beneficial ownership of sums on deposit in accounts or payments made 
from accounts. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments Maine has chosen not to adopt th e clause in UPC §6-226(c) which 
permits a financial institution to refu se payment if it receives any non-writt en notice giving the financial institution 
“reason to believe that a dispute exists ” as to payment rights.  Maine determin ed this clause was vague and created 
 
Page 249 of 253 unnecessary uncertainty with respect to a financial institution’s right to withhold payment to a party and should not be 
adopted. 
  
6-227 
SET-OFF 
Without qualifying any other statutory ri ght to set-off or lien and subject to any contractual provision, if a 
party is indebted to a financial instit ution, the financial institution has a ri ght to set-off against the account.  The 
amount of the account subject to set-off is the proportion to which the party is , or immediately before death was, 
beneficially entitled under Sect ion 6-211 or, in the absence of proof of that proportion, an equal shar e with all parties. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
6-301 
Definitions 
(1)  “Beneficiary form” means a registra tion of a security which indicates the present owner of the security and the 
intention of the owner regarding th e person who will become the owner of  the security upon the death of the 
owner. (2)  “Register,” including its  derivatives, means to issue a certificate showing the ownership of a certificated 
security or, in the case of an uncertificated security, to  initiate or transfer an account showing ownership of 
securities. (3)  “Registering entity” means a person who originates or tr ansfers a security title by registration, and includes a 
broker maintaining security accounts for cu stomers and a transfer agent or othe r person acting for or as an issuer 
of securities. (4)  “Security” means a share, participa tion, or other interest in property, in a business, or in an obligation of an 
enterprise or other issuer, a nd includes a certificated security, an uncer tificated security, and a security account. 
(5)  “Security account” means (i) a reinvestment account a ssociates with a security, a securities account with a 
broker, a cash balance in a brokerage  account, cash, interest, earnings, or dividends earned or declared on a 
security in an account, a reinvestment account, or a br okerage account, whether or not  credited to the account 
before the owner’s death, or (ii) a cash  balance or other property held for or  due to the owner of a security as a 
replacement for or product of an account security, whether or not credited to the account before the owner’s death. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
 
Page 250 of 253 6-302  
REGISTRATION IN BENEFICIARY FORM; SOLE OR MULTIPLE OWNER 
Only individuals whose registration of a security shows so le ownership by one individu al or multiple ownership by 
two or more with right of survivorship, rather than as te nants in common, may obtain regist ration in beneficiary form.  
Multiple owners of a security registered in beneficiary form hold as joint tenants with right  of survivorship as tenants 
by the entireties, or as owners of community property held  in survivorship form, and not as tenants in common. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments The ownership forms of tenancy by th e entirety and community property 
have been deleted from the Uniform Transfer on Death S ecurity Registration Act because they cannot be created 
under Maine law. 
  
6-303 
REGISTRATION IN BENEFICIARY FORM; APPLICABLE LAW 
A security may be registered in benefici ary form if the form is authorized by th is or a similar statute of the state of 
organization of the issuer or registering entity, the location of the registering enti ty’s principal office, the office of its 
transfer agent or its office making the regi stration, or by this or a similar statute of the law of the state listed as the 
owner’s address at the time of regist ration.  A registration governed by the law of a jurisdiction in which this or 
similar legislation is not in force or was not in force when  a registration in beneficiary form was made is nevertheless 
presumed to be valid and authori zed as a matter of contract law. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
6-304 
ORIGINATION OF REGISTRATI ON IN BENEFICIARY FORM 
A security, whether evidenced by certif icate or account, is regist ered in beneficiary form  when the registration 
includes a designation of a beneficiary to take the ownership at the death of the owner or the deaths of all multiple 
owners. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
6-305 
FORM OF REGISTRATION IN BENEFICIARY FORM 
Registration in beneficiary form may be shown by the word s “transfer on death” or the abbreviation “TOD,” or by the 
 
Page 251 of 253 words “pay on death” or the abbreviation “POD,” after the na me of the registered owner and before the name of a 
beneficiary. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
6-306 
EFFECT OF REGISTRATION IN BENEFICIARY FORM 
The designation of a TOD beneficiary on a registration in  beneficiary form has no ef fect on ownership until the 
owner’s death.  A registration of a security in beneficiar y form may be canceled or changed at any time by the sole 
owner or all then survivi ng owners without the cons ent of the beneficiary. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments This section replaces MPC Section 6-312 which previously permitted 
changes of beneficiary of a security by will. 
  
6-307 
OWNERSHIP ON DEATH OF OWNER 
On death of a sole owner or the last to die of all multiple  owners, ownership of securities registered in beneficiary 
form passes to the beneficiary or beneficiaries who surv ive all owners.  On proof of  death of all owners and 
compliance with any applicable requirements of the register ing entity, a security register ed in beneficiary form may 
be reregistered in the name of the beneficiary or benefici aries who survive the death of all owners.  Until division of 
the security after the death of all owners, multiple beneficiar ies surviving the death of all owners hold their interests 
as tenants in common.  If no beneficiary survives the death of all owners, the s ecurity belongs to the estate of the 
deceased sole owner or the estate of th e last to die of all multiple owners. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
6-308 
PROTECTION OF REGISTERING ENTITY 
(a)  A registering entity is not required to offer or to accept a request for security registration in beneficiary form.  If a 
registration in beneficiary form is offe red by a registering entity, the owner requesting regist ration in beneficiary form 
assents to the protections given to the registering entity by this part. 
(b)  By accepting a request for registrati on of a security in beneficiary form, th e registering entity agrees that the 
registration will be implemented on death of th e deceased owner as provided in this part. 
 
Page 252 of 253 (c)  A registering entity is discharged form all claims to a security by the esta te, creditors, heirs, or devisees of a 
deceased owner if it registers a transfer of the security in accordance wi th Section 6-307 and does so in good faith 
reliance (i) on the registration, (ii) on  this part, (iii) on information provide d to it by affidavit of the personal 
representative of the deceased owner, or by the surviving beneficiary or by the surviving beneficiary’s representatives, 
or other information available to the regi stering entity.  The protections of this part do not extend to a reregistration or 
payment made after a registeri ng entity has received written notice from any claimant to a ny interest in the security 
objecting to implementation of a registrati on in beneficiary form. No other notice or other information available to the 
registering entity affects its right to protection under this part. (d)  The protection provided by this part to  the registering entity of a security does not affect the rights of beneficiaries 
in disputes between themselves and other claimants to owners hip of the security transferre d or its value or proceeds. 
 
 Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments The language does not constitute a su bstantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
6-309 
NON TESTAMENTARY TRANSFER ON DEATH. 
A transfer on death resulting from a registration in benefi ciary form is effective by reason of the contract regarding 
the registration between the owner and the register ing entity and this Act and is not testamentary. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments The language does not constitute a substantive change to Maine law. 
 
 
6-310 
TERMS, CONDITIONS, AND FORMS FOR REGISTRATION 
(a)  A registering entity offering to accept registrations in beneficiary form  may establish the terms and conditions 
under which it will receive requests (i) for registrations in be neficiary form, and (ii) for implementation of 
registrations in beneficiary form, including requests for cancellation of previously re gistered TOD beneficiary 
designations and requests for reregistrati on to effect a change of beneficiary. The terms and conditions so established 
may provide for proving death, avoiding or  resolving any problems concerning fractional shares, designating primary 
and contingent beneficiaries, and substituting a named bene ficiary’s descendants to take in the place of the named 
beneficiary in the event of the beneficiary’s death.  S ubstitution may be indicated by appending to the name of the 
primary beneficiary the letters LDPS, st anding or “lineal descenda nts per stirpes.”  This designation substitutes a 
deceased beneficiary’s descendants who survive the owner for a beneficiary who fails to so survive, the descendants 
to be identified and to share in accordance with the law of  the beneficiary’s domicile at the owner’s death governing 
inheritance by descendants of an intestat e.  Other forms of identifying benefici aries who are to take on one or more 
contingencies, and rules for providing proofs and assuranc es needed to satisfy reasona ble concerns by registering 
 
Page 253 of 253 entities regarding conditions and identitie s relevant to accurate implementation of registrations in  beneficiary form, 
may be contained in a registeri ng entity’s terms and conditions. 
(b)  The following are illustrations of registrations in beneficiary form which a registering entity may authorize: 
(1)  Sole owner-sole beneficiary:  John S. Brown TOD (or POD) John S. Brown Jr. 
(2)  Multiple owners-sole beneficiary:  John S. Brown, Mary B. Brown JT TEN TOD John S. Brown Jr. 
(3)  Multiple owners-primary and secondary (substituted)  beneficiaries:  John S. Brown Mary B. Brown JT TEN 
TOD John S. Brown Jr. SUB BENE Peter Q. Brown or John S. Brown Mary B. Brown JT TEN TOD John S. 
Brown Jr. LDPS. 
 
Maine Probate Code Proposed Comments UPC renumbering adopted.  The la nguage does not constitute a 
substantive change to Maine law. 
   
6-311 
APPLICATION OF PART 
This part applies to registrations of s ecurities in beneficiary form made before  or after [effective date], by decedents 
dying on or after [effective date]. 
 
  
None 
TRUST ADMINISTRATION   
 
 
None 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS   
 
 
None 
ADOPTION   
 
 
