 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 514  
H.P. 353  House of Representatives, February 24, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Amend the Laws Governing the Location of Motor 
Vehicle Excise Tax Collection for Motor Vehicles Owned by Public 
Utilities  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Taxation suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative BUCKLAND of Farmington.  
Cosponsored by Senator SAVIELLO of Franklin and 
Representatives: BROOKS of Lewiston, CHIPMAN of Portland, GINZLER of Bridgton, 
HARLOW of Portland, HEAD of Bethel, HIGGINS of Dover -Foxcroft, McCABE of 
Skowhegan, McELWEE of Caribou, PICCHIOTTI of Fairfield, Senators: BRAKEY of 
Androscoggin, CYRWAY of Kennebec, DAVIS of Piscataquis, DUTREMBLE of York, 
MIRAMANT of Knox.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1236(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  36 MRSA §1484, sub -§3, ¶C, as amended by PL 2007, c. 627, §33, is 2 
repealed and the following enacted in its place:  3 
C.  The excise tax on a motor vehicle owned by a corporation or a part nership must 4 
be paid to the place in which the owner's registered or main office is located, except 5 
that if the owner has an additional permanent place of business where motor vehicles 6 
are customarily kept, the tax on these vehicles must be paid to the pla ce where that 7 
permanent place of business is located. The temporary location of an office and the 8 
stationing of vehicles in connection with a construction project of less than 24 9 
months' duration are not considered to constitute a permanent place of busine ss. If the 10 
owner is a foreign corporation or partnership not maintaining a place of business 11 
within the State, the excise tax must be paid to the Secretary of State.  12 
Within 3 years from the date of an excise tax levy under the authority of this 13 
paragraph, a municipality, county or motor vehicle owner that feels the excise tax has 14 
been improperly levied may request a determination of this question by the State Tax 15 
Assessor. The State Tax Assessor's determination is limited to the same 3 -year period 16 
and is bi nding on all of the parties. Any of the parties may seek review of the 17 
determination in accordance with the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80 -C.  18 
Within 30 days after receipt of notice of a determination made by the State Tax 19 
Assessor under this para graph, a municipality or county that has incorrectly accepted 20 
excise tax money must pay the money, together with interest at the maximum rate 21 
established by the Treasurer of State pursuant to section 505, to the municipality or 22 
county identified in the det ermination as the proper place of payment.  23 
SUMMARY  24 
Current law allows an owner of a public utility to pay excise tax for its motor 25 
vehicles to the place where its registered or main office is located.  This bill treats public 26 
utilities like other corporati ons and partnerships by requiring the payment of excise tax to 27 
the place where the owner has a permanent location where its motor vehicles are kept.  28 
 
