 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 269  
H.P. 187  House of Representatives, February 5, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Require the Maine Turnpike Authority To Consider 
Certain Third -party  Studies and Municipal Recommendations in Its 
Decision -making Process  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Transportation suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative BLUME of York.  
Cosponsored by Senator HILL of York and  
Representatives: HYMANSON of York, McLEAN of Gorham, RYKERSON of Kittery, 
Senator: COLLINS of York.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0743(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  23 MRSA ยง1961, sub -ยง5, as enacted by IB 1991, c. 1, ยง3, is amended to 2 
read:  3 
5.  Transportation policy.   Transportation planning decisions, capital investment 4 
decisions and project decis ions of the Maine Turnpike Authority  authority  are governed 5 
by and must comply with the transportation policy set forth in section 73 and rules 6 
implementing that policy. Prior to funding a significant transportation project, the 7 
authority shall review any 3rd-party study relating to the project and consider 8 
recommendations of a municipality that is entirely or in part within the boundaries of the 9 
project area as expressed in a vote of the legislative body of that municipality.  10 
For purposes of this subsectio n, "significant transportation project" means a project that 11 
increases carrying capacity of the turnpike by constructing:  12 
A.  One or more through travel lanes that connect major distribution areas;  13 
B.  A new highway, bridge or toll facility in a new locati on; or  14 
C.  Projects funded by public investments that create new capacity.  15 
SUMMARY  16 
This bill requires the Maine Turnpike Authority, prior to funding a significant 17 
transportation project, to review any 3rd -party study relating to the project and to 18 
consider  recommendations of a municipality that is entirely or in part within the 19 
boundaries of the project area as expressed in a vote of the legislative body of that 20 
municipality.  21 
 
