 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1090  
H.P. 751  House of Representatives, March 25, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Establish a Pilot Project for Medicaid Reimbursement 
for Acupuncture Treatment of Substance Abuse Disorders  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative SANDERSON of Chelsea.  
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1667(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Acupuncture pilot project.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health 1 
and Human Services and the department's office of substance abuse and mental health 2 
services shall apply for a community -based waiver from the federal United States 3 
Department of  Health and Human Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 4 
to develop a pilot project to treat alcohol abuse disorders, substance abuse disorders and 5 
co-occurring disorders using the National Acupuncture Detoxification Association 6 
auricular acu puncture protocol; and be it further  7 
Sec. 2.  Project program standards.  Resolved:  That the treatment under the 8 
pilot project must be performed by program staff who have been trained to perform the 9 
National Acupuncture Detoxification Association auricula r acupuncture protocol.  The 10 
Department of Health and Human Services and the department's office of substance abuse 11 
and mental health services shall establish treatment standards that are consistent with the 12 
National Acupuncture Detoxification Association auricular acupuncture protocol; and be 13 
it further  14 
Sec. 3.  Patient limits and financing.  Resolved:  That the pilot project must be 15 
limited to a finite number of patients determined by the Department of Health and Human 16 
Services and the department's office  of substance abuse and mental health services and 17 
may last no longer than 2 years. Acupuncture treatment under the project must be 18 
reimbursable as allowed under the United States Social Security Act, Title XIX and it 19 
must be developed and implemented in a  manner that ensures that it will be cost -neutral 20 
or will result in savings to the MaineCare program; and be it further  21 
Sec. 4.  Report.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human Services 22 
and the department's office of substance abuse and mental health services shall submit a 23 
report on the results of the pilot project to the joint standing committee of the Legislature 24 
having jurisdiction over health and human services matters at the end of the project.  25 
SUMMARY  26 
This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services and the 27 
department's office of substance abuse and mental health services to apply for a 28 
community -based waiver from the federal United States Department of Health and 29 
Human Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to develop a pilot project 30 
to treat alcohol abuse disorders, substance abuse disorders and co -occurring disorders 31 
using the National Acupuncture Detoxification Association auricular acupuncture 32 
protocol.  The project may last no longer than 2 years and mus t be reimbursable as 33 
allowed under the United States Social Security Act and be cost -neutral or result in 34 
savings to the MaineCare program.  The department and the office must report their 35 
findings to the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over health 36 
and human services matters at the end of the project.  37 
 
