 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 754  
H.P. 507  House of Representatives, March 5, 2015  
 
 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of 
Maine To Ensure That Laws Governing Hunting and Fishing Are 
Not Subject to the Citizen Petition Process  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative WOOD of Sabattus.  
Cosponsored by Representative DUNPHY of Old Town, Senator DAVIS of Piscataquis and  
Representatives: COREY of Windham, CRAFTS of Lisbon, ESPLING of New Gloucester, 
EVANGELOS of Friendship, LONG of Sherman, SHORT of Pittsfield, STANLEY of 
Medway, Senator: DU TREMBLE of York.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0345(01) -1 
 Constitutional amendment. Resolved: Two thirds of each branch of the 1 
Legislature concurring, that the following amendment to the Constitution of Maine be 2 
proposed:  3 
Constitution, Art. IV, Pt. Third, ยง18, sub -ยง1 is amended to read:  4 
1.  Petition procedure.  The electors may propose to the Legislature for its 5 
consideration any bill, resolve or resolution, including bills to amend or repeal emergency 6 
legislation but not an amendment of the State Constitution and not an amendment to the 7 
laws of the State governin g hunting and fishing , by written petition addressed to the 8 
Legislature or to either branch thereof and filed in the office of the Secretary of State by 9 
the hour of 5:00 p.m., on or before the 50th day after the date of convening of the 10 
Legislature in firs t regular session or on or before the 25th day after the date of convening 11 
of the Legislature in second regular session, except that the written petition may not be 12 
filed in the office of the Secretary of State later than 18 months after the date the petit ion 13 
form was furnished or approved by the Secretary of State.  If the applicable deadline falls 14 
on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period runs until the hour of 5:00 p.m., of the 15 
next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.  16 
; and b e it further  17 
Constitutional referendum procedure; form of question; effective date. 18 
Resolved:  That the municipal officers of this State shall notify the inhabitants of their 19 
respective cities, towns and plantations to meet, in the manner prescribed by law  for 20 
holding a statewide election, at a statewide election held in the month of November 21 
following the passage of this resolution, to vote upon the ratification of the amendment 22 
proposed in this resolution by voting upon the following question:  23 
"Do you fav or amending the Constitution of Maine to provide that laws 24 
governing hunting or fishing may not be proposed through a citizen 25 
initiative?"  26 
The legal voters of each city, town and plantation shall vote by ballot on this question 27 
and designate their choice b y a cross or check mark placed within the corresponding 28 
square below the word "Yes" or "No."  The ballots must be received, sorted, counted and 29 
declared in open ward, town and plantation meetings and returns made to the Secretary of 30 
State in the same manne r as votes for members of the Legislature.  The Governor shall 31 
review the returns.  If it appears that a majority of the legal votes are cast in favor of the 32 
amendment, the Governor shall proclaim that fact without delay and the amendment 33 
becomes part of t he Constitution of Maine on the date of the proclamation; and be it 34 
further  35 
Secretary of State shall prepare ballots. Resolved:  That the Secretary of State 36 
shall prepare and furnish to each city, town and plantation all ballots, returns and copies 37 
of this  resolution necessary to carry out the purposes of this referendum.  38 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0345(01) -1 
 SUMMARY  1 
This resolution proposes to amend the Constitution of Maine to exclude from laws 2 
that may be proposed in a citizen initiative laws governing hunting and fishing.  3 
 
