 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1539  
H.P. 1050  House of Representatives, January 6, 2016  
 
 
An Act To Expand the Early Processing of Absentee Ballots  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
203. 
Reference to the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative O'CONNOR of Berwick.  
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2303(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  21-A MRSA ยง760 -B, as amended by PL 2013, c. 457, ยง4, is further 2 
amended to read:  3 
ยง760 -B.  Procedures when clerk processes absentee ballots prior to election day  4 
Any municipality or juri sdiction that conducts its own elections may opt to process 5 
absentee ballots on the  beginning on the 4th  day immediately prior to election day , except 6 
that processing on a Sunday is not permitted .  The clerk shall use the following procedure 7 
when processin g the absentee ballots during this time.  8 
1.  Time for processing.   In a municipality that has opted to process absentee ballots 9 
on the day immediately  one or more of the days  prior to election day authorized by this 10 
section , the municipal clerk or the cler k's designees may process absentee ballots at the 11 
times designated by the clerk, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except that if 12 
an inspection is requested pursuant to subsection 3, processing may not begin until after 13 
the inspection period ha s concluded.  14 
2.  Notice of early processing.   The clerk must give notice of the municipality's 15 
intent to process absentee ballots prior to election day using the notice of election under 16 
section 621 -A, stating the time days and times  that the clerk intends  to begin processing 17 
absentee ballots and the inspection period provided in subsection 3.  At least 60 days 18 
before election day, the clerk shall provide a copy of the notice of election to the 19 
Secretary of State and the chairs of each political party of th e municipality indicating that 20 
early processing of absentee ballots will occur.  The notice to the political parties must be 21 
considered sufficient as long as it is mailed to the last address of each municipal chair that 22 
is known to the clerk.  The notice t o the Secretary of State may be delivered by mail or 23 
facsimile or as a scanned attachment to an e -mail address established by the Secretary of 24 
State.  If the notice is not received by the Secretary of State by 5:00 p.m. on the 60th day 25 
before election day,  the municipality may not process absentee ballots prior to election 26 
day. 27 
3.  Inspection of absentee envelopes before processing.   A member of the public 28 
may make a written request of the clerk to inspect absentee ballot applications and 29 
envelopes before t hey are processed if the request is made by 9:00 a.m. on the first day 30 
immediately  that the clerk will process absentee ballots as specified on the notice of 31 
election  prior to election day.  The clerk shall make the absentee ballot applications and 32 
envelop es received by that time available for public inspection for one hour before the 33 
starting time specified in the notice of election for processing the absentee ballots.  The 34 
clerk may immediately proceed to process the ballots after the one -hour inspection time 35 
has elapsed.  36 
4.  Processing and other procedures.   The clerk shall use the procedure described in 37 
this section when processing the absentee ballots during the designated times.  Procedures 38 
for handling full ballot boxes, pollwatching and challenging b allots are conducted in the 39 
same manner as election day or as close as practicable.  40 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR2303(01) -1 
 4-A.  Tabulation of absentee ballots at state -designated central locations.  The 1 
Secretary of State may provide a high -speed ballot tabulator to be made available to any 2 
municipality at one or more state -designated central locations for the purpose of scanning 3 
and tabulating absentee ballots.  If a municipality opts to process absentee ballots using a 4 
high-speed ballot tabulator, the municipal clerk must apply to the Secreta ry of State for 5 
authorization.  The Secretary of State shall notify the municipal clerk in writing of the 6 
Secretary of State's authorization or denial of authorization to use a high -speed ballot 7 
tabulator and provide a designated time for the municipality to scan its ballots.  8 
A municipality authorized to scan absentee ballots at a state -designated central location 9 
must first open and process absentee ballots at the times and in the location within the 10 
municipality as designated in the notice of election and  follow all procedures described in 11 
this section.  The absentee ballots once removed from their envelopes must be secured in 12 
locked and sealed containers before being transported to the state -designated central 13 
location.  The Secretary of State shall publi sh uniform guidelines for securing and 14 
transporting ballots and other materials under this subsection.  15 
5.  Counting and results prohibited before the polls close.   The absentee ballots 16 
may not be counted, voter intent may not be determined and election res ults may not be 17 
obtained or released until after the polls have closed on election day , and all election day 18 
ballots have been cast and all absentee ballots have been processed.  A municipality that 19 
uses a high -speed ballot tabulator pursuant to subsection  4-A and receives results at the 20 
completion of the ballot scanning may not view the results until after the polls close on 21 
election day.  22 
6.  Security of processed ballots and tabulating equipment.   At the conclusion of 23 
absentee ballot processing on the any day immediately  prior to election day, the clerk 24 
shall ensure that the early processed absentee ballots are locked and sealed in the ballot 25 
box, automatic tabulating equipment ballot box or tamper -proof containers provided by 26 
the Secretary of State and se cured in a vault or other locked secure location, until the 27 
voting resumes on election day or until the ballots are counted after the polls close.  The 28 
Secretary of State shall publish uniform guidelines for securing ballots and other 29 
materials under this subsection.  30 
SUMMARY  31 
This bill provides that a municipality may opt to process absentee ballots as early as 32 
the 4th day before the election.  It also authorizes the Secretary of State to make available 33 
high-speed tabulators for absentee ballots and to allow  a municipality to bring absentee 34 
ballots to a central location for tabulating by the high -speed tabulators as long as security 35 
guidelines are properly followed.  36 
 
