 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1404  
S.P. 522  In Senate, May 12, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, Directing the Department of Professional and Financial 
Regulation To Conduct a Sunrise Review of the Proposal To License 
Court Reporters and Legal Recorders  
 
(AFTER DEADLINE)  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
205. 
Reference to the Committee on Labor, Commerce, Research and Economic D evelopment 
suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator KATZ of Kennebec.  
Cosponsored by Representative DION of Portland.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR192 0(01) -1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Professional and Financial Regulation to conduct a 1 
sunrise review regarding the proposal to license court reporters and legal 2 
recorders.  Resolved:   That the Commissioner of Professional and Financial 3 
Regulation shall conduct an inde pendent assessment pursuant to the sunrise review 4 
requirements in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 32, chapter 1 -A, subchapter 2 of the 5 
proposal to license court reporters and legal recorders; and be it further  6 
Sec. 2.  Reporting date established.  Resolv ed:  That, no later than February 7 
17, 2016, the Commissioner of Professional and Financial Regulation shall submit a 8 
report with any necessary legislation following the independent assessment under section 9 
1 to the Joint Standing Committee on Labor, Commer ce, Research and Economic 10 
Development.  That committee is authorized to submit legislation on the subject matter of 11 
the report to the Second Regular Session of the 127th Legislature.  12 
SUMMARY  13 
This resolve requires the Commissioner of Professional and Financ ial Regulation to 14 
conduct an independent assessment pursuant to the sunrise review requirements in the 15 
Maine Revised Statutes of the proposal to license court reporters and legal recorders.  16 
 
