 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 810  
S.P. 284  In Senate, March 10, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Allow the Synchronization of Prescriptions  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Insurance and Financial Services suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator CUSHING of Penobscot.  
Cosponsored by Representative CHACE of Durham and  
Senators: MASON of Androscoggin, President THIBODEAU of Waldo, VOLK of 
Cumberland, Representatives: PETERSON of Rumford, WARD of Dedham, WOOD of 
Sabattus.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1726(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  24-A MRSA ยง2769 is enacted to read:  2 
ยง2769.  Prescription synchronization  3 
1.  Synchronization.  If a health plan provides coverage for prescription drugs, a 4 
carrier:  5 
A.  Shall permit and  apply a prorated daily cost -sharing rate to a prescription that is 6 
dispensed by a pharmacist in the carrier's network for less than a 30 -day supply if the 7 
prescriber or pharmacist determines that filling or refilling the prescription for less 8 
than a 30 -day supply is in the best interest of the patient and the patient requests or 9 
agrees to less than a 30 -day supply in order to synchronize the refilling of that 10 
prescription with the patient's other prescriptions;  11 
B.  May not deny coverage for the dispensing of a medication prescribed for the 12 
treatment of a chronic illness that is made in accordance with a plan developed by the 13 
carrier, the insured, the prescriber and a pharmacist to synchronize the filling or 14 
refilling of multiple prescriptions for the insure d.  The carrier shall allow a pharmacy 15 
to override any denial codes indicating that a prescription is being refilled too soon in 16 
order to synchronize the patient's prescriptions; and  17 
C.  May not use payment structures incorporating prorated dispensing fees .  18 
Dispensing fees for partially filled or refilled prescriptions must be paid in full for 19 
each prescription dispensed, regardless of any prorated copay for the insured or fee 20 
paid for alignment services.  21 
2.  Application.  The requirements of this section apply to all individual and group 22 
policies, contracts and certificates executed, delivered, issued for delivery, continued or 23 
renewed in this State.   For purposes of this section, all contracts are deemed to be 24 
renewed no later than the next yearly annive rsary of the contract date.  25 
SUMMARY  26 
This bill requires certain health insurance carriers to allow prescriptions to be 27 
dispensed by a pharmacist for less than a 30 -day supply if it is in the best interest of the 28 
patient.  29 
 
