 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 683  
H.P. 464  House of Representatives, March 3, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of the Final Repeal of 
Chapter 60:  New School Siting Approval, a Late -filed Major 
Substantive Rule That Has Been Provisionally Repealed by the 
Department of Education, State Board of Education  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reported by Representative KORNFIELD of Bangor for the Department of Education 
pursua nt to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, section 8072 and approved for introduction by 
a majority of the Legislative Council.  
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed pursuant to Joint Rule 218.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1889(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A requires 3 
legislative aut horization before major substantive agency rules may be finally adopted, 4 
amended, suspended or repealed by the agency; and  5 
Whereas, the final repeal of the above -named major substantive rule has been 6 
submitted to the Legislature outside the legislative rul e acceptance period; and  7 
Whereas, immediate enactment of this resolve is necessary to record the 8 
Legislature's position on final repeal of the rule; and  9 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 10 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 11 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 12 
therefore, be it  13 
Sec. 1.  Repeal.  Resolved:  That final repeal of Chapter 60:  New School Siting 14 
Approva l, a provisionally repealed major substantive rule of the Department of 15 
Education, State Board of Education that has been submitted to the Legislature for review 16 
pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A outside the 17 
legis lative rule acceptance period, is authorized.  18 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 19 
legislation takes effect when approved.  20 
SUMMARY  21 
This resolve provides for legislative review of Chapter 60:  New School Siting 22 
Approval, a  major substantive rule of the Department of Education, State Board of 23 
Education that was filed outside the legislative rule acceptance period.  24 
 
