 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 63  
H.P. 57  House of Representatives, January 14, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Require the Department of Health and Human Services 
To Provide Supplemental Reimbursement to Adult Family Care 
Homes and Residential Care Facilities in Remote Island Locations  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative KUMIEGA of Deer Isle.  
Cosponsored by Senator BREEN of Cumberland and  
Representative: COOPER of Yarmouth, Senator: MIRAMANT of Knox.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0809(01 )-1 
 Sec. 1.  Department of Health and Human Services to amend rules.  1 
Resolved:   That the Department of Health and Human Services shall amend its rules in 2 
Chapter 101, MaineCare Benefits Manual, Chapter II, Section 2; Chapter III, Section 2; 3 
and Chapter III, S ection 97, Appendix C and in Chapter 115, Principles of 4 
Reimbursement for Residential Care Facilities - Room and Board Costs in order to 5 
provide supplemental MaineCare reimbursement to both adult family care homes and 6 
residential care facilities in remote island locations. The rules must provide that eligible 7 
remote island adult family care homes and residential care facilities are those located on 8 
an island not connected to the mainland by a bridge. The rules must provide eligible 9 
homes and facilities with  a supplemental payment of 15% to be added to their MaineCare 10 
rate. Eligible homes and facilities must be allowed to retain this supplemental payment in 11 
addition to the total allowable rate for private nonmedical institution direct care services, 12 
room and board and personal care services costs otherwise determined under those rules.  13 
SUMMARY  14 
This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to amend its 15 
rules governing MaineCare reimbursement for both adult family care services and private 16 
nonmedical institution services to provide supplemental MaineCare reimbursement of an 17 
additional 15% to adult family care homes and residential care facilities in remote island 18 
locations.  19 
 
