 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 202  
H.P. 145  House of Representatives, January 29, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Portions of Chapter 22: 
Standards for  Outdoor Application of Pesticides by Powered 
Equipment in Order To Minimize Off -target Deposition, a Major 
Substantive Rule of the Department of Agriculture, Conservation 
and Forestry, Board of Pesticides Control  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reported by Representativ e HICKMAN of Winthrop for the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry, Board of Pesticides Control pursuant to the Maine Revised 
Statutes, Title 5, section 8072.  
Reference to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry suggested an d 
ordered printed pursuant to Joint Rule 218.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1843(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A requires 3 
legislative auth orization before major substantive agency rules may be finally adopted by 4 
the agency; and  5 
Whereas, the above -named major substantive rule has been submitted to the 6 
Legislature for review; and  7 
Whereas, immediate enactment of this resolve is necessary to rec ord the 8 
Legislature's position on final adoption of the rule; and  9 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 10 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 11 
immediately necessary fo r the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 12 
therefore, be it  13 
Sec. 1.  Adoption.  Resolved:  That final adoption of portions of Chapter 22:  14 
Standards for Outdoor Application of Pesticides by Powered Equipment in Order To 15 
Minimize Off -target Deposition, a provisionally adopted major substantive rule of the 16 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Board of Pesticides Control that 17 
has been submitted to the Legislature for review pursuant to the Maine Revised Statutes, 18 
Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A, is authorized.  19 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 20 
legislation takes effect when approved.  21 
SUMMARY  22 
This resolve provides for legislative review of portions of Chapter 22:  Standards for 23 
Outdo or Application of Pesticides by Powered Equipment in Order To Minimize Off - 24 
target Deposition, a major substantive rule of the Department of Agriculture, 25 
Conservation and Forestry, Board of Pesticides Control.  26 
 
