 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1151  
H.P. 789  House of Representatives, March 31, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Prevent the Infestation of Firewood by Invasive Species  
 
 
 
 
Reference  to the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry suggested and 
ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative McCABE of Skowhegan.  
Cosponsored by Senator SAVIELLO of Franklin and  
Representatives: BLACK of Wilton, HICKMAN of Winthrop, MAREAN of Hollis, MARTIN 
of Eagle Lake, SAUCIER of Presque Isle, SHORT of Pittsfield, STANLEY of Medway, 
Senator: DILL of Penobscot.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0168(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  7 MRSA c. 417 is enacted to read:  2 
CHAPTER 417  3 
FIREWOOD  4 
ยง2441.  Firewood emergency response group  5 
The commissioner shall establish a firewood emergency response group to respond to 6 
repor ts of infestation of firewood by invasive species.  Membership in the firewood 7 
emergency response group may include forest rangers, public and private foresters, 8 
entomologists, landowners, municipal officials and law enforcement officials as the 9 
commission er determines appropriate.  At least once a year the firewood emergency 10 
response group shall conduct a training exercise to prepare for an infestation incident 11 
involving firewood.  12 
ยง2442.  Firewood Infestation Education Fund  13 
The Firewood Infestation Educati on Fund, referred to in this section as "the fund," is 14 
established.  The fund is a nonlapsing fund administered by the department for the 15 
purposes of educating the public and promoting public awareness of the dangers of 16 
infestation of invasive species thro ugh the importation of firewood into the State, which 17 
may include Internet marketing, mapping resources and tools for landowners.  Money in 18 
the fund consists of appropriations or allocations for the purpose of the fund and any 19 
other money, including federa l money and other public and private contributions, 20 
deposited into the fund.  Income from investment of the fund must be deposited to the 21 
credit of the fund.  22 
SUMMARY  23 
This bill directs the Commissioner of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to 24 
create a f irewood emergency response group to respond to reports of infestation of 25 
firewood by invasive species and creates the Firewood Infestation Education Fund to 26 
educate the public regarding and promote public awareness of the dangers of infestation 27 
through the  importation of firewood into the State.  28 
 
