 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1701  
I.B. 6  House of Representatives, April 29, 2016  
 
 
An Act To Legalize Marijuana  
 
 
 
Transmitted to the Clerk of the 127th Maine Legislature by the Secretary of State on April 
27, 2016 and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
 
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  7 MRSA c. 417 is enacted to read:  2 
CHAPTER 417  3 
MARIJUANA LEGALIZATI ON ACT  4 
§2441.  Short title  5 
This chapter may be known and cited as "the Marijuana Legalization Act."  6 
§2442.  Definitions  7 
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms 8 
have the following meanings.  9 
1.  Advertising.   "Advertising" means the act of providing consideration for the 10 
publication, dissemination, solicitation or circulation, vis ual, oral or written, to induce 11 
directly or indirectly any person to patronize a particular retail marijuana establishment or 12 
retail marijuana social club or to purchase particular retail marijuana or a retail marijuana 13 
product.  "Advertising" includes mar keting, but does not include packaging and labeling. 14 
"Advertising" proposes a commercial transaction or otherwise constitutes commercial 15 
speech.  16 
2.  Applicant.   "Applicant" means a person that has submitted an application for 17 
licensure as a retail marijuan a establishment or retail marijuana social club pursuant to 18 
this chapter that was accepted by the state licensing authority for review but has not been 19 
approved or denied by the state licensing authority.  20 
3.  Batch.   "Batch" means a specific quantity of ca nnabis harvested during a specified 21 
time period from a specified cultivation area.  22 
4.  Batch number.   "Batch number" means any distinct group of numbers, letters or 23 
symbols, or any combination thereof, assigned by a retail marijuana cultivation facility or  24 
retail marijuana products manufacturing facility to a specific harvest batch or production 25 
batch of retail marijuana.  26 
5.  Cannabis.   "Cannabis" means all parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis whether 27 
growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extract ed from any part of the plant and every 28 
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or 29 
its resin including cannabis concentrate. "Cannabis" does not include industrial hemp, 30 
fiber produced from the stalks, oil, c ake made from the seeds of the plant, sterilized seed 31 
of the plant that is incapable of germination or any ingredient combined with cannabis to 32 
prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink or any other product. "Cannabis" also 33 
means marijuana.  34 
6.  Child -resistant.   "Child -resistant" means special packaging that is:  35 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 A.  Designed or constructed to be significantly difficult for children under 5 years of 1 
age to open and not difficult for normal adults to use properly;  2 
B.  Opaque so that the product ca nnot be seen from outside the packaging; and  3 
C.  Closable, for any product intended for more than a single use or containing 4 
multiple servings.  5 
7.  Commissioner.   "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Agriculture, 6 
Conservation and Forestry.  7 
8.  Containe r.  "Container" means the sealed package in which retail marijuana or a 8 
retail marijuana product is placed for sale to a consumer and that has been labeled 9 
according to the requirements set forth in section 2446, subsection 1.  10 
9.  Department.   "Department"  means the Department of Agriculture, Conservation 11 
and Forestry.  12 
10.  Edible retail marijuana product.  "Edible retail marijuana product" means any 13 
retail marijuana product that is intended to be consumed orally, including, but not limited 14 
to, any type of f ood, drink or pill.  15 
11.  Final agency order.   "Final agency order" means an order of the state licensing 16 
authority issued in accordance with this chapter and the Maine Administrative Procedure 17 
Act following review of the initial decision and any exceptions  filed thereto or at the 18 
conclusion of the declaratory order process.  19 
12.  Flowering marijuana plant.   "Flowering marijuana plant" means the 20 
gametophytic or reproductive state of cannabis in which the plant is in a light cycle 21 
intended to produce flowers, trichomes and cannabinoids characteristic of marijuana.  22 
13.  Good cause.   "Good cause," for purposes of denial of an initial license 23 
application or denial of a renewal or reinstatement of a license application, means:  24 
A.  The licensee or applicant has vio lated, does not meet or has failed to comply with 25 
any of the terms, conditions or provisions of this chapter, any rules adopted pursuant 26 
to it or any supplemental relevant state or local law, rule or regulation; or  27 
B.  The licensee or applicant has failed to comply with any special terms, consent 28 
decree or conditions that were placed upon the license pursuant to an order of the 29 
state licensing authority or the relevant municipality.  30 
14.  Harvest batch.   "Harvest batch" means a batch of processed retail mari juana that 31 
is uniform in strain, cultivated using the same herbicides, pesticides and fungicides and 32 
harvested at the same time.  33 
15.  Identity statement.   "Identity statement" means the name of the business as it is 34 
commonly known and used in any advertis ing.  35 
16.  Immature plant.  "Immature plant" means a nonflowering retail marijuana plant 36 
that is taller than 24 inches and is wider than 18 inches.  37 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 17.  Initial decision.  "Initial decision" means a decision of a hearing officer in the 1 
department following a  licensing, disciplinary or other administrative hearing.  2 
18.  Law enforcement agency.   "Law enforcement agency" means any federal, state 3 
or municipal agency or any governmental agency or subunit of such agency or any state 4 
or federal court that administer s criminal justice pursuant to a statute or executive order 5 
and that allocates a substantial part of its annual budget to the administration of criminal 6 
justice.  7 
19.  Licensed premises.   "Licensed premises" means the premises specified in an 8 
application fo r a license pursuant to this chapter that are owned or in possession of the 9 
licensee and within which the licensee is authorized to cultivate, manufacture, distribute, 10 
sell, consume or test retail marijuana in accordance with the provisions of this chapter  11 
and rules adopted pursuant to this chapter.  12 
20.  Licensee.  "Licensee" means a person licensed pursuant to this chapter or, in the 13 
case of a holder of an occupational license, a natural person licensed pursuant to this 14 
chapter.  15 
21.  Limited access area.   "Limited access area" means a building, room or other 16 
contiguous area upon the licensed premises where retail marijuana is grown, cultivated, 17 
stored, weighed, packaged, sold or processed for sale under control of the licensee.  18 
22.  Marijuana.   "Marijuana" m eans cannabis.  19 
23.  Marijuana extraction.   "Marijuana extraction" means the process of extracting 20 
marijuana with solvents or gases.  21 
24.  Mother plant.  "Mother plant" means a plant that is used solely by a cultivator 22 
for the taking of seedling cuttings.  23 
25.  Natural person.   "Natural person" means a citizen of this State who has a 24 
verifiable social security number.  25 
26.  Occupational license.   "Occupational license" means a license granted to a 26 
natural person by the state licensing authority.  27 
27.  Owner.   "Owner" means a person whose beneficial interest in a retail marijuana 28 
establishment or retail marijuana social club is such that the person bears risk of loss 29 
other than as an insurer, has an opportunity to gain profit from the operation or sale of a 30 
retail marijuana establishment or retail marijuana social club and has a controlling interest 31 
in a retail marijuana establishment or retail marijuana social club.  32 
28.  Person.   "Person" means a natural person, partnership, association, company, 33 
corporation, limit ed liability company or organization or a manager, agent, owner, 34 
director, servant, officer or employee thereof.  "Person" does not include any 35 
governmental organization.  36 
29.  Plant canopy.   "Plant canopy" means the area upon the licensed premises 37 
dedicate d to live plant cultivation, such as maintaining mother plants, propagating plants 38 
 
 Page 4 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 from seed to plant tissue, cloning and maintaining a vegetative or flowering area.  "Plant 1 
canopy" does not include areas such as space for storage of fertilizers, pesticide s or other 2 
products, quarantine areas, office space, walkways, work areas and other similar areas.  3 
30.  Production batch.  "Production batch" means a group of retail marijuana 4 
products created from a production run of retail marijuana products.  5 
31.  Propaga tion.   "Propagation" means the reproduction of retail marijuana plants 6 
by seeds, cuttings or grafting.  7 
32.  Registered dispensary.   "Registered dispensary" means a dispensary that is a 8 
nonprofit corporation organized under Title 13 -B and registered with th e Department of 9 
Health and Human Services pursuant to the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act and 10 
holds one or more dispensary registrations.  11 
33.  Restricted access area.   "Restricted access area" means a designated and secure 12 
area within the licensed premi ses in a retail marijuana store or retail marijuana social club 13 
where retail marijuana and retail marijuana products are sold, possessed for sale and 14 
displayed for sale and where no one under 21 years of age is permitted.  15 
34.  Retail marijuana.  "Retail mar ijuana" means cannabis that is cultivated, 16 
manufactured, distributed or sold by a licensed retail marijuana establishment or retail 17 
marijuana social club.  18 
35.  Retail marijuana cultivation facility.   "Retail marijuana cultivation facility" 19 
means an entity licensed to cultivate, prepare and package retail marijuana and sell retail 20 
marijuana to retail marijuana establishments and retail marijuana social clubs.  21 
36.  Retail marijuana establishment.  "Retail marijuana establishment" means a 22 
retail marijuana store , a retail marijuana cultivation facility, a retail marijuana products 23 
manufacturing facility or a retail marijuana testing facility.  24 
37.  Retail marijuana product.   "Retail marijuana product" means concentrated 25 
retail marijuana and retail marijuana produc ts that are composed of retail marijuana and 26 
other ingredients and are intended for use or consumption, including, but not limited to, 27 
edible products, ointments and tinctures.  28 
38.  Retail marijuana products manufacturing facility.  "Retail marijuana produ cts 29 
manufacturing facility" means an entity licensed to purchase retail marijuana; 30 
manufacture, prepare and package retail marijuana products; and sell retail marijuana and 31 
retail marijuana products only to other retail marijuana products manufacturing fac ilities, 32 
retail marijuana stores and retail marijuana social clubs.  33 
39.  Retail marijuana social club.  "Retail marijuana social club" means an entity 34 
licensed to sell retail marijuana and retail marijuana products to consumers for 35 
consumption on the licens ed premises.  36 
40.  Retail marijuana store.  "Retail marijuana store" means an entity licensed to 37 
purchase retail marijuana from a retail marijuana cultivation facility and to purchase retail 38 
 
 Page 5 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 marijuana products from a retail marijuana products manufacturing f acility and to sell 1 
retail marijuana and retail marijuana products to consumers.  2 
41.  Retail marijuana testing facility.  "Retail marijuana testing facility" means an 3 
entity licensed and certified to analyze and certify the safety and potency of retail 4 
marijuana and retail marijuana products.  5 
42.  Sample.  "Sample" means any retail marijuana or retail marijuana product 6 
provided for testing or research purposes to a retail marijuana testing facility by a retail 7 
marijuana establishment or retail marijuana socia l club.  8 
43.  Seedling.  "Seedling" means a nonflowering retail marijuana plant that is no taller 9 
than 24 inches and no wider than 18 inches.  10 
44.  State licensing authority.   "State licensing authority" means the authority 11 
created for the purpose of regulati ng and controlling the licensing of the cultivation, 12 
manufacture, distribution, testing and sale of retail marijuana and retail marijuana 13 
products in this State pursuant to this chapter.  14 
45.  THC.   "THC" means tetrahydrocannabinol.  15 
46.  Universal symbol.   "Universal symbol" means the image established by the state 16 
licensing authority and made available to licensees through the state licensing authority's 17 
website for indicating that retail marijuana or a retail marijuana product is within a 18 
container.  19 
47.  Unreasonably impracticable.   "Unreasonably impracticable" means that the 20 
measures necessary to comply with the rules require such a high investment of risk, 21 
money, time or any other resource or asset that the operation of a retail marijuana 22 
establishment or  retail marijuana social club is not worth being carried out in practice by 23 
a reasonably prudent business person.  24 
§2443.  Exemption from criminal and civil penalties, seizure and forfeiture  25 
Notwithstanding Title 17 -A, chapter 45 or any other provision of l aw to the contrary 26 
and except as provided in this chapter, the actions specified in this chapter are legal under 27 
the laws of this State and do not constitute a civil or criminal offense under the laws of 28 
this State or the law of any political subdivision w ithin this State or serve as a basis for 29 
seizure or forfeiture of assets under state law.  This chapter may not be construed to 30 
shield any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, association or other legal entity from 31 
federal prosecution.  32 
§2444.  State  licensing authority  33 
For the purpose of regulating and controlling the licensing of the cultivation, 34 
manufacture, distribution, testing and sale of retail marijuana and retail marijuana 35 
products in this State, the state licensing authority is the Departmen t of Agriculture, 36 
Conservation and Forestry.  37 
 
 Page 6 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 1.  Commissioner is chief administrative officer.   The Commissioner of 1 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry is the chief administrative officer of the state 2 
licensing authority and may employ such officers and  employees as may be determined to 3 
be necessary. The state licensing authority has the authority to:  4 
A.  Grant or refuse licenses for the cultivation, manufacture, distribution, sale and 5 
testing of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products as provided  by this chapter;  6 
B.  Suspend, fine, restrict or revoke licenses under paragraph A upon a violation of 7 
this chapter or any rule adopted pursuant to this chapter; and  8 
C.  Impose any penalty authorized by this chapter or any rule adopted pursuant to this 9 
chapter.  10 
2.  Adoption of rules.   The state licensing authority shall adopt rules for the proper 11 
regulation and control of the cultivation, manufacture, distribution, sale and testing of 12 
retail marijuana and retail marijuana products and for the enforcement o f this chapter, not 13 
later than 9 months after the effective date of this Act, and shall adopt amended rules and 14 
such special rules and make findings as necessary. These rules are major substantive rules 15 
pursuant to Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A.  Ru les must address but are not limited 16 
to the following issues:  17 
A.  The hearing of contested state license denials at a public hearing, employing full 18 
due process, including the subpoena power, the taking of oaths, the calling of 19 
witnesses and the maintainin g of the confidentiality of customer records.  Provision 20 
must be made for the conduct of appeal hearings following license actions, including, 21 
but not limited to, the denial of a license renewal or of an initial license and license 22 
revocation and suspensio n, and hearings contesting the imposition of a fine;  23 
B.  The development of such forms, licenses, identification cards and applications as 24 
necessary for the administration of this chapter or of any of the rules adopted under 25 
this chapter;  26 
C.  The preparati on and transmission annually, in the form and manner prescribed by 27 
this chapter, of a report to the Legislature accounting for the efficient discharge of all 28 
responsibilities assigned by law or rules to the state licensing authority;  29 
D.  Procedures consist ent with this chapter for the issuance, renewal, suspension and 30 
revocation of licenses to operate retail marijuana establishments;  31 
E.  Limits on the concentration of THC and other cannabinoids per serving in any 32 
retail marijuana product;  33 
F.  Qualifications  for licensure including, but not limited to, the requirement for a 34 
fingerprint -based criminal history record check for all owners, officers, managers, 35 
employees and other support staff of entities licensed pursuant to this chapter;  36 
G.  Security requiremen ts for any licensed premises under this chapter including, at a 37 
minimum, lighting, physical security, alarm requirements and other minimum 38 
procedures for internal control as determined necessary by the state licensing 39 
authority to properly administer and e nforce the provisions of this chapter, including 40 
reporting requirements for changes, alterations or modifications to the licensed 41 
premises.  Security requirements may not be unreasonably impracticable; and  42 
 
 Page 7 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 H.  Securing and recording permission for a local fire department or the State Fire 1 
Marshal to conduct an annual fire inspection of a retail marijuana cultivation facility.  2 
§2445.  Independent testing and certification program  3 
The state licensing authority shall establish, within a specific time frame, a retail 4 
marijuana and retail marijuana products independent testing and certification program.  5 
This program must require licensees to test retail marijuana and retail marijuana products 6 
to ensure at a minimum that products sold for human consumption do not  contain 7 
contaminants that are injurious to health and to ensure correct labeling.  8 
1.  Content of testing.   Testing must include, but is not limited to, analysis for 9 
residual solvents, poisons and toxins; harmful chemicals; dangerous molds and mildew; 10 
harm ful microbes, such as Escherichia coli and salmonella; and pesticides.  11 
2.  Presence of injurious substance.   In the event that test results indicate the 12 
presence of quantities of any substance determined to be injurious to health in any 13 
product, these prod ucts must be immediately quarantined and immediate notification to 14 
the persons responsible for enforcing the marijuana laws must be made. These products 15 
must be documented and properly destroyed.  16 
3.  THC potency.   Testing must verify THC potency representa tions for correct 17 
labeling.  18 
The establishment of an independent testing and certification program does not affect 19 
the adoption of rules in section 2444 or affect the implementation of cultivation, 20 
production and sale of retail marijuana and retail marijua na products.  21 
§2446.  Labeling; health and safety requirements; training; identification cards  22 
1.  Labeling requirements for sales of retail marijuana and retail marijuana 23 
products.   Labeling requirements for sales of retail marijuana and retail marijuana 24 
products include when applicable:  25 
A.  The license number of the retail marijuana cultivation facility license;  26 
B.  The license number of the retail marijuana store license;  27 
C.  An identity statement and a universal symbol;  28 
D.  The batch number;  29 
E.  A net we ight statement;  30 
F.  THC potency and the potency of such other cannabinoids or other chemicals, 31 
including, but not limited to, cannabidiol, as determined relevant by the state 32 
licensing authority;  33 
G.  Warning labels;  34 
H.  Solvents used in marijuana extractio n; 35 
I.  Amount of THC per serving and the number of servings per package for retail 36 
marijuana products;  37 
 
 Page 8 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 J.  A list of ingredients and possible allergens for retail marijuana products;  1 
K.  A recommended use date or expiration date for retail marijuana produc ts; and  2 
L.  A nutritional fact panel for edible retail marijuana products.  3 
2.  Health and safety rules.   The state licensing authority shall adopt health and 4 
safety rules, which are major substantive rules pursuant to Title 5, chapter 375, 5 
subchapter 2 -A, and standards for the manufacture of retail marijuana products and the 6 
cultivation of retail marijuana, which must include:  7 
A.  Limitations on the display of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products;  8 
B.  Regulation of the storage of, warehouses for a nd transportation of retail marijuana 9 
and retail marijuana products; and  10 
C.  Sanitary requirements for retail marijuana establishments, including but not 11 
limited to sanitary requirements for the preparation of retail marijuana products.  12 
3.  Training for lo cal jurisdictions and law enforcement officers.   The state 13 
licensing authority shall adopt rules, which are major substantive rules pursuant to Title 14 
5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A, and processes for training local jurisdictions and law 15 
enforcement officer s in the law, including the requirements for inspections, 16 
investigations, searches, seizures, forfeitures and such additional activities as may 17 
become necessary from time to time.  18 
4.  Identification cards.   The following provisions govern identification ca rds. 19 
A.  The state licensing authority shall adopt rules detailing the format of, and 20 
inclusion of information on, individual identification cards for owners, officers, 21 
managers, contractors, employees and other support staff of entities licensed pursuant 22 
to this chapter, including a fingerprint -based criminal history record check as may be 23 
required by the state licensing authority prior to issuing an identification card.  24 
B.  The state licensing authority shall specify those forms of photo identification th at 25 
a retail marijuana store may accept when verifying a sale, including but not limited to 26 
government -issued identification cards.  27 
C.  The state licensing authority shall develop procedures for license renewals, 28 
reinstatements, initial licenses and the pay ment of licensing fees, as well as other 29 
matters that are necessary for the fair, impartial and comprehensive administration of 30 
this chapter.  31 
D.  Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine technical rules, pursuant to 32 
Title 5, chapter 375, subch apter 2 -A. 33 
§2447.  License application and issuance  34 
An application for a license under the provisions of this chapter must be made to the 35 
state licensing authority on forms prepared and furnished by the state licensing authority 36 
and must set forth such inf ormation as the state licensing authority may require to enable 37 
the state licensing authority to determine whether a license should be granted.  The 38 
information must include the name and address of the applicant and the names and 39 
addresses of the applicant 's officers, directors or managers.  Each application must be 40 
 
 Page 9 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 verified by the oath or affirmation of such person or persons as the state licensing 1 
authority may prescribe.  The state licensing authority may issue a license to an applicant 2 
pursuant to this section upon completion of the applicable criminal history record check 3 
associated with the application.  The license is conditioned upon municipal approval.  An 4 
applicant is prohibited from operating a retail marijuana establishment or retail marijuana 5 
social club without state licensing authority and municipal approval.  If the applicant does 6 
not receive municipal approval within one year from the date of state licensing authority 7 
approval, the license expires and may not be renewed.  If an application is  not approved 8 
by the municipality, the state licensing authority shall revoke the license.  9 
1.  Qualifications.   The following provisions govern the qualifications for licensure 10 
as a retail marijuana establishment or retail marijuana social club. A person i s not 11 
qualified to conduct licensed activities until the required annual fee has been paid.  12 
A.  An applicant who is a natural person must be at least 21 years of age.  If an 13 
applicant is a corporation, all members of the board must comply with this paragra ph. 14 
B.  A person who has been convicted of a disqualifying drug offense may not be a 15 
licensee.  For purposes of this paragraph, "disqualifying drug offense" means a 16 
conviction for a violation of a state or federal controlled substance law that is a crime 17 
punishable by imprisonment for 5 years or more.  "Disqualifying drug offense" does 18 
not include an offense for which the sentence, including any term of probation, 19 
incarceration or supervised release, was completed 10 or more years prior to 20 
application for l icensure or an offense that consisted of conduct that is permitted 21 
under this chapter.  22 
C.  A person who has had a license for a retail marijuana establishment or retail 23 
marijuana social club revoked may not be a licensee.  24 
D.  A sheriff, deputy sheriff, pol ice officer, prosecuting officer or an officer or 25 
employee of the state licensing authority or a municipality is ineligible to become a 26 
licensee.  27 
E.  The state licensing authority shall investigate all applicants for compliance with 28 
this chapter prior to i ssuing a license.  29 
F.  First priority for licensure must be given to registered caregivers who have been 30 
continuously registered with the Department of Health and Human Services pursuant 31 
to the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act or who have experience servi ng as a 32 
principal officer or board member of a nonprofit medical dispensary registered with 33 
the Department of Health and Human Services pursuant to the Maine Medical Use of 34 
Marijuana Act.   If an applicant, either a business entity or an individual, owns, has a 35 
financial interest in or controls the management of more than one dispensary in this 36 
State, that applicant may receive preference for only one license in each license class.  37 
As long as there are other preferred applicants for any or all license clas ses an 38 
applicant who owns, has a financial interest in or controls the management of more 39 
than one dispensary in this State is not eligible for multiple licenses in any class.  40 
Preference must be given to an applicant who has at least 3 medical marijuana 41 
caregiver registrations when determining which applicants receive licenses.  42 
 
 Page 10 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 G.  The state licensing authority shall accept applications from registered caregivers 1 
and principal officers or board members of registered dispensaries who have 2 
continuously regi stered with the Department of Health and Human Services pursuant 3 
to the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act.  4 
H.  The state licensing authority shall adopt rules, which are major substantive rules 5 
pursuant to Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A, for a strea mlined application process 6 
for registered caregivers and principal officers or board members of dispensaries 7 
registered with the Department of Health and Human Services pursuant to the Maine 8 
Medical Use of Marijuana Act, which must include an initial site inspection 9 
confirming compliance with this chapter.  10 
2.  Investigation of qualifications.   In investigating the qualifications of an applicant 11 
or a licensee, the state licensing authority and municipality may have access to criminal 12 
history record informati on furnished by a law enforcement agency subject to any 13 
restrictions imposed by that agency.  In the event the state licensing authority or 14 
municipality considers the applicant's criminal history record, the state licensing authority 15 
or municipality shall also consider any information provided by the applicant regarding 16 
such criminal history record, including, but not limited to, evidence of rehabilitation, 17 
character references and educational achievements, especially those items pertaining to 18 
the time betw een the applicant's last criminal conviction and the consideration of the 19 
application for a license.  20 
At the time of filing an application for issuance of a retail marijuana establishment or 21 
retail marijuana social club license, an applicant shall submit a set of the applicant's 22 
fingerprints and personal history information concerning the applicant's qualifications for 23 
a license on forms prepared by the state licensing authority.  The state licensing authority 24 
shall submit the fingerprints and the municipali ty may forward fingerprints to the State 25 
Bureau of Investigation for criminal history background information.  The state licensing 26 
authority shall also forward the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the 27 
purpose of conducting a federal fingerprint -based criminal history record check.  The 28 
state licensing authority may acquire a name -based criminal history record check for an 29 
applicant or a licensee who has twice submitted to a fingerprint -based criminal history 30 
record check and whose fin gerprints are unclassifiable.  An applicant who has previously 31 
submitted fingerprints for state licensing purposes may request that the fingerprints on 32 
file be used.  The state licensing authority shall use the information resulting from the 33 
fingerprint -based criminal history record check to investigate and determine whether an 34 
applicant is qualified to hold a license pursuant to this chapter.  The state licensing 35 
authority or municipality may verify any of the information an applicant is required to 36 
submit . 37 
3.  Applications; issuance.   The following provisions govern applications for and 38 
issuance of a retail marijuana establishment or retail marijuana social club license.  39 
A.  An applicant shall file an application in the form required by the state licensing  40 
authority for the type of license sought, along with the application fee as set by the 41 
state licensing authority.  42 
B.  An applicant may apply for and be granted more than one type of license except 43 
that a person licensed as a retail marijuana testing facil ity may not hold any other 44 
 
 Page 11 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 retail marijuana establishment license.  Registered caregivers and registered 1 
dispensaries who have held a registration in good standing for 2 years by the date of 2 
the application must be given priority in the granting of license s for a retail marijuana 3 
cultivation facility, retail marijuana products manufacturing facility or retail 4 
marijuana store license. The state licensing authority shall begin accepting and 5 
processing applications by 30 days after the adoption of rules under section 2444, 6 
subsection 2.  If after 90 days those applications do not meet the maximum square 7 
footage allotment set by this chapter, the state licensing authority may begin 8 
accepting and processing applications by all other qualified applicants.  9 
C.  The state licensing authority shall issue or renew a license to operate a retail 10 
marijuana establishment or retail marijuana social club to an applicant who meets the 11 
requirements of the state licensing authority, which must include a review of the site 12 
plan, operating plan and relevant experience in the marijuana industry in this State, as 13 
set forth in rule, within 90 days of the date of receipt of the application unless:  14 
(1)  The state licensing authority finds the applicant is not in compliance with this 15 
section or rules adopted by the state licensing authority;  16 
(2)  The state licensing authority is notified by the relevant municipality that the 17 
applicant is not in compliance with an ordinance, rule or regulation in effect at 18 
the time of application; or  19 
(3)  The number of retail marijuana establishments or retail marijuana social 20 
clubs allowed in the municipality has been limited pursuant to local ordinance or 21 
is limited by subsection 7 and the state licensing authority has already licensed 22 
the maximum number of retail marijuana establishments or retail marijuana 23 
social clubs allowed in the municipality for the class of license that is sought.  24 
D.  The following provisions govern the situation when more than one application is 25 
received by the state licensing aut hority for establishment of a retail marijuana 26 
establishment or retail marijuana social club in the same municipality.  27 
(1)  If a greater number of applications are received from qualified applicants to 28 
operate a retail marijuana store in a municipality tha n are allowed under the 29 
limits enacted by that municipality pursuant to subsection 4, the state licensing 30 
authority shall solicit and consider input from the municipality as to the 31 
municipality's preferences for licensure.  Within 180 days of the date the first 32 
application is received, the state licensing authority shall issue the maximum 33 
number of applicable licenses.  34 
(2)  In any competitive application process to determine which applicants receive 35 
licenses for any class of license, the state licensing aut hority shall give first 36 
preference to an applicant who has at least 2 years of previous experience 37 
cultivating marijuana in compliance with Title 22, section 2423 and who has 38 
been continuously registered with the Department of Health and Human Services 39 
pursuant to the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act.  Preference must be given 40 
to an applicant who has 3 medical marijuana caregiver registrations when 41 
determining which applicants receive licenses.  42 
E.  The state licensing authority may not grant a license for  a retail marijuana 43 
establishment to a licensee who has already received a license to operate the same 44 
 
 Page 12 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 type of retail marijuana establishment if doing so would prevent another qualified 1 
applicant from receiving a license.  The state licensing authority may  not grant a 2 
license for a retail marijuana social club to a licensee who has already received a 3 
license to operate a retail marijuana social club if doing so would prevent another 4 
qualified applicant from receiving a license.  5 
4.  Limitation on number of r etail marijuana stores.   The state licensing authority 6 
may not limit the total number of retail marijuana stores in this State.  A municipality 7 
may regulate the number of retail marijuana stores and the location and operation of retail 8 
marijuana establishm ents and retail marijuana social clubs and may prohibit the operation 9 
of retail marijuana establishments and retail marijuana social clubs within its jurisdiction.  10 
5.  Limitations on retail marijuana cultivation.   The state licensing authority may 11 
establis h limitations upon retail marijuana cultivation through one or more of the  12 
following methods:  13 
A.  Placing or modifying a limit on the number of licenses that it issues, by class or 14 
overall, but in placing or modifying the limits, the state licensing autho rity shall 15 
consider the reasonable availability of new licenses after a limit is placed or 16 
modified; and  17 
B.  Placing or modifying a limit on the amount of production permitted by a retail 18 
marijuana cultivation facility license or class of licenses based up on some reasonable 19 
metric or set of metrics, including, but not limited to, previous months' sales, pending 20 
sales or other reasonable metric as determined by the state licensing authority.  21 
6.  Limitation on retail marijuana cultivation facility size.   The amount of space 22 
approved for marijuana cultivation at retail marijuana cultivation facilities is limited to 23 
800,000 square feet of plant canopy, unless the state licensing authority determines that a 24 
greater amount may be needed to ensure an adequate suppl y to meet demand for various 25 
strains of marijuana throughout the State.  An applicant must designate on the applicant's 26 
operating plan the size category of the licensed premises and the amount of actual square 27 
footage in the applicant's licensed premises t hat will be designated as plant canopy.  28 
The state licensing authority shall license 2 types of retail marijuana cultivation facilities, 29 
those with 3,000 square feet or less of plant canopy and those with more than 3,000 30 
square feet of plant canopy.  The s tate licensing authority shall license marijuana 31 
cultivation at retail marijuana cultivation facilities by unit blocks of 10 feet by 10 feet, or 32 
100 square feet, of plant canopy, with 40% of all licenses issued going to licensees of 30 33 
unit blocks or less.   The maximum amount of unit blocks allowed to a single licensee is 34 
300. 35 
An applicant who applies for a retail marijuana cultivation facility license for a facility 36 
with more than 3,000 square feet of plant canopy but is not licensed by the state licensing  37 
authority may be considered for a license for a facility with 3,000 square feet or less of 38 
plant canopy.  39 
No more than 6 retail marijuana cultivation facilities or more than 300 unit blocks of 40 
plant canopy may be located on the same parcel of property.  41 
 
 Page 13 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 The state licensing authority may reduce the number of unit blocks a retail marijuana 1 
cultivation facility is authorized to cultivate if 50% or fewer of the unit blocks a facility is 2 
authorized to cultivate are not used by the end of the first year of operati on.  3 
7.  Restrictions on applications for licenses.   The state licensing authority may not 4 
approve an application for the issuance of a license pursuant to this chapter:  5 
A.  If the application for the license concerns a location that is the same as or wit hin 6 
1,000 feet of a location for which, within the 2 years immediately preceding the date 7 
of the application, the state licensing authority denied an application for the same 8 
class of license due to the nature of the use or other concern related to the loc ation; or  9 
B.  Until it is established that the applicant is in or will be entitled to possession of the 10 
licensed premises for which application is made under a lease, rental agreement or 11 
other arrangement for possession of the premises or by virtue of owne rship of the 12 
premises.  13 
§2448.  Classes of licenses; license provisions  14 
1.  State licensing authority may issue license.   For the purpose of regulating the 15 
cultivation, manufacture, distribution, sale and testing of retail marijuana and retail 16 
marijuana pro ducts, the state licensing authority, in its discretion, upon receipt of an 17 
application in the prescribed form, may issue and grant to the applicant a license from one 18 
or more of the following classes, subject to the provisions and restrictions provided by  19 
this chapter:  20 
A.  Retail marijuana store license;  21 
B.  Retail marijuana cultivation facility license;  22 
C.  Retail marijuana products manufacturing facility license;  23 
D.  Retail marijuana testing facility license;  24 
E.  Retail marijuana social club license; and  25 
F.  Occupational licenses and registrations for owners, managers, operators, 26 
employees, contractors and other support staff employed at, working in or having 27 
access to restricted access areas of the licensed premises, as determined by the state 28 
licensing authority.  29 
2.  Licensee to collect tax.   A retail marijuana store licensee or retail marijuana 30 
social club licensee shall collect sales tax on all retail sales made at a retail marijuana 31 
store or retail marijuana social club, respectively.  32 
3.  Retail marij uana store license.   The following provisions govern a retail 33 
marijuana store.  34 
A.  A licensed retail marijuana store may sell only retail marijuana, retail marijuana 35 
products, marijuana accessories, nonconsumable products such as apparel and 36 
marijuana -related products such as child -resistant containers, but is prohibited from 37 
selling or giving away any consumable product, including but not limited to 38 
cigarettes, alcohol and edible products that do not contain marijuana, including but 39 
 
 Page 14 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 not limited to sodas, c andies and baked goods.  Automatic dispensing machines that 1 
contain retail marijuana and retail marijuana products are prohibited.  2 
B.  A retail marijuana store licensee shall track all of its retail marijuana and retail 3 
marijuana products from the point at  which they are transferred from a retail 4 
marijuana cultivation facility or retail marijuana products manufacturing facility to 5 
the point of sale.  6 
All retail marijuana and retail marijuana products sold at a licensed retail marijuana 7 
store must be packaged  and labeled as required by rules of the state licensing 8 
authority and pursuant to section 2446, subsection 1.  Notwithstanding the provisions 9 
of this section, a retail marijuana store licensee may also sell retail marijuana 10 
products that are prepackaged a nd labeled as required by rules of the state licensing 11 
authority and pursuant to section 2446, subsection 1.  12 
C.  A person must be 21 years of age or older to make a purchase in a retail marijuana 13 
store.  14 
(1)  Prior to initiating a sale, the employee of the retail marijuana store making 15 
the sale shall verify that the purchaser has a valid government -issued 16 
identification card, or other acceptable identification, showing that the purchaser 17 
is 21 years of age or older.  If a person under 21 years of age present s a 18 
fraudulent proof of age, any action relying on the fraudulent proof of age may not 19 
be grounds for the revocation or suspension of any license issued under this 20 
chapter.  21 
(2)  The state licensing authority shall adopt rules, which are routine technical 22 
rules as described in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A, to prohibit certain 23 
signs, marketing and advertising, including but not limited to a prohibition on 24 
mass -market campaigns that have a high likelihood of reaching persons under 21 25 
years of age.  26 
Thes e rules may include:  27 
(a)  A prohibition on health or physical benefit claims in advertising,  28 
merchandising and packaging;  29 
(b)  A prohibition on unsolicited advertising on the Internet;  30 
(c)  A prohibition on opt -in marketing that does not permit an easy an d 31 
permanent opt -out feature; and  32 
(d)  A prohibition on marketing directed toward location -based devices, 33 
including but not limited to cellular phones, unless the marketing is a mobile 34 
device application installed on the device by the owner of the device wh o is 35 
21 years of age or older and includes a permanent and easy opt -out feature.  36 
(3)  A magazine whose primary focus is marijuana or marijuana businesses may 37 
be sold only in a retail marijuana store or behind the counter in an establishment 38 
where persons u nder 21 years of age are present.  39 
(4)  A retail marijuana product may not contain an additive designed to make the 40 
product more appealing to children.  41 
 
 Page 15 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 (5)  Notwithstanding any other provision of state law, sales of retail marijuana 1 
and retail marijuana pro ducts are not exempt from state sales tax.  2 
(6)  Nothing in this chapter may be construed to limit a law enforcement agency's 3 
ability to investigate unlawful activity in relation to a retail marijuana 4 
establishment or retail marijuana social club.  A law en forcement agency may run 5 
a Maine criminal history record check of a licensee, or employee of a licensee, 6 
during an investigation of unlawful activity related to retail marijuana and retail 7 
marijuana products.  8 
D.  Retail marijuana and retail marijuana produ cts may be transported between a 9 
licensed retail marijuana store and retail marijuana stores, retail marijuana cultivation 10 
facilities, retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities, retail marijuana social 11 
clubs and retail marijuana testing facilities . 12 
4.  Retail marijuana cultivation facility license.   The state licensing authority shall 13 
create a statewide licensure class system for retail marijuana cultivation facilities.  14 
A.  The following provisions govern retail marijuana cultivation facilities.  15 
(1)  A retail marijuana cultivation facility licensee is permitted to cultivate retail 16 
marijuana for sale and distribution only to licensed retail marijuana stores, retail 17 
marijuana products manufacturing facilities, other retail marijuana cultivation 18 
facili ties or retail marijuana social clubs.  19 
(2)  A retail marijuana cultivation facility may have a retail marijuana store if it is 20 
located on the same licensed premises as the retail marijuana cultivation facility.  21 
If the retail marijuana cultivation facility  chooses the option to have a retail 22 
marijuana store it must meet all requirements set by the state licensing authority 23 
and municipality in which it is located.  A retail marijuana store located on the 24 
licensed premises of a retail marijuana cultivation fa cility does not count against 25 
any municipal limits on the number of retail marijuana stores.  26 
(3)  A retail marijuana cultivation facility shall track the marijuana it cultivates 27 
from seed or immature plant to wholesale purchase.  The state licensing author ity 28 
may not make rules that are unreasonably impracticable concerning the tracking 29 
of marijuana from seed or immature plant to wholesale purchase.  30 
(4)  A retail marijuana cultivation facility may provide, except as required by 31 
subsection 6, a sample of its  products to a retail marijuana testing facility for 32 
testing and research purposes.  A retail marijuana cultivation facility shall 33 
maintain a record of what was provided to the retail marijuana testing facility, the 34 
identity of the retail marijuana testing  facility and the testing results.  35 
B.  Retail marijuana may be transported between a licensed retail marijuana 36 
cultivation facility and retail marijuana stores, other retail marijuana cultivation 37 
facilities, retail marijuana products manufacturing faciliti es, retail marijuana social 38 
clubs and retail marijuana testing facilities.  39 
5.  Retail marijuana products manufacturing facility license.   The following 40 
provisions govern retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities and the preparation 41 
of retail marij uana products.  42 
 
 Page 16 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 A.  The following provisions govern retail marijuana products manufacturing 1 
facilities.  2 
(1)  A retail marijuana products manufacturing facility licensee is permitted to 3 
manufacture retail marijuana products pursuant to the terms and conditio ns of 4 
this chapter.  5 
(2)  A retail marijuana products manufacturing facility may cultivate its own 6 
retail marijuana if it obtains a retail marijuana cultivation facility license, or it 7 
may purchase retail marijuana from a licensed retail marijuana cultivati on 8 
facility.  A retail marijuana products manufacturing facility licensee shall track 9 
all of its retail marijuana from the point it is either transferred from its retail 10 
marijuana cultivation facility or the point when it is delivered to the retail 11 
marijua na products manufacturing facility from a licensed retail marijuana 12 
cultivation facility to the point of transfer to a licensed retail marijuana store, 13 
retail marijuana social club or retail marijuana testing facility.  14 
B.  A retail marijuana products manuf acturing facility licensee may not:  15 
(1)  Add any marijuana to a food product if the manufacturer of the food product 16 
holds a trademark to the food product's name, except that a retail marijuana 17 
products manufacturing facility licensee may use a trademarked  food product if 18 
the licensee uses the product as a component or as part of a recipe and if the 19 
licensee does not state or advertise to the consumer that the final retail marijuana 20 
product contains a trademarked food product;  21 
(2)  Intentionally or knowingl y label or package a retail marijuana product in a 22 
manner that would cause a reasonable consumer confusion as to whether the 23 
retail marijuana product was a trademarked food product;  24 
(3)  Label or package a product in a manner that violates any federal trad emark 25 
law or regulation; or  26 
(4)  Include harmful additives in any retail marijuana product, including, but not 27 
limited to, those that are toxic, designed to make the product more addictive and 28 
designed to make the product more appealing to children or misl eading to 29 
consumers, but not including common baking and cooking items.  30 
C.  The following provisions govern the preparation of retail marijuana products.  31 
(1)  Retail marijuana products must be prepared on licensed premises that are 32 
used exclusively for the  manufacture and preparation of retail marijuana or retail 33 
marijuana products and prepared using equipment that is used exclusively for the 34 
manufacture and preparation of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products.  35 
(2)  All licensed premises in which r etail marijuana products are manufactured 36 
must meet the sanitary standards for retail marijuana product preparation adopted 37 
pursuant to section 2446, subsection 2 and must be licensed as commercial 38 
kitchens by the Department of Health and Human Services.  39 
(3)  Retail marijuana products must be packaged, sealed and conspicuously 40 
labeled in compliance with this chapter and any rules adopted pursuant to this 41 
chapter.  42 
 
 Page 17 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 (4)  A retail marijuana products manufacturing facility licensee may provide a 1 
sample of the li censee's products to a licensed retail marijuana testing facility 2 
pursuant to subsection 6 for testing and research purposes.  A retail marijuana 3 
products manufacturing facility licensee shall maintain a record of what was 4 
provided to the retail marijuana testing facility, the identity of the testing facility 5 
and the results of the testing.  6 
(5)  A retail marijuana products manufacturing facility licensee may list 7 
ingredients and compatibility with dietary practices on an edible retail marijuana 8 
product.  9 
(6)  All retail marijuana products that require refrigeration to prevent spoilage 10 
must be stored and transported in a refrigerated environment.  11 
D.  Nothing in this chapter may be construed to limit a law enforcement agency's 12 
ability to investigate unlawful ac tivity in relation to a retail marijuana establishment.  13 
A law enforcement agency may run a Maine criminal history record check of a 14 
licensee, or employee of a licensee, during an investigation of unlawful activity 15 
related to retail marijuana and retail ma rijuana products.  16 
E.  Retail marijuana products may be transported between a licensed retail marijuana 17 
products manufacturing facility and retail marijuana stores, other retail marijuana 18 
products manufacturing facilities, retail marijuana social clubs and retail marijuana 19 
testing facilities.  20 
6.  Retail marijuana testing facility license.   A retail marijuana testing facility 21 
license may be issued to a person who performs testing and research on retail marijuana. 22 
The facility may develop and test retail marij uana products.  23 
The state licensing authority shall adopt rules pursuant to its authority in section 2445 24 
related to acceptable testing and research practices, including but not limited to testing, 25 
standards, quality control analysis, equipment certificatio n and calibration, chemical 26 
identification and other practices used in bona fide research methods.  27 
A.  A person that has an interest in a retail marijuana testing facility license from the 28 
state licensing authority for testing purposes may not have any int erest in a registered 29 
dispensary, a registered caregiver, a licensed retail marijuana store, a licensed retail 30 
marijuana social club, a licensed retail marijuana cultivation facility or a licensed 31 
retail marijuana products manufacturing facility.  A person  that has an interest in a 32 
registered dispensary, a registered caregiver, a licensed retail marijuana store, a 33 
licensed retail marijuana social club, a licensed retail marijuana cultivation facility or 34 
a licensed retail marijuana products manufacturing fac ility may not have an interest 35 
in a facility that has a retail marijuana testing facility license.  For purposes of this 36 
paragraph, "interest" includes an ownership interest or partial ownership interest or 37 
any other type of financial interest, such as bei ng an investor or serving in a 38 
management position.  39 
B.  Retail marijuana and retail marijuana products may be transported between the 40 
licensed retail marijuana testing facility and retail marijuana cultivation facilities, 41 
retail marijuana products manufact uring facilities, retail marijuana stores and retail 42 
marijuana social clubs.  43 
 
 Page 18 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 7.  Retail marijuana social club license.   The following provisions govern retail 1 
marijuana social clubs.  2 
A.  A licensed retail marijuana social club may sell only retail marijuan a, retail 3 
marijuana products, marijuana accessories, nonconsumable products such as apparel, 4 
marijuana -related products and edible products that do not contain marijuana, 5 
including but not limited to sodas, candies and baked goods, but may not sell or give  6 
away cigarettes or alcohol.  All retail marijuana and retail marijuana products 7 
purchased at a licensed retail marijuana social club must be consumed or disposed of 8 
on and may not be taken off the licensed premises.  9 
B.  A retail marijuana social club shal l track all of its retail marijuana and retail 10 
marijuana products from the point at which they are transferred from a retail 11 
marijuana cultivation facility, retail marijuana store or retail marijuana products 12 
manufacturing facility to the point of sale.  13 
C.  The following provisions govern procedures for preventing sales to persons under 14 
21 years of age.  15 
(1)  Prior to allowing a person onto the retail marijuana social club's licensed 16 
premises, an employee of the retail marijuana social club shall verify that  the 17 
person has a valid government -issued identification card, or other acceptable 18 
identification, showing that the person is 21 years of age or older.  If a person 19 
under 21 years of age presents a fraudulent proof of age, any action relying on the 20 
fraudul ent proof of age may not be grounds for the revocation or suspension of 21 
any license issued under this chapter.  22 
(2)  The state licensing authority shall adopt rules, which are routine technical 23 
rules as described in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A, to prohibit certain 24 
signs, marketing and advertising, including but not limited to a prohibition on 25 
mass -market campaigns that have a high likelihood of reaching persons under 21 26 
years of age.  27 
These rules may include:  28 
(a)  A prohibition on health or physical benefit claims in advertising, 29 
merchandising and packaging;  30 
(b)  A prohibition on unsolicited advertising on the Internet;  31 
(c)  A prohibition on opt -in marketing that does not permit an easy and 32 
permanent opt -out feature; and  33 
(d)  A prohibition on marketin g directed toward location -based devices, 34 
including but not limited to cellular phones, unless the marketing is a mobile 35 
device application installed on the device by the owner of the device who is 36 
21 years of age or older and includes a permanent and easy  opt-out feature.  37 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other provision of state law, sales of retail marijuana 38 
and retail marijuana products are not exempt from state sales tax.  39 
(4)  Nothing in this chapter may be construed to limit a law enforcement agency's 40 
ability to investigate unlawful activity in relation to a retail marijuana 41 
establishment.  A law enforcement agency may run a Maine criminal history 42 
 
 Page 19 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 record check of a licensee, or employee of a licensee, during an investigation of 1 
unlawful activity related to reta il marijuana and retail marijuana products.  2 
D.  Retail marijuana and retail marijuana products may be transported between a 3 
licensed retail marijuana social club and other retail marijuana social clubs or retail 4 
marijuana testing facilities.  5 
8.  Inspection  of books and records.   Each licensee shall keep a complete set of all 6 
records necessary to show fully the business transactions of the licensee, all of which 7 
must be open at all times during business hours for the inspection and examination by the 8 
state l icensing authority or its duly authorized representatives.  The state licensing 9 
authority may require any licensee to furnish such information as it considers necessary 10 
for the proper administration of this chapter and may require an audit to be made of th e 11 
books of account and records on such occasions as it may consider necessary by an 12 
auditor to be selected by the state licensing authority.  The auditor must have access to all 13 
books and records of the licensee, and the cost of the audit must be paid by t he licensee.  14 
The licensed premises, including any places of storage, where retail marijuana or retail 15 
marijuana products are stored, cultivated, sold, dispensed or tested are subject to 16 
inspection by the State or the municipality in which the licensed prem ises are located and 17 
by the investigators of the State or municipality during all business hours and other times 18 
of apparent activity for the purpose of inspection or investigation.  Access must be 19 
granted during business hours for examination of any inven tory or books and records 20 
required to be kept by a licensee.  When any part of the licensed premises consists of a 21 
locked area, upon demand to the licensee this area must be made available for inspection, 22 
and, upon request by authorized representatives of the State or municipality, the licensee 23 
shall open the area for inspection.  24 
Each licensee shall retain all books and records necessary to show fully the business 25 
transactions of the licensee for a period comprising the current tax year and the 2 26 
immediatel y preceding tax years.  27 
9.  Product pricing.   Nothing in this chapter may be construed as granting to the 28 
state licensing authority the power to fix prices for retail marijuana or retail marijuana 29 
products.  30 
10.  License fees.   The state licensing authority shall determine the revenue needed to 31 
set up the licensing and enforcement operations of the department and set the fees 32 
applicable to the categories as outlined in subsection 1 within the ranges specified in the 33 
following schedule:  34 
A.  Retail marijuana st ore license, $250 to $2,500, with a $10 to $250 nonrefundable 35 
application fee;  36 
B.  Retail marijuana cultivation facility license, $10 to $100 per unit block, with a 37 
$10 to $250 nonrefundable application fee;  38 
C.  Retail marijuana products manufacturing faci lity license, $100 to $1,000, with a 39 
$10 to $250 nonrefundable application fee;  40 
D.  Retail marijuana testing facility license, $500, with a $10 to $250 nonrefundable 41 
application fee;  42 
 
 Page 20 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 E.  Retail marijuana social club license, $250 to $2,500, with a $10 to $ 250 1 
nonrefundable application fee; and  2 
F.  Occupational licenses and registrations for owners, managers, operators, 3 
employees, contractors and other support staff employed at, working in or having 4 
access to restricted access areas of the licensed premises,  as determined by the state 5 
licensing authority.  6 
11.  License terms.   All licenses under this chapter are effective for one year from 7 
the date of issuance.  8 
12.  License renewal.   The following provisions govern license renewals.  9 
A.  Ninety days prior to th e expiration date of an existing license, the state licensing 10 
authority shall notify the licensee of the expiration date by first class mail at the 11 
licensee's address of record with the state licensing authority.  A licensee may apply 12 
for the renewal of an  existing license to the state licensing authority not less than 30 13 
days prior to the date of expiration.  Upon receipt of an application for renewal of an 14 
existing license and any applicable fees, the state licensing authority shall, within 7 15 
days, submit  a copy of the application to the appropriate municipality to determine 16 
whether the application complies with all local restrictions on renewal of licenses.  17 
B.  The state licensing authority may not accept an application for renewal of a 18 
license after the  date of expiration, except that the state licensing authority may 19 
extend the expiration date of the license and accept a late application for renewal of a 20 
license as long as the applicant has filed a timely renewal application with the 21 
municipality.  The state licensing authority or the municipality, in its discretion, 22 
subject to the requirements of section 2447 and based upon reasonable grounds, may 23 
waive the 30 -day time requirements set forth in this subsection.  24 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions of para graph A, a licensee whose license has been 25 
expired for not more than 90 days may file a late renewal application upon the 26 
payment of a nonrefundable late application fee of $250 to the state licensing 27 
authority.  A licensee who files a late renewal applica tion and pays the requisite fees 28 
may continue to operate until the state licensing authority takes final action to 29 
approve or deny the licensee's late renewal application unless the state licensing 30 
authority summarily suspends the license pursuant to subse ction 16, this chapter and 31 
rules adopted pursuant to this chapter.  32 
D.  The state licensing authority may administratively extend the expiration date of a 33 
license and accept a later application for renewal of a license at the discretion of the 34 
state licensi ng authority.  35 
E.  The state licensing authority may, for good cause, elect to not renew a license.  36 
13.  Inactive licenses.   The state licensing authority, in its discretion, may revoke or 37 
elect not to renew any license if it determines that the licensed pr emises have been 38 
inactive, without good cause, for at least one year.  39 
14.  Unlawful financial assistance.   The state licensing authority shall require a 40 
complete disclosure of all persons having a direct or indirect financial interest, and the 41 
extent of su ch interest, in each license issued under this chapter.  This subsection is 42 
 
 Page 21 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 intended to prohibit and prevent the control of a retail marijuana store, retail marijuana 1 
cultivation facility, retail marijuana products manufacturing facility or retail marijuan a 2 
social club by a person or party other than the persons licensed pursuant to the provisions 3 
of this chapter.  4 
15.  Denial of license.   The state licensing authority may, for good cause, deny 5 
approval of a license application.  Upon denial of a license app lication, the state licensing 6 
authority shall inform the applicant of the basis for denial and the right to appeal the 7 
denial in a hearing.  8 
16.  Disciplinary actions.   In addition to any other sanctions prescribed by this 9 
chapter, or rules adopted pursuant  to this chapter, the state licensing authority has the 10 
power, on its own motion or on complaint, after investigation and opportunity for a public 11 
hearing at which the licensee must be afforded an opportunity to be heard, to fine a 12 
licensee or to suspend o r revoke a license issued by the state licensing authority for a 13 
violation by the licensee, or by any of the agents or employees of the licensee, of the 14 
provisions of this chapter or any of the rules adopted pursuant to this chapter or of any of 15 
the terms,  conditions or provisions of the license issued by the state licensing authority.  16 
The state licensing authority has the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to 17 
require the presence of persons and the production of papers, books and records necess ary 18 
for a hearing that the state licensing authority is authorized to conduct.  19 
The state licensing authority shall provide notice of suspension, revocation, fine or other 20 
sanction, as well as the required notice of the hearing required by this subsection, by 21 
mailing the same in writing to the licensee at the address contained in the license and, if 22 
different, at the last address furnished to the state licensing authority by the licensee.  23 
Except in the case of a summary suspension, a suspension may not be f or a period longer 24 
than 6 months. If a license is suspended or revoked, a part of the fees paid must be 25 
retained by the state licensing authority.  26 
Whenever a decision of the state licensing authority suspending a license for 14 days or 27 
less becomes final, the licensee may, before the operative date of the suspension, petition 28 
for permission to pay a fine in lieu of having the license suspended for all or part of the 29 
suspension period. Upon the receipt of the petition, the state licensing authority may, in 30 
its sole discretion, stay the proposed suspension and cause any investigation to be made 31 
that it considers desirable and may, in its sole discretion, grant the petition if the state 32 
licensing authority is satisfied that:  33 
A.  The public welfare would not be impaired by permitting the licensee to operate 34 
during the period set for suspension and that the payment of the fine will achieve the 35 
desired disciplinary purposes; and  36 
B.  The books and records of the licensee are kept in such a manner that the loss of 37 
sales that the licensee would have suffered had the suspension gone into effect can be 38 
determined with reasonable accuracy.  39 
The fine imposed may not be less than $500 nor more than $10,000.  Payment of a fine 40 
pursuant to the provisions of this subsection mus t be in the form of cash or in the form of 41 
a certified check or cashier's check made payable to the state licensing authority.  42 
 
 Page 22 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 Upon payment of the fine pursuant to this subsection, the state licensing authority shall 1 
enter its order permanently staying the  imposition of the suspension.  Fines paid to the 2 
state licensing authority pursuant to this subsection must be transmitted to the Treasurer 3 
of State.  4 
In connection with a petition pursuant to this subsection, the authority of the state 5 
licensing authority  is limited to the granting of such stays as are necessary for the state 6 
licensing authority to complete its investigation and make its findings and, if the state 7 
licensing authority makes such findings, to the granting of an order permanently staying 8 
the imposition of the entire suspension or that portion of the suspension not otherwise 9 
conditionally stayed.  10 
If the state licensing authority does not make the findings required in this subsection and 11 
does not order the suspension permanently stayed, the susp ension goes into effect on the 12 
operative date finally set by the state licensing authority.  13 
No later than January 15th of each year, the state licensing authority shall compile a 14 
report of the preceding year's actions in which fines, suspensions or revocat ions were 15 
imposed by the state licensing authority.  The state licensing authority shall include this 16 
information in its annual report to the Legislature.  17 
17.  Disposition of unauthorized retail marijuana or retail marijuana products 18 
and related materials.   The following provisions apply to the disposition of 19 
unauthorized retail marijuana or retail marijuana products and related materials.  20 
A.  The provisions of this subsection apply in addition to any criminal, civil or 21 
administrative penalties and in addit ion to any other penalties prescribed by this 22 
chapter or any rules adopted pursuant to this chapter.  Every licensee is deemed, by 23 
virtue of applying for, holding or renewing that licensee's license, to have expressly 24 
consented to the procedures set forth in this subsection.  25 
B.  If the state licensing authority issues a final agency order imposing a disciplinary 26 
action against a licensee pursuant to subsection 16, then, in addition to any other 27 
remedies, the state licensing authority's final agency order ma y specify that some or 28 
all of the licensee's marijuana or marijuana products is not retail marijuana or a retail 29 
marijuana product and is an illegal controlled substance.  The order may further 30 
specify that the licensee loses any ownership interest in any of the marijuana or 31 
marijuana products even if the marijuana or marijuana products previously qualified 32 
as retail marijuana or a retail marijuana product.  The final agency order may direct 33 
the destruction of any such marijuana and marijuana products.  The  authorized 34 
destruction may include the incidental destruction of any containers, equipment, 35 
supplies and other property associated with the marijuana or marijuana products.  36 
C.  A district attorney, or an assistant attorney general, shall notify the state licensing 37 
authority if an investigation of a retail marijuana establishment or retail marijuana 38 
social club is commenced.  If the state licensing authority has received notification 39 
from a district attorney, or an assistant attorney general, that an invest igation is being 40 
conducted, the state licensing authority may not destroy any marijuana or marijuana 41 
products from the retail marijuana establishment or retail marijuana social club until 42 
the destruction is approved by the district attorney or assistant at torney general.  43 
 
 Page 23 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 D.  A state or local agency may not be required to cultivate or care for any retail 1 
marijuana or retail marijuana products belonging to or seized from a licensee.  A state 2 
or local agency is not authorized to sell marijuana, retail or other wise.  3 
18.  Judicial review.   Final agency actions by the state licensing authority are subject 4 
to judicial review pursuant to Title 5, section 11001, et seq.  5 
§2449.  Local licensing  6 
1.  Municipality may regulate retail marijuana establishments and retail 7 
marijuana social clubs.   A municipality may regulate the location and operation of retail 8 
marijuana establishments and retail marijuana social clubs pursuant to Title 30 -A, chapter 9 
187, subchapter 3.  A municipality may adopt and enforce regulations for ret ail marijuana 10 
establishments and retail marijuana social clubs that are at least as restrictive as the 11 
provisions of this chapter and any rule adopted pursuant to this chapter.  Nothing in this 12 
chapter prohibits the registered voters of a municipality from  calling for a vote on any 13 
regulations adopted by a municipal legislative body.  14 
2.  Municipal approval required.   A retail marijuana establishment or retail 15 
marijuana social club may not operate until it is licensed by the state licensing authority 16 
pursuan t to this chapter and approved by the municipality in which it is located.  If an 17 
application is denied by the municipality, the licensee has 90 days to locate and obtain 18 
legal interest in another property in a municipality that approves of the retail mari juana 19 
establishment or retail marijuana social club before the license is revoked.  20 
3.  Notice and portion of fee must be given to municipality.   When the state 21 
licensing authority receives an application for original licensing, or renewal of an existing 22 
license, for any retail marijuana establishment or retail marijuana social club, the state 23 
licensing authority shall, within 7 business days, provide a copy of the application and 24 
50% of the licensing fee to the municipality in which the establishment or clu b is to be 25 
located.  The municipality shall determine whether the application complies with the 26 
local land use ordinance and any other restrictions on time, place, manner and the number 27 
of marijuana businesses within the municipality.  The municipality sha ll inform the state 28 
licensing authority whether the application complies with the local land use ordinance 29 
and other local restrictions.  30 
4.  Municipality may impose licensing requirement.   A municipality may impose a 31 
separate local licensing requirement as  a part of its restrictions on time, place, manner and 32 
the number of marijuana businesses.  A municipality may decline to impose any local 33 
licensing requirements, but a municipality shall notify the state licensing authority that it 34 
either approves or deni es each application forwarded to it within 14 business days.  35 
5.  Public hearing notice.   The following provisions govern local public hearings 36 
and notice.  37 
A.  If a municipality issues local licenses for a retail marijuana establishment or retail 38 
marijuana social club, a public hearing on the application may be scheduled.  If the 39 
municipality schedules such a hearing, it shall post and publish public notice of the 40 
hearing not less than 10 days prior to the hearing.  The municipality shall give public 41 
notice by posting a sign in a conspicuous place on the premises identified in a local 42 
 
 Page 24 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 license application and by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the 1 
county in which the premises are located.  2 
B.  If a municipality does not issue local licenses , the municipality may give public 3 
notice of the state application by posting a sign in a conspicuous place on the 4 
premises identified in the application and by publication in a newspaper of general 5 
circulation in the county in which the premises are locat ed. 6 
§2450.  Transfer of ownership  7 
A license granted under the provisions of this chapter is not transferable except as 8 
provided in this section, but this section does not prevent a change of location as provided 9 
in section 2451, subsection 7.  10 
For a transfe r of ownership, a licensee shall apply to the state licensing authority on 11 
forms prepared and furnished by the state licensing authority.  Upon receipt of an 12 
application for transfer of ownership, the state licensing authority shall, within 7 days, 13 
submit a copy of the application to the appropriate municipality to determine whether the 14 
transfer complies with any local restriction on transfer of ownership.  In determining 15 
whether to permit a transfer of ownership, the state licensing authority shall conside r only 16 
the requirements of this chapter, any rules adopted by the state licensing authority and 17 
any other local restrictions.  The municipality may hold a hearing on the application for 18 
transfer of ownership.  The municipality may not hold a hearing pursua nt to this section 19 
until the municipality has posted a notice of hearing in the manner described in section 20 
2449, subsection 5 on the licensed premises for a period of 10 days and has provided 21 
notice of the hearing to the applicant at least 10 days prior t o the hearing.  Any transfer of 22 
ownership hearing by the state licensing authority must be held in compliance with the 23 
requirements specified for a municipality in this section.  24 
§2451.  Licensing in general  25 
The following provisions govern licensing in gene ral. 26 
1.  Notice of new owner, officer, manager or employee.   A retail marijuana 27 
establishment or retail marijuana social club shall notify the state licensing authority in 28 
writing of the name, address and date of birth of an owner, officer, manager or empl oyee 29 
before the new owner, officer, manager or employee begins managing, owning or 30 
associating with the establishment or club.  The owner, officer, manager or employee 31 
must pass a fingerprint -based criminal history record check as required by the state 32 
licensing authority and obtain the required identification card prior to being associated 33 
with, managing, owning or working at the establishment or club.  34 
2.  Each license separate.   Each license issued under this chapter is separate and 35 
distinct.  A person ma y not exercise any of the privileges granted under a license other 36 
than the license that the person holds and a licensee may not allow any other person to 37 
exercise the privileges granted under the licensee's license.  A separate license is required 38 
for eac h specific business or business entity and each geographical location.  39 
 
 Page 25 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 3.  Licensee to maintain possession of premises.   At all times, a licensee shall 1 
possess and maintain possession of the licensed premises identified in the license by 2 
ownership, lease, rental or other arrangement for possession of the premises.  3 
4.  License specifics; display.   A license issued pursuant to this chapter must specify 4 
the date of issuance, the period of licensure, the name of the licensee and the premises 5 
licensed.  A licens ee shall conspicuously place the license at all times on the licensed 6 
premises.  7 
5.  Computation of time.   In computing any time prescribed by this chapter, the day 8 
of the act, event or default from which the designated time begins to run is not included. 9 
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays are counted as any other day except that any 10 
documents due to be submitted to state or local government on a date that falls on a 11 
Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday are due on the next business day.  12 
6.  Licensee to repor t transfer of interest.   A licensee shall report each transfer or 13 
change of financial interest in the license to the state licensing authority and appropriate 14 
municipality and receive approval prior to any transfer or change pursuant to section 15 
2450.  16 
7.  Relocation of licensed premises.   A licensee may move the permanent location 17 
of licensed premises to any other place in this State once permission to do so is granted 18 
by the state licensing authority and municipality where the retail marijuana establishment  19 
or retail marijuana social club proposes to relocate.  Upon receipt of an application for 20 
change of location, the state licensing authority shall, within 7 days, submit a copy of the 21 
application to the municipality to determine whether the transfer compli es with all local 22 
restrictions on change of location.  In permitting a change of location, the municipality 23 
where the retail marijuana establishment or retail marijuana social club proposes to 24 
relocate shall consider all reasonable restrictions that are or  may be placed upon the new 25 
location by the governing board of the municipality.  Any such change in location must 26 
be in accordance with all requirements of this chapter and rules adopted pursuant to this 27 
chapter.  28 
§2452.  Personal use of marijuana  29 
1.  Pers on 21 years of age or older.   A person 21 years of age or older may:  30 
A.  Use, possess or transport marijuana accessories and up to 2 1/2 ounces of 31 
prepared marijuana;  32 
B.  Transfer or furnish, without remuneration, up to 2 1/2 ounces of marijuana and up 33 
to 6 immature plants or seedlings to a person who is 21 years of age or older;  34 
C.  Possess, grow, cultivate, process or transport up to 6 flowering marijuana plants, 35 
12 immature plants and unlimited seedlings, and possess all the marijuana produced 36 
by the pla nts at the adult's residence;  37 
D.  Purchase up to 2 1/2 ounces of retail marijuana and marijuana accessories from a 38 
retail marijuana store; and  39 
 
 Page 26 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 E.  Purchase up to 12 seedlings or immature plants from a retail marijuana cultivation 1 
facility.  2 
2.  Home cultiva tion.   The following provisions apply to the home cultivation of 3 
marijuana for personal use by a person who is 21 years of age or older.  4 
A.  A person may cultivate up to 6 flowering marijuana plants at that person's place 5 
of residence, on property owned by  that person or on another person's property with 6 
written permission of the owner of the property.  7 
B.  A person who elects to cultivate marijuana shall ensure the marijuana is not 8 
visible from a public way without the use of binoculars, aircraft or other o ptical aids 9 
and shall take reasonable precautions to prevent unauthorized access by a person 10 
under 21 years of age.  11 
3.  Legible tag on each marijuana plant.   A person 21 years of age or older must 12 
have a legible tag on each marijuana plant.  The tag must i nclude at least the person's 13 
name and Maine driver's license number or Maine identification number.  14 
4.  Exemptions.   The following exemptions apply.  15 
A.  Marijuana cultivation for medical use is not considered cultivation for personal 16 
use under this chapter  and is governed by Title 22, section 2423 -A. 17 
B.  This section does not apply to cultivation by a registered dispensary licensed 18 
pursuant to Title 22, section 2428.  19 
5.  Use.  A person may consume marijuana in a nonpublic place including a private 20 
residence . 21 
A.  The prohibitions and limitations on smoking tobacco products in specified areas 22 
in Title 22, chapters 262 and 263 apply to smoking marijuana.  23 
B.  A person who smokes marijuana in a public place other than as governed by Title 24 
22, chapters 262 and 263  commits a civil violation for which a fine of not more than 25 
$100 may be adjudged.  26 
C.  This subsection may not be construed to shield any adult from federal 27 
prosecution.  28 
D.  This subsection may not be construed to allow any adult to possess or consume 29 
marijuana on federal property.  30 
§2453.  Unlawful acts and exceptions  31 
1.  Consumption; transfer.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a person 32 
may not:  33 
A.  Consume retail marijuana or retail marijuana products in a retail marijuana 34 
establishment.  A re tail marijuana establishment may not allow retail marijuana or 35 
retail marijuana products to be consumed upon its licensed premises; or  36 
B.  Buy, sell, transfer, give away or acquire retail marijuana or retail marijuana 37 
products.  38 
 
 Page 27 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 2.  Limited access area; tra nsfer of ownership.   Except as otherwise provided in 1 
this chapter, a person licensed pursuant to this chapter may not:  2 
A.  Be within a limited access area unless the person's identification card is displayed 3 
as required by this chapter;  4 
B.  Fail to designa te areas of ingress and egress for limited access areas and post 5 
signs in conspicuous locations as required by this chapter; or  6 
C.  Fail to report a transfer as required by section 2450.  7 
3.  Person licensed to sell retail marijuana or retail marijuana prod ucts.   A 8 
person licensed to sell retail marijuana or retail marijuana products pursuant to this 9 
chapter may not:  10 
A.  Display any signs that are inconsistent with local laws or regulations;  11 
B.  Use advertising material that is misleading, deceptive or false , or that is designed 12 
to appeal to a person under 21 years of age;  13 
C.  Have in that person's possession or upon the licensed premises any marijuana the 14 
sale of which is not permitted by the license;  15 
D.  Sell retail marijuana or retail marijuana products to  a person under 21 years of age 16 
without checking the person's identification;  17 
E.  Except for a retail marijuana social club licensee, have on the licensed premises 18 
any retail marijuana, retail marijuana products or marijuana paraphernalia that shows 19 
eviden ce of the retail marijuana having been consumed or partially consumed; or  20 
F.  Violate the provisions of section 2450 or abandon the licensed premises or 21 
otherwise cease operation without notifying the state licensing authority and 22 
appropriate municipality at least 48 hours in advance and without accounting for and 23 
forfeiting to the state licensing authority for destruction all marijuana and products 24 
containing marijuana.  25 
§2454.  Construction  26 
1.  Relation to the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Act.  This chapt er may not be 27 
construed to limit any privileges or rights of a qualifying patient, primary caregiver, 28 
registered or otherwise, or registered dispensary under the Maine Medical Use of 29 
Marijuana Act.  30 
2.  Employment policies.   This chapter may not be construe d to require an employer 31 
to permit or accommodate the use, consumption, possession, trade, display, 32 
transportation, sale or growing of cannabis in the workplace.  This chapter does not affect 33 
the ability of employers to enact and enforce workplace policies  restricting the use of 34 
marijuana by employees or to discipline employees who are under the influence of 35 
marijuana in the workplace.  36 
3.  School, employer or landlord may not discriminate.   A school, employer or 37 
landlord may not refuse to enroll or employ o r lease to or otherwise penalize a person 21 38 
 
 Page 28 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 years of age or older solely for that person's consuming marijuana outside of the school's, 1 
employer's or landlord's property.  2 
4.  Person may not be denied parental rights and responsibilities or contact with 3 
a minor child.   A person may not be denied parental rights and responsibilities with 4 
respect to or contact with a minor child as a result of acting in accordance with this 5 
chapter, unless the person's conduct is contrary to the best interest of the minor chi ld as 6 
set out in Title 19 -A, section 1653, subsection 3.  7 
Sec. 2.  22 MRSA §2383, sub -§1, as repealed and replaced by PL 2009, c. 652, 8 
Pt. B, §6, is repealed.  9 
Sec. 3.  36 MRSA §1817 is enacted to read:  10 
§1817.  Taxes on retail marijuana and retail marijuana products  11 
1.  Definitions.   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the 12 
following terms have the following meanings.  13 
A.  "Retail marijuana" has the same meaning as in Title 7, section 2442, subsection 14 
34. 15 
B.  "Retail marijuana produ ct" has the same meaning as in Title 7, section 2442, 16 
subsection 37.  17 
C.  "Retail marijuana social club" has the same meaning as in Title 7, section 2442, 18 
subsection 39.  19 
D.  "Retail marijuana store" has the same meaning as in Title 7, section 2442, 20 
subsecti on 40.  21 
E.  "State licensing authority" has the same meaning as in Title 7, section 2442, 22 
subsection 44.  23 
2.  Sales tax on retail marijuana and retail marijuana products.   The sales tax on 24 
retail marijuana and retail marijuana products is 10% and is the only  tax charged on the 25 
sale of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products at the point of final sale at a retail 26 
marijuana store or retail marijuana social club.  27 
3.  Returns; payment of tax; penalty.   A retail marijuana store or retail marijuana 28 
social cl ub shall file, on or before the last day of each month, a return on a form 29 
prescribed and furnished by the state licensing authority together with payment of the 30 
sales tax due under this section.  The return must report all sales of retail marijuana and 31 
retail marijuana products within the State during the preceding calendar month.  A retail 32 
marijuana store or retail marijuana social club shall keep a complete and accurate record 33 
at its principal place of business to substantiate all receipts and sales of r etail marijuana 34 
and retail marijuana products.  35 
4.  Failure to make payments.   The state licensing authority shall adopt rules to 36 
address the case in which a retail marijuana store or retail marijuana social club fails to 37 
make tax payments as required by th is section, including fines and other penalties up to 38 
permanently revoking the retail marijuana store's or retail marijuana social club's license.  39 
 
 Page 29 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine technical rules as described in Title 1 
5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. 2 
5.  Exemption.   The tax on marijuana imposed pursuant to this section may not be 3 
levied on marijuana sold by a registered nonprofit dispensary or registered caregiver to a 4 
qualifying patient or primary caregiver pursuant to Title 22, chapte r 558 -C. 5 
6.  Records.   The following records must be kept by a licensee and those records 6 
must be available for inspection by an agent of the state licensing authority:  7 
A.  The reports and transmittal of monthly sales tax payments by retail marijuana 8 
store s and retail marijuana social clubs; and  9 
B.  Authorization for the Bureau of Revenue Services to have access to licensing 10 
information to ensure sales, excise and income tax payment.  11 
7.  Application of tax revenues.   All sales tax revenue collected pursuant  to this 12 
section must be deposited in the General Fund.  Sales tax revenue derived from the sale 13 
of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products may not be used to directly fund any 14 
new state programs except that this revenue may be appropriated to the M aine Criminal 15 
Justice Academy for the purpose of training law enforcement personnel on retail 16 
marijuana and retail marijuana products laws and rules.  Funds appropriated to the Maine 17 
Criminal Justice Academy pursuant to this subsection may be used only for  the actual 18 
costs incurred to provide the necessary education and training of law enforcement 19 
personnel.  20 
SUMMARY  21 
This initiated bill allows the possession and use of marijuana by a person 21 years of 22 
age or older.  It provides for the licensure of retail m arijuana facilities including retail 23 
marijuana cultivation facilities, retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities, retail 24 
marijuana testing facilities and retail marijuana stores.  It also provides for the licensure 25 
of retail marijuana social clubs  where retail marijuana products may be sold to consumers 26 
for consumption on the licensed premises.  It provides for regulation and control of the 27 
cultivation, manufacture, distribution and sale of marijuana by the Department of 28 
Agriculture, Conservation a nd Forestry.  It allows the department to establish limitations 29 
on retail marijuana cultivation.  It allows a municipality to regulate the number of retail 30 
marijuana stores and the location and operation of retail marijuana establishments and to 31 
prohibit t he operation of retail marijuana establishments in the municipality.  It also 32 
allows a municipality to require separate local licensing of retail marijuana 33 
establishments.  34 
The initiated bill allows a person 21 years of age or older to use, possess or trans port 35 
marijuana accessories and up to 2 1/2 ounces of prepared marijuana; transfer or furnish, 36 
without remuneration, up to 2 1/2 ounces of marijuana and up to 6 immature plants or 37 
seedlings to a person who is 21 years of age or older; possess, grow, cultiva te, process or 38 
transport up to 6 flowering marijuana plants, 12 immature marijuana plants and unlimited 39 
seedlings, and possess all the marijuana produced by the marijuana plants at that person's 40 
residence; purchase up to 2 1/2 ounces of marijuana and marij uana accessories from a 41 
 
 Page 30 - 127LR2829(01) -1 
 retail marijuana store; and purchase up to 12 marijuana seedlings or immature marijuana 1 
plants from a retail marijuana cultivator.  It allows the home cultivation of marijuana for 2 
personal use of up to 6 flowering marijuana plants b y a person 21 years of age or older.  3 
The initiated bill allows a person to consume marijuana in a nonpublic place 4 
including a private residence.  It provides that the prohibitions and limitations on smoking 5 
tobacco products in specified areas as provided b y law apply to smoking marijuana and 6 
that a person who smokes marijuana in a public place other than as governed by law 7 
commits a civil violation for which a fine of not more than $100 may be adjudged.  8 
The initiated bill places a sales tax of 10% on retail  marijuana and retail marijuana 9 
products.  10 
 
