 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1305  
S.P. 470  In Senate, April 9, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Encourage Health Insurance Consumers To Comparison 
Shop for Health Care Procedures and Treatment  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Insurance and Financial Services suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator WHITTEMORE of Somerset.  
Cosponsored by Representative BECK of Waterville and  
Senators: CUSHING of Penobscot, KATZ of Kennebec, MASON of Androscoggin, President 
THIBODEAU of Waldo, Representatives: ESPLING of New Gloucester, PICCHIOTTI of 
Fairfield, PRESCOTT of Waterboro, STETKIS of Canaan.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0956(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA §1718 -B, sub -§1, ¶C is enacted to read:  2 
C.  "Allowed amount" means the contractually agreed upon amount paid by a carrier 3 
to a health care entity for health care services provid ed to a patient covered by 4 
insurance.  5 
Sec. 2.  22 MRSA §1718 -B, sub -§§3 and 4 are enacted to read:  6 
3.  Estimate of charges prior to an admission, procedure or service.  Prior to an 7 
admission, procedure or service and upon request by a patient or prospectiv e patient, a 8 
health care entity shall, within 2 working days, disclose the allowed amount if the entity 9 
participates in the patient's carrier network or the amount that will be charged if the entity 10 
does not participate in the patient's carrier network for  the admission, procedure or 11 
service, including the amount for any facility fees required.  If a health care entity is 12 
unable to quote a specific amount in advance due to the health care entity's inability to 13 
predict the specific treatment or diagnostic co de, the health care entity shall disclose what 14 
is known for the estimated allowed amount if the entity participates in the patient's carrier 15 
network, or the amount that will be charged if the entity does not participate in the 16 
patient's carrier network for  the proposed admission, procedure or service, including the 17 
amount for any facility fees required.  The health care entity shall disclose the incomplete 18 
nature of the estimate and inform the patient or prospective patient of the ability to obtain 19 
an updat ed estimate once additional information is obtained.  If a health care entity fails 20 
to provide an estimate as required by this subsection, the health care entity may not bill 21 
the patient or the patient's insurance carrier for the admission, procedure or se rvice.  Upon 22 
request of a patient or prospective patient who is covered by insurance, a health care 23 
entity that participates in a carrier's network shall, based on the information available to 24 
the health care entity at the time of the request, provide suff icient information regarding 25 
the proposed admission, procedure or service for the patient or prospective patient to use 26 
that carrier's applicable toll -free telephone number and publicly accessible website to 27 
obtain information about the amount of out -of-pocket costs in accordance with Title 28 
24-A, section 4303, subsection 20.  A health care entity may assist a patient or 29 
prospective patient in using a carrier's toll -free telephone number and publicly accessible 30 
website.  31 
4.  Access to data.  Notwithstanding a ny other provision of law, a health care entity 32 
or another person designated by a health care entity or a patient or prospective patient 33 
shall have access at no cost to the all -payor and all -settings health care database based on 34 
claims established by the Maine Health Data Processing Center in accordance with 35 
section 682 for the purposes of providing information to a patient or prospective patient 36 
as required by subsection 3.  Disclosure of data to a health care entity or another person 37 
pursuant to this sub section must be reasonably limited to the minimum extent necessary 38 
and any information disclosed must be used solely for the purposes of providing 39 
information to a patient or prospective patient as required by subsection 3.  40 
Sec. 3.  24-A MRSA §4303, sub -§20 is enacted to read:  41 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR0956(01) -1 
 20.  Costs of health care services; estimates and payment.  A carrier offering a 1 
health plan in this State shall comply with the following requirements with respect to the 2 
costs of health care services.  3 
A.  A carrier shall establish a  toll-free telephone number and publicly accessible 4 
website that enables an enrollee to request and obtain from the carrier information on 5 
the average price paid in the past 12 months to network health care providers for a 6 
proposed admission, procedure or service in each geographic rating area established 7 
by the carrier and to request an estimate pursuant to paragraph B.  8 
B.  Within 2 business days of an enrollee's request, a carrier shall provide a binding 9 
estimate for the maximum allowed amount or charge f or a proposed admission, 10 
procedure or service and the estimated amount the enrollee will be responsible to pay 11 
for a proposed admission, procedure or service that is a medically necessary covered 12 
benefit, based on the information available to the carrier a t the time the request is 13 
made, including any facility fee, copayment, deductible, coinsurance or other 14 
out-of-pocket amount for any covered health care benefits.  An enrollee may not be 15 
required to pay more than the disclosed amounts for the covered healt h care benefits 16 
that were actually provided, except that this paragraph does not prohibit a carrier 17 
from imposing cost -sharing requirements disclosed in the enrollee's certificate of 18 
coverage for unforeseen health care services that arise out of the propos ed admission, 19 
procedure or service.  A carrier shall notify an enrollee that these are estimated costs, 20 
and that the actual amount the enrollee will be responsible to pay may vary due to 21 
unforeseen services that arise out of the proposed admission, procedu re or service.  22 
For purposes of this paragraph, "allowed amount" means the contractually agreed 23 
upon amount paid by a carrier to a health care entity for health care services provided 24 
to an enrollee in a carrier's health plan.  25 
C.  If an enrollee elects to receive health care services from a provider that cost less 26 
than the average amount for a particular admission, procedure or service, a carrier 27 
shall pay to an enrollee 50% of the saved cost to a maximum of $7,500 except that a 28 
carrier is not required to m ake a payment if the saved cost is $50 or less.  A payment 29 
to an enrollee must be made within 30 days.  If an enrollee elects to receive health 30 
care services from an out -of-network provider that cost less than the average amount 31 
for a particular admission,  procedure or service, a carrier shall apply the enrollee's 32 
share of the cost of those health care services as specified in the enrollee's health plan 33 
toward the enrollee's member cost sharing as if the health care services were provided 34 
by a network provi der. 35 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a carrier or another person 36 
designated by a carrier or an enrollee shall have access at no cost to the all -payor and 37 
all-settings health care database based on claims established by the Maine Health 38 
Data  Processing Center in accordance with Title 22, section 682 for the purposes of 39 
providing information to an enrollee as required by this subsection.  Disclosure of 40 
data to a carrier or another person pursuant to this paragraph must be reasonably 41 
limited to  the minimum extent necessary and any information disclosed must be used 42 
solely for the purposes of providing information to an enrollee as required by this 43 
subsection.  44 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR0956(01) -1 
 E.  By February 1st of each year, a carrier shall file with the superintendent for the 1 
most recent calendar year the total number of requests for a binding estimate pursuant 2 
to paragraph B, the total number of transactions made pursuant to paragraph C, the 3 
average cost by service for such transactions, the total savings achieved below the 4 
average cost by service for such transactions, the total payments made to enrollees 5 
and the total number and percentage of a carrier's enrollees that participated in such 6 
transactions.  7 
SUMMARY  8 
This bill requires a health care entity to provide an estimate of  the allowed amount if 9 
the entity is within a patient's carrier network or the amount that will be charged if the 10 
entity does not participate in a patient's carrier network for a proposed admission, 11 
procedure or service within 2 business days of a patient' s request and to assist a patient in 12 
using a carrier's toll -free telephone number and publicly accessible website to obtain 13 
information about the out -of-pocket costs for which a patient will be responsible.  14 
The bill requires health insurance carriers to es tablish a toll -free telephone number 15 
and publicly accessible website to provide information to enrollees about health care 16 
costs. A carrier is required to provide information on the average price paid in the past 12 17 
months to a network health care provider  for a proposed admission, procedure or service 18 
in each geographic rating area established by the carrier and to provide a binding estimate 19 
for the maximum allowed amount or charge for a proposed admission, procedure or 20 
service and the estimated amount the  enrollee will be responsible to pay for a proposed 21 
admission, procedure or service that is a medically necessary covered benefit.  22 
The bill also requires a carrier to pay an enrollee 50% of the saved cost to a 23 
maximum of $7,500 if an enrollee elects to rec eive health care services from a provider 24 
that cost less than the average cost for a particular admission, procedure or service unless 25 
the savings is $50 or less.  If an enrollee elects to receive health care services from an 26 
out-of-network provider that c ost less than the average amount for a particular admission, 27 
procedure or service, a carrier shall apply the enrollee's share of the cost toward the 28 
enrollee's member cost sharing as if the health care services were provided by a network 29 
provider.  30 
The bill  authorizes a health care entity, a carrier or another person designated by a 31 
health care entity, carrier, patient or prospective patient to have access at no cost to the 32 
all-payor and all -settings health care database for claims for the purposes of provid ing the 33 
information required.  34 
The bill also requires carriers to provide certain information to the Department of 35 
Professional and Financial Regulation, Bureau of Insurance on an annual basis relating to 36 
the payments made to enrollees and the saved costs i f an enrollee elects to receive health 37 
care services from a provider that cost less than the average cost for a particular 38 
admission, procedure or service.  39 
 
