 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION -2016  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1472  
S.P. 570  In Senate, December 18, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Enhance the Administration of the Child and Adult 
Care Food Program by Creating Clear Guidelines for Organizations 
and Streamlining the Application Process  
 
 
 
Approved for introduction by a majority of the Legislative Council pursuant to Joint Rule 
203. 
Received by the Secretary of the Senate on December 18, 2015.  Referred t o the Committee 
on Health and Human Services pursuant to Joint Rule 308.2 and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator ALFOND of Cumberland.  
Cosponsored by Representative GATTINE of Westbrook and  
Senators: BURNS of Washington, HASKELL of Cumberland, Representatives: BLACK of 
Wilton, HAMANN of South Portland, HICKMAN of Winthrop, MAREAN of Hollis.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR2410(01) -1 
 Whereas, the Child and Adult Care Food Program is a federally funded nutrition 1 
program within the United States Department of Agriculture that is administered in the 2 
State by the bureau of child and family services within the Department of Health and 3 
Human  Services; and  4 
Whereas, the federal Child and Adult Care Food Program provides reimbursement 5 
for nutritious meals and snacks served to eligible infants and children in qualifying child 6 
care centers, family day care homes, emergency shelters and after -schoo l care programs 7 
for at -risk students and to eligible adults receiving care in qualifying nonresidential adult 8 
day care centers; and  9 
Whereas, in order to provide such services and receive reimbursement, qualifying 10 
care facilities must complete lengthy appli cations and comply with numerous 11 
requirements, prohibitions and guidelines; and  12 
Whereas, certain facilities encounter difficulty navigating the application process 13 
and meeting the requirements, thus reducing the number of facilities that qualify to 14 
provide  these critical services; now, therefore, be it:  15 
Sec. 1.  Review and revise application; guidelines. Resolved:  That the 16 
Department of Health and Human Services shall review the application and reapplication 17 
procedures and forms required for an organizatio n to apply to participate in the federal 18 
Child and Adult Care Food Program and shall:  19 
1.  Streamline the application and reapplication forms;  20 
2.  Provide access to the forms through the department's publicly accessible website; 21 
and 22 
3.  Enable online comple tion and submission of all forms required for an organization 23 
to participate in the program, including but not limited to the application and 24 
reapplication forms.  25 
Rules adopted pursuant to this section are routine technical rules as defined in the 26 
Maine Re vised Statutes, Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. 27 
SUMMARY  28 
This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to review the 29 
application and reapplication procedures and forms required for an organization to apply 30 
to participate in the fed eral Child and Adult Care Food Program, and it directs the 31 
department to streamline the application and reapplication forms; provide access to the 32 
forms through the department's publicly accessible website; and enable online completion 33 
and submission of al l forms required for an organization to participate in the program, 34 
including but not limited to the application and reapplication forms.  35 
 
