 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 629  
S.P. 222  In Senate, March 3, 2015  
 
 
An Act Regarding Community Paramedicine Pilot Projects  
 
 
 
Submitted by the Department of Public Safety pursuant to Joint Rule 204.  
Reference to the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator DUTREMBLE of York.  
Cosponsored by Representative GERRISH of Lebanon and  
Senators: HASKELL of Cumberland, SAVIELLO of Franklin, WILLETTE of Aroostook, 
Representatives: HEAD of Bethel, LAJOIE of Lewiston, McLEAN of Gorham, VACHON of 
Scarborough.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0498(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  32 MRSA ยง84, sub -ยง4, as enacted by PL 2011, c. 562, ยง1, is amended to 2 
read:  3 
4.  Establishment of community paramedicine pilot projects.  Using the same 4 
process established by the board in rule for using pilot projects to evaluate the workability 5 
and appropriateness of incorporating a particular emergency medical treatment technique 6 
or a type of equipment into any licensure level, the board may establish up to 12  pilot 7 
projects for the pu rpose of developing and evaluating a community paramedicine 8 
program.  A pilot project established pursuant to this subsection may not exceed 3 years 9 
in duration.  10 
As used in this subsection, "community paramedicine" means the practice by an 11 
emergency medica l services provider primarily in an out -of-hospital setting of providing 12 
episodic patient evaluation, advice and treatment directed at preventing or improving a 13 
particular medical condition, within the scope of practice of the emergency medical 14 
services pr ovider as specifically requested or directed by a physician.  15 
The board shall establish the requirements and application and approval process of pilot 16 
projects established pursuant to this subsection.  At a minimum, an emergency medical 17 
services provider, i ncluding, but not limited to, an ambulance service or nontransporting 18 
emergency medical service, that conducts a pilot project shall work with an identified 19 
primary care medical director, have an emergency medical services medical director and 20 
collect and submit data and written reports to the board, in accordance with requirements 21 
established by the board.  22 
On or before January 30th of each year, the board shall submit a written report to the joint 23 
standing committees of the Legislature having jurisdiction over criminal justice and 24 
public safety matters and labor, commerce, research and economic development matters 25 
that summarizes the work and progress during the previous calendar year of each pilot 26 
project authorized pursuant to this subsection.  27 
SUMMARY  28 
This bill removes a requirement that an emergency medical services provider that 29 
conducts a community paramedicine pilot project work with an identified primary care 30 
medical director, have an emergency medical services medical director and collect and 31 
submit data and written reports to the board, in accordance with requirements established 32 
by the board.  The bill also removes a provision limiting the number of pilot projects.  33 
 
