 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 305  
S.P. 120  In Senate, February 10, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Authorize Circus Conservatory of America To Grant 
Baccalaureate Degrees  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs suggested and ordered 
printed.  
 
 
  
 HEATHER J.R. PRIEST  
 Secretary of the Senate  
 
Presented by Senator MILLETT of Cumberland.  
Cosponsored by Representative MAKER of Calais and  
Senators: ALFOND of Cumberland, KATZ of Kennebec, LANGLEY of Hancock, 
SAVIELLO of Franklin, Representatives: DAUGHTRY of Brunswick, KORNFIELD of 
Bangor, POULIOT of Augusta, TIPPING -SPITZ of Orono.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR0918(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble. Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, authorization by the Legislature is required for any institution of higher 3 
education to co nfer academic, educational, literary or professional degrees upon the 4 
recommendation of the State Board of Education; and  5 
Whereas, circus has historically been a dynamic feature of the American cultural 6 
landscape and is now increasingly being recognized as  a sophisticated performing art 7 
internationally and in the United States; and  8 
Whereas, circus education and training environments attract and retain young, 9 
healthy and energetic populations to their communities; and  10 
Whereas, circus is a significant and gro wing entrepreneurial force in the global 11 
entertainment industry and the founders of Circus Conservatory of America have 12 
demonstrated a commitment to economic development; and  13 
Whereas, launching the first circus college in the United States promises to brin g 14 
distinction to Maine in the international performing arts community and will add to the 15 
State's identity as a cultural destination; and  16 
Whereas, Circus Conservatory of America will offer education in the fields of 17 
performance, coaching, production and ci rcus arts and intends to offer bachelor's degrees 18 
and needs to receive approval of degree -granting authority; and  19 
Whereas, it is necessary for the Legislature to grant this authority in order that the 20 
school may begin offering degrees for the school year b eginning in September 2015; and  21 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 22 
the meaning of the Constitution of Maine and require the following legislation as 23 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public p eace, health and safety; now, 24 
therefore,  25 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  26 
Sec. 1.  Degree.  Circus Conservatory of America, a corporation organized and 27 
existing under the laws of the State, may confer on all students who success fully 28 
complete its prescribed course of study the degrees of Bachelor of Arts or Bachelor of 29 
Fine Arts as are usually conferred by like institutions of higher education.  30 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 31 
legislation ta kes effect when approved.  32 
SUMMARY  33 
This bill authorizes Circus Conservatory of America to grant the degrees of Bachelor 34 
of Arts and Bachelor of Fine Arts.  35 
