 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed  on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 133  
H.P. 91  House of Representatives, January 22, 2015  
 
 
Resolve, To Establish the Task Force on Independence from Public 
Assistance  
 
(EMERGENCY)  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative POULIOT of Augusta.  
Cosponsored by Senator HASKELL of Cumberland and  
Representatives: GATTINE of  Westbrook, HAMANN of South Portland, PARRY of Arundel, 
PETERSON of Rumford, SANDERSON of Chelsea, SIROCKI of Scarborough, VACHON of 
Scarborough, Senator: McCORMICK of Kennebec.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1417(01) -1 
 Emergency preamble.  Whereas, acts and resolves of the Legislature do not 1 
become effective until 90 days after adjournment unless enacted as emergencies; and  2 
Whereas, the Task Force on Independence from Public Assistance is required to 3 
perform its work in a thorough and deliberate manner so that legislation may be drafted to 4 
encourage independence from public assistance for consideration in the Second Regular 5 
Session of the 127th Legislature; and  6 
Whereas, the study must be initiated before the 90 -day period  expires in order that 7 
the study may be completed and a report submitted in time for submission to the next 8 
legislative session; and  9 
Whereas, in the judgment of the Legislature, these facts create an emergency within 10 
the meaning of the Constitution of Main e and require the following legislation as 11 
immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety; now, 12 
therefore, be it  13 
Sec. 1.  Task Force on Independence from Public Assistance established.  14 
Resolved:  That the Task Force on I ndependence from Public Assistance, referred to in 15 
this resolve as "the task force," is established; and be it further  16 
Sec. 2.  Task force membership.  Resolved:  That the task force consists of 13 17 
members appointed as follows:  18 
1.  Three members of the Sen ate appointed by the President of the Senate, including 19 
members from each of the 2 parties holding the largest number of seats in the Legislature;  20 
2.  Four members of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the 21 
House, including members fro m each of the 2 parties holding the largest number of seats 22 
in the Legislature;  23 
3.  Three members appointed by the Governor who possess expertise in public 24 
assistance programs and programs to assist people to achieve employment.  One member 25 
must represent the executive branch, one member must represent municipal 26 
administrators of general assistance programs and one member must represent employers 27 
in the State;  28 
4.  One member appointed by the President of the Senate who represents the 29 
academic community and possesses policy and research expertise in public assistance 30 
programs and poverty; and  31 
5.  Two members appointed by the Speaker of the House who possess expertise in 32 
public assistance programs.  One member must represent nonprofit organizations and 33 
possess  policy expertise in public assistance programs that help people move out of 34 
poverty, and one member must be a person who has successfully transitioned from 35 
poverty and reliance on the State's public benefit programs to sustainable employment; 36 
and be it fu rther  37 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1417(01) -1 
 Sec. 3.  Cooperation.  Resolved:  That the Department of Health and Human 1 
Services, other state agencies and the Maine State Housing Authority shall provide 2 
information and assistance to the task force as requested by the task force for the 3 
performan ce of its duties; and be it further  4 
Sec. 4.  Chairs.  Resolved:  That the first -named Senate member is the Senate 5 
chair and the first -named House of Representatives member is the House chair of the task 6 
force; and be it further  7 
Sec. 5.  Appointments; conve ning of task force.  Resolved:  That all 8 
appointments must be made no later than 30 days following the effective date of this 9 
resolve.  The appointing authorities shall notify the Executive Director of the Legislative 10 
Council once all appointments have bee n completed.  After appointment of all members, 11 
the chairs shall call and convene the first meeting of the task force.  If 30 days or more 12 
after the effective date of this resolve a majority of but not all appointments have been 13 
made, the chairs may reques t authority and the Legislative Council may grant authority 14 
for the task force to meet and conduct its business; and be it further  15 
Sec. 6.  Duties.  Resolved:  That the task force shall meet up to 8 times to review 16 
and make evidence -based recommendations, including any suggested legislation, on 17 
initiatives needed to help families receiving municipal, state or federal public assistance 18 
move out of poverty to independence through employment.  The task force shall identify 19 
any provisions in current state polic y, law and rules that penalize or create a disincentive 20 
to work and make needed recommendations to eliminate any such barriers and propose 21 
new policies that support and promote stable and lasting employment.  In performing its 22 
work, the task force shall re view categories of public assistance available to residents of 23 
the State and eligibility requirements; termination of eligibility, assistance and benefits; 24 
transitional assistance and benefits; barriers to independence from public assistance; 25 
related legis lative reports and academic research conducted in the State; and initiatives to 26 
assist people to achieve employment; and be it further  27 
Sec. 7.  Staff assistance.  Resolved:  That the Legislative Council shall provide 28 
necessary staffing services to the task  force; and be it further  29 
Sec. 8.  Report.  Resolved:  That, no later than December 2, 2015, the task force 30 
shall submit a report that includes its findings and recommendations, including suggested 31 
legislation, for presentation to the Joint Standing Commit tee on Health and Human 32 
Services.  33 
Emergency clause.  In view of the emergency cited in the preamble, this 34 
legislation takes effect when approved.  35 
SUMMARY  36 
This resolve establishes the Task Force on Independence from Public Assistance.  37 
The task force is dir ected to review and make evidence -based recommendations on 38 
initiatives needed to help families receiving public assistance to move out of poverty to 39 
independence through employment.  The task force must meet up to 8 times, consists of 40 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR1417(01) -1 
 13 members and must r eport by December 2, 2015 with its findings and 1 
recommendations and suggested legislation to the Joint Standing Committee on Health 2 
and Human Services.  3 
 
