 
MAINE STATE LEGISLATURE  
 
 
 
The following document is provided by the 
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DIGITAL LIBRARY  
at the Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library 
http://legislature.m aine.gov/lawlib 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reproduced from electronic originals 
(may include minor formatting diffe rences from printed original) 
 
 
Printed on recycled paper   
127th MAINE LEGISLATURE  
 
FIRST REGULAR SESSION -2015  
 
Legislative Document  No. 1125  
H.P. 776  House of Representatives, March 26, 2015  
 
 
An Act To Expand Public Access to Epinephrine Autoinjectors  
 
 
 
 
Reference to the Committee on Health and Human Services suggested and ordered printed.  
 
 
  
 ROBERT B. HUNT  
 Clerk  
 
Presented by Representative PETERSON of Rumford.  
Cosponsored by Senator HASKELL of Cumberland and  
Representatives: BURSTEIN of Lincolnville, GATTINE of Westbrook, HEAD of Bethel, 
MALABY of Hancock, McCABE of Skowhegan, SHORT of Pittsfield, Senator: BRAKEY of 
Androscoggin.  
 
 

 
 Page 1 - 127LR1552(01) -1 
 Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  1 
Sec. 1.  22 MRSA c. 423 is enacted to read:  2 
CHAPTER 423  3 
ACCESS TO EPINEPHRIN E AUTOINJECTOR  4 
ยง2150 -F.  Definitions  5 
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following te rms 6 
have the following meanings.  7 
1.  Administer.   "Administer" means to apply an epinephrine autoinjector directly to 8 
a human body.  9 
2.  Authorized entity.   "Authorized entity" means any entity, organization or place of 10 
employment, other than a school under  Title 20 -A, section 6305, in connection with or at 11 
which allergens capable of causing anaphylaxis may be present, including but not limited 12 
to recreation camps, colleges, universities, day care facilities, youth sports leagues, 13 
amusement parks, restaurant s and sports arenas.  14 
3.  Emergency public access station.   "Emergency public access station" means a 15 
locked, secure container for the storage of epinephrine autoinjectors that is under the 16 
general oversight of a health care practitioner who is available in  real time by audio, 17 
video or other similar means of electronic communication and that, upon authorization of 18 
the consulting health care practitioner, may be unlocked to make available the 19 
epinephrine autoinjectors.  20 
4.  Epinephrine autoinjector.   "Epinephr ine autoinjector" means a single -use device 21 
used for the automatic injection of a premeasured dose of epinephrine into a human body.  22 
5.  Health care practitioner.   "Health care practitioner" means an individual who is 23 
licensed, registered or otherwise auth orized in the appropriate jurisdiction to prescribe 24 
and administer drugs in the course of professional practice.  25 
ยง2150 -G.  Epinephrine autoinjectors; emergency administration  26 
1.  Prescribing to an authorized entity permitted.   A health care practitioner ma y 27 
prescribe epinephrine autoinjectors in the name of an authorized entity for use in 28 
accordance with this section, and pharmacists and health care practitioners may dispense 29 
epinephrine autoinjectors pursuant to a prescription issued in the name of an auth orized 30 
entity.  A prescription authorized pursuant to this section is valid for 2 years.  31 
2.  Authorized entities permitted to maintain supply.   An authorized entity may 32 
acquire and stock a supply of epinephrine autoinjectors pursuant to a prescription issu ed 33 
under subsection 1.  An epinephrine autoinjector must be stored in a location readily 34 
accessible in an emergency and in accordance with the instructions for use for the 35 
epinephrine autoinjector and any additional requirements that may be established by the 36 
department.  An authorized entity shall designate employees or agents who have 37 
 
 Page 2 - 127LR1552(01) -1 
 completed the training required under subsection 4 to be responsible for the storage, 1 
maintenance, control and general oversight of epinephrine autoinjectors acquired by the  2 
authorized entity.  3 
3.  Use of epinephrine autoinjectors.   An employee or agent of an authorized entity 4 
who has completed the training required by subsection 4 may use epinephrine 5 
autoinjectors prescribed pursuant to subsection 1 to:  6 
A.  Provide an epineph rine autoinjector to a person the employee or agent believes in 7 
good faith is experiencing anaphylaxis, or the parent, guardian or caregiver of such a 8 
person, for immediate administration, regardless of whether the person has a 9 
prescription for an epinephr ine autoinjector or has previously been diagnosed with an 10 
allergy; and  11 
B.  Administer an epinephrine autoinjector to a person the employee or agent believes 12 
in good faith is experiencing anaphylaxis, regardless of whether the person has a 13 
prescription for an epinephrine autoinjector or has previously been diagnosed with an 14 
allergy.  15 
4.  Training.   An employee or agent of an authorized entity shall complete an 16 
anaphylaxis training program and shall complete additional training at least every 2 years 17 
thereafte r.  The training must be conducted by a nationally recognized organization 18 
experienced in training nonprofessionals in emergency health treatment or an entity or 19 
individual approved by the department.  The department may approve specific entities or 20 
indivi duals or may approve classes of entities or individuals to conduct training.  Training 21 
may be conducted online or in person and, at a minimum, must cover:  22 
A.  How to recognize signs and symptoms of severe allergic reactions, including 23 
anaphylaxis;  24 
B.  Standards and procedures for the storage and administration of an epinephrine 25 
autoinjector; and  26 
C.  Emergency follow -up procedures.  27 
The entity or individual that conducts the training shall issue a certificate, on a form 28 
developed or approved by the department , to each person who successfully completes the 29 
anaphylaxis training program.  30 
5.  Immunity.   An authorized entity that possesses and makes available epinephrine 31 
autoinjectors and its employees and agents; a health care practitioner that prescribes 32 
epinephr ine autoinjectors to an authorized entity; a pharmacist or health care practitioner 33 
that dispenses epinephrine autoinjectors to an authorized entity; and an individual or 34 
entity that conducts the training under subsection 4 may not be held liable for any i njuries 35 
or related damages that result from any act or omission taken in good faith pursuant to 36 
this section except that this immunity does not apply to acts or omissions constituting 37 
gross negligence or willful or wanton misconduct.  The administration of  an epinephrine 38 
autoinjector in accordance with this section is not the practice of medicine or any other 39 
profession that otherwise requires licensure.  This subsection does not eliminate, limit or 40 
reduce any other immunity or defense that may be available  under the laws of this State, 41 
including that provided under Title 14, section 164.  An authorized entity located in this 42 
 
 Page 3 - 127LR1552(01) -1 
 State is not liable for any injuries or related damages that result from the provision or 1 
administration of an epinephrine autoinjecto r outside of this State if the authorized entity 2 
would not have been liable for such injuries or related damages had the provision or 3 
administration occurred within this State.  4 
6.  Reporting.   An authorized entity that possesses and makes available epineph rine 5 
autoinjectors shall submit to the department, on a form developed by the department, a 6 
report of each incident on the authorized entity's premises that involves the administration 7 
of an epinephrine autoinjector pursuant to subsection 3.  The departmen t shall annually 8 
publish a summary of all reports submitted to it under this subsection.  9 
ยง2150 -H.  Emergency public access stations  10 
1.  Emergency public access stations.   Notwithstanding any provision of Title 32, 11 
chapters 2 -B, 31, 48 and 117:  12 
A.  A health  care practitioner may prescribe a stock supply of epinephrine 13 
autoinjectors to an entity or organization for storage in an emergency public access 14 
station or may place a stock supply of epinephrine autoinjectors at an entity or 15 
organization in an emergenc y public access station in accordance with protocols 16 
established by the health care practitioner and approved by the department;  17 
B.  A health care practitioner may provide consultation services to an individual 18 
accessing an emergency public access station and may make the epinephrine 19 
autoinjectors stored in the emergency public access station available to the individual 20 
in accordance with protocols established by the health care practitioner and approved 21 
by the department; and  22 
C.  An individual may use an e mergency public access station and may administer or 23 
provide an epinephrine autoinjector made available from the emergency public access 24 
station to a person believed in good faith to be experiencing anaphylaxis or may 25 
provide such an epinephrine autoinject or to the parent, guardian or caregiver of such 26 
a person.  27 
2.  Immunity.   A person, including an entity or organization at which an emergency 28 
public access station is located, a health care practitioner and a user of an emergency 29 
public access station, who undertakes in good faith any act or omission pursuant to this 30 
section is not liable for any injuries or related damages that result from any such act or 31 
omission except that this immunity does not apply to acts or omissions constituting gross 32 
negligence or  willful or wanton misconduct.  This subsection does not eliminate, limit or 33 
reduce any other immunity or defense that may be available under the laws of this State, 34 
including that provided under Title 14, section 164.  Use of an emergency public access 35 
station in accordance with this section is not the practice of medicine or any other 36 
profession that otherwise requires licensure.  37 
SUMMARY  38 
This bill allows entities, organizations and places of employment at which allergens 39 
capable of causing anaphylaxis may  be present, other than schools, to stock prescribed 40 
epinephrine autoinjectors and administer them to persons believed in good faith to be 41 
 
 Page 4 - 127LR1552(01) -1 
 experiencing anaphylaxis and provides that those entities, organizations and places of 1 
employment may not be held lia ble for any injuries or related damages that may result.  It 2 
requires training for employees or agents of such entities, organizations or places of 3 
employment.  It also provides for the establishment of emergency public access stations 4 
to contain stocks of  epinephrine autoinjectors, allows health care practitioners to stock 5 
them with epinephine autoinjectors and to provide individuals accessing the stations with 6 
consultation services in real time by audio, video or other similar means of electronic 7 
communic ation and provides that persons involved with the stations and acting in good 8 
faith may not be held liable for any injuries or related damages that may result.  9 
 
