                                                                                                                         February 24, 2023
Hello Committee On Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry. 
Thank you for the serious consideration of passing LD 644 - An Act to Include Cats in the Laws Governing Animal Trespass.
I strongly support LD 644. 
Domestic pet cats are safe indoors and leashed. Cats kept indoors reduce the costs of our beleaguered humane societies.  Cats leashed and kept indoors help our veterinarians who are asked daily for reduced fees and free services. Domestic pet cats roaming our streets are a vehicle safety hazard. Domestic pet cats are a direct threat to biodiversity. 
Year around in Maine cats daily kill at least mice, shrews ,voles, squirrels and rabbits each of which are native and have important roles in our ecosystems, our food webs.  The world wide research on the billions of birds cats kills annually is well documented.
Personally I believe that this legislation "should" be a start as domesticated pet cats including barn cats and feral cats need to be mandated to be licensed and kept indoors and if outdoors always on a leash even on private property.  Where I live in Thomaston is typical of every area throughout Maine.  Where ever people live be it downtown Portland or rural farming areas with barns or any of the islands or the western mountains cats are out killing wildlife as I write this.
I regret not being in front of you in Augusta to personally deliver the dead birds killed in my yard by roaming neighborhood cats.  My next door neighbors have 4 cats all roaming daily and into the night. They have 4 bird feeders on poles surrounded by ﬂimsy chicken wire to supposedly keep the cats out. I see this from my windows.The cats lay in wait preying on the birds. The birds of course are not staying within the ﬂimsy chicken wire!!! Birds feed everywhere and anywhere. I see these 4 cats along with countless others which live in houses on the streets behind me and the cross streets. I see them with birds in their mouths. 
Cats are in my yard even now with the snow. They are defecating and digging in the ground, in pots and under my decks. I have spent a small fortune on fencing, most of which they dig out underneath or climb and scratch and damage.  Cat feces is a known health hazard. 
It may be needless to say but there are legions of professional research published over many years documenting the annual ecosystem damage and accompanying costs of ecosystem services caused by cats. https://www.npr.org/2020/04/18/820953617/the-killer-at-home-house-cats-have-more-impact-on-local-wildlife-than-wild-preda
Thank you for your work, your time and for 
considering at the very least including cats 
in the Laws Governing Animal Trespass.
Cindy Lang 

