Jean Cobb
Paws Animal Welfare Society, Inc.
LD 644
LD644
Although I support keeping cats inside for their sake and the sake of birds and other 
wildlife, I am not in favor of this legislation because it does not address the problem. 
The majority of cats outside do not have any owner. They were abandoned by their 
owner or born outside to cats that were abandoned.
Their survival depends on compassionate people helping them. If there is shelter 
nearby, they will take the cats. If not, there are groups who will will do trap, neuter, 
return (TNR) which will stop the breeding of cats. Designating people who help 
homeless cats as “keepers” places an unfair burden on them and prevents them from 
feeding the cat and helping it get into a shelter. It is counterproductive.
Let me give you an example of these situations:
I met an older couple several years ago that own a barn. A neighbor had moved and 
left their two cats behind, an intact male and female. The cats took refuge in George 
and Nancy’s barn so they began feeding them. They tried to find someone to help 
them, animal control, police, veterinarians, etc. No one would. 
After a few years they had over 30 – 40 cats due to the breeding and people dropping off cats
they did not want. We were a small but growing operation in 2013 but we agreed to help. 
They brought 3 sick kittens to us in Oct. and we continued to take the cats each year. George
trapped them, we had them altered and gave them whatever medical care they needed. We 
kept most of the cats and found homes for them. We completely finished the job in 2021. We 
had taken 91 cats from the barn, none are left.  
In summary, passing a law to include cats in the Maine trespass law does not solve the 
problem of cat predation on wildlife and birds. Preventing cat abandonment and helping to 
reduce the feral colonies and hoarding situations around the State would be more of a 
solution. I believe this should be a function of the Animal Welfare program because we few 
scattered volunteers cannot do it alone.       
