1 
4 1;»
'. 
f‘. 
i A 
|‘g 
t __)_._ . 
MAINE FEDERATION OF HUMANE SOCIETIES 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 644 — An Act to include Cats in the Laws Governing Animal Trespass 
To the Committee on Agricultural, Conservation and Forestry February 27, 2023 
Senator lngwersen, Representative Piuecker, and members of the Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Committee: 
My name is Katie Lisnik and l am the Executive Director the Greater Androscoggin Humane Society in Lewiston 
and Secretary of the Maine Federation of Humane Societies (MFHS). I am offering testimony in opposition to 
LD 644 on behalf of MFHS whose board also includes representatives from the Animal Refuge League of 
Greater Portland in Westbrook, Animal Welfare Society in Kennebunk, Bangor Humane Society in Bangor, 
Greater Androscoggin Humane Society in Lewiston, Humane Society of the United States, Maine State Society 
for the Protection of Animals in Windham, PAWS Animal Adoption Center in Camden, Pope Memorial Humane 
Society in Thomaston, and Spirits Place Cat Sanctuary in St. Albans. 
Maine is consistently in the top three cat-owning states in our country, according to data collected by the 
American Veterinary Medication Association. Every year, thousands of cats come into the licensed shelters and 
rescues across our state- needing shelter, rehoming, veterinary care and more. In 2022, my shelter alone took 
in and cared for 1,689 at a cost of hundreds of thousands of dollars. 
While we also care about wildlife in our communities and acknowledge that cats outdoors do engage in 
predation, this bill will do nothing to address that issue. Rather, it will force an unfunded mandate onto 
already struggling animal control officers, law enforcement and the shelters and rescues who provide 
contracted sheltering services for lost and stray animals. The Maine Municipal Association let us know they 
felt the bill, if passed, would need to be enacted with a mandate preamble for the state to fund the activity at 
90% of the impact (including facilities and time.) On top of that, no matter how much money is spent, it will be 
nearly impossible to round up every cat who free-roams outdoors. 
if passed and actually enforced, this bill would result in thousands of owned cats being rounded up and 
brought to shelters and rescues, further over~burdening non-profit organizations that already struggle to 
address all of the cats in actual need (lost, injured, abandoned, homeless) in their communities. Research has 
shown that lost cats are 13 times more likely to be reunited with their family if they stay in the community 
versus being brought to a shelter. This bill would effectively take thousands of owned cats away from their 
homes and force them to be rehomed. Many shelters may stop taking stray contracts with municipalities 
because we would not be able to address these added cats who are not in actual need of sheltering services. 
Additionally, this bill could have disastrous effects on feral and community cat colonies. Shelters could find 
themselves inundated with multiple cats at a time who are not suited to the shelter model. This class of cat 
would also use up valuable human and financial resources. As this Committee has recognized and supported 
through the use of Help Fix ME funds, the better solution is wide-spread spay/neuter and trap/neuter/return 
programs.
Overall, this bill has significant unintended consequences and will not actually address the issue of wildlife 
predation. We encourage you to vote Ought Not To Pass on LD 644. Thank you for your consideration and 
opportunity to submit testimony. 
Sincerely, 
Katie Lisnik 
Secretary, Maine Federation of Humane Societies 
Executive Director 
Greater Androscoggin Humane Society, Lewiston 
.7’alag 
Patsy Murphy 
Vice President, Maine Federation of Humane Societies 
Executive Director 
Animal Refuge League of Greater Portland, Westbrook 
Suzan .7’uende/zgaxst 
Suzan Prendergast 
Board Member, Maine Federation of Humane Societies 
Executive Director 
Bangor Humane Society, Bangor 
Sﬁcllq .‘73ut&v¢ 
Shelly Butler 
Board Member, Maine Federation of Humane Societies 
Executive Director 
PAWS Animal Adoption Center, Camden 
.Bee.9’a£nw¢ 
Lee Palmer 
Board Member, Maine Federation of Humane Societies 
President 
Splrit’s Place Cat Sanctuary, St. Aibans .7{atie gfamlie/01;; 
Katie Hansberry 
President, Maine Federation of Humane Societies 
Maine Senior State Director 
The Humane Society of the United States 
Abigail Smith 
Treasurer, Maine Federation of Humane Societies 
Executive Director 
Animal Welfare Society, West Kennebunk 
ffuacq Saﬁa 
Tracy Sala 
Board Member, Maine Federation of Humane Societies 
Executive Director 
Pope Memorial Humane Society, Thomaston 
.7{at!ig, ‘llkundﬁueq 
Kathy Woodbrey 
Board Member, Maine Federation of Humane Societies 
Executive Director 
Maine State Society for the Protection of Animals, 
Windham
