Marie Zwicker
Sullivan
LD 644
Designating Cats in the Trespassing Law
My name is Marie Zwicker and I live in Sullivan, Maine. I am currently out of the state due to 
the passing of one of my sons, so I am not able to be present in person at this meeting but 
wish to provide testimony for this important matter.  I was certified as an Animal Control 
Officer (A.C.O.) through the Animal Welfare Department training program given in Augusta, 
Maine in October of 2009, having been hired by the Towns of Sullivan and Sorrento just prior 
to that. I started work as an A.C.O. in these two towns early in January, 2010 and 
subsequently was hired as A.C.O. in the Towns of Hancock, Franklin, Trenton and Waltham, 
as well as the Unorganized Territories of Hancock County. I served these towns and 
territories until I retired from the position of A.C.O. in 2022. In this capacity I was also 
privileged to assist and be assisted by the Humane Agent on numerous occasions.
Working as an A.C.O. for those many years has given me an opportunity to see, firsthand, 
some of the multitude of problems generated with regard to the plethora of community, stray, 
feral cats in rural Maine. In order to alleviate the situation and help in some small way, I 
started a small non-profit "Protecting Animals' Welfare (P.A.W.)"  to help those cats as well as
owned cats and/or those cats who had no home but were being fed by kind people who 
wanted the cats to survive . in addition, P.A.W. also provided and continues to provide 
assistance when requested by individuals and small groups involved in TNR 
(Trap-Neuter-Return). The monies collected primarily from private donations and some small 
funding from some of the towns, were and are used to help with spay/neuter costs, as well as 
help people who could not afford the full veterinary costs for their animals. (As a corollary, as 
the law currently reads, those who feed stray animals for a short time become designated as 
the "owners" of those animals, and considered legally responsible for their care).
Yes, outdoor cats do kill some birds and small animals, but the biggest killer of birds and 
small animals is habitat destruction of wildlife areas for development; the second largest 
cause of mortality is pesticides; then a multitude of other causes come into play such as 
climate change and competition from invasive species. Unfortunately cats are more visible 
and consequently are more convenient targets to blame.
I believe most who work professionally in animal welfare, animal control, shelter and rescue 
work recognize that for the safety of all, including cats, humans, other small animals and 
birds, it is better for cats to remain indoors. Cats do not NEED to go out, although that is 
argued by some who do not recognize the expertise of professionals.
But cats are far back in the line, in my professional opinion, when it comes to protecting birds 
and small animals, so making a law to label cats as trespassers will not solve that problem. 
Enacting yet another law, when some of the laws already on the books are not consistently 
enforced, would appear to be counter productive. It might give an impression of some 
proactive laws being enacted but will not actually solve any real problems; it will only serve to 
further demonize cats as the villains and label those who are trying to help community, stray, 
feral cats by doing TNR or humanely feeding the cats as lawbreakers.
With regard to the currently proposed law of designating/including cats into the Trespass 
laws, I have some mixed feelings. As an A.C.O. entrusted with enforcing the law with regard 
to animals, with my A.C.O. mindset of bringing people into compliance with the rules and 
regulations to solve the problems, my first response was to believe that an additional law 
such as the one proposed to designate cats as trespassers, was in order and needed to be 
enacted. But there is a lot to be considered here. My experience has shown me also that it 
has been problematic to enforce the existing laws for a multitude of reasons. 
For example, in my view there needs to be more uniform and consistent follow-up  by ADA's 
and judges in the different counties and they must take animal issues more seriously and 
more consistently, especially in responses to animal abuse, neglect and cruelty, and more 
consistent consequences for serious offenders. There should be more ACO's who  perform 
their jobs in a more professional manner, who are held to a higher standard of performance in
following up on animal complaints, who must sincerely care for the animals and take the lives 
of the animals for whom they are entrusted to enforce animal laws, more seriously, rather 
than considering them as nuisances, and who honestly strive to help people and their 
animals. There should also be more support for TNR programs, whether they be done by 
shelters, organized rescue groups or individuals sincerely trying to help the cats and solve the
problems of cats in rural Maine. There should be more funding and more support for the Fix 
Me program, rather than reducing its effectiveness and making it even mor difficult to access 
by those who really need the help. There needs to be more education for the general 
population which is  also an important part of the job of A.C.O.'s and Humane Agents, as well 
as it should be part of the job of the AWD.   
So simply enacting yet another law which may or may not be effectively and consistently 
enforced, should be scrutinized more carefully before any further consideration if enacting. I 
believe that more education of the public, in conjunction with far greater support for those 
trying to help through TNR programs, more funding and support for the Fix Me program, more
education in the schools on kindness to animals, starting at an earlier age, more support for 
funding for these educational and TNR programs, more consistency in enforcing existing 
laws, more and better expectations for A.C.O. performance and hiring, would be good places 
to start.
Thank you for the opportunity to comment,
Marie Zwicker
Animal Control Officer (Retired)
Towns of Sullivan, Sorrento, Hancock, Franklin, Trenton, Waltham and Unorganized 
Territories
      
