       Oh, My Goodness     URGENT      URGENT     
Norma Milton    Caribou, MAINE       999 1 -075  norma@halfwayhomepet rescue.org  
 
LD 644   Bill "an Act to Include Cats in the Laws Governing Animal Trespass"   (HPO421).  
 
I also would like to add deer, m oose, bear, coyote, skunk, raccoon and Hawks, Owls, Eagles as 
well as all living creatures to this bill.   Afterall, hawks, owls and eagles come onto my 
property and try to kill my cats.   Plus a few years ago 3 coyotes came and tried to kill my cats 
and my ducks so I had to hire extra help that spring to watch over my animals because the 
game warden told me he would give me permission to shoot them.   I said in shock, "____," 
Can you imagine me with a gun?" " Well," he said once he had thought about me runnin g 
around with a gun. "Well then" he slowly suggested, "if you aggravate them by making lots of 
noise that might make them leave"   So I spent all day each day that week walking over 160 
acres of farmland banging two metal pots together and yelling, "Go Coyo te, go Coyote, go 
Coyote Go.  AND THEY WENT , right next door to my neighbor's farm.  
 
When you talk about chaining anymore animals up  especially family pets, try to remember 
that Maine is basically a rural environment and in cities most cats are kept insi de anyway.   At 
the same time remember that the bird got the worm and the bug. Yes, I like birds, cats, dogs, 
horses, whatever.  But this was their land long before it was ours. The bird eats the worm, the 
cat eats the bird but so do a lot of animals then g o after the cat, and the jets flying in the air 
still kill far more birds than all the world's cats put together. Shall we ground the jets. What 
about the sprays that farmers have to use for their potatoes.   Some things we can't or 
shouldn't restrict, cens or or try to control. We have to let nature be nature. Doing this could 
mean that feral cats could be used as target practice. We as volunteers trap the feral colony, 
sterilize the colony and statistics show that within 3 years the colony has moved out due  
solely to natural attrition. This plan of sterilization has been proved to be working state -wide 
and it isn't censoring anyone's freedoms.  
 
 
 
Tim, please make sure that Becky Quirk gets this email as I can't read my own writing.   
 
Norma Milton
Caribou
LD 644
Norma Milton Caribou, MAINE 999 1-075 norma@halfwayhomepet rescue.org LD 
644 Bill "an Act to Include Cats in the Laws Governing Animal Trespass" (HPO421).
I also would like to add deer, moose, bear, coyote, skunk, raccoon and Hawks, Owls, 
Eagles as well as all living creatures to this bill. Afterall, hawks, owls and eagles 
come onto my property and try to kill my cats. Plus a few years ago 3 coyotes came 
and tried to kill my cats and my ducks so I had to hire extra help that spring to watch 
over my animals because the game warden told me he would give me permission to 
shoot them. I said in shock, "____," Can you imagine me with a gun?" " Well," he 
said once he had thought about me running around with a gun. "Well then" he slowly 
suggested, "if you aggravate them by making lots of noise that might make them 
leave" So I spent all day each day that week walking over 160 acres of farmland 
banging two metal pots together and yelling, "Go Coyote, go Coyote, go Coyote Go. 
AND THEY WENT, right next door to my neighbor's farm. When you talk about 
chaining anymore animals up especially family pets, try to remember that Maine is 
basically a rural environment and in cities most cats are kept inside anyway. At the 
same time remember that the bird got the worm and the bug. Yes, I like birds, cats, 
dogs, horses, whatever. But this was their land long before it was ours. The bird eats 
the worm, the cat eats the bird but so do a lot of animals then go after the cat, and the 
jets flying in the air still kill far more birds than all the world's cats put together. Shall
we ground the jets. What about the sprays that farmers have to use for their potatoes. 
Some things we can't or shouldn't restrict, censor or try to control. We have to let 
nature be nature. Doing this could mean that feral cats could be used as target 
practice. We as volunteers trap the feral colony, sterilize the colony and statistics 
show that within 3 years the colony has moved out due solely to natural attrition. This
plan of sterilization has been proved to be working state-wide and it isn't censoring 
anyone's freedoms.
