Regarding: An Act to Include Cats in the Laws Governing Animal Trespass 
My name is Rachel Bray, co-founder of Community Cat Advocates, a small Maine non-profit, andl 
oppose this bill. We have been working for the last 8 years to try and get Maine's free-roaming cat 
population under control through spay and neuter of feral cats in colonies that often number over 100 
cats at a time. Free-roaming cats are close to my heart, and this bill will not only be nearly impossible to 
enforce, it will hurt our efforts to control their populations for a variety of reasons, and put undue 
burden on local level animal control and law enforcement employees: 
- Caretakers of outdoor/free roaming cat populations will be reluctant to ask for help, because 
admitting they are feeding the cats will open them up to fines — this does not mean they will 
stop feeding the cats, but will do it secretly to avoid the legal implications of owning an animal 
after feeding it for 10 days per Maine law 
- Finding out who legally "owns" a cat will be nearly impossible since many cats who roam, even 
domesticated ones, are often being fed by multiple people — we have been in areas where an 
entire community puts food out for cats — how will law enforcement know where to start? 
- This bill will unnecessarily increase the workload on our already over-worked and under-paid 
animal control officers, many of whom contract with multiple towns and have a hard time 
keeping up with the overwhelming number of calls about actual animal welfare issues in their 
towns. 
- A large number of towns in Maine do not have a dedicated animal control officer and instead 
rely on local Police or Sherriff's departments ~ it is a waste of time and resources for our law 
enforcement officers to be attempting to issue fines for free-roaming cats when they have 
actual business to attend to. 
- Anyone involved on the local level with animal welfare is paid by the local municipality- asa 
home owner in Auburn, I already struggle to keep up with ever-rising taxes, and I cannot 
condone adding yet another expense for increased animal welfare calls to that budget for what 
amounts to disputes among neighbors about who's cat walked where 
This bill will also be a death sentence for the thousands of Maine cats who live at large and are not 
candidates for being kept indoors for any number of reasons. lt will also primarily affect individuals 
who simply cannot afford to pay fines such as the large number of farmers l have met and worked 
with personally, who rely on working cats as an economical way to keep rodents out of their farms 
and livelihoods. Cats and farmers go back thousands of years, and Maine is still very much an 
agricultural state. 
Protect the already overwhelmed animal welfare system, and support our law enforcement officers 
and local budgets by not adding to their workload. Oppose LD 644.
