Good morning. Please accept this as my written testimony to oppose LD 644 - An Act to Include 
Cats in the Laws Governing Animal Trespass. 
This is an unrealistic and unreasonable proposal, and waste of already overburdened resources 
like law enforcement and animal control. This will further back up the court system and drive a 
wedge and negative “environment” within our neighborhoods and communities.
Many people don’t understand what groups like Friends of Feral Felines, and other similar grass 
roots organizations do daily. Their trap, spay, neuter and release practices are vital to humanely 
decreasing the cat colonies and populations. All of this is done by volunteers.
Perhaps the Animal Welfare program could create a trap, neuter and release team within the 
department. There are clearly many interested and active citizens, volunteers etc within the 
community.  This would serve a central “hub” for education, action, communication, and pooling 
of resources. Their audience and ability to reach more Maine people would go a long way in 
helping this situation. 
Again, please consider the above solution and do not include cats in the laws governing animal 
trespass.
I look forward to an acknowledgment that my testimony was received, and welcome any further 
discussion.
Sincerely,
Sara Cusson
20 Woodfield Drive
Scarborough, ME 04074
(207)459-4553
smcusson@hotmail.com 
Sara Cusson
Scarborough (Friends of Feral Felines)
LD 644
Good morning. Please accept this as my written testimony to oppose LD 644 - An Act to 
Include Cats in the Laws Governing Animal Trespass. 
This is an unrealistic and unreasonable proposal, and waste of already overburdened 
resources like law enforcement and animal control. This will further back up the court system 
and drive a wedge and negative “environment” within our neighborhoods and communities.
Many people don’t understand what groups like Friends of Feral Felines, and other similar 
grass roots organizations do daily. Their trap, spay, neuter and release practices are vital to 
humanely decreasing the cat colonies and populations. All of this is done by volunteers.
Perhaps the Animal Welfare program could create a trap, neuter and release team within the 
department. There are clearly many interested and active citizens, volunteers etc within the 
community.  This would serve a central “hub” for education, action, communication, and 
pooling of resources. Their audience and ability to reach more Maine people would go a long 
way in helping this situation. 
Again, please consider the above solution and do not include cats in the laws governing 
animal trespass.
I look forward to an acknowledgment that my testimony was received, and welcome any 
further discussion.
Sincerely,
Sara Cusson
20 Woodfield Drive
Scarborough, ME 04074
(207)459-4553
smcusson@hotmail.com 

