Sharon Secovich Testimony Against LD 644 
"An Act to Include Cats in the Laws Governing Animal Trespass" 
After many years of having indoor/outdoor cats, l have come the to the conclusion that keeping cats 
indoors is best for the cats and best for wildlife. That being said, l do not support LD 644. 
The general consensus from those that study birds is that free-ranging domestic cats kill 1.3 to 4.0 
billion birds annually. This is a huge range indicating that no one really knows how many birds are 
killed by cats annually. Both feral and owned cats live near humans. When you hike into the back 
country, away from human habitation, you do not come across feral or owned cats. They simply 
cannot survive without humans. 
We do know that are many reasons that bird populations are in decline, climate change, habitat loss, 
building strikes, car strikes, poaching, and possibly domestic cats. A 2019 report from Bird Life 
International cites ”agriculture and logging as today's top threats to imperiled species. ” Bird Life 
international maintains that "ln terms oftrashing the planet, humans are plainly the worst offenders. 
And blaming cats only deflects our responsibility onto an animal with no concept of saving the world." 
Instead of including cats in the state's trespassing laws, which undoubtedly will have many 
unintended consequences. Perhaps the state's Animal Welfare Program (AWP) could take a lead role 
in helping to mitigate this issue by: 
1. Require its humane agents trap/neuter/release feral cats. Especially those found in colonies. 
2. Hire a team to focus on TNR for feral cats. 
3. Require the AWP to conduct an ongoing education campaign about the benefits of 
spay/neuter, keeping cats indoors, and giving unwanted cats to the local animal shelter 
instead of letting them loose or leaving them behind. Surely the state has public 
relations/communications specialist who could design an education campaign. I regularly 
receive email blasts from the Department of Agriculture on anything from invasive plant 
species, fairs, potatoes, logging, etc. Never once have l received anything about animal 
welfare. 
These are just three suggestions. I am sure if we put our heads together during the works session, 
there are many others measures that can be taken that are not punitive to the cats or their caretakers 
in nature. 
Respectfully,_ 
.(’7 
M/%%/JL0»(,L\(/ ’Z/
K 
Sharon Secovich 
Testimony Against LD 644 
Sharon Secovich 
2/27/23
