Susan Hall
Falmouth
LD 644
My name is Susan Hall and I live in Falmouth.
I can understand why this law was proposed. Cats do kill birds and wildlife. They also
help control rodents on farms. Window collisions kill millions of birds.
The journal Science cited a 29% drop in the bird population in the US and Canada 
since the 1970s. Science cited the most important drivers of this decline as habitat loss
and pesticides.  According to the World Wildlife Fund since 1970 there has been a 
69% worldwide drop in populations of mammals, birds, amphibians, reptiles and fish.
They outlined the largest drivers of this decline as habitat loss, species 
overexploitation, invasive species, pollution, climate change and disease.  I just 
wanted to outline those drivers before the kitty cats get all the blame.
Today though is about cats and the animal trespass law. I agree that ideally cats 
should be kept indoors.  It might be easy to say to someone in suburbia— all cats 
shall be subject to the animal trespass law so keep your cats inside. Even cat owning 
environmentalists are conflicted on whether to let their cats out to get fresh air and 
sun.  But, the state of Maine’s cat population is not so simple that we can save the 
state’s bird population making it illegal for cats to trespass.
We don’t see Maine’s large feral cat population much where I live in Southern Maine.
However, I work with cat groups in Aroostook County, Penobscot County, Western 
Maine and Downeast Maine. The situation there is very different. There are many, 
many kind hearted people in these areas who feed feral and abandoned cats on their 
properties. These cats of course roam around, ie trespass. Feeding the cats makes the 
feeder the owner/keeper.  Many are elderly and very low income. 
If the trespass law is changed to include cats I can see at least three problems with it.
It could cause more neighbor wars involving animal control than we already have if it 
becomes illegal for cats to roam next door. This would increase animal control calls and 
municipal costs.
It could cause these nice kind hearted people feeding ferals/abandoned cats to become 
law-breakers and be fined with fines most cannot afford to pay. What then?
And most importantly it would not solve the problem of Maine’s many free roaming or feral 
cats that are killing birds. (Many are not feral but abandoned pet cats.)
What would work to address this problem? A humane solution:
Trap, neuter and release or TNR works. This is where a group goes into one of these 
situations, humanely traps the cats & spays or neuters them. If there are tame cats, 
which some are, they are taken to a shelter to be adopted. Kittens are removed and 
socialized for adoption. If the cats are truly feral they are ear tipped, released back 
into the colony with the feeder and feral cat houses. Over time, nature takes its course 
with the colony cats and the colony shrinks. If a cat is added to the colony it is trapped
and fixed.
I will give you two examples where we have worked and helped fund TNR for large 
colonies that are now mostly extinct.  In Machias there used to be a downtown colony
of 80-100 cats.  With the hard work of a local volunteer, grant funding and some Help
Fix ME vouchers the colony over a few years has shrunk to just four cats. The 
previous town manager was elated and thanked us saying they were no longer seeing 
ferals everywhere and no longer seeing dead kittens on the roads.
Another example was in Madawaska. There was a colony of about 75-100. It is hard 
to be exact with colonies. Using TNR as outlined above the colony is now gone.
These two colonies that we helped are a drop in the bucket in rural Maine.
Instead of adding cats to the animal trespass law which won’t address the feral cat 
bird/animal predation problem, how about changing the law to actually do something 
that would be effective in getting many of Maine’s outdoor cats away from birds and 
wildlife?
How about changing the law to require the Animal Welfare Program to go into these 
situations and do TNR? They could use the Help Fix ME funding.
How about we change the cat law to do something that actually works?

