TESTIMONY OF SUSANNA RICHER  
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 644  " An Act to Include Cats in the Laws Governing Animal Trespass ” 
Committee On Agricultur e, Conservation and Forestry  
February 27, 202 3 
 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative  Pluecker , and distinguished members of the Committee:  
 
Thank you for considering my testimony in opposition  to L.D. 644 " An Act to Include Cats in the Laws Governing Animal 
Trespass .”   
 
There is no question that free-roaming cats  present a threat to our already struggling bird and wildlife  populations . However, 
amending the  animal  trespass statute to include cats will not resolve this issue and it may result in a wide array of 
unintended  and costly consequences.  
 
 As a cat parent  and wildlife  advocate , I strongly believe  that domesticated / ow ned cats should be kept indoors and / or 
secured  (on leash  or in a “Catio”) when outdoors to keep both the cats and wildlife safe . In addition to the  threat presented 
to wildlife, free -roaming cats are at risk of being  lost, hit by cars , attacked by dogs or wild anim als, and are of increased 
danger  of death by  poison, disease,  and exposure . However,  Maine has quite a  few felines that cannot be classified as 
“owned” in the traditional sense, and the  welfare of these  cats must be considered when  proposing changes to the animal 
trespass statute.    
 
Cats are currently excluded  from the animal trespass  law for a reason.  The financial and human resources required to 
enforce the e xisting animal trespass law  already present  a struggle for  many of the smaller , more rural municip alities in 
Maine .  Adding the management of  free-roaming cats  to the enforcement  to-do list will place an unfair burd en on animal  
control  officer s and the town  budgets , not to mention the impact such a change could have on animal shelters.  
 
Additionally, as others will no do ubt mention,  passing L.D. 644 could have negative consequences for the feral and 
community  cat populations and  their caretakers .  Removing cats from feral colonies to enforce an animal trespass law will 
not provide a n effective  solution to  the problem  this b ill tries to address  and will label caring individuals , who are trying to 
help a bandoned cats in their communit ies, as law breakers.   
 
More appropriate and effective  solution s to th e challenges created by  free roaming cats  include: 
 
1) Implementing a state -sponsored Trap-Neuter -Release program  staffed with trained volunteers .  TNR is the only proven 
long lasting approach to reduce  free roaming / feral cat colony numbers  and should be a priority of the Animal Welfare 
Program . 
 
2) In partnership  with local shelters, res cues and TNR groups, AWP should create  an outreach program  to educate the 
public  about  the benefits of early feline spay/neutering , of keeping cats inside  and of ways to allow cats to safely enjoy the 
outdoors  without being  allowed to free -roam. For ex ample, h olding online workshops to teach cat owners how to bu ild a 
secure outd oor enclosure  (Catio) for their cats  to enjoy  would be a fun and proactive way for the state to connect with and 
educate the public on this issue.  
  
All animals deserve protection.  However,  this initiative  will do little to protect birds from cats , will place Maine’s free roaming 
cats and their caretakers at risk  and place undue  burden on the municipal ities charged with enforcement of the animal 
trespass law .  Please vote “Ought not to pass. ”  
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Susanna Richer  - Portland, ME  
 
DIY Catio Plans : https://catiospaces.com/catios -cat-enclosures/diy -plans/  
