8 May 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury and members of the committee. 
I am here today to support an Ought to pass for LD 1103. 
No person should have their rights restricted just for using something that is 
considered legal for use in our state. That right is not restricted for any other 
legally used drug, many of which are far, far worse. 
lam also here to request an Ought not to pass for LD's 1011 and 1340. 
LD 1101 turns victims into criminals for exactly what reason? l\/lost every person 
that is the victim of a robbery already reports it, why the added threat of criminal 
convictions and the stress and anguish that goes with that? This is another useless 
law that turns ordinary people into criminals. 
LD 1340 is an attempt to make federally legal accessories into illegal ones. Why? 
There are no known crimes being committed in Maine with these and they have 
been owned and used by residents here for decades with no problem. As an 
instructor l use a binary system for training students. Why are we inventing more 
ways to send the people of Maine to jail and putting permanent criminal records 
on people that have done nothing wrong or hurt anyone else? 
Both laws are just more ”Keep up with the Jone's” law imported from other states 
by out of state inﬂuences funded mostly by a single person. Why? Because these 
proposed laws are not about gun safety, they're about gun control and there isa 
huge difference. 
I am a retired US Army Veteran, a nationally accredited instructor and an IFW, 
Maine instructor for ﬁrearm safety. When the proponents of these laws are 
drafting them, they never, ever consult with people like me before submitting 
them. Why not? I am the person these laws will turn into a criminal. They treat us 
like an enemy when we're all trying to achieve the same goal. Having a safe, nice 
place to live and work in.
lam not the enemy, quit treating me like one. If you would just talk to me, you 
would ﬁnd I'm actually quite likeable and able to carry on a debate or discussion 
with a respectable amount of knowledge about this subject. I'm more than willing 
to share that knowledge and experience, I will however request that the 
discussion be based on facts and stay civil and that it be about solutions and not 
just feelings and emotions. Those two things are lousy reasons to restrict other 
people's rights by passing laws that don't really address or have any effect on 
crime or criminals. 
Respectfully, 
Bruce Ashmore 
Sgt USA Ret. 
Bucksport ME
