 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1103 (Opposed to Sections 1, 3; Drafting Recommendation re Section 2)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1103, An Act to allow Persons Who Lawfully Use or Possess Cannabis to Own or 
Possess Firearms or Ammunition  
 
DA: May 8 , 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony with respect to LD 1103.  
 
 The majority of CLAC members do  not oppose  the policy proposed by Secti on 2 of the bill, 
to repeal the prohibition against possession of firearms based on a person’s use o f/addiction to 
cannabis.  However, CLAC suggests that the intent of the proposal may be more clear if the 
proposed additional language follows the reference to feder al law, rather than precedes it , or if the 
exception is drafted as a form of defense.  For the difference between “defense” and “affirmative 
defense,” see 17 -A M.R.S. § 101.   Alternative drafting suggestions for Section 2 of the bill follow.   
 
Option 1:   
G.  Is an unlawful user of or is addicted to any controlled substance , except cannabis used, 
possessed or transported in accordance with Title 22, chapter 558 -C or Title 28 -B, and as a 
result is prohibited from possession of a firearm under 18 United Sta tes Code, Section 
922(g)(3).    It is a defense [OR an affirmative defense] that the controlled substance is 
cannabis used, possessed or transported in accordance with Title 22, chapter 558 -C or Title 
28-B.   Violation of this paragraph is a Class D crime;  
Option 2:  
G.  Is an unlawful user of or is addicted to any controlled substance , except cannabis used, 
possessed or transported in accordance with Title 22, chapter 558 -C or Title 28 -B, and as a 
result is prohibited from possession of a firearm under 18 United States Code, Section 
922(g)(3).  Notwithstanding the federal law , cannabis used, possessed or transported in 
accordance with Title 22, chapter 558 -C or Title 28 -B is not a basis for  the Maine 
prohibition against use, possession or control of firearms.    Violation of this paragraph is a 
Class D crime;  
CLAC also notes w ith respect to Section 2 that such a change creates a conflict for issuing 
authorities acting pursuant to  25 M.R.S. §  2003, Permits to carry concealed handguns, as well as 
the permitee.   A  person might be eligible for a permit because that person is not prohibited by 15 
M.R.S. § 393, but the same person could be prohibiting from possessing a firearm under federal 
law.   Such a permit would not authorize an individual to carry a firearm in violation of federal law.  
 
  CLAC is opposed to Sections 1 and 3 of the bill.   First,  although Maine’s law enforcement 
officers do not generally have any authority to enforce federal la w themselves, Maine’s law 
enforcement officers are sometimes cross -deputized to serve on interagency task forces that may 
include a combination of officers from multiple jurisdictions.   The proposed prohibition could 
preclude officers from participating i n such efforts, including those targeting criminal conduct other 
than firearms offenses, as it cannot be anticipated what situations officers will encounter.   Second, 
as part of their duties enforcing State law, Maine’s officers encounter situations that violate the laws 
of both State and federal law.   The proposed prohibition  against cooperation  is broad enough to 
preclude cooperation such as witness duties and information sharing, potentially putting such 
officers in conflict with requests or demands fr om the federal courts.   Third,  federal statutes such as 
the Bipartisan Safer Communities Act of 2022 require information sharing from state, county, local, 
and tribal criminal justice agencies  and state governments  relevant to a person’s eligibility to 
possess firearms.   Fourth, Maine, as do other states, contributes criminal history to federal 
databases that are queried when a federally licensed firearms dealer runs a background check prior 
to purchase, as required by federal law.  These same databases a re queried for other criminal justice 
purposes.    It is not clear whether the intent of this proposal is to curtail the provision of that 
criminal history record information, which has implications beyond firearms possession . 
(Implications related to  grant funding and state -federal or interstate compacts are beyond CLAC’s 
expertise.)  Overall, t his proposal would appear to put Maine in conflict with federal statutes  and 
requirements , creating potential preemption issues.    LD 1451 presents similar conflic t of laws 
issues.    
 As is LD 1451, the bill is drafted broadly, and would to apply to any state or local employee 
or official in Maine, thus restricting public agencies and employees outside of law enforcement.    
 
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practition er with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislatur e’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
