Margaret S. Groban 
South Portland, ME 
May 8, 2023 
Testimony Against: 
llO3 — An Act to Allow Persons Wi'lQ_‘L21WfL1ii _V Use Cannabis_to_Q_wn/Possess Firearms 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury, and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee.‘ 
My name is Margaret Groban. I live in South Portland. I recently retired after a 30+ year 
career as a federal prosecutor focusing on firearms and domestic violence and the 
intersection between the two. I also served on Maine’s Domestic Violence Homicide 
Review Panel. 
lt is my extensive experience with firearm statues that leads me to oppose l_.D. 
llO3. It is settled law that state legislatures are without authority to invalidate 
federal statutes under the Supremacy Clause of the US Constitution. Yet this statute 
does just that. 
L.D. l lO3 suffers from the safe fatal lilaws as LD. l 45 l. First. it would prevent state and 
municipal employees from assisting federal officials in “locating, apprehending, 
arresting or el1a1'gi1ig ” a person alleged to have a firearm while a user or marijuana ta 
Schedule 1 controlled substance.) This bill would prevent state law enforcement from 
serving on federal task forces, from assisting in execution of search/arrest warrants and 
other critical law enforcement roles that relate to ﬁrearm enforcement. In a state with 
limited federal law enforcement officers, this withdrawal of state support would greatly 
diminish the ability of law enforcement to keep our communities safe from gun violence. 
ln addition. this bill is unconstitutional because it seeks to nullify federal law. While 
i\/laine cannot be compelled to assist in the enforcement of federal ﬁrearm laws. it cannot 
interfere or impede with these operations. A federal court recently ruled in Missouri that 
a similar state law that tried to prevent state government agencies from cooperating in 
any enforcement of federal firearm laws was unconstitutional and awarded costs against 
the state. 
L.D. l 103 also seeks to eliminate the Maine ﬁrearm prohibitor for cannabis drug users. 
Even if this statue is revised. marijuana use will remain a basis for the federal ﬁrearm 
prohibition.
