 
 
To The Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
May 8, 2023  
 
Mark Barnett  
125 Granite St  
Auburn, ME 04210  
LD 1103  OUGHT TO PASS  
 
Distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety  Committee, my name is Mark 
Barnett. I’m a resident of Auburn, owner of a medical cannabis retail store in Portland called 
Higher Grounds of Maine, and the Policy Director  for the Maine Craft Cannabis Association. We 
strongly urge this committee  to defe nd Maine citizens ’ constitutional  rights and  vote LD 1103 
‘An Act to Allow Persons Who Lawfully Use or Possess Cannabis to Own or Possess Firearms or 
Ammunition ’ as Ought to Pass.  
 
This bill is an important  one in a state like Maine where private gun ownership is extremely 
common  and is often  essential to feeding families. Maine also has a ve ry high level of 
participation in its legal Adult Use and Medical Use cannabis markets as well as a large 
population of home cultivators. We have long been a leader in common sense cannabis policy, 
and this bill carries that forward by addressing yet anoth er injustice in our legal system that 
unfairly limits a Maine citizens ’ right to safely possess a firearm while also possessing their legal 
cannabis. While we cannot change federal policy overnight, even at the federal level there is 
movement to undo this  now clearly backwards policy that presumes the possession of cannabis 
makes a person a dangerous criminal, something we know is a relic of draconian and 
completely wrongheaded Drug War policies intended to  target marginalized  populations and to  
increase prison sentences to pad the pockets of the prison industrial complex. In 2021, the 
GRAM Act  was introduced in Congress to allow for legal possession of a firearm with the  legal 
possession of cannabis. This year, t he Second Amendment Protection Act  was filed in Congress 
to do the same for medical cannabis patients.  
 
Further, a federal  judge in Oklahoma ruled  earlier this year that the federal ban on possessing 
firearms and cannabis was unconstitutional. We fully agree. Maine should not participate in the 
violence and injustice of the Drug War in any way, and while we have come a l ong way from 
that in many areas , our citizens still need protections from these outdated and backwards 
federal firearms prohibitions. Please vote LD 1103 Ought to Pass.  
 
Sincerely,  
Mark Barnett  
Maine Craft Cannabis Association  
 
  
