F STATE OF MAINF 
~' rfig D. A T OF PROFESSIONAL 
_F, ., . FP RTMEN 
AND FINANCIAL REGULATION 
BUREAU OF FINANCIALINSTITUTIONS 
36 S'l‘A'l"l5 uouss STA'l‘l()N 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 
04333-0036 
Jane1T_ Mills LLOYD P. LAFOUNTAIN lll 
GOVERNOR SUPEFUNTENDENT 
131st Maine Legislature, First Regular Session 
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and 
Financial Services 
Testimony of Gordon Laurendeau, Attorney, 
Bureau of Financial Institutions 
Department of Professional and Financial Regulation 
In Opposition to L.D. 1460 
An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Certificates of Deposit 
Tuesday, April 18, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the 
Committee: 
My name is Gordon Laurendeau and I am the Attorney for the Maine 
Bureau of Financial Institutions. On behalf of the Bureau and the 
Administration, l am here to testify in opposition to L.D. 1460, An Act to 
Amend the Laws Governing Certificates of Deposit. 
This bill would create a new section in Title 9-B governing time 
deposits, also called certificates of deposit (CD). The legislation would 
authorize a depositor to notify a financial institution within 90 days prior to 
the maturity of a CD what the depositor ’s intent is for handling the funds, 
and would also allow depositors to withdraw funds before maturity and 
without penalty “in case of a bona fide emergency or financial hardship. ” 
L.D. 1460 would also allow early withdrawals of CD funds without penalty if 
a nursing home or assisted living facility takes over management ofa 
depositor ’s funds. 
TTY USERS CALL MAINE RELAY 711 O : 207 624-8570 ;:- FHCE PHONE [ J 
CONSUMERTOLLFREEI (800)965-5235 FA) (2O7)624 8590 
OFFICES LOCATED AT: 76 NORTHERN AVENUE, GARDINER MAINE 
WEBSITE: http://www.malne.gov/pfr/financialinstitutions
The Bureau notes that current law requires depository institutions to 
provide notices and disclosures to depositors before a CD matures, 
allowing the depositor an opportunity to withdraw funds or choose another 
CD. The notice requirements come from federal Truth-in-Savings 
regulations, adopted by reference in Maine. The regulations require notice 
to the depositor at least 30 days prior to maturity of a CD, thus providing 
ample time for the depositor to indicate what they intend to do with their 
money. The bill proposes to require banks to accept instructions 90 days 
prior to a CD’s maturity, something banks and credit unions are likely to 
accept without a new statute. 
The Bureau would also like to inform the Committee about the likely 
reach of the proposed legislation. Given its placement in the Banking Code, 
it will not apply to credit unions. In addition, the Bureau is concerned that 
the bill may create an uneven playing field between Maine-chartered 
institutions and federally-chartered institutions. This is because national 
banks may exercise deposit taking powers without concern for state law 
limitations on deposit taking [see 12 CFR 7.4007(a) —(b)] or account 
charges [12 CFR 7.4002], meaning that national banks would likely 
continue charging early withdrawal fees. 
Finally, if the Committee decides to move forward with this legislation, 
it should consider what constitutes a “bona fide emergency or financial 
hardship ” with respect to the fee waiver. The term is not currently defined in 
the Banking Code. Absent a defined term, a financial institution would be 
unable to assess whether funds in a CD could be withdrawn early without 
penalty, leading to consumer confusion and uncertainty for the bank. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today. I would be 
happy to answer any questions from the Committee.
