BANKERS 
April 18, 2023 
Testimony to the 131“ Maine Legislature 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, honorable members of the Committee. My name 
is Josh Steirman and I am here on behalf of the Maine Bankers Association. We are testifying today 
regarding L.D. 1460, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Certificates of Deposit. We respectfully oppose 
the bill as it is currently drafted, although it is important to note that our concern is primarily limited to 
only one of the bill's three provisions. 
The bill's requirement to allow for "withdrawal in case of emergency or hardship" is undefined and could 
be interpreted as overly broad to include nearly any customer. We are concerned that such an expansive 
wording would effectively void the principles of contract and mutual agreement which are inherent in 
certificate of deposit accounts. In this type of account, often referred to as a "time deposit," a bank agrees 
to pay a fixed rate of interest for a set duration of time. The interest rate on these accounts is typically 
higher than other accounts, and in return the customer and bank both receive certainty around future 
obligations. By allowing broad latitude for withdrawal without penalty, the certainty that is foundational 
in this type of account is removed. Banks would be disincentivized from offering certificate of deposit 
accounts, thus reducing interest earnings received by depositors and harming Maine people. 
The proposed 90 day notice would effectively replace the current 30 day requirement. We do not object 
to this change if the Legislature sees fit, however bankers have found through experience that longer 
notice periods can reduce customer feedback. We are concerned that a longer notice period would 
actually make managing accounts more challenging for the typical consumer. 
The requirement around nursing homes points to situations when banks would routinely waive penalties 
without any law in place, so new statute may be unnecessary. We appreciate the more clearly defined 
terms in this clause, though we again are concerned about the potential for overly broad application. 
While acknowledging the bill's reasonable intent, Maine banks are concerned about the broad and 
undefined requirements in this bill. We thank the Committee for its consideration and are happy to 
answer any questions. 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Joshua Steirman 
Director of Government Relations 
2 Thomas Drive I Westbrook l Maine 04092 207.791.8400 www.mair|ebankers.com
