Moine Credit Union Leogue
A 2 Ledgeview Drive - 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Mailing Address: P.O. Box 1236 - 
Portland, ME 04104 
207-773-5671 - 
1-800-442-6715 
www.mainecul.org 
ln Opposition to LD 1460 
An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Certiﬁcates of Deposit 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
April 18,2023 
Good Afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the Committee 
on Health Coverage, insurance and Financial Services, 
My name is Krista Simonis, and l am the Director of Governmental Affairs at the Maine Credit Union 
League. The Maine Credit Union League is the trade association for Maine’s 50 credit unions and over 
725,000 members statewide. We respectfully submit the following testimony in opposition to LD 1460. 
I first learned how banking works from Mary Poppins. The scene where Michael wants to feed the birds 
and refuses to hand over his tuppence for savings and investment and ends up causing a bank run. 
With a certificate of deposit, also known as a term or time deposit, Michael has agreed to let the bank 
hold his tuppence for a pre-determined period of time, which lets the bank safely invest it, knowing he 
won't ask for it back the next day. Our entire banking system is based on this premise- not of 100% 
reserves, but of diversified portfolios and well-managed risk. Certificates of Deposit often have higher 
interest rates precisely because they have a guaranteed timeframe. l_D 1460 breaks this system of trust 
and the federal regulations enforcing it. 
All credit unions in the state of Maine are subject to the terms of the Truth In Savings Act (TlSA) as 
implemented in regulation by the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA). This regulation 
defines a term share account as: 
Any share certificate, interest-bearing certificate of deposit account, or other account 
with a maturity of at least seven days in which the member generally does not havea 
right to make withdrawals for six days after the account is opened, unless the account 
is subject to an early withdrawal penalty of at least seven days‘ dividends on amounts 
withdrawn, offered by a credit union to a member or potential member.1 
Truth in Savings also specifically addresses preemption by indicating that any inconsistency between 
TISA and state law requirements are preempted by the federal law? In this case, the federal definition 
of a time deposit would prevail. 
We know that many Mainers face unexpected financial hardship every day. It's why we are so 
committed to fighting for a stable financial future and financial well-being for all. Yet LD 1460 does not 
define financial hardship, creating legal and regulatory uncertainty. Our credit unions balance their risk 
portfolios to ensure all Mainers have ready access to their funds and that investments into community 
businesses and individual homes can continue. By putting time deposits at risk, credit unions would be 
limited in the type of returns and accounts they could offer and would have more difficulty in investing 
in the community. 
We thank the committee for hearing our testimony and urge the committee to vote ought not to pass 
on LD 1460. 
l 
12 CFR 707.2(v) 
212 CFR 707.1(d)
