                                                     District 111 : Falmouth  (part)  
  
     Testimony of Rep. Amy Kuhn in support of  
LD 103, An Act to Provide Incentives to Employers to Provide On -
site Child Care  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and 
Business  
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and esteemed members of the Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business, m y name is Amy Kuhn and I represent the 
Town of Falmouth in House District 111. I regret that I am unable to testify in person today, but 
I am pleased to submit these written comments in support of LD 103, now referred t o as “A 
Resolve, Directing the Maine Children’s Cabinet to Study Incentives for the Provision of Child 
Care in Maine.”  
 
The harm to families when they cannot find high quality, affordable child  care is significant and 
far reaching, preventing parents from  being able to work or go to school and contributing to 
financial insecurity. The harm to Maine’s economy is also significant. In touring a number of 
large employers across the state this legislative session, I heard repeatedly how child  care 
shortages hav e negatively impacted employers’ ability to recruit and retain workers and expand 
their businesses.  
 
Maine’s child  care shortage is complex in its origins and undoubtedly in its solutions. By 
directing the Maine Children's Cabinet to study expansion of child  care services, we can identify 
gaps in our current system and develop a comprehensive plan to address them. The Cabinet can 
work with businesses, educators, child  care providers, parents, and community organizations to 
balance each constituencies’ intere sts through a fair process and render thoughtful solutions.  
 
This bill as amended seeks to set us on course to meaningfully address Maine’s urgent need for 
accessible, affordable child  care. It is my hope that the Maine Children’s Cabinet will establish 
strong, evidence -based recommendations for moving forward that c an be considered by the 
legislature later in this session. I urge you to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 103 to meaningfully 
expand accessible child care services in Maine.  
  
Amy Kuhn  
20 Old Powerhouse Road  
Falmouth, ME 04105  
(207) 939 -6903  
Amy.Kuhn@legislature.maine.gov  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333 -0002  
(207) 287 -1400  
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711  
 

