Testimony in Opposition to LD 103,
“An Act to Provide
Incentives to Employers to
Provide On-site Child Care”
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and the distinguished members of the
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, my
name is Nick Murray and I serve as director of policy for Maine Policy Institute. We are
a free market think tank, a nonpartisan, non-profit organization that advocates for
individual liberty and economic freedom in Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify on LD 103
Ask any parent in Maine and they will tell you how difficult and costly it is to
secure stable child care. Families are being squeezed between inflated costs for food and
household necessities, and runaway costs for child care. Many parents are caught in a
tough place--either dedicate nearly all of one’s full-time wages to child care, or forgo
work to stay home and provide one’s own child care. Single parent households today
bear a significantly higher burden.
Meanwhile, in the past four years, lawmakers and Gov. Mills have eschewed
opportunities to reduce barriers for providers, and instead piled on more requirements.
1
This has led to a staggering loss of child care providers of all sizes across Maine—nearly
25% since 2008.
2
2
https://www11.maine.gov/dhhs/ocfs/data-reports-initiatives/early-childhood-education
1
https://mainepolicy.org/what-makes-child-care-so-expensive-overregulation/
; 
https://mainepolicy.org/maine-lawmakers-moving-in-the-wrong-direction-on-accessible-affordable-child-ca 
re/
Maine Policy Institute | mainepolicy.org| themainewire.com | Post Office Box 7829 Portland Maine 04112 | 207.321.2550

The effects of state regulation are evident. As more restrictions on child care
spaces, staff, and programs, Mainers have lost access to 48% of the family-based care
providers they had in 2008, an option that is 40-50% cheaper than center-based care on
average.
3
The regulatory hurdles imposed on this industry
and the corresponding loss in
family child care providers is the single biggest culprit for runaway child care costs.
Those who want higher burdens on child care providers often say it is in the
name of safety and ensuring program quality. How can the state inflict so much
regulatory pain on this industry in the name of child safety, when the Department of
Health and Human Services’ own record on child safety is most dubious?
4
The state has
no moral standing to dictate to child care providers how to do their job.
So-called “advocates” of child care clamor for more regulations that only improve
observational quality of child care. For example, if one provider can only watch six
children instead of eight, the care provided must be better, they reason. But Maine’s
regulations are out of step with national norms.
5
The more these rules are tightened, the
more expensive care becomes for hardworking Maine families.
5
https://mainepolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/Child-care-report_MHPC.pdf
4
https://www.wabi.tv/2023/03/03/dhhs-lays-out-new-efforts-reduce-child-deaths-abuse-maine/
3
2019 Maine State Fact Sheet. Child Care Aware of America. 
https://info.childcareaware.org/hubfs/2019%20Price%20of%20Care%20State%20Sheets/Maine.pdf

Increased regulation has proven only to hamstring providers, limit parents’
options, and raise costs. For an industry so foundational to the economy, politicians
should be acutely aware how detrimental their plans to shape the world truly are.
A core tenant of our economic and political philosophy is empowerment of the
individual over government. We do not accept the need for a government “solution” to a
problem created by politicians with flawed incentives.
6
Instead, entrepreneurs taking
their own risks on a level playing field are best suited to determine where the need exists
for their product or service.
Therefore, the state should not subsidize child care for some workers from the
earnings of those who will not use it; this will distort market signals that both parents
and providers need to operate efficiently. The state should simply get out of the way and
let these entrepreneurs serve their neighbors’ needs with the lowest barriers possible.
There are no government subsidies or massive state spending needed to ensure
quality child care services across Maine. The government simply needs to get out of the
way. When the local mother or grandmother down the street, who has had many
children of their own and has been watching other people’s children for decades, is no
longer open for business, it’s time to ask, what is the state doing which could be
contributing to this problem?
The fact is, Maine does not need another study on the problems with the child
care industry. Legislators and bureaucrats must simply look within, and see that the
state is the biggest hurdle to increasing child care capacity.
Please deem LD 103 “Ought Not To Pass” and instead focus it on clearing away
unnecessary and costly regulatory barriers for providers of all sizes. This is the path to
expand capacity across the state and ultimately control prices. Thank you for your time
and consideration.
6
https://www.econlib.org/library/Enc1/PublicChoiceTheory.html
