‘: 
I HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
s 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Rebm; Jauch TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
676 Cathance Rd. 
Topsham, ME 04086 
Phone: (207) 522 -7438 
Rebecca.Iauch@legislature.maine.gov 
March 10, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Rebecca Jauch presenting 
LD 103, Resolve, Directing the Maine Children ’s Cabinet to Study Incentives for the 
Provision of Child Care in Maine 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement 
and Business 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and distinguished members of the Irmovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement, and Business Committee. My name is Rebecca J auch 
and I represent House District 51 which includes most of Topsham. I am pleased to present LD 
103, Resolve, Directing the Maine Children ’s Cabinet to Study Incentives for the Provision 
of Child Care in Maine. 
Maine is experiencing a workforce shortage as an ever-growing proportion of our population 
retires or leaves the workforce without being replaced by adequate numbers of new employees. 
This leads to economic uncertainty and has sparked conversations on how to bring more people 
into our workforce, including attracting more workers to our state. One of the cormnonly cited 
barriers we are facing in this endeavor is a lack of childcare. 
Childcare in Maine faces two major issues - a shrinking pool of childcare providers and the 
difficulty parents have in affording childcare. This is not a problem speciﬁc to Maine, but it is 
one we are feeling keenly and that needs to be addressed immediately. Childcare workers area 
historically underpaid and undervalued sector of the workforce. Traditionally low wages make it 
hard to attract and retain workers to-the ﬁeld, in tum leading to fewer childcare providers and 
fewer slots in childcare centers. Childcare workers deserve higher wages, but many families 
cannot afford to pay more for childcare. When families are already struggling to pay for housing, 
utilities and food, childcare often becomes the expense that can’t be met. This keeps some 
parents out of the workforce entirely and forces other parents to try and cobble together friends 
and family to provide childcare — a situation that can quickly become unreliable and inconsistent. 
The lack of sufficient affordable, quality childcare is something that affects many Maine families 
and dissuades others from moving to our state. We need meaningful public and private 
investment in childcare in order to improve our workforce and strengthen our economy. LD l03 
presents an opportunity for stakeholders, including representatives of the State, the business 
District 51: Topsham
community, early childhood education and childcare providers, to come together to study the 
issue of childcare speciﬁc to Maine and to propose recommendations for ways to expand access 
to childcare in our state. 
I know there are various groups looking at the issue from different angles already. With this 
resolve, it is my intent to consolidate those efforts by bringing all interested parties together in 
one room, to provide the group with a clear framework of benchmarks and goals and to request a 
report back within a speciﬁc timeframe to allow us to move forward with the group’s 
recommendations. 
One of the reasons I ran for office was to be a voice for working parents and families. It is my 
hope that LD 103 will move us forward and make Maine an even more welcoming, inviting and 
supportive state for young people and families. Investing in childcare today will lead toa 
brighter future for all of us tomorrow. Thank you for your consideration and I welcome your 
questions. 
District 5 l: Topsham
