TESTIMONY FOR THE TOWN OF BAILEYVILLE AND THE BAILEYVILLE UTILITIES 
DISTRICT— 
LD 925 
On behalf of the Town of Baileyville and the Baileyville Utilities District, we are testifying 
today in support of LD 925 ’”'An Act to Allow the Baileyville Utilities District to 
Disconnect Water Service for a Customer's Failure to Pay for Sewer Service Provided by 
the Town of Baileyville" Because the Baileyville Utilities District (BUD) and the Town are 
considered two separate entities this bill is needed to permit the two entities to work 
together on this effort to collect overdue payments. Water and Sewer systems are 
already allowed to due these types of collections if they are both a District or botha 
Town Department. 
The reason why this is supported by both parties is that the Town of Baileyville isa 
close-knit Town with minimal staff to help collect nonpayment's and conduct 
collections. ln small communities, it is good to work together and utilize the skill set of 
different parts of the community to assist with making the system better. The BUD is 
already conducting collections for the water bills that are overdue, and many of the 
customers that are late on sewer payments are also late on water payments. The use 
of water shut off to collect payments is proven to be very successful on collection of 
payments. 
As of late, the Town and BUD have been teaming up on projects, working together to 
complete repairs to infrastructure that benefits infrastructure in a street or the entire 
community and this relationship is only going to save money for the Town as a whole. 
I am in support of this bill as one of the District's Board Members, and an employee of 
the Town of Baileyville working as the Code Enforcement Officer. -This will help both 
the District and the Town to ensure that collections are done efficiently, correctly and 
that all customers are treated the same. The Town and the District are committed to 
finding ways to improve efficiency and work together to achieve common goals. 
\ \ I i I‘ \‘
1
