 
 
 
 
 
  
15 University Drive  
Augusta, Maine 04330  
207-623-9511  
  
 
March 21, 2023  
 
Honorable Mark Lawrence , Senate Chair  
Honorable Stanley Zeigler  House Chair  
Joint Legislative Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: Testimony Neither  for Nor Against  of LD 925, An Act to Allow the Baileyville Utilities District to 
Disconnect Water  Service for a Customer's Failure to Pay for Sewer Service Provided  by the 
Town of Baileyville  
 
Dear Senator Lawrence , Representative Zeigler , and Members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology : 
 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA)  appreciate s the o pportunity to provide  testimony neither  
for nor against  LD 925 which would allow the Baileyville Utilities District to disconnect water for unpaid 
sewer  bills owed to the town of Baileyville . 
 
About MWUA.   MWUA  is a nonprofit association based in Augusta that provides support for water 
works professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for safe drinking water through 
educational and technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, state, and national level .  The 
Association was formed in 1925 and counts approximately 109 water utilities  in Maine as members.   
 
Discussion.   MWUA supports the concept of allowing water utilities to disconnect water service for 
unpaid sewer bills.  Our support of the concept should not be considered an endorsement of the specific 
language of LD 925.  We feel additional details are needed to properly implement such a process and it 
should not be limited to one  specific  utility.  Allowing disconnection of water service for sewer fees 
makes sense as the two service are closely related, and the current proces s for collecti ng customer 
payments for sewer fees is ineffective in many communities.  Several Maine communities have combined 
water and sewer utilities .  These combi ned utilities already have the authority to disconnect water service 
for failure  to pay for sewer service.   Our concern is that this concept  requires far mor e process and 
consideration than the single sentence included in this bill.  
 
The water utility performing the disconnection would need to be a willing participant (vote of the board) .  
A mechanism such as an interlocal agreement should be required to ensure that the specific needs  and 
peculiarities of the water utility are met .  The agreement should cover items such the cost of 
disconnecting water service, who is allowed to perform the actual disconnection, responsibility for 
damage to a shut -off valve (sometimes valves are damage d during shutoff), customer p rotections  
mirror ing or follow ing MPUC Chap ter 660 rules , and ensuring both water  and sewer  utility governing 
bodies  agree that disconnections of water service for unpaid sewer bills should take place in their 
community.  
 
For these reasons  we are neither for nor against this bill .  We  strongly support the concept  if the proper 
process es and guardrails are in place .  We are not opposed to allowing Baileyville to move forward with 
this but would appreciate a la rger conversation about allowing this to happen in other communities in 
Letter from  MWUA re LD 925 
March 21, 202 3 
Page 2 
Maine where separate entities provid e water and sewer service.  Ensuring payment of bills helps stabilize  
water and sewer  rates for all customers.  
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
 
 
Roger Crouse,  
Legislative Committee Chair, Maine Water Utilities Association  
General Manager, Kennebec Water District  
 
cc:  Bruce Berger, Executive Director  (MWUA)  
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counse l 
  
