101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 -0101  
www.Maine.gov/sos/cec ; tel. 207 -624-7736 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS  
 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows , Secretary of State  
Department of the Secretary of State  
 
May 22 , 2023  
 
Testifying In Opposition to 
  
L.D. 1959, “An Act Regarding Open Primary Elections and Ranked -choice Voting " 
 
Senator Hickman , Representative Supica  and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, my name is Shenna Bellows and I am the Secretary of State and the chief elections 
officer.  I am speaking today in opposition to L.D . 1959. 
 
This bill is very similar to one that this committee heard in the 130st Legislature . The current bill, like 
the previous one, provides that for Governor, State Senator or State Rep, only the top two candidates 
will go to the general  election ballot . This bill differs from the old bill in that the four people who 
received the most votes for U.S. Senator or Congress would go to the general  election  ballot.   
 
Should the committee be interested in pursuing this new type of election system, often known as 
“jungle primaries,” it is important  to note the  potential costs to make those changes , which  include new 
ballot designs, mailing materials, technology and coding changes, public education efforts, and staffing 
to answer questions from candidates, municipal election officials, the p ress, and the public.   
 
While a “jungle primary” or “top four” primary would not be completely incompatible with ranked 
choice voting, it certainly has the opposite impact of ranked choice voting in that it limits choice for 
voters in districts where one party or another predominates.  
 
One place that the proposed legislation could save the State money is in changing the presidential 
primary to align with the primary election for other federal and state races. We could  provide those 
figures to the commi ttee ahead of the work session.  
 
I would like to remind the committee the semi -open primary law which was enacted last session has an 
effective date of January 01, 2024, which we have been working diligently to make work with our 
Central Voter Registratio n (CVR) system. We would not be able to change course and implement this 
bill for 2024 without a significant cost and possible delays with rollout of the CVR system ; therefore, 
 
 
Shenna Bellows  
Secretary of State  Department of the Secretary of State  
 
Bureau of Corporations, Elections and Commissions  
 
 
 
Julie L. Flynn  
Deputy Secretary of State  
101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 -0101  
www.Maine.gov/sos/cec ; tel. 207 -624-7736 
 should the committee decide to move forward with this bill we would need to mak e sure the effective 
date of this bill is workable with current deadlines and demands.  
 
For the above reasons, we oppose L.D. 1959. Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions 
that the committee may have.  
