March 3, 2023
In Support of LD 812
An Act to Assist Clerks in Facilitating Elections and to Improve Access 
to In-person Absentee Voting for Working People by Increasing Time 
for Absentee Ballot Processing and In-person Voting
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, members of the Committee on Veterans and Legal 
Affairs, my name is Alysia Melnick and I’m submitting this testimony on behalf of Mainers for 
Modern Elections in support of LD 812. 
Mainers for Modern Elections is a coalition committed to ensuring our right to vote safely 
transcends politics and partisanship. We advocate for safe, secure, modern elections. Our 
coalition is committed to securing access to the ballot for every eligible Maine voter. 
Coalition members include the ACLU of Maine, AARP of Maine, the Center for Secure and 
Modern Elections, Common Cause, Defend Our Health, Gateway Community Services, the 
League of Women Voters of Maine, the Maine AFL-CIO, Maine Citizens for Clean Elections,
Maine Conservation Voters, Maine Education Association, Maine Equal Justice, Maine 
Immigrant Rights Coalition, Maine People's Alliance, Maine Service Employees Association-
SEIU Local 1989, Maine Women's Lobby, Maine Youth Power, Planned Parenthood of Northern 
New England, and Represent Us.
LD 812 expands access to in-person absentee voting and makes important reforms to advance 
ballot processing and notice of ballot envelope inspection that will improve election 
administration. Mainers for Modern Elections supports both efforts.
Expanding in-person absentee voting, particularly outside of standard business hours, is an 
important way to ensure more equitable access to voting. We support efforts such as this bill to 
ensure that working people and others unable to vote during business hours have more options 
to do so. Weekend voting is an important part of that effort. 
Additionally, we strongly support the measures in LD 812 designed to improve election 
administration. Expanding the window for processing absentee ballots by an additional seven 
days will give local election officials extra flexibility in the days before an election, which may 
allow for services such as additional in-person absentee hours to be more readily offered. 
Setting the deadline to request inspection of absentee ballot envelopes to 5 PM the previous 
day will improve election officials’ ability to plan and prepare in the crucial final days before an 
election. While these changes may seem minor, they are important steps to help support our 
hardworking election officials in their jobs.
LD 812 has the opportunity to expand access to voting while making important election 
administration reforms to streamline election officials’ work. We urge the committee to vote 
Ought to Pass on LD 812.
