Q, 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Charles A. Skold MAINE RELAY 711 
59 State Street Apt. 67 
PO1Tl3ll(l, ME 0410]‘ 
Char]es.Skold@legislalure.maine.gov 
Cell: (207)329-3838 
A ' 
March 13, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Charles Skold presenting 
LD 812, An Act to Assist Clerks in Facilitating Elections and to Improve Access to In-- 
person Absentee Voting for Working People by Increasing Time for Absentee Ballot 
~ 
Processing and In-person Voting 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and esteemed colleagues on the Joint Standing y 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, I am Charles Skold, representing part of Portland in 
House District 119. I am honored to be here to present LD 812, An Act to Assist Clerks in 
Facilitating Elections and to Improve Access to In-person Absentee Voting for Working People 
by Increasing Time for Absentee Ballot Processing and In-person Voting. 
In many ways our State of Maine leads the country when it comes to voter access and voter 
participation. We care that every Mainer has the right to cast their ballot in our democratic 
elections, ‘ and we strive to make it as straightforward and convenient as possible to cast that 
ballot. In Maine, this means we allow no-excuse absentee voting, whether in the mail, through a 
ballot drop box, or at your local town hall in the presence of the clerk. 
The point of this bill is to take one more step in the direction of voter access, by giving working 
Mainers an opportunity to vote on a weekend day. For people who work regular business hours 
Monday through Friday, this bill would provide them an opportunity to cast their ballot in- 
person, at their local town hall, on a Saturday. No need to miss work. No need to fill out an 
application beforehand. Just show up Saturday to your town hall and cast your vote. 
More and more Mainers have taken advantage of opportunities to vote early in-person, which is 
in no small part thanks to the great service and extraordinary efforts of municipal clerks and their 
hardworking teams all across our State. This bill is written to give working Mainers greater 
access to in-person absentee voting, while also being as helpful to our municipal clerks as 
possible, in assisting their faithful facilitation of State Elections. To that end, I would like toI 
point out the ways this bill aims to help clerks facilitate this opportunity for Saturday in-person 
absentee voting. 
1. This bill allows some ﬂexibility for municipalities of smaller sizes to opt-in to Saturday 
absentee voting. While towns and cities with population of over 7,000 people would be required 
to provide the Saturday voting opportunity, towns under that size would have the option of 
choosing whether or not to do so. 
District 119 Portland (Part) 
Primed on recycled paper
2. This bill provides grant funding for municipalities to help cover the cost of additional staff 
hours needed to provide Saturday voting. With estimated costs of up to $3,000 per day of in- 
person voting and up to three qualifying State Elections per biennium, this bill provides up to 
$9,000 per biennium for municipalities above 7,000 people. Additionally, this bill provides grant 
funding to all other municipalities who opt-in to providing the same level of Saturday voting for 
State Elections. This funding would be $3,000 for municipalities between 3,000 and 7,000 
people, and $1,200 for municipalities under 3,000 people, consistent with lower cost estimates 
for municipalities of smaller size. In total, these grants would have an estimated minimum fiscal 
impact of $396,000 and a maximum ﬁscal impact of $1,155,600. _ 
3, This bill adjusts two statutory dates in the period of absentee voting. It gives clerks seven 
additional days to begin pre-processing of absentee ballots, giving them greater ﬂexibility to 
adjust to any increase in absentee ballots and letting them structure their workload as they see ﬁt. 
It also gives clerks one extra day of notice to prepare for facilitating members of the public who wish to inspect absentee ballots before they are pre-processed. Currently, clerks sometimes only get one hour of notice for this public inspection, which is not always adequate time to prepare. 
4. While the original language of LD 812 would have required 8 hours on a Saturday and 8 hours on a Sunday of in-person absentee voting, I have submitted a proposed amendment to require 
only Saturday voting instead of Saturday and Sunday, and to require only 6 hours instead of 8. 
This compromise is meant to still fulﬁl the aims of substantially increasing access to early in- 
person voting for working people, while also taking concerns of municipal clerks into account 
and reducing the need for their staff to come in on a Sunday during a busy election season. 
Municipal clerks and their staff are already working so hard, and that is why this bill seeks to 
give them ﬂexibility and support as they fulfil our State’s promise of free, fair, and accessible 
elections. Hopefully there is at least one more benefit to clerks in this bill, in that it could reduce the lines and busyness of Election Day itself. The more people who get their vote in early, the 
easier it is for clerks to do their job. 
More and more Mainers are taking advantage of opportunities to vote in our elections before 
Election Day itself. After a record year in 2020 for absentee voting, the most recent election of 
2022 continued to see an upward trend of absentee voting, surpassing 2018 levels with more than 
211,000 absentee ballot requests, many of which were in-person absentee voters. And across the 
country, 19 states require early in-person Saturday voting while an additional seven states allow their counties to hold Saturday voting if they choose (National Conference of State Legislators). 
This bill is a needed extension of what we are already doing. In fact, our State already supports 
working people’s access to early in-person voting by requiring that clerk ofﬁces remain opena 
few hours later on the ﬁnal Thursday of the in-person absentee voting period. However, those 
few hours on one Thursday are the only currently required extended hours, and many working people still can’t make it. Let’s give working people a Saturday to vote, an opportunity on many people’s day-off to get your vote in and make sure your voice is counted in our elections. 
Thank you and I’m happy to answer any questions you may have.
