 
 
 
 
 
March 13, 2023  
 
Sen. Craig Hickman, Chair  
Rep. Laura Supica, Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
Maine State Legislature  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 812 An Act to Assist Clerks in Facilitating Elections and to Improve Access to In -person 
Absentee Voting for Working People by Increasing Time for Absentee Ballot Processing and In -person 
Voting  
Chair Hickman, Chair Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Leg al 
Affairs: My name is David O’Brien and I am Policy Director  for RepresentUs, the nation’s leading 
nonpartisan anti -corruption organization. RepresentUs is submitting testimony today in support of LD 
812, as we believe it will enhance clerks’ ability to p rocess a growing number of absentee ballots and 
will improve Mainers’ access to the ballot through weekend voting .  
RepresentUs is a nonpartisan advocacy organization dedicated to the idea that the government  
should be representative of and accountable to the people. It advocates for policies to  
strengthen our democracy and provides activists with the resources and training to bring  
meaningful change.  Regarding the electoral process, we work to  pass powerful state and local laws that 
expand voter access , make elections more representative,  and enhance  election  security.   
LD 812 would do the following:  
1. Allow 14 days for the processing of absentee ballots instead of 7 as in current law;  
2. Adjust the hours for a member of the public to make a written request of  the clerk to inspect 
ballot applications and envelopes before they are processed;  
3. Require certain municipalities to offer opportunities for weekend absentee voting in the 
presence of a clerk;  
4. Require the Secretary of State to provide grants to certain mu nicipalities for the purpose of 
expanding the hours available for absentee voting.  
Absentee voting is growing in popularity because it provides voters flexibility. In 2022, nearly 2 3 percent 
of Maine voters used absentee ballots . Overall, there has been a n increasing trend in use of absentee 
ballots in Maine, with a large spike in November 2020 during the pandemic. With the rise in the numb er 
of absentee ballots being returned, clerks would benefit from having additional time to process ballots.  

The bill a lso proposes changing the timeframe when members of the public can make requests to 
inspect absentee ballots. Allowing the public to inspect absentee ballots is an important election 
transparency measure and helps demonstrate to the public that our electio ns are fair and safe. Making 
it so members of the public must make their request to inspect ballots by 5 pm the day before, instead 
of 9 am the day of, is a reasonable change that will help clerks better manage the election process.  
Lastly, LD 812 would r equire certain municipalities to offer opportunities for absentee voting in the 
presence of a clerk on the weekend in the days leading up to Election Day. We understand that some of 
our partners on the ground in Maine , including the League of Women Voters and the League of 
Conservation Voters,  have suggestions for how to best implement this weekend voting provision and we 
would support their recommendations. However, in general RepresentUs is in favor of accommodating 
some weekend voting in order to increas e access to the ballot for people who have busy weekday 
schedules.  
For these reasons, and with the recommended changes noted above, we urge the committee to vote 
“Ought to Pass” on LD 8 12. 
 
 
