Maine Town & City Clerks’ 
Association
Local Government Center  60 Community Drive  
Augusta, Maine 04330-9486
1-800-452-8786 (In Maine)  207-623-8428
Fax 207-626-5947
Representing Over 400 
MunicipalitiesDate: March  2, 2023
To: Senator Craig Hickman, Senate Chair 
Representative Laura Supica, House Chair
And members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee
From: Patti Dubois, Chairperson, Legislative Policy Committee 
Maine Town and City Clerks’ Association
Re: LD 812 – An Act to Assist  Clerks  in Facilitating  Elections  and to Improve  Access  to 
In-person  Absentee  Voting  for Working  People  by Increasing  Time for Absentee  
Ballot  Processing  and In-person  Voting
Position: Neither For Not Against
The Maine Town & City Clerks’ Association is neither for nor against LD 812 and we thank 
you for the opportunity to outline our points for your committee.
Section 1: STRONGLY OPPOSED
‘
1. Clerks were strongly opposed to mandating municipalities with a population over 
7,000 to conduct in person absentee voting for 8 hours on one Saturday and 8 hours 
on one Sunday within 18 days before the date of the election.  
2. Most clerks are already working on the weekends to catch up on work that simply 
can’t be done during regular business hours immediately preceding an election.  
Years ago, many municipalities had routinely held Saturday voting hours, but very 
few voters ever took advantage of this; therefore, most stopped offering it.  In 
addition, registrars in towns over 2,500 in population are required to hold extended 
hours for voter registration for at least 2 hours between 5-9 p.m. in the last five days 
preceding election day, and many allow for absentee voting during this time.  
Extended hours have very low citizen participation.  With that said, a few 
municipalities embrace weekend voting and some of their residents have come to 
expect it and do take advantage of it.
3. Requiring clerks to be open on days that no other municipal offices are open could 
create security and safety issues.  
4. Clerks know their voters and can already set extended hours or weekend hours if 
they choose to do so.  Mandating it for all is unnecessary and burdensome.  Towns 
already have the the ability to hold weekend in-person voting, and we feel that those 
decisions are best made at the local level.
Maine Town & City Clerks’ 
Association
Local Government Center  60 Community Drive  
Augusta, Maine 04330-9486
1-800-452-8786 (In Maine)  207-623-8428
Fax 207-626-5947
Representing Over 400 
Municipalities5. The bill language doesn’t specify that it applies to general elections only, so smaller 
special elections, primaries, municipal elections, etc. would also require the 
mandatory weekend voting hours.
6. Clerks agree that increasing the number of hours that absentee voting is available 
likely won’t increase the voter turnout but will simply spread that turnout over a 
longer period of time.  In-person voting continues to decrease, both absentee and on 
election day, with the addition of online request options and ballot drop boxes. 
Current absentee voting options are already incredibly convenient.  Clerks question 
the need to mandate additional hours.
Section 2.8.A.:  No position
Clerks felt that administering the grants will further stretch the Secretary of State’s staff and 
would require further administrative tracking for clerks to qualify for those funds; passage of 
this would require additional resources for the Secretary of State in order to manage this 
program.
Section 3: SUPPORT
Although many clerks indicated that they would be unlikely to take advantage of the extended 
processing time, we agree that opening the option up to municipalities would allow flexibility 
in managing this process, particularly in larger communities.
Section 4:  STRONG SUPPORT
Clerks strongly support the addition of moving the deadline to request an inspection of 
absentee ballot applications and envelopes to 5 p.m. on the day before processing, to allow 
for adequate planning to facilitate the inspection and alter staffing start times for those 
assigned to processing tasks.  Having a request come in at 8:59 a.m. when processing is 
scheduled to begin at 9 a.m. delays the entire process to a 10 a.m. start.  Although this 
doesn’t seem significant, it is when the process takes several hours of steady work to 
complete.  Those who wish to inspect can do so upon timely request well before the day 
processing is scheduled.
The Maine Town & City Clerks’ Association appreciates the opportunity to share its  
testimony with the Committee. Should any questions arise, please feel free to contact  me at 
207)680-4210 or by email: pdubois@waterville-me.gov .
