 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
 
In Opposition to  
 
LD 812, An Act to Assist Clerks in Facilitating Elections and to Improve Access to In -person 
Absentee Voting for Working People by Increasing Time for Absentee Ballot Processing and In-
person Voting  
 
March 13, 2023 
 
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Lambert , and I am providing testimony in opposition to  LD 812 
on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association’s (MMA) elected 70 -member Legislative Policy 
Committee (LPC). For refere nce, the LPC provides direction to the advocacy team at MMA and 
establishes the position on bills of municipal interest.    
While municipal officials feel portions of LD 812 have merit, there is strong opposition to 
the part of the bill that would mandate weekend hours for the purpose of absentee voting. 
Municipalities currently have the ability to set weekend hours, and do so as they see fit, but are 
not in favor of a mandated requirement.  Likewise, the proposed amendment lowers the required 
number of hours to be open on the weekend but remains  a mandate.  
The Secretary of State’s (SOS) office is inundated with requests from a myriad of 
stakeholders requiring important information or clarification. Requiring the SOS office to 
administer a grant program to f und weekend hours for absentee voting, that is already allowable 
under current law if the municipality chooses to do so, seems arbitrary and a waste of resources. 
While local officials appreciate the effort to increase voter turnout, they all agree that th is is not 
likely to foster that outcome.  
The LPC does support the provisions in the bill that enable municipalities to process 
absentee ballots 14 days, rather than seven days, before the election, and the extension of the 
deadline for providing notice to the clerk of the intent to inspect absentee ballots prior to 
processing those ballots. These changes would ease the burden s placed  on the clerks during a 
time wrought with pre -election  tasks .   
Thank you for  your time and for  considering the municipal perspective on this issue.  
 

 
