Department of the Secretary of State 
. 5 EL *- A - 
-'; 1."!-'~<, §. 
til";-l" 1 7I 
Bureau of Corporations, Electrons and Commissions 
It 2' T2‘ ,3 
Shenna Bellows 
Secretary of State 
Julie L. Flynn 
» 
Deputy Secretary of S/ale 
V - 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows, Secretary of State~ 
Department of the Secretary of State 
March I3, 2023 
Testifying Neither for Nor Against 
L.D. 812, “An Act to Assist Clerks in Facilitating Elections and to Improve Access 
to In—person Absentee Voting for Working People by Increasing Time for 
Absentee Ballot Processing and In-person Voting” 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, my name is Shenna Bellows and I am the Secretary of State and the chief elections 
officer. I am speaking today in neither for nor against L.D. 812. 
First, we support the concept proposed in Section 1 of the bill, to the extent it is designed to encourage 
municipalities who wish to offer weekend absentee voting opportunities to their residents during the 10 
days before the election. In fact, many Clerks already offer some Saturday hours for conducting 
municipal business, based on their experience of the needs of their residents and usage of those 
extended hours. Conversely, other municipalities have piloted Saturday hours, but discontinued them 
due to low or no usage by their residents. However, we are concerned that this section of the bill, as 
drafted, would not just encourage Saturday hours by municipalities with a population greater than 
7,000 — rather, it would require it. We do not have a breakdown of population by municipality but 
based on the number of municipalities with more than 6,000 voters, this bill could apply to 25-30 
municipalities, and require them to provide in-person absentee voting for at least 6 hours on one 
Saturday within I0 days before the election. We would encourage the committee to consider enabling 
language to promote Saturday voting hours but avoiding a mandate. 
Section 2 of the bill provides for a grant program to cover the costs of expanded hours for absentee 
voting in participating municipalities. This is an important provision, and we appreciate the sponsor’s 
recognition that municipalities would need additional resources to make Saturday voting a reality if 
mandated to do so. The Secretary of State would be responsible for managing this grant program and 
must adopt routine technical rules to do so. To adequately manage a grants program — something we do 
not currently do -— we would need to hire a grants administrator to manage this program. 
101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0101 
www.Maine.g0v/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
We have concerns that Section 3 of the bill, which would allow municipalities to process absentee 
ballots prior to election day starting 14 days (instead of the current 7 days) before the election, would 
create logistical challenges that could interfere with the smooth administration of our elections rather 
than improving election administration. It’s important to keep in mind that Maine makes voting truly 
accessible by offering no-excuse absentee voting 30 days prior to Election Day. However, that means 
that municipalities must test DS200 tabulators and the ExpressVote Accessible Ballot Marking Device 
after ballots have been issued but before early processing begins. We believe that extending early 
processing a week earlier could interfere with adequate testing of the systems required for processing. 
Currently, municipalities may process 7 days prior to Election Day, and we believe that’s more than 
sufficient time for processing. Keep in mind that ballots are just beginning to be returned in larger 
numbers two weeks before the election, and these must be entered into the Central Voter Registration 
(CVR) system, proofread and batched for efficient processing. Additionally, by spreading out early 
processing over a two-week period as this bill proposes, it would make it more difﬁcult for interested 
parties to inspect envelopes and view the process. For all of these logistical reasons, we strongly 
oppose Section 3 of the bill. 
In contrast, we are pleased to support Section 4 of this bill, which changes the deadline for someone to 
request an inspection of absentee ballot envelopes from 9 a.m. on each day of processing prior to 
election day to 4 p.m. on the day before the ballots will be processed. This gives the clerk advance 
notice and time to prepare for and allow the inspection of absentee envelopes for one hour before the 
ballot processing begins, and if no inspection is requested by the deadline, then processing can begin 
immediately at the stated time. 
For all these reasons, I testify neither for nor against this bill. This concludes my testimony. Thank you 
and I would be happy to answer any questions that the committee may have. 
101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0101 
www.Maine.g0v/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
