53 Baxter Boulevard, Suite 202  |  Portland, ME 04101
Phone: 866-554-5380 | Fax: 207-775-5727 | TTY: 877-434-7598
aarp.org/me  |  me@aarp.org  |  twitter: @aarpmaine
facebook.com/aarpmaine  |  instagram.com/aarpme
March 10, 2023
Star Pelsue, Volunteer Advocate for AARP Maine 
Good morning, Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Distinguished Members of the 
Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee:
My name is Star Pelsue. I am a resident of Portland and I am a volunteer with AARP Maine. 
AARP is the nation’s largest nonprofit, nonpartisan organization dedicated to empowering 
people 50 and older to choose how they live as they age. With a presence of nearly 200,000 
members in Maine, AARP strengthens communities and advocates for what matters most 
to families.
I am writing to ask you to support LD 812 which seeks to increase access to the polls over 
select weekends. I believe that voting is one of my biggest responsibilities as an American. I 
recall the stress during heavily attended elections standing in line before work because 
that was the best time for me to get to the poll and worrying that I would be late to work. 
On one occasion I actually was late. Standing in a line that wrapped around the building, I 
called my employer to tell them I would be late. My employer now had to deal with a 
classroom without a teacher. Fortunately, I only ended up being 10 minutes late as my 
polling place was just down the road from the school. I did use my tardiness as a teachable 
moment to express how I feel about my responsibility to vote. Now I have another 
teachable moment: the pandemic has demonstrated that when given easy access, people 
vote.
As a non-partisan organization, AARP remains focused on the issues that impact Mainers 
50+ which includes voting. Issues that impact the 50+ typically benefit all.  AARP is an 
advocate for equal access for all of those of voting age to exercise their democratic right. 
Legislation that assists Maine residents by increasing equitable access to the polls by 
extending hours on select weekends allows more residents to make their voices heard. 
Those people who prefer to vote in person but have difficulty finding the time to get to the 
polls due to jobs and family commitments would benefit from the weekend hours. 
I urge you to support LD 812. Our democracy is strongest when we all can participate in the 
voting process. 
Thank you,
Star Pelsue
Portland, ME 
