Testimony of Maine Conservation Voters
“An Act to Assist Clerks in Facilitating Elections and to Improve Access to In-person Absentee
Voting for Working People by Increasing Time for Absentee Ballot Processing and In-person
Voting”
Before the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee
March 13, 2023
My name is Will Sedlack, Political Director at Maine Conservation Voters, writing in support of
LD 812, “An Act to Assist Clerks in Facilitating Elections and to Improve Access to In-person
Absentee Voting for Working People by Increasing Time for Absentee Ballot Processing and
In-person Voting” on behalf of more than 13,000 members and supporters of Maine
Conservation Voters. Maine Conservation Voters works to build an inclusive democracy and to
make conservation and climate action a political priority . We support measures that make voting
more ef ficient, secure, and accessible for all eligible Maine voters and oppose those that do not
achieve that profoundly American goal.
This bill would make voting more ef ficient, secure, and accessible for all eligible Maine voters.
In particular , we wish to applaud Rep. Skold for his work on this bill. We strongly support
expanding the window for processing absentee ballots from 7 to 14 days and believe this is a
common sense change that will improve the lives of Maine’ s town and city clerks while ensuring
a positive voter experience.
We also strongly support municipalities providing an opportunity for in-person voting on the
weekends. In the spirit of ensuring success for the proposals laid out in this legislation, we wish
to recommend a few changes that we believe would lead to more predictable, uniform voting
experiences for Mainers and hopefully alleviate any potential confusion that might arise during
the expansion of in-person voting opportunities.
1.
Amend “...the clerk shall provide an opportunity for absentee voting in the presence of
the clerk for at least 8 hours on one Saturday and 8 hours on one Sunday within 18 days
before the date of the election.” to “the clerk shall provide an opportunity for absentee
voting in the presence of the clerk for at least 8 hours on the Saturday ten days before the
date of an election.”

2.
Amend “In a municipality with a population greater than 7,000…” to “In a municipality
with a population greater than 3,000…”
We believe the changes listed above will allow for clear state-wide communication about early
voting opportunities, reduce voter confusion about what opportunities are available, and ensure
the ef ficient allocation of municipal staf fing against the demand for in-person voting
With the recommendations listed above, Maine Conservation Voters ur ges you to vote “ought to
pass” on LD 812.
Thank you.
William D. Sedlack, J.D.
Political Director
Maine Conservation Voters
