L LEAGUE 0F WOMEN VOTERS“ 
L. or MAINE 
TO: The Honorable Craig Hickman 
The Honorable Laura Supica, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
DATE: March 13, 2023 
RE: LD 812 An Act to Assist Clerks in Facilitating Elections and to Improve Access to In-person 
Absentee Voting for Working People by Increasing Time for Absentee Ballot Processing 
and In-person Voting 
Good morning Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Veterans and Legal Affairs. 
My name is Will Hayward. I am here today as Advocacy Program Coordinator representing the League of 
Women Voters of Maine. The League supports LD 812. 
Removing barriers to voting and increasing voter turnout have been constant goals throughout the 
103-year history of the League. lVlaine leads the nation in voter turnout, but even so, tens of thousands 
of registered voters do not participate. By requiring weekend voting before an election, LD 812 would 
increase access to the ballot for citizens whose schedules and other limitations make it difficult for them 
to vote during regular weekly office hours. We believe that weekend voting will be most successful when 
it is widely and consistently offered across the state. To strengthen this component of the bill, the League 
suggests two changes: we recommend setting a fixed date, perhaps the Saturday ten days preceding the 
election, for weekend voting to be held, and lowering or eliminating the population threshold for 
weekend voting so access is consistent across the state. We recognize that any expansion of weekend 
voting would require additional resources for our local election, so we support the Committee working 
to identify what resource support would be appropriate. 
LD 812 also provides some relief to town and city clerks as they manage an ever-increasing volume of 
absentee ballots. It includes two sensible changes to the laws governing early processing of absentee 
ballots. First, it gives clerks extra time -- an extra seven days -- before the election to process those 
thousands of ballots. And second, it proposes a small but significant change to the law concerning public 
inspection of absentee ballot envelopes. Before they begin early absentee-ballot processing, clerks must 
allow members of the public -- upon written request -- one hour to inspect boxes of sorted, unopened 
ballots and compare voters‘ signatures on the envelopes with those on their absentee ballot 
applications. 
Allowing public oversight of this routine activity helps to demonstrate that our election system is 
transparent, free, and fair. And members of the public do regularly exercise this right to inspect absentee 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
info @lwvme.0rg 207.622.0256 www.lwvme.0rg
LWVME to VLA 2 
LD 812 March 13, 2023 
ballot envelopes. To accommodate these inspections, clerks may have to set up a special area and assign 
election workers to help the inspectors. 
Under current law, inspectors can notify clerks as late as 9:00 a.m. on an early processing day, just as 
clerks are preparing to get to work, that they intend to inspect ballots. LD 812 would move the 
notification deadline back to 5:00 p.m. of the day before. This would not put an undue burden on the 
public, while allowing clerks a little more time to get ready for an inspection. 
We ask that you vote Ought to Pass on LD 812. It would remove a barrier to voting for some Maine 
citizens, which may increase turnout. The advance processing and changes to absentee ballot inspection 
notice also give clerks some breathing room and flexibility in managing the volume of absentee ballots. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee. 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
info@lwvme.org 207.622.0256 www.1wvme.org
