Testimony of Lani Graham, MD, MPH 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 1086 
An Act to Deﬁne the term “SoIitary Confinement" for the Laws Governing a ]ail 
or Correctional Facility 
Presented by Representative Lookner 
Before the Criminal Iustice and Public Safety Committee, April 24,2023 
Senator Bee-bee Center, Representative Salisbury and Members of the 
Criminal Iustice and Public Affairs Committee, my name is Lani Graham. 
I am a former Chief Public health Officer for Maine. I serve on the Public 
Health Committee of the Maine Medical Association. I live in Freeport. 
I was a supporter of Representative L0oker’s bill regarding solitary 
confinement presented in the last legislative session. Despite the 
support of 25 organizations and more than 300 Maine people, that 
earlier bill proved too extreme for the Maine Legislature. We heard 
you. This bill is a very modest effort to get us all on the same page 
regarding what is meant by the term “solitary confinement ”. 
This definition simply establishes a common understanding of what 
solitary confinement is for Maine people and Maine government. 
Whenever there is a medical problem for public health, the first step is 
establishing a clear definition of the problem. For example, we all know 
now what must be present for a diagnosis of Covid. It is not sufficient 
to have a loss of smell, a runny nose, or a sore throat. You must havea 
positive test. Most people will agree that solitary confinement isa 
serious problem for the health of people who undergo it. This bill 
simply defines the condition, allowing us all to understand what is 
meant. It requires nothing of the Maine Department of Corrections nor 
of sheriffs, nor of county jails. This bill will not change any care, 
treatment or behavior in Maine jails or prisons. 
This bill establishes in Maine law the United Nations definition of this 
practice, which was passed and endorsed by that Assembly in 2015.
By passing this law, Maine comes into line with hundreds of other 
countries and jurisdictions that have recognized solitary confinement. 
The Maine Department of Corrections has been clear in its assertion 
that this practice is no longer used in Maine and therefore we no longer 
need to wonder about the definition. However, as we certainly know, 
governing administrations at both the state and federal level can change 
radically in just a year or two. Therefore, coming to agreement on 
what exactly solitary confinement is could be valuable in the future as 
we continue to struggle with violent crime, substance use disorders and 
mental health problems. 
I urge this committee to support this very modest bill unanimously 
ought to pass. 
Thank you for your attention, I would be pleased to answer any 
questions you might have.
