STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS 
111 STATE HOUSE STATION 
JANET T. MILLS AUGUSTA MAINE RANDALL A. LIBERTY 
GOVERNOR 04333-0111 COMMISSIONER_ 
TESTIMONY OF 
RANDALL A. LIBERTY, COMMISSIONER 
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS 
NFNA 
LD 1086 An Act to Define the Term “Solitary Confinement ” for the Laws Governing a Jail or 
Correctional Facility 
Before the 
Criminal Justice Public Safety Committee, April 10, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center and Representative Salisbury and other distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, I am Randall Liberty, Commissioner of the Maine Department of Corrections providing testimony 
neither for nor against LD 1086. 
Vlfhile the Department doesn’t have any issue with putting into statute a deﬁnition of solitary conﬁnement we don’t agree 
it’s needed. 
However, if the legislature believes it so, we offer some improvements to the language presented in this bill. 
The deﬁnition proposed in the bill references both jails and state correctional facilities, however if the deﬁnition is meant 
to capture both types of facilities, there needs to be language in Title 30, to account for county jails. You’ll see in our 
proposed language we’ve only offered language in Title 34~A, as that’s DOC’s statutes. 
Second, in the language we’ve proposed we’ve taken out the word “detained ” as this is generally only used to refer to 
individuals being held pre-trail, which is rare for the MDOC. The sponsor may wish to include it in language additions to 
Title 3 0. 
You’ll also see that we’ve taken out the reference to “other place” in the bill’s language and replaced the term with more 
speciﬁc language. A term as general a “other place” would include the MDOCs inﬁrmary, or medical detox for example, 
so the language as written would suggest that someone in medical detox would be considered in “solitary confmement. ” 
If the committee believes deﬁning the term is necessary, we offer the follow amendment to consider: 
Title 34-A: "Solitary conﬁnement” means the isolation of a resident from other residents of the correctional facility by_ 
conﬁning the resident in a cell or other single housing for 22 hours or more within a 24-hour period. except for medical 
reasons as determined necessary by the facility ’s treating physician or mental health reasons as determined necessary by; 
the facility ’s treating;_psychiatrist,_psychologist, or other licensed clinician. It is not “solitary conﬁnement” to conﬁnea 
resident in a cell for up to 5-days based on reasonable suspicion that they have ingested a contraband item or inserted a 
contraband item in a body cavityb 
Thank You, 
Randall A. Liberty, Commissioner 
Maine Department of Corrections
l
