Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
 
Testimony of the  Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
 
In Opposition  to LD 59, An Act to Prohibit Inclusion of the COVID -19 Vaccine  
in the Universal Childhood Immunization Program  
 
Hearing Date: April 24, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services , my name is  Ann Farmer and I am the Associate Director of the Division of Disease 
Surveillance at the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention at the Department of Health and 
Human Services . I am here today to provide testimony on behalf of the Maine Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention  (Maine CDC)  and I will be speaking against LD 59, An Act to Prohibit Inclusion 
of the COVID -19 Vaccine in the Universal Childhood Immunization P rogram . 
 
This bill seeks to prohibit the inclusion of any vaccine for COVID -19 on the list of vaccines available 
through the Universal Childhood Immunization Program.  
 
The Maine Immunization Program (MIP) distributes vaccine s under the Universal Vaccine Pr ogram at 
no cost for all childr en birth through age 18 years of age . Although vaccine s are provided free of charge  
to medical providers, this vaccine is paid through two separate funding types. First, t he federal Vaccine s 
for Children (VFC) program provides vaccine s for Medicaid  eligible, uninsured, underinsured, Alaskan 
Native, and American Indian populations. Establi shed in 1993, t he VFC program is an entitlement 
program, a right granted by law , for eligible children who otherwise might not be vaccinated because of 
inability to pay . Children who are eligible for VFC vaccine are entitled to receive at no cost all pedia tric 
vaccines recommended by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) through the 
passage of VFC resolution .  
 
Secon d, the Universal Childhood Immunization Program provides vaccine s for fully insured children. 
Implemented in 2012, Maine’s un iversal program was designed to augment the VFC program and to 
close the vaccine access gap by providing vaccines for all children in Maine regardless of insurance 
status by working with third party payers to cover the cost for insured individuals. This al lows for a 
provider to receive vaccine s directly from MIP without privately purchasing from the manufacturer at an 
increased, open market, cost.  
 
Because states are required by federal law to provide  vaccine s to VFC eligible children , this bill will not 
prevent MIP from distributing COVID -19 vaccine s, because  the COVID -19 vaccine has been 
recommended by the ACIP through the VFC resolution passed on October 19, 2022.  LD 59  would, 
however,  prevent the distributi on of the COVID -19 vaccine to privately insured children  in Maine , 
roughly 50% of our pediatric population. If vaccine s for COVID -19 are excluded from the Universal 
Program, all MIP providers would be required  to privately purchase vaccine s for their insur ed 
 
 population 6 months through 18 years of age at the manufacturer ’s rate, which is  approximated to be 
20% higher  than MIP -provided COVID -19 vaccine s.  
 
There are roughly  125,000 insured children under age 1 9 in Maine.  COVID -19 vaccine is estimated to 
be at least $100.00 per dose. At 50% coverage levels, providers will be responsible for purchasing $6.25 
million dollars of vaccine s annually. At 75% coverage levels, this increases to $9.375 million. This is an 
upfront co st to the providers. If provider sites cannot afford these upfront costs and choose not to carry 
the vaccine,  this can disrupt healthcare services and  insured children may have trouble accessing 
COVID -19 vaccines . 
 
In summary, the Maine CDC strongly oppose s this bill. It will not prevent the distribution of COVID -19 
vaccine in the State of Maine  as intended . Instead, it will force our healthcare providers to shoulder the 
financial burden  of these vaccines, likely  result ing in health inequities  across our st ate. 
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter and for the opportunity to provide testimony today. I can 
address questions from  the Committee , and I will be available to participate in the work session.  
 
 
