 
 
 
 
 
 
State of Maine | 131st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony of Hannah A. Hudson on behalf of Maine Immunization Coalition  
April 24, 2023  
 
In Opposition To:  
LD 59, An Act to Prohibit Inclusion of the COVID -19 Vaccine in the  
Universal Childhood Immunization Program  
 
Sponsored By:  Representative Underwood  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Services , I am Hannah Hudson, a member of the Maine 
Immunization Coalition (MIC) and the Policy and Communications Manager at Maine 
Primary Care Association (MPCA). MPCA serves as the admini strative home of the MIC.  
 
The MIC is  a network of associations, health care  systems, and providers working to 
protect Maine people across their lifespan against vaccine -preventable diseases, by 
increasing immunization rates through information sharing  and collaboration. As a 
statewide group, we undertake collabo rative advocacy on immunization. Our e fforts 
promote evidence -based policies that result in improved immunization rates for 
children and adults in the State of Maine.  
 
We are opposed to LD 59. The Universal Childhood Immunization Program provides all 
children from birth until 19 years of age in the State with access to a uniform set of 
vaccines as determined and periodically updated by the Maine Vaccine Board  (MVB) . 
The legislature formed the MVB in 2010 to help reinstate its universal purchase of 
vaccines for children. The MVB assures the necessary flow of vaccine purchase funds by 
collecting payments from health plans, insurance companies, and other payers  and 
remitt ing the funds to the  State.1  
 
Through the Universal Childhood Immunization Program , the state purchases vaccines 
at favorable rates and distributes them to providers at no charge . A universal vaccine 
purchase policy reduces the upfront cost for stocking vaccines and has many additional 
economic benefits, as outlined by Maine DHHS in a report on the implementation of the 
Universal Childhood Immunization Program2: 
• Lower costs through a public -private partnership and purchasing at reduced 
rates  
• Lower costs by reducing parallel systems in provider offices  
• Improve d access by creating a single -tier system  
• Improve d rates by offering combination vaccines to reduce missed 
 
1 https://www.mevaccine.org/ui#about_section   
2 https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/mecdc/infectious -disease/immunization/providers/presentations/Universal -
Childhood -Immunization -Program -Becomes -Law-in-Maine.pdf   

 
 
 
 
opportunities  
• Improve d rates by reducing out -of-pocket costs  
 
Vaccines for COVID -19 are not currently included in the list of vaccines available through the program. 
However, if vaccines for COVID -19 were  excluded from the program  in the future , providers would have 
to privatel y purchase COVID -19 vaccines and seek reimbursement  through other vaccine billing 
channels . This would place an unnecessary burden on the health care system and Mainers seeking care.  
 
On behalf of the Maine Immunization Coalition, we urge you to oppose th is bill. Please do not hesitate 
to contact me directly at hhudson@mepca.org  if I can answer any questions.  
 
Hannah A. Hudson, MA  
Policy and Communications Manager, MPCA  
 
 
