Karen Marysdaughter
Bangor
LD 59
Karen Marysdaughter
21 Mt. Desert Dr.
Bangor, ME  04401
karenmd@myfairpoint.net
April 23, 2023
Dear Members of the Joint Committee on Health & Human Services:
My name is Karen Marysdaughter and I am a resident of Bangor.  I am writing in 
opposition to LD’s 172, 59, 601, 1382, 1547, and 1598, bills that I believe would 
undermine public health in the state of Maine.
Regarding universal immunizations for children, I know from personal experience 
how important it is to protect children and the people they come in contact with from 
threatening diseases.  A number of years ago I contracted pertussis (whooping cough),
which I likely caught due to a non-immunized child, and was miserably ill for at least 
2 weeks.  The coughing was so severe that I could barely sleep.  I had trouble keeping
food down and lost 8 pounds during my illness.  All of this despite the fact that I was 
a middle aged healthy adult.  A few days before I developed symptoms, I visited a 
friend and met her newborn daughter.  When I later realized I was coming down with 
pertussis, I was terrified I might have infected her child, who had not yet been 
immunized, since I know that pertussis is a very serious, possibly fatal illness for 
non-immunized infants.  Fortunately she did not catch it from me.  I did, however, 
infect two other neighborhood children, but thankfully they had been immunized and 
therefore had mild cases.  
Regarding the immunization of healthcare and EMS workers, during the pandemic I 
postponed both dental and medical care in cases where the health care providers were 
not required to be immunized.  I am a senior, and my household at that time also 
included my older partner and my mother who is in her 90’s; I could not justify 
exposing them to possible COVID infection in order to address non emergency 
medical and dental issues for myself.  I actually debated whether I would call EMS 
personnel if we had an emergency, knowing that not all of those workers were 
immunized.  Fortunately that situation did not arise.  My health deteriorated during 
the pandemic and I am now having to address multiple health issues.
Meanwhile, my elderly aunt and uncle, who were in a nursing facility, both contracted
COVID twice from non immunized staff, and were confined to their rooms with no 
visitors for periods of time.  My aunt, who was simultaneously diagnosed with cancer,
was unable to get treatment at the time she needed it, due to the 2nd COVID 
infection, and subsequently died of cancer.
I am furious that misinformation is being fed to people, resulting in risks to myself 
and my loved ones.  We must not let this undermine the public health of our 
communities. I urge you to vote “Ought not to pass” on all the above mentioned bills. 
Thank you for your attention.

