Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
Treasurerg 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
immediate Past President 
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
Board of Directors 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP 
Valerie O'Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medica| Student Representatives 
Staff 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME 04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
www.maineaap.org Maine Chapter 
lNCORl’()RATED lN MAINE 
19)§_lJV \" 
‘?L 
American Academy of Pediatrics 
DP-Dll-' .1\T|‘,U T0 THF. Hr,/\l.Tl| OF f\l.|. CHILDREN"\ “'i11~W§1g 
April 14, 2023 
In Opposition To: LD 59, An Act to Prohibit Inclusion of the COVID-19 Vaccine in the 
Universal Childhood Immunization-Program 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Services, my name is Laura Blaisdell-- I am a resident of South 
Portland, a board-certified pediatrician, the current president of the Maine Chapter of the 
American Academy of Pediatrics and a mother of two sons. 
lam speaking in opposition of LD59 which is a statement and not a solution. Separating a 
single vaccine from Maine's vaccine purchasing system would restrict access and equity 
of COVID-19 vaccine availabilty to our children and create inefficient and siloed COVID-19 
vaccine purchasing. 
My colleague, Dr. Sewall has eloquently testified about COVID-19 vaccine safety and 
efficacy and its miraculous development and deployment — a central player in turning a 
world-wide pandemic that froze humanity into a deadly disease with which we are 
learning to live. COVlD-19 vaccines have prevented 10s of millions of hospitalizations and 
millions of deaths in the US.r 
Deaths and illness have been prevented because people chose to be vaccinated. lt is 
estimated that COVID-19 vaccines have been received by 72.3% or 5.5 billion of the 
worlds population. In the US, 31 million children ages 6 months to 17 years old have 
received a COVID-19 vaccine. In Maine as it relates to LD59, 77% of 12~17 year olds, 53% 
of 5-11 year olds and 22% of children under 4 years of age have received a COVID-19 
vaccine. That's a lot of kids. 
COVID-19 vaccines were included in CDC Routine Childhood immunization Schedule in 
February 2023. But adding the vaccine to a recommended schedule does not make it 
mandatory nor affordable to the system and patient. The cost of the COVID-19 vaccine, 
which has been largely free throughout the pandemic, will be shifting with the end of the 
public health emergency to the health care system and consumer. 
Maine's Universal Childhood Immunization Program ensures that Maine children have 
access to state purchased vaccines at favorable rates and health care providers can 
receive state-supplied vaccines at no charge. Excluding COVID-19 vaccine from this 
system of vaccine purchase would restrict access, reduce choice for pediatricians and 
patients alike and create inequities in cost of the COVID-19 vaccine to Maine's children. 
There is no COVID-19 mandate for children in Maine, and yet pediatricians provide this 
vaccine to families choosing to receive it. Excluding COVID-19 vaccines from the vaccine 
purchasing system would force pediatricians to create' 
a parallel system for the delivery of 
a singular vaccine- the waste and burden of which is absolutely avoidable by simply 
including it in the system. 
Simply put, LD59 is a solution in search of a problem.
