 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health all Maine people 
 
TO:   Joint Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
FROM: Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health & Government Affairs Associate  
 
DATE:  April 24, 2023 
 
OPPOSE – LD 59 , An Act to Prohibit Inclusion of the COVID-19 Vaccine in the Universal 
Childhood Immunization Program 
LD 1547 , An Act to Temporarily Prohibit the State from Mandating COVID19 Vaccinations  
LD 1382 , An Act to Establish the Guiding Public Health Principles of Focused Protection for 
Pandemics of a Highly Infectious Respiratory Disease 
 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and the esteemed members of the 
Health and Human Services Committee. My name is Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health and 
Government Affairs Associate for the Maine Medical Association and I live in Windham. The 
MMA appreciates the opportunity to provide the following comments in opposition to LD 59, LD 
1547, and LD 1382. 
 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine’s largest professional association representing over 
4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings. 
 
The Universal Childhood Immunization Program provides all children from birth until age 19 
with access to a uniform set of vaccines as determined and periodically updated by the Maine 
Vaccine Board. The purpose of this program was to expand access to immunizations 
recommended by the federal Department of Health and Human Services and the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention. The program lowers costs, improves access, and improves 
immunization rates overall.  
 
The MMA’s top priorities include protecting and investing in our public health to ensure the 
safety of all Maine residents now and in the future. Childhood immunizations have been one of 
the most cost-effective and effective public health preventive measures; saving an estimated 
2-3 million deaths annually across all age groups. The COVID-19 is a safe and effective way at 
preventing hospitalizations and deaths cause by the coronavirus. The U.S. has administered 
more than 655 million doses of the COVID-19 vaccine – with a cumulative effect of preventing 
more than 18 million additional hospitalizations and more than 3 million additional deaths.  
 
The Maine Vaccine Board is made up of public health and physicians that work to improve 
access to vaccines for children. They were formed by the Maine State Legislature in 2010 to 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 help the State of Maine reinstate our universal purchase of vaccines for children under age 19.  
 
In December, the Food and Drug Administration approved the Bivalent COVID-19 Vaccine for 
children down to 6 months of age. Roughly 12 months of data, including data from tens of 
thousands of participants in clinical trials, show that the vaccines are safe and effective at 
preventing serious disease or death due to COVID-19. Providing equitable and affordable 
access to COVID-19 vaccines is a safe and effective way to protect public health.  
 
Maine’s COVID-19 response has been successful because of our health experts giving Maine 
guidance and our coordinated efforts throughout the state to protect the health and safety of 
everyone. The Maine Medical Association supports our health professionals and opposes 
efforts to limit their ability to make expert determinations.  
 
Vaccination has made an enormous contribution to public health. Often it is stated that 
vaccination has made the greatest contribution to global health of any human intervention 
apart from clean water and sanitation. The intentions of this bill may come from a good place; 
but in seeking a balance between religious freedom and public health we must consider which 
possesses the greatest risk. The COVID-19 vaccine is safe and effective at preventing 
hospitalizations and death. 
 
For these reasons, the Maine Medical Association urges the Committee to vote ought-not-to-
pass on LD 59, LD 1547, and LD 1382.We thank the Committee for considering our comments 
and are happy to answer any questions or provide any resources.  
 
Sincerely, 
Mikenzie Dwyer 
(mdwyer@mainemed.com) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Resources:  
 
Two Years of U.S. COVID-19 Vaccines Have Prevented Millions of Hospitalizations and 
Deaths. The Commonwealth Fund. 2022 https://www.commonwealthfund.org/blog/2022/two-
years-covid-vaccines-prevented-millions-deaths-hospitalizations  
 
Is the COVID-19 Vaccine Safe? Johns Hopkins Medicine. 2022. 
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/coronavirus/is-the-covid19-vaccine-
safe 
 
Development and Licensure of Vaccines to Prevent COVID-19. U.S. Food & Drug Administration. 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 https://www.fda.gov/media/139638/download  
 
COVID-19 vaccines: Get the facts. Mayo Clinic. https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-
conditions/coronavirus/in-depth/coronavirus-vaccine/art-20484859  
 
 
 
 
 
