Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
Secretary _ 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
Immediate Past President 
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
Board of Directors 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP 
Valerie O'Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP* 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medlcal Student Representatives 
Staff 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
30 Association Drive, Box 190’ 
Manchester, ME 04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
.‘§‘~' §E{‘ii“£.t§iii3.< ”i‘ _@¥1t“2~<>fE »- 
Maine Chapter 
li\i(lORl ’OR1\'l'l£D lN MAINE 
.,\‘5“'“?,- 
American Acadcmyof Pediatrics 
l)liiIli ‘A'l'l'.l7 TO Tlli-T lll‘./\lTll OF All Cllll.l)RF.N" "'r,.~"\'°\e 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSlTlON TO LD 59 -- 
’Sydney R. Sewall, MQMPH - Hallowell 
Sen. Baldacci, Rep. Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services 
committee: 
1 am writing as a representative of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy 
of Pediatrics, an organization of over‘30O health care practitioners distributed 
throughout the state who focus on the care of infants, children, teens and young 
adults. We believe that the motivation undelying LD 59 is based on 
misinformation and false science, the that COVID vaccines deserve consideration 
for being included in the Maine immunization Program portfolio. Note that being 
included DOES NOT mean that COVlD vaccines would be mandated. 
The history of the development of the currently used COVlD vaccines is 
remarkable. Messenger RNA technology emerged from some breakthroughs a 
decade prior among researchers seeking new approaches to cancer therapy. 
Moderna and Pfizer had access to this technology, and with the urging of the 
Trump administration and government funding, they quickly manufactured mRNA 
sequences for the “spike protein" appendages on the COVID surface — which had 
been identified as important structures needed by the virus to be infective. 
Clinical trials were initiated and completed at a lightning pace, and we started 
giving shots to adults in early 2021‘ . Initial studies showed much better than 
expected efficacy in both preventing infection and decreasing rates of serious 
illness. Common side effects from vaccination included sore arm, fever, 
headache, and fatigue. Serious side effects were rare. - 
Trials in children began somewhat later —first in teens, and subsequently in 
younger groups down to age 6 months. Both the efficacy and side effect profile 
in children were similar to findings in adults. 
The presence of variants — Delta, Omicron, and more recently BA.4/BA.5 — has 
reduced some of their original efficacy at preventing ALL cases, but NOTin 
reducing the risk of complications. This graphic was published recently in the 
MMWR online journal published by the CDC regarding the bivalent vaccine now 
used: 
§@%§¥
Studies continue to show that vaccinated individuals have less serious illness and fewer 
complications than unvaccinated. While serious illness and hospitalizations from COViD in 
childhood is less common than in adults, they can occur — especially in children with chronic 
illnesses or immunosuppression. 
Even healthy kids have been affected by l\/ilS-C, a virulent form of multi-organ dysfunction 
necessitating ICU care and often leading to chronic heart problems. Other children have been 
affected by ”long COVID” with chronic neurological symptoms, ”brain fog” and fatigue 
impairing their quality of life. All these complications occur more often in unimmunized 
children._ 
As of November 2022, about 60% of adolescents and 35% of younger school aged children had 
received a primary series of COVID shots. Parents were not required to get their children 
immunized but chose to follow medical recommendations based on their reading and 
discussions with their doctors. i\/lost of these families will likely choose to continue protecting 
their children with the periodic boosters that will likely be part of upcoming CDC 
recommendations. Other parents will choose to initiate the COVID vaccination series after 
learning more about the disease -- and some will choose not to. 
A majority of the children who aren't immunized against COVD will have mild illness and be 
cared for at home, but a proportion may get seriously ill -- and end up in an ICU with what 
could have been a preventable event. r- 
When the COVID emergency ends in May, Federal financial coverage for COViD shots will also 
end. Maine pediatricians believe that the public health benefits from including COVID vaccines 
in the i\/laine immunization Program outweigh any additional logistical burden. Health care 
costs will be lowered since the lViiP is able to obtain vaccine materials at reduced prices. These 
purchasing costs are covered by a combination of Federal VFC funding, and a cooperative 
agreement with the insurance companies who cover children in i\/laine. 
The i\/laine Immunization Program provides a great public service to families by reducing 
financial barriers to vaccines and reducing overall health costs to insurers and taxpayers. There 
is no justification for restricting i\/ilP's ability to make an informed public health decision. 
Sincerely, 
Sydney R Sewall, IVID MPH 
instructor in Pediatrics, l\/laine-Dartmouth Family Medicine Residency
