 
Testimony on Behalf of the Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United Before the 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
 
In CONCERN  for: LD 1832 , An Act to Require Reimbursement of Fees for Treatment Rendered 
by Public and Private Ambulance Services  
 
Public Hearing : Mon day, May 15, 2023 at 10:00 a.m., Cross Building, Room 2 20  
 
Senator Bailey , Representative Perry  and distinguished members of the Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services:  
 
My name is Coralie Giles. I am a registered nurse  of more than  40 years , President of the Maine 
State Nurses Association, Vice -President of National Nurses Unit ed, and a resident of Brewer. I 
am providing testimony in concern regarding  LD 1832  on behalf of Maine State Nurses 
Association/National Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), representing 4,000 nurses and caregivers 
across the state of Maine . MSNA/NNU  requests that you amend  the bill to clarify that  
reimbursement for  ambulance services  without transport to a hospital do not include caring for 
hospital -at-home patients . 
 
MSNA/NNU is concerned that LD 1832 ’s requirement that carriers  reimb urse no-transport calls 
could be used to support dangerous hospital -at-home programs.  Hospital -at-home programs 
allow hospitals to replace  the inpatient hospital care that acute -level patients need, including 24 -
hour care by a re gistered nurse and immediate emergency response, with two daily visits by 
nurses or community paramedics and a 30 -minute emergency response  time.1 Hospital -at-home 
patients are at serious risk of worsening illness or even death, while patients treated in a hospital 
receive regular assessment s by nurses and doctors. Additionally, r esponse time is crucial when a 
patient’s condition deteriorates. Allowing  patients to  wait up to 30 minutes for an ambulance  to 
arrive could be deadly  for patients who are so sick that they  require i npatient  hospital care . In 
contrast, a patient in a fully ope rational hospital would receive an immediate emergency 
response.  
 
Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United  thanks the committee for accepting 
these comments.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Coralie Giles, RN  
President, Maine State Nurses Association  
Vice -President, National Nurses United  
 
1 For an in -depth discussion of Medicare hospital -at-home programs, see National Nurses United’s report at 
https://www.nationalnursesunited.org/sites/default/files/nnu/documents/0922_Medicare_HospitalAtHome_Report.pdf . 

Coralie Giles
Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United
LD 1832
Testimony on Behalf of the Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United 
Before the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services
In CONCERN for: LD 1832, An Act to Require Reimbursement of Fees for 
Treatment Rendered by Public and Private Ambulance Services
Public Hearing: Monday, May 15, 2023 at 10:00 a.m., Cross Building, Room 220 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Committee on
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services:
My name is Coralie Giles. I am a registered nurse of more than 40 years, President of 
the Maine State Nurses Association, Vice-President of National Nurses United, and a 
resident of Brewer. I am providing testimony in concern regarding LD 1832 on behalf
of Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), 
representing 4,000 nurses and caregivers across the state of Maine. MSNA/NNU 
requests that you amend the bill to clarify that reimbursement for ambulance services 
without transport to a hospital do not include caring for hospital-at-home patients.
MSNA/NNU is concerned that LD 1832’s requirement that carriers reimburse 
no-transport calls could be used to support dangerous hospital-at-home programs. 
Hospital-at-home programs allow hospitals to replace the inpatient hospital care that 
acute-level patients need, including 24-hour care by a registered nurse and immediate 
emergency response, with two daily visits by nurses or community paramedics and a 
30-minute emergency response time.  Hospital-at-home patients are at serious risk of 
worsening illness or even death, while patients treated in a hospital receive regular 
assessments by nurses and doctors. Additionally, response time is crucial when a 
patient’s condition deteriorates. Allowing patients to wait up to 30 minutes for an 
ambulance to arrive could be deadly for patients who are so sick that they require 
inpatient hospital care. In contrast, a patient in a fully operational hospital would 
receive an immediate emergency response.
Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United thanks the committee for 
accepting these comments.
Sincerely,
 
Coralie Giles, RN
President, Maine State Nurses Association
Vice-President, National Nurses United
