Testimony in Support of LD 1832 
An Act to Fund the Delivery of Emergency Medical Services 
 
Good morning, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage 
Insurance, and Financial Services Committee. My name is Rick Petrie, and I am a Paramedic who 
has worked in the Maine EMS system for 42 years. I am now the Chief Operations Officer for North 
East Mobile Health, a for-profit Ambulance Service based in Scarborough Maine and the Program 
Director for the Jackman Paramedic project.  
 
I was also fortunate to serve as a member of the EMS Blue Ribbon Committee whose work laid the 
foundation for this, and other, legislation supporting Emergency Medical Services in Maine.   
 
As the Blue-Ribbon Committee heard very clearly, EMS is in trouble. We are inadequately funded, 
tightly regulated, and under resourced. We have a significant staffing shortage because of poor 
wages and benefits, long hours, and incredibly difficult working conditions. Yet, every day, EMS 
providers have found a way to respond, sacrificing time with their families, appropriate rest, and their 
own mental health. In the past, much of the State relied on volunteers, but those days are coming to 
an end. 
 
 
On Average, non-transports make up between 20% - 30% of the call volume for Ambulance Services 
in Maine. These calls range anywhere from responding to a car accident because the initial caller 
didn’t know whether someone was injured, to diabetic patients where we start IV’s and give 
medications, to Cardiac Arrest calls where we spend upwards of an hour attempting to resuscitate a 
patient, using a tremendous amount of medications, supplies, and human resources. 
 
While you may hear that insurance pays for no-transport calls, it really is a limited number of calls. 
Anthem will pay for treat and no-transport at the basic life support (BLS) base rate, but there must be 
treatment. Medicare and MaineCare will pay for a cardiac arrest call and diabetic calls, but only at the 
BLS emergency rate. This doesn’t help with the thousands of calls we respond to every year where 
we tie up ambulances and staff responding to, evaluating, and sometimes treating patients. 
 
The public expects that we will respond when they call for help. In order to continue to be available to 
respond, we need this bill to begin to start to recover the costs associated with readiness and 
response, even if there is no transport. All payors need to reimburse ambulance services at the BLS 
and Advanced Life Support (ALS) base rate (as appropriate) for any patient for who they respond, 
make patient contact, and complete an assessment. The ALS base rate would only apply if they 
assessed a patient and provide treatment at an ALS level. 
 
We would request that this also include assessment, which can be a very involved process that also 
keeps a crew from responding to other calls.  
 
This bill would provide some of the help we desperately need to maintain the EMS infrastructure in 
the State of Maine, as well as provide some breathing room for EMS agencies to rebuild their 
organizations.  
 
Thank you for your consideration, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
 
Rick Petrie, EMT-P 
rpetrie@nemhs. com 
207-754-9109 
