STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF AGRIC ULTURE , CONSERVATION & FORESTRY  
OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER  
22 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA , MAINE 04333  
JANET T. MILLS AMANDA E. BEAL 
GOVERNOR  COMMISSIONER  
 
 
 
 
 
HARLOW BUILDING  PHONE : (207)  287-3200 
18 ELKINS LANE FAX: (207)  287-2400  
AUGUSTA , MAINE  WW W.MAINE .GOV/DACF  
 TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON  AGRICULTURE, 
CONSERVATION, AND FORESTRY  
 
LD 682 An Act Regarding Labeling of Packaged Foods for Genetically Modified Organisms  
 
March 15, 2023  
 
Senator Ingwersen , Rep resentative  Pluecker , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry , my name is Celeste Poulin , and I am the Director of the 
Division of Quality Assurance and Regulation .  I am speaking on behalf of the Department of  
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry on LD 682, An Act Regarding Labeling of Packaged 
Foods for Genetically Modified Organisms . LD 682 is a concept draft; therefore, the department 
does not have the information needed to take a position.   However, we want to provide some 
context as the Committee considers this legislation.  
 
The Division of Quality Assurance and Regulation (QAR) is tasked with implementing both 
state and federal law regarding food and food products in commerce.   In addition  to enforcing 
basic food sanitation and safety standards, o ur Consumer Protection Inspectors enforce retail 
compliance with the Maine Food Code and the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.   This 
includes ensuring that all food and food products offered fo r sale in Maine are properly labeled , 
including a complete list of all ingredients and any necessary disclosures.  
 
The labeling of genetically modified organisms is addressed by the federal government .  In 2016, 
Congress passed the National Bioengineered Food Disclosure Standard to preempt any state 
standard.   This was intended to make a uniform national standard and prevent a patchwork of 
state laws from being made that might interfere with interstate commerce.   States and other 
entities are precluded fro m setting different or additional requirements by CFR: Title 7 § 1639i , 
which states:  
 
No State or a political subdivision of a State may directly or indirectly establish under 
any authority or continue in effect as to any food or seed in interstate commerce any 
requirement relating to the labeling of whether a food (including food served in  a 
restaurant or similar establishment) or seed is genetically engineered (which shall 
include such other similar terms as determined by the Secretary of Agriculture) or was 
developed or produced using genetic engineering, including any requirement for cla ims 
that a food or seed is or contains an ingredient that was developed or produced using 
 
genetic engineering.   (Aug. 14, 1946, ch. 966, title II, §295, as added Pub.   L. 114–216, 
§1, July 29, 2016, 130 Stat.   838.)  
 
In 2014 prior to federal preemption, Ma ine did act to require the labeling of GMO ingredients. 
LD 718 , passed by the 126th Legislature and signed by Gov. LePage, required a disclosure on 
any food “produced with genetic engineering.” However, that  bill included both a trigger  clause 
and mandator y repeal language. Specifically, the law would not become effective until five 
contiguous states passed similar regulations, and the law would be automatically repealed if five 
contiguous states did not act  by January 1, 2018. Both the federal preemption a nd the failure of 
enough neighboring states to act rendered Maine’s law moot.  
 
I will be happy to answer any questions  and can be available at the work session as needed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
