 
 
Testimony of the  
Biotechnology Innovation Organization (BIO)  
 
Hearing of the Maine Legislature ’s Joint Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry   
March 15 , 2023  
 
Representative Bill Pluecker , Chair  
Senator Henry Ing wersen , Chair  
Representative Dean Cray , Ranking Member  
Senator Russell Black , Ranking Member  
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee  
Maine Legislature  
Cross Building, Room 214  
Augusta, ME  04333  
 
Re:  In Opposition to  LD 682, An Act Regarding Labeling of Packaged Foods for Genetically  
Modified Organisms  
 
I submit this testimony today on behalf of the Biotechnology Innovation Organization (BIO) in  
opposition to LD 682, “An Act Regarding Labeling of Packaged Foods for Genetically Modified  
Organisms .” 
 
BIO is a Washington, DC -based trade group representing more than 1,100 biotechnology companies – 
including some based in Maine  - academic institutions, state biotechnology centers, and related 
organizations across the United States and 31 other nations that are involved in the research and 
development of healt hcare, agricultural, industrial, and environmental biotechnology products.  
 
Maine ’s biotechnology sector is comprised of 575 establishments, employing 10,374  people who  
earn an average annual salary of $ 89,095.  Bioscience industry employment in Maine grew by 20  
percent from 2018 through 2021 . 
In the summer of 2016, the U.S. Congress overwhelmingly passed, and President Barack Obama  
signed the Bioengineered Food Disclosure Law, amending the Agricultural Marketing Act of  
1946 to direct the U.S. Department of Agriculture to establish a national mandatory uniform  
standard for disclosing human foods that are or may be bioengineered.  Under the standard,  
food manufacturers, importers, and certain retailers are required to ensure bioengineered  
foods are appropriately disclosed. Regulated entities have several disclosure options: text,  
symbol, electronic or digital link, and/or text message. Additional options such as a phone number  
 
 
or web address are available to small food manufacturers or fo r small and very small packages.  
 
The rules implementing the National Bioengineered Food Disclosure Standard (NBFDS) were  
finalized in late 2018 and companies have been voluntarily complying with the requirements  
since early 2019.   Mandatory compliance start ed on January 1, 2022,  and all foods  
entering commerce must now be  labeled in compliance with the Standard.     
 
Since the comprehensive federal regulatory review process - that includes the U.S. Food and  
Drug Administration, USDA, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency - has determined  
that there is no difference in safety between a bioengineered food and it s non -bioengineered  
counterpart, the NBFDS is considered a marketing standard – not a health and safety requirement - 
intended to provide consumers with more information about their food.  
 
It is important to note that crops and food derived from modern bi otechnology (GMOs)  
are safe.   Since being introduced to U.S. markets in 1996, not a single person or animal has  
become sick from eating biotech foods or feeds because the product was produced by  
biotechnology.  USDA, FDA, and EPA have all found biotech crops to be safe for humans,  
animals, and the environment.  The American Medical Association  agrees and believes biotech  
plants have the potential to improve nutrition and prevent and cure disease, and the World Health 
Organization  says biotech crops can help developing nations overcome food security problems.  
 
Indeed, the committee report accompanying the 2016 federal law noted:  
 
“The comprehensive federal regulatory review process has determined that foods produced  
using bioengineering are safe and not materially different in any way from those made using  
other methods. This is consistent with scientific research conducted and re viewed by both  
federal agencies and private entities. Consequently, the legislation ensures that the national  
disclosure standard and USDA’s implementing regulations treat the safety of a bioengineered  
food the same as its non -bioengineered counterpart.  The mandatory disclosure requirement is  
designed solely to address marketing matters, not based on any concerns with respect to  
safety of bioengineered foods or ingredients, which is why authority for implementation of this  
program is given to the Secr etary under the Agricultural Marketing Act. The legislation does  
not change the authority of the FDA to require that a bioengineered food be accurately labeled  
should any material difference arise with respect to safety or nutrition. FDA’s authority over   
bioengineered foods remain s the same. ” 
 
 
 
 
The law also preempts state and local governments from enacting their own genetically  
engineered (GE) food or seed disclosure requirements.   As such, no U.S. state or local  
government has adopted and implemented its own GE seed or food disclosure requirement  since  
the federal law’s enactment .   
 
Specifically, the preemption lan guage  reads : 
 
 “No State or a political subdivision of a  State may directly or indirectly establish under any  
 authority or  continue in effect as to any food or seed in interstate commerce any  requirement  
 relating to the labeling of whether a food (including food  served in a restaurant or similar  
establishment) or seed is genetically  engineered (which shall include such other similar terms as 
determined  by the Secretary of Agriculture) or was developed or produced using  genetic  
 engineering, inclu ding any requirement for claims that a food or  seed is or contains an  
 ingredient that was developed or produced using  genetic engineering. ” 
 
In explaining the need for preempting a hodgepodge  of differing GE food labeling requirements   
Congress said in the committee report that:  
 
“Congress recognizes the importance of having a uniform national standard for the disclosure  
of whether a food is or may be genetically engineered to prevent a patchwork of state,  
tribal, and local requirements. The preemption provision in Section 295 applies to all  
disclosure requirements regarding whether a food or seed is genetically engineered. Congress  
selected the term ‘‘genetically engineered’’ food or seed, rather than ‘‘bioengineering,’’ because  
it is the intent for the provision to broadly preempt state, t ribal, and local requirements regarding  
genetically engineered foods or seed regardless of whether the technology used to develop  
the food or seed falls within the definition of bioengineering. The intended goal is national  
uniformity and avoiding the c onfusion and disputes that would arise if a jurisdiction could  
require disclosure relying on one or more other terms that might be used to refer in various  
ways to genetic engineering, biotechnology, or breeding techniques, now or in the future.  
 
The Con gress recognizes states have expressed an interest in regulating the disclosure of  
bioengineered foods. The language in section 293(e) provides states with the legal authority  
to establish disclosure requirements for bioengineered foods, provided, the sta te establishes  
a definition for bioengineered food and disclosure requirements that are identical to those  
established by USDA. The state would be preempted from establishing requirements that differ  
from the federal requirements for bioengineered foods .” 
 
 
 
 
Even before the 2013 feder al law expressly preempting states from enacting their own GMO  
labeling requirements high level Maine policymakers expressed significant doubts about the  
legality and constitutionality  of state legislation requiring Maine specific GE food labeling  
requirements.  Indeed, in a May 14, 2013,  letter to legislators then Attorney General Janet Mills  
outlined constitutional  and other issues with pending GMO legislation.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to present testimony in opposition to  LD 682 .  I respectfully  
ask that you oppose this legislation , as it is unnecessary and expressly preempted by federal law.   
Please do not hesitate to contact me at (202) 365 -6436 or gharrington@bio.org  if you have any  
questions regarding this matter.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Gene Harrington  
Biotechnology Innovation Organization (BIO)  
 
 
 
About BIO  
BIO is a national trade organization, based in Washington, DC, representing more than 1,100  
biotechnology companies, academic institutions, state biotechnology centers, and related  
organizations across the United States and 31 other nations.  BIO members are involved  
in the research and development of healthcare, agricultural, industrial, and e nvironmental  
biotechnology products. Biotechnology researchers expand the boundaries of science to  
benefit mankind by providing better healthcare, enhanced agriculture, and a cleaner and  
safer environment.  
www.bio.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
