Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the ENR Committee, 
My name is Abby Huntoon. I am speaking "for" LD71 on behalf of Protect South 
Portland, an all-volunteer grassroots community non-proﬁt and the Tank Emissions 
Coalition of Maine which includes 12 health and environmental advocacy organizations. 
It is encouraging that the rulemaking process strengthened LD 163 by including 
toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene, in addition to benzene for fenceline monitoring and 
added a requirement that wind direction data be collected during monitoring. We urge 
you to further reduce the maximum time allowed from passage to implementation to9 
months. Fenceline monitoring is a simple widely-used low-cost EPA method and the EPA 
provides explicit directions for implementation. EPA Region 1 recommended fenceline 
monitoring for the tank farms in South Portland back in 2016. We also call fora 
requirement that raw data and analysis be shared with local municipalities and the 
public. 
The legislature spoke when it passed LD163. Despite the position of the oil industry in 
questioning the usefulness of fenceline monitoring, the data it collects will clarify to 
what extent emissions from the tank farms are going into the adjacent communities 
and will reveal potential impacts to health. 
As stated on EPA's website, “extra care must be taken when dealing with contaminants 
and other pollutants in close proximity to areas recognized as sensitive 
receptors." https:[/www.epa.gov/newenglandhc/environmental-issues —concern-urban- 
communities-resources#SensitiveReceptors. A sensitive receptor is deﬁned to include, 
but is not limited to, schools, daycares, and elderly housing and other facilities, where 
occupants are more susceptible to the adverse effects of exposure to toxic chemicals 
and other pollutants. The monitoring has been predominantly done far from the tanks 
and does not reflect the impact on those close to the tank farms, thus the crucial need 
for fenceline monitoring. 
There has been no accountability or transparency around the tank emissions as 
indicated by the results of the EPA required testing in 2012 and 2013. Consent Decrees 
did not mandate emission controls or improved monitoring. The industry has been 
allowed to use widely unreliable self-reporting based on estimates from an industry 
created formula. 
The cost to the oil industry of twice a year testing of heated tanks and continuous 
fenceline monitoring is minimal for this industry. 
Please pass LD71. 
new llruo/Woo ﬂ
