PO Box 88Belfast, ME 04915Phone: (207) 761-5616www.sierraclub.org/maine
To:Members of the Joint Committ ee on En vironmentand Natur al Resour cesFrom:Ania W right, Sierr a Club MaineDate:February 7, 2023Re:
Testimony in
Support of L.D. 71: Resolve, Regarding
Legislative Review of Chapter 171:
Control of Petroleum Storage Facilities, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department of
Environmental Protection
 Senat or Br enner , Representati ve Gr amlich, and Members of the Committ ee on En vironmentand Natur al Resour ces,
I am submitting the f ollowing t estimon y today on behalf of Sierr a Club Maine, r epresentingover 22,000 support ers and members stat ewide. F ounded in 1892, Sierr a Club is one of ournation ’s oldest and lar gest en vironmental or ganizations. W e work diligentl y to amplify thepower of our 3.8 million members nation-wide as w e work towards combating climat echange and pr omoting a just and sustainable econom y. We ur ge an “oug ht to pass” r eporton L.D . 71: R esol ve, Regarding Legislati ve Review of Chapt er 171: Contr ol of P etroleumStorage F acilities, a Major Substanti ve Rule of the Department of En vironmental Pr otection.
Of our 22,000 members and support ers, 982 li ve in South P ortland.Ther e are 120petr oleum tank s in South P ortland w hich ar e permitt ed b y the Maine DEP t o emit 630 t onsper y ear of v olatile or ganic compounds and 104 t ons per y ear of hazar dous air pollutants.The people in the homes, schools, da ycares, senior housing, community cent ers, andbusinesses close t o the tank f arm f acilities ar e exposed t o hig her le vels of emissions thanthose w ho li ve further a way.
Strong mandat ed fenceline monit oring in addition t o requir ed biannual t esting of heat edtank s will help k eep r esidents li ving near these tank f arms saf e. Fenceline monit oring issimple and eff ective, and with the final adoption of Chapt er 171, w e will be able t o continueto gather data about ho w the tank f arms ar e impacting r esidents.
In addition t o the final adoption of Chapt er 171, w e hope the Committ ee and the DEP willconsider w ays to mak e this data publicl y available in an accessible w ay for residents, suchas requiring r egular r eports fr om the DEP on ho w it is implementing the contr ol measur esidentified in its 2021 “Measur ement and Contr ol of Emissions fr om A bovegroundPetroleum St orage T anks” report (https://legislatur e.maine.go v/doc/5490).Regularreporting, ideall y done in consultation with the F eder al En vironmental Pr otection Agencyand leading agencies fr om other stat es, should include inf orming citizens and this

PO Box 88Belfast, ME 04915Phone: (207) 761-5616www.sierraclub.org/maine
Committ ee of an y reasons the DEP and Boar d decide not or ar e unable t o requir e additionalcontr ol measur es that could pr otect South P ortland r esidents.
Thoug h we would lik e to str ess the importance of considering long t erm planning and e veneventual r etirement of the tank f arms, air quality monit oring r emains a vital t ool at thistime t o keep our r esidents saf e and t o understand the true impacts of the oil industry onour communities’ health and saf ety.  Please v ote “oug ht to pass” on L.D . 71.
With gr atitude,
Ania W rightPolitical and Legislati ve SpecialistSierr a Club Maine Chapt er

