it 
=»”’\. 
ﬁE?=3 
Anne M. Carney THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 29 Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Sen. Anne Carney in Support of LD 71 
Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 171: Control of Petroleum Storage 
Facilities, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department of Environmental Protection 
Good morning Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and esteemed colleagues of the 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee. As you know, I am Senator Anne Carney, andI 
am pleased to support LD 71, Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 171: Control of 
Petroleum Storage Facilities, a Maj or Substantive Rule of the Department of Environmental 
Protection. This committee did important Work in 2021 to establish policies to mitigate emissions 
from the large petroleum facilities along the coast that receive shipments of oil from tankers, and 
to require owners of those facilities to test emissions. This resolve asks the committee to approve 
rule changes to Chapter 171 to implement the policies set by Pub. Laws 2021, Chapter 294, then 
LD 163, which passed the House and Senate by unanimous consent in the ﬁrst session of the 
13 Om Legislature. 
I’d like to use my time before the committee explaining Why the rule changes in Chapter 171 are 
so important to District 29 and to our state. We continue to be heavily dependent on petroleum 
products. These products come to our state by tanker ship and are ofﬂoaded to oil terminal 
facilities along the Fore River in South Portland, home to 6 of the ll marine oil terminal 
facilities in the State of Maine. The petroleum products unloaded and stored in South Portland 
are used throughout the state to fuel Mainers’ cars, buses and trucks, heat our homes, schools and 
hospitals, and pave our roads. South Portland and its residents bear the bmnt of the ﬁnancial and 
environmental risk posed by the petroleum products stored in these tanks and the related transfer 
operations. 
South Portland is a very densely populated community. The numerous oil terminal facilities 
across a relatively small footprint and their proximity to residences and schools are signiﬁcant 
concerns for the city. Many of South Portland's schools, daycare centers, and homes are 
extraordinarily close to these huge oil storage tanks. When you stand on the South Portland High 
School sports ﬁeld or the Kaler Elementary School playground, you can see and smell the tanks. 
Aerial photographs, attached, will help you understand the impact oil terminal facilities have on 
the surrounding community, and the urgency of protecting the health of children who attend 
daycare or school, as well as other members of the community who live and work near the tanks. 
Inside Climate News discussed the concerns posed by emissions from heated petroleum tanks in 
a series of articles that provide a detailed history of the efforts to reduce emissions from the 
facilities.
l
Both the 2021 statutory changes and the amended rules are the culmination of much work by city 
officials, residents of South Portland and surrounding communities, health and environmental 
advocates, the Department of Environmental Protection and numerous other stakeholders. 
The Legislature, Whose role it is to set policy, passed LD 163 to increase leak detection and 
repair, require actual testing of emissions semiannually, require fenceline monitoring to 
consistent with the requirements of the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s 
Method 325A to measure Volatile Organic Compounds in the areas surrounding the oil terminal 
facilities. 
The Board of Enviromnental Protection and department ’s role is to implement the policies set by 
the legislature, and in this case to undertake rulemaking to amend its rules regulating air 
emissions adopted to align those rules as necessary with the provisions of Title 38, section 5 90, 
subsection 1, paragraphs A to E established by our work in LD 163. 
It is important to understand these roles in connection with suggestions that fence line 
monitoring be omitted from the rules. There is an urgent need to understand the public health 
impact of the petroleum storage facilities on the people who live so close to them. The fence line 
monitoring will gather data identifying what emissions members of the community living, 
working and going to school near the facilities are being exposed to. 
Some have suggested that fence line monitoring is inappropriate because it will not gather the 
data needed to apportion responsibility for emissions to speciﬁc oil terminal facilities and to 
other sources. The purpose of the policy set by the Legislature is to gather data on human 
exposure near the oil terminal facilities. This information is the foundation for understanding 
potential risks to public health, improving air quality and ensuring we have clean air to breathe. 
Thank you for your consideration, and I am happy to answer any questions. 
al\\A\J.-. 
Anne Carney 
State Senator, Senate District 29 
South Portland, Cape Elizabeth, and part of Scarborough
2
