 
 
 
February 8, 2023  
 
Hon. Senator  Stacy Brenner, Senate Chair  
Hon. Representativ e Lori Gramlich, House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC Testimony Neither For Nor Against LD 71: Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 
171: Control of Petroleum Stroage Facilities, a Major Substantive Rule of the Departmenrt of Environmental 
Protection.  
Dear Senator Brenner , Representative  Gramlich , and members of the Environment and Natural Resources 
Committee :  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, and I am submitting this  testimony on behalf of the Maine State Chamber of 
Commerce, a statewide business organization consisting of a network of more than 5,000 large and small 
employers across Maine . We are here to testify neither for nor against LD 71.  
 
The Maine State Chamber of Commerce understands that despite the tremendous amount of work done by Maine 
DEP and CDC to collect and a nalyze air quality data over the past 3+ years, there are a few people in South 
Portland who would like more ambient air monitoring at the fenceline of the terminals. We believe this desire can 
be met while also addressing the concerns raised by BEP in its  July 7th letter to the ENR Committee regarding  
fenceline monitoring. Nowhere in Chapter 171 or in LD 163 does it say that fenceline monitoring must be done 
every week of the year in perpetuity. Both Chapter 171 and LD 163 state that fenceline monitoring m ust be done 
in accordance with EPA test methods 325A and 325B which clearly state that frequency of testing can be reduced 
based upon monitoring results if the regulator finds them acceptable. Under this correct and commonsense 
understanding of the rules a s written, DEP clearly has the authority to require testing be done every week for 
years,  but DEP also has the authority to reduce frequency of testing based on previous results that may indicate 
what activities and times of year are most likely to have hi gher than baseline readings or lower readings. For 
example, in the week we recently had the testing equipment will not provide usable data because of low 
temperatures. To address BEP’s concerns, all that needs to be done is for DEP or this committee to rea ffirm that 
this is the correct understanding of the rule.  
 
To add some context, LD 163 led to this change of Chapter 171 and the Chamber expressed concerns about this 
original bill in 2021 along with a number of business groups including Associated Genera l Contractors of Maine, 
Professional Logging Contractors of Maine, Maine Better Transportation Association, Maine Energy Marketers 
Association, Maine Motor Transport Association, Maine Asphalt Pavement Association, Maine Aggregate 
Association, Maine Jobs C ouncil and Portland Regional Chamber of Commerce. The wording of LD 163 was 
 
 
 introduced at the last minute with a public hearing on a Friday and work session on Monday, where it received 
an “ought to pass” vote with no discussion of amendments or the opport unity for these business groups to 
participate in discussion about elements of the bill that will have the opposite of its intended effect, like increasing 
emissions by forcing tanks to be emptied every five years when other inspection and leak detection m ethods are 
already being implemented. If given proper discussion, the potential ambiguity regarding fenceline monitoring 
could have been resolved at the outset .  
 
The Chamber would like to offer some context and corrections to information submitted to the ENR Committee 
in January by Protect South Portland (PSP) that has created undue concern in the community about air quality:  
 
Naphthalene is the only VOC at a potential level of concern and naphthalene levels in South Portland are most 
likely due to traffic and combustion, not the storage of liquid fuels.  
• PSP has expressed concern about benzene, which is the focus of fenceline monitoring. Since June of 
2019, Maine DEP has been conducting in South Portland one of the most intensive volatile organic 
compound (VOC) air monitoring programs ever done in this country.1 According to Maine CDC, “no 
24-hour VOC sample result has exceeded a health -based guideline for short -term, acute exposures.”2 
Only two compounds, acrolein and naphthalene, have been identif ied by CDC to be of potential concern 
for exceeding Maine’s longer -term Ambient Air Guidelines. CDC has analyzed the cumulative health 
risk of multiple VOCs over a lifetime exposure and found that naphthalene is the primary driver of 
potential health risks  at most  monitoring sites in South Portland and Portland. According to the DEP, 
combustion engines of mobile vehicles are likely the predominant source of most VOCs measured in 
South Portland that do not come from natural biogenics (vegetation and soil).  
 
Changing locations of air monitors won’t show that liquid fuel storage tanks are causing health problems.  
• First, air quality in South Portland is not causing health problems. The Maine CDC has analyzed asthma 
and cancer rates and has not found elevated nu mbers of either in South Portland. As mentioned 
previously, naphthalene is the only VOC at a potential level of concern and airborne naphthalene 
primarily comes from combustion and tail pipes, not storage of liquid fuels. DEP has stated that the air 
qualit y in South Portland is similar to other urban areas and CDC has state that naphthalene levels are 
similar to those measured in Presque Isle where there are no marine terminals with liquid fuel storage 
tanks.  
• Second, there are currently VOC monitors at Mech anic Street and at Bug Light that are adjacent to 
liquid fuel terminals in South Portland and whose readings are consistently lower than VOC monitors 
placed in Portland. DEP has stated the river and waterfront are low lying areas that funnel air 
contaminan ts from a variety of sources beyond the boundaries of South Portland and that these areas 
have microclimates with frequently shifting wind patterns. Monitors placed close together within these 
areas, like comparing Mechanic Street to Pearl Street or one fe nceline monitor to another, will not 
provide useful data about what is the source of VOCs being monitored.  
 
Concerns about so -called “burst emissions” when tanks receive a shipment of product are unfounded.  
• Vessels offloading at terminals is a common activity, occurring approximately 200 days per year.  As 
stated previously, none of the hundreds of 24 -hour samples collected during the monitoring program has 
detected any VOC above a health -based guideline for short term exposures, indicating that  “burst 
emissions” are not at levels which would create a health risk. There is also no correlation between 
 
1 https://www.maine.gov/dep/air/monitoring/docs/S.Portland -VOC -Air-Quality -Monitoring -Project -Update.pdf   
2 https://www.dropbox.com/sh/w5ls9eddxdkgp5i/AAD0kfc1NBCBT_PHXYJFLuwia/2020 -
2021/2.%20CAAC%20member%20inputs?dl=0&preview=60.+South+Portland+ -
+Portland+24+Hour+VOC+Air+Monitoring+Summary+Report+Dec+Update12.22.20.pdf&subfolder_nav_tracking=1   
 
 
 vessels making fuel deliveries and VOC levels measured at air monitoring locations like the one at 
Mechanic Street, which is adjacent to the CITGO t erminal and is the closest VOC monitor to tanks 
operated by Global, Buckeye and Sprague. The lowest levels of aromatics (which include naphthalene 
and benzene) detected at Mechanic Street in 2021 was on April 16 when CITGO had a delivery of 
120,000 barrels  of fuel. April 16 also had the second lowest levels of aliphatics (which include butane 
and propane). Just a few days earlier on April 10 there were no shipments to any terminals that day or 
the day before, but aliphatics were 12 times higher and aromatic s were 4 times higher than they were on 
April 16. August 26 had the highest levels of aromatics detected and third highest levels of aliphatics 
and no terminal received shipments that day or the day before. December 18, 24 and 30 had the lowest 
levels of n aphthalene but Buckeye received 170,000 barrels on December 17, CITGO received 95,000 
barrels on December 18, Sprague received 50,000 barrels on December 23, Buckeye received 170,000 
barrels on December 24 and 90,000 barrels on December 29.  
 
The Internati onal Liquid Terminal Association has already presented this information to South Portland’s Clean 
Air Advisory Committee which we hope will be taken under thoughtful consideration. We are happy to further 
work with state leaders to ensure you are properly informed,  so regulations aren’t passed that harm our 
economy while providing no measurable benefit to environmental health and safety  
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
