RE:  LD 71 - Chapter 171 Rules
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and Members of the Environment and 
Natural Resources Committee,
I am Bruce Taylor from the Town of Sweden. I support the Chapter 171 Rules and 
appreciate the opportunity to make some comments.  It has almost been 3 years 
and 3 months since then Commissioner Reid and other members of the 
Department of Environmental Protection at a South Portland City Council meeting 
first discussed the vexing problem of emissions of hazardous air pollution from 
the above ground petroleum storage tanks. I hope these rules, after some 
modification, will produce much needed transparency for the community and 
reduce their health risk while helping industry with permitting, compliance, and 
cost reduction by lessening tons of product loss through air emissions.
1. A profoundly significant and unique feature of South Portland is the 
industrial- community interface in census tract areas of high population 
density with minimal to no buffering. In most cases of industrial – community 
interface there is a discernable line of demarcation between the population 
and industrial activities. However, in the case of South Portland there are 5 
different petroleum storage and docking facilities dispersed in all direction 
throughout the city. Several day care centers and parks, and many residences 
are within a half mile of several tank farms.  Both Kaler Elementary School 
and South Portland High School abut on a storage tank facility.
2. Fenceline monitoring has already been successfully deployed in Corpus 
Christi, Texas and Philadelphia using EPA method 325A/B, as is proposed in 
Chapter 171 rules.  Although these are refinery facilities, careful examination 
very reveals large numbers of above ground storage tanks within the 
refineries.  There are over 40 in the case of the Flint Hills West refinery in 
Corpus Christi (see picture below).  Critically, the fenceline monitoring of the 
refineries includes large amounts of emissions of hazardous air pollutants 
from the storage tanks themselves and also from transfer and transportation 
activities. 
                                       
3. Fenceline monitoring for tank farms has already been enacted into law.  In 
2021, the state of Colorado mandated real time community based fenceline 
monitoring for an above ground petroleum storage tank facility.  (NAICS 
424710).  In HB 21-1189 EPA method 325A/B and forward looking infrared 
(FLIR) are employed.  In addition, Colorado added an additional method to 
their community based monitoring which is not included in our proposed 
Chapter 171.  They added EPA method TO-15 measures toxic organic 
compounds in ambient air collected in specially prepared containers by gas 
chromatography/mass spectrometry. 97 out of the listed 187 hazardous air 
pollutants can be measured by this method.   
4. Fenceline monitoring as proposed in Chapter 171 will help reduce risk from 
the toxic effects of hazardous air pollutants. It will provide important data 
for human health assessment such as used in EPA method HEM -4 (Human 
Exposure Model) which is vital for a city with such a significant industrial – 
community interface.  These efforts will help reduce disease causing 
exposure, reduce health care costs, and improve quality of life.  
Importantly, it will improve trust between the community and industry and 
also increase the community’s trust with the regulators who are supposed 
to help protect them.
5. More than benzene should be evaluated.  In fact, in rule 171, Definition I.  
Liquid Petroleum Products covers far more than products with benzene. In 
the proposed rules 6-B (2) states “the target analyte shall be benzene”.  
There are other toxics that can be emitted that have an impact on the 
community’s health that also affect permitting and compliance. For 
example, asphalt can be “cut” with many chemicals. So benzene would not 
be a good indicator by its self.  At a minimum all of the toxic BTEX  - 
benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene-  should be analyzed.  By using 
EPA method TP-15 Colorado could look at more compounds associated 
with petroleum products.  Even with all these methods a class of 
compounds, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, known to be carcinogenic 
would not be analyzed.  Analysis of the environment is the first step to risk 
reduction.
6. Community notification is not included in the rules.  Transparency is vital 
for a community that is in such intimate contact with industry.  The citizens 
of the community should be provided with data in real time.  They have the 
right to know about the environment that they live in since emissions of 
hazardous chemicals have a great impact on health. Information must be 
communicated to the community quickly and accurately so it can be 
trusted and understood.
7. Industry will benefit from fenceline monitoring and optical measurements. 
It has been shown to be cost effective. It can help reduce product loss, 
allow for faster and more efficient repairs and quality control, and improve 
permitting.  More accurate data will also help the Maine Department of 
Environmental protection with SIP (State Implementation Plan) 
development.
8. Resiliency planning should be included in these rules.   The threats from 
severe weather, flooding or power loss are major threats to the proper 
functioning and safety. Planning will help protect both industry and 
community.                                                                                                                        
“Climate change and extreme weather events represent a real physical 
threat to the oil and gas sector, particularly in low-lying coastal areas and 
areas exposed to extreme weather events. The sector needs to take climate 
change seriously, assess its own vulnerability, and take appropriate 
measures to prevent or mitigate any potentially negative effects.”             
Cruz & Klausmann, Journal of Climate Change, 121(1), 2013.     
9. Implementation time for fenceline monitoring is absurdly too long. As the 
proposed rule states “In no case shall monitoring commence later than 18 
months from the effective date of this rule.” At a minimum this would start 
effective monitoring nearly 5 years after then Commissioner Reid first 
promised that he would investigate the problem of toxic emissions 
(November 2019).  How many tons of hazardous air pollutants will have 
been released into our environment over that time period?
The Chapter 171 rules are essential for protecting the community’s wellbeing.  
The rules will also help industry in cost reduction and compliance.  By having 
better data Maine’s SIP will be more accurate.      
I hope the Committee will agree that the essential and timely initiation of 
fenceline monitoring should be expanded beyond just benzine, and that 
community communications and information are essential to the rules.   
As stated in the Preamble of this Resolve, rules for monitoring fenceline emissions 
are “immediately necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and 
safety”.
Thank you for your consideration.
Bruce Taylor, MD, FAAP                                                                                                       
Sweden  04040
               
                
