MacMaster, Marianne 
From: Cathy Lemar <cathylemar52@gmail.com>" 
Sent: Wednesday, February 8, 2023 12:27 AM 
To: ENR 
Cc: Brian Craig; Michael Moffett; zuckerman.roberta1O@gmail.com 
Subject: OLD 71 - Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 171: Control of Petroleum 
Storage Facilities, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department of Environmental 
Protection 
This messa e ori inatcs from outside the Maine Le vislaturc. =I
c 
February 7, 2023I 
Cathy Hinds Lemar 
101 Ridgeland Avenue APT 303 
South Poitland, ME 04106 
Ph (207)699-9245 
Dear Members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee: 
I am writing in favor of continuing mandated fenceline monitoring in addition to required biannual testing of 
heated tanks. Fenceline monitoring is a simple and effective, EPA approved way of knowing how much of the 
tank emissions are going into the surrounding communities. 
I am not a stranger to the adverse health effects of petrochemical exposure in air and drinking water. In the late 
seventies my family’s well water was contaminated with more than two dozen contaminants after waste taken 
from the cleanup of the Tamano tanker oil spill in Portland Harbor was dumped into the ground at the McKin 
Site in East Gray. It was supposed to be in incinerated. Seaweed gummed up the works and the workers were 
ordered to turn the tall storage tanks over and cut holes in the bottom of them so the waste could just seep into 
the ground. 
History of spill: 
https://nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPDF.cgi/9l 0 1211 3 .PDF?Dockey=9l 012113 .PDF 
I lived in a new home in East Gray. My well was contaminated with the very hazardous pollutants to the people 
of South Portland neighborhoods need protection from. 
I have painful and personal reasons to be in favor of the continued monitoring. Those petrochemical waste 
products turned our toilets black, funky, oily. Dishwasher insides turned a black sludgy mess. I had two small 
children that had varying health problems from their exposure. They got dizzy just sitting at the dinner table and 
walked as if intoxicated, bumping into walls. When I ran a bath I. The tub and put them in to wash, they cried 
the water was burning them, yet the water was not too hot. It was the chemicals. We all had rashes and 
breathing problems. My husband had to go by rescue to the hospital because of severe asthma attacks.My cat 
had a litter of three cats. One was born dead, one two-headed, and the other was smooth skinned like a seal with 
all internal organs on the outside of its body.
1
This was an absolute nightmare. I suffered a miscarriage and the following year my son died at two days old.I 
was treated for temporary blindness because of neurotoxins. 
Companies that have such large proﬁts need to be good neighbors and put people before proﬁts and work for 
preventative messages, such as monitoring. I suggest monitoring more often and closer to the tanks. 
I now live in South Portland at Ridgeland Gardens on the third floor. There are dangerous fumes and I am 
having to clean out my air conditioner of the sarne oily sludge that made us so sick in East Gray. I have lung 
problems and some days emissions make it difﬁcult to breathe. I have a nebulizer and two different inhalers. I 
am chemical sensitive and have moved to a place with the same problems that so sadly affected my life. I never 
thought I would be testifying again! 
Please, the ENR needs to reduce the maximum time 
allowed between passage of the rules and implementation 
from l5 months to 9 months. The people have been waiting 
long enough. There is no time like now to protect our children and older residents. 
As an official FOIA request, we would like copies of raw monitoring data and analysis of that information as it 
should be made available to the public in an easily 
accessible way, to allow our independent experts to analyze the results as well. 
South Portland bears a disproportionate health burden in 
its role of providing petroleum products for most of the 
state of Maine to heat homes, fuel cars, and pave roads. 
There are 120 petroleum tanks in South Portland which 
are permitted by the Maine DEP to emit 630 tons per year 
of volatile organic compounds and 104 tons per year of 
hazardous air pollutants. It is essential to know what toxic 
chemicals are coming out of the tanks and how much is' 
going over the fenceline into the neighborhoods closest to 
the tanks. Fenceline monitoring is crucial to getting that 
information. 
Fenceline monitoring and biannual testing of heated 
tanks is relatively inexpensive and will be paid for by the 
oil companies. The DEP has said that they do not have the 
resources to continue monitoring and have been unwilling 
to move the monitoring closer to the tanks. Given the oil 
industry's enormous proﬁts, the cost of testing & 
monitoring is negligible compared to the healthcare 
burdens. 
I am asking that the Committee hold the oil industry accountable in their role as our neighbors. This is a plea for 
the institution of A Good Neighbor Campaign in South Portland. 
I would be happy to answer any questions committee members might have. I would welcome meeting with oil 
industry ofﬁcials. We need to do the right thing. I can’t believe this is happening all over again. 
Thank you for considering my testimony. I would have loved to come and testify in person like the old days, it 
just recovering from COVID.‘
2
