Damien Lally
South Portland
LD 71
Hello members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee, 
I am writing in favor of the passage of LD 7. I am a South Portland resident living 
within 1000 feet of a tank farm near Broadway and the Greenbelt Trail. 
While I have not noticed any severe health related issues due to the fumes, I can tell 
the committee that the fumes have been noxious, frequent, and distressing. Despite 
the hard work of organizers to enforce emissions standards, there has not been enough
done to assure the public that it is safe to live here. I am particularly concerned about 
long-term exposure to known volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and carcinogens in 
the air. I would like to see these companies forced to ensure the safety of their tank 
farms or be forced to leave the area. Simply put, this doesn't seem to me an issue we 
can fine our way out of. If these companies can continue operating here without a 
loss, they will. But our neighbors and their kids will be the ones paying for it. 
It could be years before we see the manifestation of this exposure play out in 
increased cancer or death rates, or we could take action now to curtail these emissions
and force the tank owners to adhere to strict emissions standards. 
I notice the smell wafting from the tanks almost every single day. During the winter I 
can at least close my windows, though I know that doesn't guarantee the air is safe. 
During the spring and summer, the smell can be so strong that I'm forced to close 
everything up. I am very concerned about my personal exposure and what this would 
mean if I stay in this location. I am considering a move out of South Portland to a 
place where the air is safer to breathe. 
Anecdotally I can say I have heard of plenty of neighbors in South Portland who have
had it much worse: worsened asthma, kids with debilitating migraines, etc. There is a 
clear issue here impacting the health of our community. I hope the Committee will 
support the passage of LD 71, especially with regard to enforcing fence line 
monitoring of tank emissions. This is crucial to informing the public and holding 
these companies accountable for potentially harmful emissions. 
In addition to enforcing fence line emissions monitoring as provided by LD 71, I also 
write in favor of: 
- biannual testing of heated tanks
- reducing the maximum time allowed between passage of the rules and their implementation 
from 15 months to 9 months
- making raw emissions testing data and analyses available and easily accessible to the 
public
- ensuring oil companies pay for testing rather than shifting more tax burden onto an already 
pressed taxpayer base
Thank you for your time. 
Damien Lally 
South Portland resident
