David Plimpton
Cape Elizabeth
LD 71
Dear Legislators,
I hope you will preserve strong mandated fenceline monitoring  in addition to 
required biannual testing of heated tanks. Fenceline monitoring is a simple and 
effective, EPA approved way of knowing how much of the tank emissions are going 
into the surrounding communities. 
2. I live in Cape Elizabeth, literally right next to South Portland and in warm weather 
I have often smelled tank emission, forcing me and my family inside in good weather.
This is outrageous, The wealthy oil industry and its affiliates and enablers can well 
afford to do more to protect my family's health by reducing oil tank fumes and 
emissions. 
3. I encourage your Committee to reduce the maximum time allowed between passage
of the rules and implementation from 15 months to 9 months.
4. Raw monitoring data and analysis of that information should be made available to 
municipalities near the tank farms and to the public in an accessible way.
5. South Portland and Cape Elizabeth bear a disproportionate health burden in 
providing petroleum products for most of the State of Maine to heat homes, fuel cars, 
and pave roads.
6. There are 120 petroleum tanks in South Portland which are permitted by the Maine 
DEP to emit 630 tons per year of volatile organic compounds and 104 tons per year of
hazardous air pollutants. It is essential to know what toxic chemicals are coming out 
of the tanks and how much is going over the fenceline into the neighborhoods closest 
to the tanks. Fenceline monitoring is crucial to getting that information. 
7. Fenceline monitoring and biannual testing of heated tanks is relatively inexpensive 
and will be paid for by the oil companies. The DEP has said that they do not have the 
resources to continue monitoring and have been unwilling to move the monitoring 
closer to the tanks. Given the oil industry's enormous profits, the cost of testing & 
monitoring is negligible compared to the healthcare burdens and financial costs to the 
community. The State should tax the oil companies to provide funds to ameliorate and
monitor oil tank use.
8. The people in the homes, schools, day-cares, senior housing, community center, 
and businesses close to the tank farm facilities are exposed to higher levels of 
emissions than those who live further away. This is an environmental and health 
justice issue. These neighborhoods are essentially "sacrifice zones", with the oil 
companies profiting at the expense of people's health and quality of life.
