 of 13To: Maine Legislative Committee on Environment and Natural ResourcesFrom: David von Seggern (Portland, Maine; vonseg1@sbcglobal.net)Date: February 4, 2023Subject: LD 71 and MDEP proposed rule in Chapter 171Ladies and Gentlemen of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources:I am submitting comments on LD 71 (HP 46) with the title“Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 171: Control of Petroleum Storage Facilities, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department of Environmental Protection”While I live in Portland, Maine across the Fore River Estuary from the petroleum storage tanks to be affected by this bill, my son and his family have lived in South Portland for 25 years close to these tanks, and so I am especially speaking on their behalf.First, I support the authorization of emergency action prescribed by LD 71 and urge that it be enacted.  Second, I have comments on Chapter 171, the subject of the action.  The effect of whatever rules ﬁnally are approved should be to provide the public living nearby to storage tank facilities fairly certain evidence that air quality standards are not being violated in their neighborhoods.  This can only be done with actual monitoring by instruments calibrated and operated to report measurements relating to the standards.  The use of modeling or equations of any sort will serve only to support the actual measurements but must not be used as substantive evidence that air-quality standards are not exceeded.  Comment on “5. Inspection Requirements”: We cannot allow point measurements at the tanks themselves to substitute for actual measurements at points outside the tank facility perimeter and in the actual neighboring area.  While the point measurements inside the facility are important to show that emission suppression equipment is working as intended, they do not substitute for actual 
 of 23measurements outside the facility under random wind, temperature, and humidity conditions.  Understandably, owners of facilities will balk at the extra expense of monitoring external to their facilities.  However, by careful correlation of internal and external measurements over time, a case can likely be built that internal measurements are sufﬁcient; if emissions are sufﬁciently low inside the facilities, then they will be low enough to satisfy air-quality standards outside the facilities.  Comment on 5.A(3)(b).  The sitemap of inspection points must include some key to show which tanks are actually full, partially full, or empty in the facility at the time of the monitoring measurements.  Comment on 5.A(5).  It may be too optimistic to require repairs within 15 days.  Replacement parts for faulty equipment may not be readily available, or the manufacturer may require return of the product for inspection and repair.  I think a 30-day, or even 60-day, window would be reasonable.Comment on 5.B(3).  Again, the 15-day window for repair may be too tight.Comment on 6.A.  This whole protocol is backwards.   I strongly disagree with using 06-096 CMR, Ch. 137 (Emission Statements) to extrapolate emission levels in the neighborhoods adjacent to heated tank facilities.  There is a long history of ﬁndings that such extrapolations are unreliable.  Actual monitoring at the perimeter of the tank facility and in adjacent neighborhoods should be the criterion for judging whether emissions are at dangerous levels.  Readings above some threshold for these external sites should trigger individual tank monitoring at the time such readings are reported in order to pinpoint one or more emission problems needing correction.  This approach will remove the burden of a frequent “at-the-tank” monitoring plan from the facility owner or operator.  (See Economic Impact Statement prepared by Maine DEP.)Comment on 6.B.  The proposed Fenceline Monitoring is entirely appropriate and I commend BAQ, Maine DEP, for proposing it.  This largely satisﬁes my comment on 6.A.
 of 33Comment on ECONOMIC IMPACT STATEMENT:The state should be looking to balance the quality of the monitoring equipment against the uncertainties attached to equipment with various level of costs.  Would it be unreasonable, for instance, to allow use of equipment that measures a pollutant to within a factor of two when ambient conditions will often skew the actual pollutant levels by factors at least this large?  In this regard, the report on use of low-cost sensors to measure air pollution within Indian cities is encouraging.  
