122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
        
Testimony of Maine Public Health As sociation in Support of  
LD 71: Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 171: Control of Petroleum Storage Facilities, a 
Major Substantive Rule of the Department of Environmental Protection  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
Room 216, Cross State Office Building 
Wednesday, February 8, 2023 
 Good morning, Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. My name is Ed Miller . I am a resident of Hallowell, retired 
public health professional , including serving as CEO of the  American Lung Association in Maine for  more than 
20 years, and current board member  of Maine Public Health Association  (MPHA) . MPHA supports  LD 71: 
Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 171: Control of Petroleum Storage Facilities, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department of Envir onmental Protection . 
 MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical 
public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that responsibility seriously.  This resolve provides for legislative review of Chapter 171: Control of Petroleum Storage Facilities, a major substantive rule of the Maine Department of Environmental Protection. MPHA is supportive of the provisions 
in this proposed rule, including new requirements for fenceline monitoring , continuous measurement of actual 
emissions from heated petroleum storage tanks , and reporting.  
 
Research shows our zip code is a stronger predictor of our health status than our genetic code. In 2013, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation published a report exploring this finding.
1 Air pollution, including ozone and 
particulate matter, can increase risk for asthma and other respiratory illnesses – and can aggravate symptoms for those who already have respiratory health cha llenges. According to the 
American Lung Association’s State of 
the Air Report  (2022), thousands of Mainers live in parts of the state where air quality is poor enough to cause 
both acute and chronic health problems. The Report also showed 19,797 Maine children and 116,217 adults 
have asthma.  Like many public health challenges, we see disparities in the burden of respiratory health 
problems, like those associated with poor air quality, such that there is a greater prevalence of disease among  
low-income and minority populations. In South Portland, t he neighborhoods adjacent to the tank farms are at 
greater risk for poor air quality than neighborhoods further from the farms given their proximity to the emissions . These proposed changes will provide needed information for determini ng if the ambient air in those 
adjacent neighborhoods is safe to breathe.  
 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  This legislation will positively impact the air quality and health of Maine communities. We respectfully request 
you vote  LD 71 “Ought to Pass.” Thank you for your consideration.  
  
 
1RWJF Commission to Build a Healthier America. Improving the health of all Americans by focusing on communities. Robert Wood 
Johnson Foundation . 2013. https://www.rwjf.org/en/library/research/2013/06/improving- the-health -of-all-americans -by-focusing- on-
communities.html . 
