Eve Raimon
South Portland
LD 71
                                                                      February 6, 2023
Dear members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee,
The Maine Legislature has passed and Governor Mills has approved both fenceline 
monitoring and twice a year testing of the heated oil tanks in South Portland. It is 
frankly beyond me why these steps have not already been implemented. For the sake 
of public health and safety, I urge you to endorse LD 71.
I happen to live not far from some of the tanks in question. As such, the health of 
myself and my entire neighborhood is at issue here. Indeed, it cannot reasonably be 
denied that the people in the homes, schools, daycares, senior housing, community 
center, and businesses close to the tank farm facilities are exposed to higher levels of 
emissions than those who live further away.
The fact is that combined, there are no less than 120 petroleum tanks in South 
Portland that are permitted by the Maine DEP to emit 630 tons per year of volatile 
organic compounds and 104 tons per year of hazardous air pollutants. It is essential to
know what toxic chemicals are coming out of the tanks and how much is going over 
the fenceline into the neighborhoods closest to the tanks. Fenceline monitoring is 
crucial to getting that information. Further, it only makes sense that raw monitoring 
data and analysis of that information should be made available to the public in an 
easily accessible way.
Given the oil industry's undeniably enormous profits, the cost of testing & monitoring
of these tank farms is negligible compared to the healthcare burdens and financial 
costs to the community. At bottom, then, this is an environmental and health justice 
issue. These neighborhoods are essentially "sacrifice zones," with the oil companies 
profiting at the expense of people's health and quality of life.
Clearly, South Portland bears a disproportionate health burden in its role of providing 
petroleum products for most of the state of Maine to heat homes, fuel cars, and pave 
roads. Please act on behalf of South Portland as though you, too, lived there and 
approve passage of LD 71.
With thanks for your public service,
Eve A. Raimon
Angell Ave.
South Portland, ME 04106

