James LaPlante
South PORTLAND
LD 71
Hello, 
  I am a resident of South Portland Maine residing at 1490 Broadway. I am writing in 
support of passing LD 71 which will require fence line monitoring of the petroleum 
tanks here in South Portland. 
  My family including my child have been exposed to the toxic and noxious fumes emitted by 
the petroleum storage tanks located in South Portland for the almost 2 decades we have lived
here.  I am very concerned about the health effects this has had on my growing child. And I 
feel strongly that more needs to be done to monitor and hold these industries to account for 
their pollution. 
 The industry has proven that are not good neighbors and cannot be trusted to operate in the 
best interest of the citizens living near their tanks. 
  LD71 will monitor emissions from their tanks at the fence line and provide real time 
information to better inform the state and citizens of violations and toxic gas emissions.  
These monitors will be paid for by the industry. An industry that has been enjoying record 
profits.  Profits I feel should be re-invested in better vapor capture and filtering technologies. 
But for now Fence line monitoring.  
   I also feel that the monitoring data should be publicly available in Realtime and presented in
a clear way so that local residents living near these tanks can see when levels of gas 
emissions are high or at dangerous levels. So that people can make informed decisions about
their health and take protective measures. 
  We also need to hold these companies accountable for releases that violate state standards 
and demand penalties and fines that should go into a fund to help people with medical 
expenses or to install ventilation and filtering systems in their houses to keep these toxins out.
   If LD71 is not passed it will send a strong message to the citizens of South Portland that our
legislators do not care about our health, but only the profits of the oil industry. 
   Please pass LD71 and continue to enact stronger legislation to monitor and regulate these 
industries that pollute and poison the air we breathe.   
