Jeffrey Collins
South Portland
LD 71
Dear Sir/Madam,
I can’t emphasize enough the importance of preserving strong mandated fenceline monitoring
in addition to the required biannual testing of heated tanks. Fenceline monitoring is a simple 
and effective, EPA approved, way of knowing how much of the tank emissions are going into 
the surrounding communities. 
As a resident of South Portland, I have experienced the strong odor given off by these tanks 
on the nearby running path, and find it dangerous and offensive. South Portland bears a 
disproportionate health burden in its role of providing petroleum products for most of the state
of Maine to heat homes, fuel cars, and pave roads.
There are 120 petroleum tanks in South Portland which are permitted by the Maine DEP to 
emit 630 tons per year of volatile organic compounds and 104 tons per year of hazardous air 
pollutants. It is essential to know what toxic chemicals are coming out of the tanks and how 
much is going over the fenceline into the neighborhoods closest to the tanks. Fenceline 
monitoring is crucial to getting that information.
Fenceline monitoring and biannual testing of heated tanks is relatively inexpensive and will be
paid for by the oil companies. The DEP has said that they do not have the resources to 
continue monitoring and have been unwilling to move the monitoring closer to the tanks. 
Given the oil industry's enormous profits, the cost of testing & monitoring is negligible 
compared to the healthcare burdens and financial costs to the community.
I encourage the ENR to reduce the maximum time allowed between passage of the rules and 
implementation from 15 months to 9 months. The people have been waiting long enough. 
Raw monitoring data and analysis of that information should be made available to the public 
in an easily accessible way.
South Portland bears a disproportionate health burden in its role of providing petroleum 
products for most of the state of Maine to heat homes, fuel cars, and pave roads. The people 
in the homes, schools, daycares, senior housing, community center, and businesses close to 
the tank farm facilities are exposed to higher levels of emissions than those who live further 
away. This is an environmental and health justice issue. These neighborhoods are essentially
"sacrifice zones", with the oil companies profiting at the expense of people's health and 
quality of life.
I trust you will take these things into consideration. Many thanks.
Sincerely,
Jeffrey Collins
149 Parrott St
South Portland

