February 8, 2023 
Senator Stacy F. Brenner, Chair 
Representative Lori K. Gramlich, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Enviromnent and Natural Resources 
Cross State Ofﬁce Building, Room 216 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
RE: Proposed Chapter 17 l: Control of Petroleum Storage Facilities 
Comments on Proposed Regulations 
Dear Ms. Brenner and Gramlich, 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Keith Ocheski, and I am the Senior 
Manager for Air Compliance at Buckeye Partners. Buckeye operates two Petroleum Storage 
Facilities in Maine that would be impacted by these regulations: (1) the South Portland Terminal 
operating under Title V Permit A-282-70-G-R and (2) the Bangor Terminal operating under 
License A-202-71-J-R. We are providing these comments to highlight signiﬁcant concems we 
have with the proposed Chapter 171 Regulations: 
General Comments 
l. The proposed Chapter 171 Regulations are overly prescriptive and do not allow the Maine 
DEP to develop or allow alternative regulations that would achieve the same goals. 
Buckeye feels these regulations should include provisions to allow Department approval 
of alternative inspection, testing, and monitoring plans. This recommended change would 
make these proposed Chapter 171 regulations consistent the adopted Chapter 170 
regulations, where there are provisions for an alternative testing plan. 
2. The proposed regulations have several levels of redundancy that are unnecessary and will 
not result in any increased environmental beneﬁt. For example, the proposed monthly 
lower explosive limit (LEL) measurements for internal ﬂoating roof (IFR) tanks would be 
A 
expected to identify signiﬁcant issues with fugitive leaks in the IFR seals or ﬁttings, 
therefore making it unnecessary for an intemal inspection of the same tanks every ﬁve (5) 
years. In addition, the proposed Optical Gas Imaging (OGI) fugitive leak inspection 
program will detect any signiﬁcant fugitive leaks and make the proposed Method 325A 
fenceline monitoring program, designed to identify fugitive leaks, umiecessary and 
redundant. These redundancies will cause unnecessary operational and ﬁnancial hardship 
to facility owners with little to no additonal environmental beneﬁt.
3. The economic impact is substantial and causes an undue hardship. In addition, the 
unavailability of qualiﬁed third-party contractors may result in facilities being unable to 
meet the requirements. The upfront capital costs for Buckeye are estimated at more than 
$200,000 including purchasing of an OGI camera, associated training and third-party 
design and installation of a Method 325A compliant fenoeline monitoring programs at each 
of our locations. Annual recurring costs will likely exceed $175,000 for third party services 
related to fenceline monitoring and potential employment of additional site personnel to 
conduct required monitoring. These costs are especially burdensome for minor sources 
like our Bangor Tenninal. Additionally, due to the redundancy of the regulations, a large 
portion of these costs are not expected to result in an emissions reduction or other 
environmental beneﬁt. The economic impact of this regulation will likely result in 
increased costs to consumers in Maine and the surrounding areas. 
Section 5. Inspection Requirements 
5.A. Inspections Using Optical Gas Imaging Equipment 
l. 
2. 
3. Tenninals that store gasoline are already required to have a monthly leak detection program 
in accordance with federal Maximum Achievable Control Technology (MACT) 
regulations pursuant to 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 63 Subpart BBBBBB. 
The quarterly fugitive monitoring program as proposed in Chapter 171 should apply to 
equipment in vapor or light liquid service, as OGI and instrument-based monitoring are not 
as useful in determining fugitive emissions from very low volatility products like distillate 
or residual fuel. 
Existing Federal regulations require different monitoring ﬁequencies depending on the 
type of component (i.e. pumps vs piping components). A similar approach should be used 
here with variable frequency options depending on the likelihood of a leak. Alternatively, 
a quarterly program could be reduced in frequency depending on the results of the 
monitoring program for components less likely to leak (i.e. piping connectors). 
The OGI program requires the terminal purchase a OGI camera and train personnel. 
Altematively, a third-party contractor would be required to conduct the required 
monitoring. There is limited availability of qualiﬁed contractors, and they are not located 
in close proximity to the Terminals, especially Buckeye’s Bangor Terminal. Furthermore, 
OGI is a qualitative approach that does not give deﬁnitive results. An instrument-based 
program, such as the United States Environmental Protection Agency (U SEPA) Method 
21, is an established, proven quantitative method used to deﬁnitively determine if a fugitive 
leak is present and should be an acceptable altemative to an OGI program.
In addition, according to 5.A.(5), “if visible emissions are observed in a fugitive emissions 
component using optical gas imaging equipment, within two calendar days, the owner or 
operator shall determine whether a leak, as deﬁned by this chapter, is present by using 
photo ionization detection (PID) technology, ﬂame ionization detection (FID) teclmology 
or LEL meter.” Instrumentation therefore is reguired for veriﬁcation of a leak detected 
through OGI. The OGI program is an unnecessary, cost-prohibitive additional step and an 
approved instrument-based program, such as Method 21, should be an acceptable 
altemative. Instrument based fugitive programs as contained in MACT Subpart TT 
(National Emission Standards for Equipment Leaks - Control Level 1) or Subpart EEEE 
(National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Organic Liquids Distribution 
(Non-Gasoline) would be suggested surrogates. 
5.B. Internal Floating Roof Tank Inspections 
5.B.(1) Visual Inspections 
1. 
2. The IFRs at Buckeye’s Maine facilities have aluminum pontoon decks. Buckeye is not able 
to internally inspect the IFRs with the tanks in service due to safety concerns of conﬁned 
space entry onto an aluminum deck. Therefore, the tanks will need to be emptied and 
degassed for the proposed 5-year internal inspections. Currently, these tanks are taken out 
of service every l0 years for these inspections. Increasing the out of service inspection 
ﬁequency will substantially increase the emissions from emptying and degassing the tanks, 
even with controlled degassing pursuant to Chapter 170. Based on the very limited repairs 
most often required on the current 10-year inspection schedule, the increase in emissions 
from cleaning and degassing the tanks every ﬁve (5) years will most often be substantially 
higher than any potential decrease from any repairs made to the IFRs. In addition, 
greenhouse gas emissions will be generated from each controlled degassing event, ftuther 
increasing the environmental harm from the increased inspection ﬁequency. 
When EPA issued their New Source Performance Standards (N SPS) 40 CFR Subpart Kb 
regulations which require the l0-year up-close visual inspections on ﬂoating roofs the 
preamble speciﬁcally states that “the controls required on ﬁxed roof vessels have a very 
low rate of failure and are expected to last many years when properly installed ” . The EPA 
chose the current 10-year ﬁequency to match up with the typical frequency these tanks are 
already taken out of service for inspection and therefore would require no additional 
degassing ’s and hence no additional emissions. (Excerpt of Federal Register Vol 49, No. 
142, from Monday July 23, 1984 pages 29708-29709 are attached). Buckeye does not 
believe there is any relevant data to support that there would be measurable enviromnental 
beneﬁt from doubling the ﬁequency of these inspections. 
The monthly LEL instrument inspections required by 5.(B).(2) would detect signiﬁcant 
defects in the IFR and makes the ﬁve (5) year internal inspections redundant and 
unnecessary.
Section 6. Testing and Monitoring Requirements 
6.B. Fenceline Monitoring 
l. 
2. 
3 The proposed regulation requires the owner/operator of any petroleum storage facility that 
operates a ﬂoating roof tank to implement a major MACT reﬁnery level Method 325A/B 
fenceline monitoring program for benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene (BTEX). It 
can be assumed that given the applicability threshold of operating a ﬂoating roof tank and 
the target BTEX compounds, this requirement is meant to be focused on petroleum 
terminals that actively store gasoline since the only product requiring a ﬂoating roof that 
contains non-negligible amounts of BTEX is commercial grade gasoline. Buckeye 
requests that the applicability requirement be revised to focus on facilities that operate a 
ﬂoating roof tank storing gasoline. 
A fenceline monitoring program is economically burdensome, especially for small 
facilities such as Buckeye’s Bangor Terminal. At a minimum, there should be a threshold 
of potential facility-wide BTEX emissions that triggers the requirement for the fenceline 
monitoring program, such as 0.5 ton per year (tpy) which is 10% of the major source 
threshold that would trigger fenceline monitoring requirement at a full scale petroleum 
reﬁnery. A BTEX potential to emit threshold to trigger fenceline monitoring would also 
encourage facilities to voluntarily reduce potential BTEX emissions through operational or 
additional controls which would likely result in actual quantiﬁable emissions reductions. 
Routine sampling of BTEX content of stored products and/or product Certiﬁcates of 
Analysis (COAs) could be used in lieu of fenceline sampling to monitor BTEX 
concentrations in on site products. 
Extensive ambient sampling for volatile organic compounds/hazardous air pollutants 
(V OCs/HAPs) has been conducted in South Portland by the Maine DEP since 2019. As 
stated in the “South Portland / Portland 24 Hour Volatile Organic Compounds Air 
Monitoring Results Analysis and Summary Report” dated March 20, 2020, prepared by the 
Maine Center for Disease Control, “Regarding short-term exposure levels, to date no 24- 
hour sample result at any sample location for the measured VOCs exceeded an acute MRL. 
For long-term exposures, the time-weighted cumulative average for most VOCs (including 
all BTEX) is well below their corresponding AAGs.” Based on the published ﬁndings, 
Buckeye does not understand the goal of this proposed extensive fenceline monitoring 
program that results in an economic hardship when the State has not identiﬁed a problem 
that needs to be addressed. 
In addition, if the aforementioned Maine DEP ambient sampling program has not indicated 
any issues in the relatively more urban South Portland/Portland area, it is unclear why 
fenceline monitoring would be required for far less industrial areas like Bangor or 
Searsport. This rule appears to be proposed to address the concems of South Portland area 
citizen groups, yet the burdensome requirements apply to all terminals in the entire State, 
regardless of location. Buckeye contends that the OGI/instrument-based fugitive leak 
program will result in an effective on-site monitoring program to reduce fugitive emissions 
and the requirement for fenceline monitoring is redundant, will result in very high annual 
costs to the Terminals, and will bring no additional enviromnental beneﬁt.
4. If the primary purpose of the fenceline monitoring program is data gathering, sampling 
could be limited to a deﬁnitive period of time. The frequency of monitoring should also 
be able to be reduced and discontinued based on monitoring results. For example, ifa 
facility detects only background concentrations for 12 consecutive months, sample 
ﬂequency could be decreased to monthly or quarterly for the next 12 months. If results 
still only indicate background concentrations, sampling could be further reduced and/or 
ultimately discontinued at that facility. A sampling frequency reduction plan should be 
included in the regulation as is allowed in the Reﬁnery MACT rule (Subpart CC) which 
currently is the only other Federal regulation that requires fenceline monitoring. 
5. The Maine DEP has formally stated that they do not recommend fenceline monitoring asa 
measure to reduce VOC and HAP emissions from petroleum storage tanks and facilities in 
Maine, which is counter to this proposed requirement. As stated in the Report titled 
“Measurement and Control of Emissions from Aboveground Petroleum Storage Tanks” 
dated January l, 2021, and developed by Maine DEP, Section D.2. states “The Department 
does not recommend fenceline monitoring at this time. Fenceline monitoring is most 
commonly used around the perimeter of large facilities, such as petroleum reﬁneries, with 
few or no other emissions sources nearby. Given the proximity of petroleum storage 
facilities in South Portland to one another and to other signiﬁcant emissions sources such 
as highways, railways, marine vessels, and even local trafﬁc and home heating combustion 
sources, as well as expected emissions release points at tank-top levels, and considering 
typical air movement and dispersion characteristics, fenceline monitoring for any given 
facility is not expected to provide much useful data. Emissions from any given source may 
not impact ground level within the fenceline before being mingled with emissions from 
other nearby sources, so pollutants detected on fenceline monitors in an area with several 
potential emissions sources would not necessarily be directly attributable to the facility at 
whose fences the monitors are located. ” 
Buckeye appreciates the ENR Committee ’s consideration of the comments and suggestions 
contained in this correspondence. If you have any questions about these responses or need 
additional information, please feel free to contact me at (610) 904-4017 or k0cheski@buckeye. com. 
Sincerely, 
Kuﬂ aazwée 
Keith Ocheski 
Sr. Manager, Air Compliance 
Attachment
