Laura Bridgman
Dixmont
LD 71
LD71: Testimony in Support for the passage of LD 71
Strong fenceline monitoring is the core of this legislation, in addition to required 
biannual testing of heated tanks containing petroleum products. Monitoring of 
emissions is done by the Department of Environmental Protection far away from the 
120 large storage tanks, rather than at the fence around the tanks where accurate 
measuring must be carried out. Fenceline monitoring is a widely used, simple and 
effective, EPA-approved, way of knowing how much of the tank emissions are going 
out into the surrounding communities. 
The passage of the Rules must be followed by their implementation in 9 months 
rather than 15 months. The delay is not acceptable!
South Portland bears a disproportionate health burden as the site for multiple tanks of 
petroleum products that supply most of the State of Maine. These products are used to
heat homes, fuel cars, and pave roads.
There are 120 petroleum tanks in South Portland, which are permitted by the Maine 
DEP to emit 630 tons of volatile organic compounds and 104 tons per year of 
hazardous air pollutants. It is essential to know what toxic chemicals are coming out 
of the tanks and how much is going over the fenceline into the neighborhoods closest 
to the tanks. Fenceline monitoring is crucial in providing that information.
Raw monitoring date and analysis of that information should be made available to 
municipalities near the tank farms and to the public.
The people in homes, schools, daycare facilities, senior housing, community centers, 
and businesses close to the tank farm facilities are exposed to higher levels of 
emissions than those who live further away. This is an environmental and health 
justice issue. These neighborhoods are sacrificed for the profits of the oil companies 
at the expense of people’s health and quality of life.
I was made aware of the health hazards to people from exposure to propane and oil 
through educational efforts of the good folks at Protect South Portland. Although I 
live in the Bangor area, where we have less than a dozen tanks, I have a patient who 
works as a propane and oil delivery man who has very high liver function blood tests. 
He is exposed to petroleum emissions every time he connects and disconnects the 
hose on the delivery truck. He was not aware of the health dangers of his job. Neither 
was the delivery man who filled the propane tanks at my house and who sprayed a 
cloud of propane around my house just to display his disregard for my concerns.
I speak strongly FOR the passage of LD71!
Laura Bridgman, FNP, ND
Dixmont ME

