1+ 
, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
. 2 STATE HOUSE STATION j‘ ~ 3 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002I 
-it-E (207) 287-1400 
Lori K‘ Gramlich TTYI l\/lE1lI ’l6 R€l8.y 7ll 
154 Temple Ave. 
Old Orchard Beach, ME 04064 
Phone: (207) 232-1067 
lori. gramlich@,legislature.n1aine. gov 
February 8, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Lori K. Gramlich introducing 
LD 71, Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 171: Control of 
Petroleum Storage Facilities, a Maj or Substantive Rule of the 
Department of Environmental Protection 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
Senator Brenner, esteemed colleagues of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee, I am Rep. 
Lori Gramlich. I arnhonored to represent House District 131, the beautiful seaside community of Old 
Orchard Beach. I come before our committee today to introduce LD 71, Resolve, Regardingg 
Legislative Review of Chapter 171: Control of Petroleum Storage Facilities, a Major Substantive 
Rule of the Department of Environmental Protection. 
Maine has more than 150 large bulk petroleum storage tanks, and many of these tanks near residential 
neighborhoods, commercial districts, and even schools and day care facilities. In South Portland alone, 
there are more than 100 bulk storage tanks storing a range of products, including gasoline, distillate fuel, 
residual fuel, liquid asphalt and crude oil. 
In response to growing concerns over air emissions and odors from these facilities, the 129* Maine 
Legislature passed LD 1915, Resolve, Directing the Department of Environmental Protection To 
Evaluate Emissions from Aboveground Petroleum Storage Tanks. This resolve directed the Department 
of Environmental Protection to study methods to measure and estimate air emissions ﬁom aboveground 
petroleum storage tanks and to control odor and other air emissions from emission sources at oil 
terminal facilities, including emissions from aboveground petroleum storage tanks, loading racks and 
vessel offloading. The resolve also directed the Department to identify methods or programs for 
assisting municipalities in the use and application of mobile air quality monitoring devices and to report 
its ﬁndings to this committee by January 1, 2021. 
In January 2021, the Department provided this committee a report entitled Measurement and Control of 
Emissions from Aboveground Petroleum Storage Tanks. This report ‘was the culmination of a year-long 
effort by the Department to study emissions and methods of control for petroleum storage facilities. The 
District 131: Old Orchard Beach
report contained a number of recommendations, many of which are included in legislation passed later 
that year under LD 163, An Act to Revise Maine’s Enviromnental Laws. This legislation required the 
Department to initiate rulemaking to amend its rules to align with the new requirements contained in 38 
M.R.S. §590, subsection 1.A
t 
The Department ’s provisionally-adopted Chapter 171, Control of Petroleum Storage Facilities, rule 
implements the requirements established by the Legislature, including new control, operating, 
inspection, testing, monitoring, recordkeeping and reporting requirements for petroleum storage 
facilities throughout the state. These requirements will become effective six months after fmal adoption 
of the rule and will also be incorporated into each facility ’s air emission license.
I 
The Department is here today to speak to this proposed rule and to answer questions from the 
committee. Thank you for your attention to this important matter.
A 
District l3 l: Old Orchard Beach
