                        Hearing on Tank Emissions      2/8/2023
Good morning, my name is Louisa Beckett.
I am a retired South Portland teacher and resident of South Portland. 
Having taught at James Otis Kaler School, I experienced ﬁrsthand the fumes coming from the oil tanks. The tanks are in close proximity to the school building and immediately adjacent to the playgrounds, bordering on two sides.
During the time I was at Kaler (a period of seven years), I really didn’t think about the fumes. However, now knowing these fumes contain carcinogens, I am very concerned about the potential harm they may cause, and perhaps have caused.
I support LD 71.
LD 163, which was passed by the Legislature and signed by Governor Mills, has at its core, the requirement for fenceline monitoring around all tank farms and biannual testing of all heated tanks in Maine. At this point it is imperative that we preserve the mandated fenceline monitoring and the required biannual testing of the heated tanks to track tank emissions going into the surrounding communities. 
Three points that I would encourage the ENR Committee to review: 
1)Moving the already existing monitors closer to the tanks.
2)Reduce the maximum time allowed between passage of the rules and implementation from 15 months to 9 months. Time is important.

3)Raw monitoring data and analysis of that information should be made available to the municipalities near the tanks and made accessible to the public.
My understanding is that the Board of Environmental Protection (BEP), is lobbying the ENR to eliminate fenceline monitoring.
It is essential to know what toxic chemicals are coming out of the tanks 
and how much is moving over the fenceline into adjoining neighborhoods.
Fenceline monitoring is crucial to obtaining that information. This cannot be downplayed.
The cost of monitoring, moving the monitoring and testing the emissions of the oil tanks is the responsibility of their owners!
As I have mentioned, my primary connection to this issue is Kaler School. Kaler has 2 pre-kindergarten classes and 2 classes each through grade 5. That is approximently 280 students each year, learning and playing right beside the oil tanks.
What value do we place on our children and citizens who live and work in close proximity to the oil tanks? They are exposed to higher levels of emissions than those who live and work elsewhere in South Portland. This is an environmental and health issue. We need to know what their level of exposure is? I ask you, the committee, this question: 
Where are the environmental protections?

