TESTIMONY of Megan Diver                
Vice President
Maine Energy Marketers Association
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
In Opposition to LD 71
“Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 171: Control of Petroleum Storage Facilities, a 
Major Substantive Rule of the Department of Environmental Protection”
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Environment and Natural Resources 
Committee, my name is Megan Diver, I am the Vice President of the Maine Energy Marketers 
Association (MEMA).
MEMA is a trade association composed of approximately 300-member companies and over 5,000 direct 
and 5,000 indirect people working in energy delivery and servicing businesses delivering heating oil, 
biofuels, motor fuels, propane, pellets and kerosene and offering service and installations on the 
equipment that operates these fuels. In addition, our members own and operate 70% of Maine's 1,300 
convenience stores, throughout Maine and employ approximately 10,000 Maine people and sell more 
than one billion gallons of gasoline and diesel fuel each year. Our members also sell more than 90% of 
all the propane sold in our state every year. We provide education and training to the heating, 
ventilation, air conditioning, weatherization, and energy auditing trades for hundreds of Maine citizens 
annually through our courses at our own state of the art training facility MEMA Technical Education 
Center (MTEC) in Brunswick.
I submit testimony in opposition to LD 71, just as I did on the bill LD 163, An Act Concerning the 
Regulation of Air Emissions at Petroleum Storage Facilities, during the 130th Maine Legislature and as I 
did during the public comment period as part of the rulemaking process to implement the requirements 
of LD 163. 
There are several ways in which LD 71 will be problematic to implement. This bill is a bit too aggressive 
at this point as well as premature. There isn’t data at this point to support this bill that potential creates 
a burden on Maine citizens and businesses. In addition, this bill may have a negative effect on public 
health by making regulators and businesses less agile and effective, taking additional time and resources 
away from areas where there are proven public health concerns and away from actions that can have 
real public health impacts. This bill will be costly for the state and the hundreds of hospitals, colleges 
and businesses with air permits and the hundreds of thousands of Mainers who use their products and 
services. 
Many of the provisions in LD 71 are either unnecessary or duplicative. The Maine Department of 
Environmental Protection (DEP) is already monitoring air quality across the state and has the authority 
to address potential air quality issues. This bill compels DEP and businesses to spend time and resources 
on areas and actions that are not supported by science as being the most beneficial. 
LD 71 requires that tanks be emptied every five years for the complete inspection of tank roofs, even if 
emission monitors, infrared and photo ionization technology detect no such problems. We believe this 
requirement would create excess emissions, generating large amounts of wastes that need to be 
shipped to facilities for treatment and disposal. Creating more challenges to storing asphalt, heating oil, 
gasoline and other essential fuels in Maine would not make the need for them disappear. Instead, they 
would have to be trucked in from other states at high expense to Maine citizens and taxpayers with no 
environmental benefit.  This would conflict with the work of the Maine Climate Council and the 
Governor’s goals to reduce carbon emissions and achieve carbon neutrality in Maine by 2045.  
While the scope of LD 71 would affect all of Maine, this bill has originated from past discussions 
regarding liquid fuel terminals located in South Portland and have been there for more than 100 years. 
The issue was previously studied by DEP and DEP has presented their report to the ENR committee this 
year with its recommendations on what to do to further monitor liquid fuel storage tanks. DEP is 
continuing their study in South Portland and collecting more data with more testing. 
Thank you for the all the hard work DEP does for Maine citizens and businesses and, for the opportunity 
to share our concerns about LD 71.  We hope you will consider our comments, along with the technical 
expertise of those in the industry being regulated and oppose LD 71.
Thank you.
