My name is Melinda Hull and I live at 44 Kaler Road in South Portland.   My story bel ow has 
been shared in various forms previously, and I am sharing again with the ENR Committee now 
as you finalize Ch  171 rules/LD71.   I support the passage of LD 71.  
In 2015,  I came back to Maine after nearly 22 years away, to contribute my talents and energy 
to the local economy and to start a family.  When I first returned to South Portland and lived on 
Grand St,  in the morning sometimes I would notice a smell, sometimes a little sweet , 
sometimes a little more noxious , but always nauseati ng. I knew what i t was: they were doing 
some thing with the oil tanks. ‘They ’ were the companies who were my neighbors in Ferry 
Village or over  in Pleasantdale.  
My daughter  Carly , who was then  1 ½ years old,  started attending a childcare  center  in the 
Ligonia neighborhood  of South Portland in Spring 2018 .  In the mornings, we headed to daycar e 
singing songs in the car with  the windows rolled down in most any weather . On many, many 
days after making the turn  onto Lincoln Street , my throat would start to burn. Quickl y I would 
roll up the windows and switch the air circulator to avoid pulling in outside air. The fumes from 
that area would choke us. The air smelled like a mix of petroleum and asphalt. We couldn’t sing 
anymore  because we were coughing , and I’d tell Carly to put her blanket  over her nose and 
mouth to filter out the fumes.  
 
Often, she and her classmates c ould not  go out side due to the  fumes. The daycare provider 
would talk to us parents about keeping the kids in for long stretches when the air smelled so 
foul.  These  fumes enter ed her daycare ’s air ventilation system, no matter the weather or 
season. Teachers started to ha ve headaches and chronic respiratory issues. The other daycares 
and schools nearby were  all dealing with the same issue.   I learned this because I tried to find 
Carly another place to attend daycare.   I thought to myself:  We all know that these fumes are 
not safe . Our bodies tell us they aren’t, science tells us they aren’t . Why do our neighbors  – the 
tank farms – continue to expose us and our kids  to this ? Why are we letting them?  
Since that t ime, groups of residents have spoken out to share their stories, only to be silenced 
by their landlords beca use of threats to evict them.  There has also been a feeling of 
hopelessness as people try to move out of the se neighbo rhoods but cannot due to lack o f 
affordable options elsewhere outside of these neighborhoods.   
There have also been lawsuits outlining  violations  of emissions permits  and proposals initiated 
by the EPA for fence  line monitoring of the tanks in South Portland.  There has been  other types 
of monitoring of air quality  in South Portland  not near the tanks, which has provided some 
baseline data for comparison to any data we may get from closer monitoring.  A monitor  that 
was placed  in closer proximity  to certain tank farms showed frequent  spikes in benzene and 
naphthalene , two substance s where  exposure  to them is acknowledged to be  quite concern ing 
and hazardous to human health .  An official at the DEP ’s Bureau of Air Quality confirmed that 
the benzene and naphthalene  could only  be coming from a nearby tank farm , based on wind 
direction and other weather indicators.  
There have been a number o f efforts , inclu ding legislation , to help residents living, working , or 
attending school near the tank farms  to und erstand what is in the fumes. It is crucial to better 
understand what ’s happening in  the neighborhoods immediately adjacent to the tanks, as 
those exposures are t he most constant and concentrated.  Fence  line monitoring provides that 
knowledge and understanding .  If we know  what’s in the fumes  and how much , we can take 
steps to try and protect ourselves.    
All we are asking is for our neighbors  - any of the handful of tank farm  companies who operate 
among us - to be good neighbors by a ccurately monitor ing what they are emitting and how 
much. Just as we would with any other resident or bu siness whose activities are endangering 
the wellbeing or health of anoth er resident or t heir property, please help us hold our neighbors  
accountable  by being transparent about what ’s happening at their facilities . Please uphold the 
fence  line monitoring  outlined in  LD 71  and put this m onitoring in place without delay.  15 
months is far too long for all of us  being impacted every day to wait  – especially the youngest 
and oldest among us .  We have alr eady been wa iting a  very  long t ime and we are suffering.    
Thank you for consideration of this message and consideration of the health and wellbeing of 
all who reside adjacent  to the 120 or s o storage tanks in the residential nei ghborhoods of South 
Portland as well as the other communities around the state housing the se facilities.  Thank you 
also for  your ser vice to the state of Maine and its people.  
 
  
