Dear Environment and Natural Resources Committee, 
I am writing in strong support of the passage of LD71. I was born and raised in South Portland and 
have lived here for most of my life. I also live near the 120 petroleum tanks. There are 120 petroleum 
tanks in South Portland which are permitted by the Maine DEP to emit 630 tons per year of volatile 
organic compounds and 104 tons per year of hazardous air pollutants. I feel strongly that it is essential 
to know what toxic chemicals are coming out of the tanks and how much is going over the fenceline 
into the neighborhoods closest to the tanks. Fenceline monitoring is crucial to getting that 
information. Anyone living, working or schooling near the tanks are at risk. Everyone deserves to breathe 
clean air. The people in the homes, schools, daycares, senior housing, community center, and businesses 
close to the tank farm facilities are exposed to higher levels of emissions than those who live further 
away. This is an environmental and health justice issue. These neighborhoods are essentially "sacrifice 
zones", with the oil companies profiting at the expense of people's health and quality of life.
My family has had negative health experiences living near the oil tanks in Sopo breathing in the tank 
emissions. There have been occasions that my children came to visit me and woke up with nausea and 
sick to stomach symptoms from breathing in oil fumes that have permeated the house starting in the wee 
hours of the night until morning. It affected one of my children so much during the Thanksgiving holiday 
that one of them felt too sick to go to another family’s house for celebration.  
Please I urge you to preserve strong mandated fenceline monitoring in addition to required biannual 
testing of heated tanks in LD71. Fenceline monitoring is a simple and effective, EPA approved way of 
knowing how much of the tank emissions are going into the surrounding communities. Raw monitoring 
data and analysis of that information should be made available to the public in an easily accessible way.
I encourage the ENR to please reduce the maximum time allowed between passage of the rules and 
implementation from 15 months to 9 months. People have been waiting long enough and we are 
literally sick and tired from breathing in toxic fumes. It wasn’t always this way! Over the past 20+ 
years the oil companies have increased the amount of toxic chemicals stored in and around South Portland 
near us the residents and we are feeling the horrible affects on our health. South Portland bears a 
disproportionate health burden in its role of providing petroleum products for most of the state of Maine 
to heat homes, fuel cars, and pave roads.  Fenceline monitoring and biannual testing of heated tanks is 
relatively inexpensive and will be paid for by the oil companies. The DEP has said that they do not have 
the resources to continue monitoring and have been unwilling to move the monitoring closer to the tanks. 
Given the oil industry's enormous profits, the cost of testing & monitoring is negligible compared to the 
healthcare burdens and financial costs to the community.
Thank you for your support of LD71 that includes fenceline monitoring. I hope that the State of Maine 
will stand with us by passing LD71.
Sincerely,
Pat Roberts
Pat Roberts
South Portland
LD 71
Dear Environment and Natural Resources Committee, 
I am writing in strong support of the passage of LD71. I was born and raised in South 
Portland and have lived here for most of my life. I also live near the 120 petroleum tanks. 
There are 120 petroleum tanks in South Portland which are permitted by the Maine DEP to 
emit 630 tons per year of volatile organic compounds and 104 tons per year of hazardous air 
pollutants. I feel strongly that it is essential to know what toxic chemicals are coming out of 
the tanks and how much is going over the fenceline into the neighborhoods closest to the 
tanks. Fenceline monitoring is crucial to getting that information. Anyone living, working or 
schooling near the tanks are at risk. Everyone deserves to breathe clean air. The people in 
the homes, schools, daycares, senior housing, community center, and businesses close to 
the tank farm facilities are exposed to higher levels of emissions than those who live further 
away. This is an environmental and health justice issue. These neighborhoods are essentially
"sacrifice zones", with the oil companies profiting at the expense of people's health and 
quality of life.
My family has had negative health experiences living near the oil tanks in Sopo breathing in 
the tank emissions. There have been occasions that my children came to visit me and woke 
up with nausea and sick to stomach symptoms from breathing in oil fumes that have 
permeated the house starting in the wee hours of the night until morning. It affected one of my
children so much during the Thanksgiving holiday that one of them felt too sick to go to 
another family’s house for celebration.  
Please I urge you to preserve strong mandated fenceline monitoring in addition to required 
biannual testing of heated tanks in LD71. Fenceline monitoring is a simple and effective, EPA 
approved way of knowing how much of the tank emissions are going into the surrounding 
communities. Raw monitoring data and analysis of that information should be made available 
to the public in an easily accessible way.
I encourage the ENR to please reduce the maximum time allowed between passage of the 
rules and implementation from 15 months to 9 months. People have been waiting long 
enough and we are literally sick and tired from breathing in toxic fumes. It wasn’t always this 
way! Over the past 20+ years the oil companies have increased the amount of toxic 
chemicals stored in and around South Portland near us the residents and we are feeling the 
horrible affects on our health. South Portland bears a disproportionate health burden in its 
role of providing petroleum products for most of the state of Maine to heat homes, fuel cars, 
and pave roads.  Fenceline monitoring and biannual testing of heated tanks is relatively 
inexpensive and will be paid for by the oil companies. The DEP has said that they do not 
have the resources to continue monitoring and have been unwilling to move the monitoring 
closer to the tanks. Given the oil industry's enormous profits, the cost of testing & monitoring 
is negligible compared to the healthcare burdens and financial costs to the community.
Thank you for your support of LD71 that includes fenceline monitoring. I hope that the State 
of Maine will stand with us by passing LD71.
Sincerely,
Pat Roberts

