Priscilla Skerry 
Maine Association of Naturopathic Doctors
LD 71
Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 171: Control of Petroleum Storage
Facilities, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department of Environmental Protection"
Letter Testimony from: Priscilla Skerry, N.D.
Licensed Naturopathic Doctor
So.Portland, Maine
Rep: Maine Association of Naturopathic Doctors  (MAND)
Public Hearing: February 8th, 2023
From a medical and public health perspective knowing what’s in the air in the 
communities next to the oil tank farms in So. Portland…and possibly anywhere else 
in our state where tank farms exist, is critical. 
Health reasons why are blatantly clear. Emission from these storage tanks contain volatile 
organic compounds (VOC’s).  Think of asthma and breathing problems.  There are also 
HAP’s or hazardous air pollutants.  Think of benzene… known to cause cancer, leukemias 
and  neurotoxicity.  Other compounds are known to cause damage to the liver, brain, kidney 
and developing fetuses.   These are the toxins people in So. Portland in close proximity to 
these tanks have been living with for years.
  
Present licensing and Maine DEP requirements are not adequately addressing the problem.  
One wonders if they have been created more with corporate and municipal profit in mind 
rather than actual  human health.  The passage of LD 163 last June (and signed by the 
governor) was supposed to require, at a minimum,  fenceline monitoring within 3 mos…or so 
the community thought.  Little did we know that it had to go back to the Rules Committee for 
further clarification, which is causing a considerable delay in getting results!  It may take as 
long as a year or more before we know anything about what people in the community living 
near these tanks are exposed to…that is to say if fenceline monitoring is indeed kept in the 
bill! 
We learned about this VOC and HAP emissions problem in a  Portland Press Harold 
article published  in the spring of 2019.  It took the City and community by surprise.  
A Clean Air Advisory Committee was formed to study the issue and uncovered very 
disturbing health emergencies.  The question remains, why have the petroleum 
companies not felt it their responsibility to actually measure their emissions, and keep
the citizens informed of what might be in them?
Rep.Victoria Morales tried to introduce a bill, LD 1532, to  make certain that the 
owners of the 177 industrial manufacturing companies and petroleum tank facilities, 
under the auspices of the Federal EPA and Maine DEP, CDC and other licensing 
agencies,  would do their part. They would’ve been required to measure the “actual” 
emissions coming from these tanks, or, at the very least, monitor them at their fence 
lines, and If health limits were exceeded, they would’ve  been required to correct the 
problem using best available technologies, and, at their expense.  Non-compliance 
would’ve been grounds for loss of license.
But, then, Director of Maine’s Division of Air Licensing and Compliance, Eric 
Kennedy. proclaimed the bill unnecessary.  One of his objections was that the funds 
and personnel to accomplish what was being proposed was not available, would be 
prohibitive, and “further more, would not accomplish what is being sought.”   The 
message appeared to be:  “We’ve got things under control to the best of our financial 
capacity.”  The story’s  been the same from the Maine DEP: “The funds and 
personnel are not available. These toxic emissions are found every where from 
various sources…it would be unjust for us to point fingers only at the petroleum tank 
farm operators.”  
To an extent, this is true!  There are other sources for VOC’s and HAP’s,  but not to 
the extent  that cumulative and burst emissions from the more than 100 petroleum 
tanks and the unloading and loading of oil tankers and trucks might pose to near by 
children, families, schools and the elderly in  close proximity to their operations.  And
as to who should pay for mitigation of these fumes? Consider the following:
In a short 53 years we went from Lindbergh’s first trans- Atlantic flight  (1927) to 
landing on the moon (1979).  In my early years in medicine as an x-ray technologist, I
was still hand developing x-ray films.  Over 50 years since, we find ourselves in the 
age of MRI’s and CT scans that can literally look into the depths of our bodies in 3D  
and determine where our pathology exists.  Lab and other technologies can look at 
microbes in our intestines… in our blood and at our DNA to determine everything 
from nutrient to immune status.   And yet, when we ask, “ What are the kinds and 
levels of toxic substances in these tank farm emissions, we don’t get an actual 
measurement or answer,  we get an amount determined by an imprecise formula 
developed by an enormously profitable petroleum industry itself.
LD 1532  was dismissed as unneeded , LD 163 asking for at least, fenceline 
monitoring, was passed and signed by the governor. It is imperative that this 
legislation before you, LD 71, Chapter  171,  retain its core requirement for fenceline 
monitoring around all tank farms and biannual testing of all heated tanks in Maine to 
track tank emissions going into the surrounding communities.  I speak for the MAND 
in recommending also that: 1) Existing monitors be moved closer to the tanks. 2) That
maximum time allowed between passage of the rules and their implementation be 
moved from 15 months to 9 months. and that 3) Raw monitoring data and analysis of 
that information be made available to the municipalities near the tanks and accessible 
to the public.  
Maine’s Board of Environmental Protection (BEP) was adopted to take corrective 
action, whenever it finds that such action is necessary to protect public health or the 
environment or to ensure compliance with environmental laws.   The “bursts” and 
toxic emissions that have plagued this local community for far too long must be taken 
into consideration. sooner than later.   I am proud of our legislature and the legislators
who have nearly always fought for and won on issues protecting the health of our 
communities. Let’s not falter on this one.
Dr.Priscilla Skerry, N.D.
Licensed Naturopathic Doctor
Healing Routes
100 Brickhill Ave.
S.Portland, Maine 04106
(207) 772-5227
Residing at:  95 Emery St., Portland, ME 04102
