Testimony by: Dr. Priscilla Skerry, N.D. 
Representing: Maine Association of Naturopathic Doctors (MAND) 
Public Hearing: February 8th, 2028 Regarding LD 71, Rule 171- 
A Bill "Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 171: Control of 
Petroleum Storage Facilities, a Major Substantive Rule of the1 
Department of Environmental Protection" 
Chairpersons Stacey Brenner and Lori Gramlich and esteemed 1 
members of the Energy and Natural Resources Committee, thank you 
for this opportunity to testify. _1 
I am Dr. Priscilla Skerry, a licensed Naturopathic Doctor practicing these 
past 2 decades in S.Portland. I am also representing my colleagues of 
the Maine Association of Naturopathic Doctors in asking for support of 
Rule 171 requiring fenceline monitoring of the tank farms surrounding 
any close, nearby communities._ 
From a medical and public health perspective knowing what's in the air 
in these communities next to the petroleum tank farms in So. Portland- 
and possibly anywhere else in our state—is critical. 
Health reasons why are blatantly clear. Emissions and bursts from these 
storage tanks contain VOC’s. .. volatile organic compounds! Think of 
asthma and breathing problems. There are also HAP’s or hazardous air 
pollutants. Think of benzene... known to cause cancer, leukemias and 
neurotoxicity. Other compounds (.*BTEX’s) are known to cause 
damage to the liver, brain, kidney and developing fetuses. lf you, or Jgur 
children or close friends were living some yards away from and exposed 
to these potentially toxic emissions — as many in So. Portland have 
been for years--wouldn ’t you want answers too?- 
Present licensing and l\/laine DEP requirements are no_t_ adequately 
addressing the problem. There’s a moral along with a health 
responsibility here! The passage of LD 163 last June (and signed by the 
governor) was supposed to require,,at a minimum, fenceline monitoring 
within 3 mos...or so we and the community thought. Little did we know 
that it had to go back to the Legislative Rules Committee for further 
clarification. This is causing considerable delay in getting any meaningful
results! it may take as long as a year or more before we know what 
people in the community near these tanks are exposed to...and that will 
be only if fenceline monitoring is keiclin this bill. 
The message put forth by the State Regulatory Agencies seems always 
to be: “We do not have the funds and personnel to carry out what you 
ask.“ And from the Petroleum Tank Farm Industry it is: “These toxic 
emissions (BTEX’s) are found every where. ..it would be unjust to point 
fingers only at tank farms and their operators. ” 
To an extent, this is true! There are other sources for VOC’s and HAP’s, 
but not the specific kinds, nor the amounts in the burst emissions and 
those from unloading and loading of oil tankers and trucks in the near by 
proximity where children, families, schools and the elderly are being 
exposed! And it has to be taken into account that we haven't been 
getting an “actual” measurement or answer. It is an amount determined 
by an imprecise formula developed by an enormously profitable 
petroleum industry. 
We are asking that: 1) LD 71 retain its core requirement for fenceline 
monitoring around all tank farms,2) along with biannual testing of all 
heated tanks in Maine. 3) Existing monitors be moved closer to the 
tanks. 4) That the maximum time allowed between passage of these» 
Rules and their implementation be moved from Q months to Q months, 
and 5) that the raw monitoring data and analysis of that information be 
made available to the municipalities near the tanks, and made 
accessible to the public. 
l\/laine and its Legislators are known for making tough decisions on- 
behalf of the health of its citizens. Let’s not falter on this one. Thank 
you" 
ﬁg, )\l/ 
Dr.Priscilla Skerry, N.D. (Licensed Naturopathic Doctor) (207)772-5227 
Healing Routes, 100 Brickhill Ave.,Suite 304, S.F’ortland, ME 04106 
*BTEX I Benzene, Toluene, Ethylbenzene and Xylene
