93 Exchange Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772-2811 chamber@portlandregion.com • 
PortlandRegion.com
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • 
Westbrook
Testimony Neither For Nor Against LD 71-An Act to Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of 
Chapter 171: Control of Petroleum Storage Facilities, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department 
of Environmental Protection
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources
February 8, 2023
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities & 
Technology,
My name is Quincy Hentzel, and I am the President and CEO of the Portland Regional Chamber 
of Commerce. We represent 1,300 businesses in our region who employ over 65,000 Mainers. We are 
submitting this written testimony today neither for nor against LD 71.
Stability in energy supply and the liquid fuel terminals in South Portland are crucial to a working 
waterfront and the entire state’s economy. Maine’s business, transportation and energy infrastructure are 
facing challenges as we recover from an unprecedented pandemic and record inflation. State rules that make 
Maine an outlier to the region while providing no measurable benefit to environmental health and safety 
puts the Maine economy, and companies operating in Maine, at a disadvantage. It is essential for the state 
to work cooperatively with businesses and be open to the expertise they bring to the table.
You have undoubtedly received comments from people concerned about air quality in South 
Portland, but we feel it is important to add context on all the data that has already been collected when it 
comes to air quality concerns there. Following a 3-year VOC air monitoring program in South Portland that 
is one of the most comprehensive programs implemented in the United States, Maine DEP has stated that 
the air quality in South Portland is in line with other urban areas. Additionally, the Maine CDC has analyzed 
asthma and cancer rates and has not found elevated numbers of either in South Portland. As stated in the 
Portland Press Herald this year, “the city currently has no evidence that tank emissions are harmful to people 
living near the tanks, and no federal, state or local environmental authority has stated such a problem exists, 
including the city’s Clean Air Advisory Committee.”1 
Liquid fuel terminals in South Portland have already successfully worked with the EPA, DEP and 
the city to address and resolve concerns around heated tanks. Heated tanks now have limits on how much 
product they can store each year; odor control equipment has been installed on heated tanks which members 
of South Portland’s Clean Air Advisory Committee have stated has led to a decrease in odors in the 
surrounding neighborhoods; permits have been updated so emissions from the odor control equipment is 
tested multiple times a year, including when tanks are actively being filled; emissions from the odor control 
equipment was tested for VOCs and no trace of acrolein or naphthalene was found, which CDC has 
identified as the only VOCs of potential concern for being above their ambient air guideline in the three 
years of data collected from DEP’s multiple VOC air quality monitors spread across the city. Now Chapter 
171 is being updated with multiple inspection, monitoring and reporting requirements of all liquid fuel 
storage tanks, including optical gas imaging for leak detection. 
1 https://www.pressherald.com/2023/01/03/early-plans-for-south-portland-shipyard-redevelopment-draw-opposition/ 
93 Exchange Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772-2811 chamber@portlandregion.com • 
PortlandRegion.com
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • Portland • 
Westbrook
All the data we have indicates that the liquid fuel terminals in South Portland are acting responsibly. 
The CDC has analyzed the cumulative health risk of multiple VOCs over a lifetime exposure and found 
that naphthalene is the primary driver of potential health risks at the majority of monitoring sites in South 
Portland 
and Portland. According to DEP and members of the South Portland Clean Air Advisory Committee, 
naphthalene levels found in Portland and South Portland are most likely due to traffic as most airborne 
naphthalene emissions result from combustion, from sources like tailpipe emissions, not the storage of 
petroleum products. The CDC also says that indoor exposure to naphthalene from products in the home is 
much higher than outdoor exposure, and yet businesses are being asked to spend millions of dollars trying 
to comply with onerous regulations when there is no evidence it will improve public health. 
It’s important that DEP feels it has the authority to exercise its discretion and that legislation is not 
overly prescriptive. With Chapter 171, DEP and industries they regulate may determine that a year’s worth 
of fenceline monitoring data gives enough of a snapshot of ambient air quality to sufficiently alleviate 
community concerns. However, after sufficient ambient air monitoring data is collected, it’s necessary that 
DEP exercise its discretion and not waste the resources of DEP and regulated industries in collecting data 
that has no value. 
We hope you will continue to listen to the advice of the scientific experts at DEP and CDC to ensure 
Mainer’s public health while remaining cognizant of the benefits of predicable, reasonable, and effective 
regulation that is not duplicative, burdensome and overly prescriptive.
Respectfully, 
Quincy Hentzel
President & CEO
Portland Regional Chamber
 
