‘\ 
it 
1 HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES ~ 
0"), 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
A 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400. 
Rebecca Mme“, TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
50 Market St., Ste 1A PMB 162 
South Portland, ME 04106 
Residence: (207) 415-3770 
Rebacca.Millett@legislature.maine.gov 
February s, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Rebecca Millett in support of 
LD 71, Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 171: 
Control of Petroleum Storage Facilities, a Major Substantive Rule 
of the Department of Environmental Protection 
Before the Joint Standing Commission on Environment and Natural Resources 
Good morning, Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and esteemed members of the 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. My name is Rebecca Millett and I represent 
House District 123, which is most of Cape Elizabeth. I am presenting testimony in support of LD 
71, Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 171: Control of Petroleum Storage 
Facilities, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department of Environmental Protection. 
Maine prides itself as a dream vacation destination for tourists from around the country and the 
world. 37.4 million visitors came to Maine in 2019, which equaled $4.3 billion in combined 
restaurant and lodging sales. Our state is renowned for its fresh seafood, tasty blueberries, 
beautiful mountains, forests, lakes and coastline. Toxic emissions have no place in our state, and 
we must do all we can to protect our environment and our precious brand as Vacationland. 
Three years ago, we learned of air quality violations against operators of petroleum storage tanks 
located in South Portland as a result of reports in the press on the consent decrees ﬁled by the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). We immediately enacted a new law requiring 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) to provide notice to each municipality in 
which a violation of air quality has been received by the DEP or issued by the DEP. 
The following session, we passed a resolve that initiated the process of studying and making 
recommendations related to best practice methods to estimate, measure and control emissions 
from above-ground petroleum storage tanks and transference of petroleum products between 
transportali ﬁn vehicles and storage tanks. What you have before you today is a result of that 
resolve. The committee reported out legislation based on the recommendations which required 
District 123: Cape Elizabeth (Part)
\ 
major substantive rulemaking, Board of Enviromnental Protection review and now legislative 
approval. The path to addressing concerns about the quality and safety of the air we breathe has 
been thoughtful yet lengthy. I appreciate the serious attention paid to this issue by the DEP and 
their efforts, and I look forward to ﬁnally having in place rules that will help identify and address 
toxic emissions and keep our neighborhoods safe.- 
There are 120 petroleum tanks in South Portland, which arepermitted by the Maine DEP to emit 
630 tons per year of volatile organic compounds and 104-tons per year of hazardous air 
pollutants. Fenceline monitoring and biannual testing of heated tanks are relatively inexpensive 
yet effective ways to gather infonnation about what toxic chemicals are coming out of the tanks 
and how much is going over the fence line into the neighborhoods. I urge you to keep this testing 
in the proposed rules, as Well as to make sure that this information will be accessible by the 
public for complete transparency. 
These are achievable steps for our state tobegin tackling toxic emissions that threaten the public 
health of its residents and our reputation as a pristine natural treasure. Let us now move forward 
with this important work. I hope that you Will join me in supporting LD 71. 
A.»
a 
District 123: Cape Elizabeth (Part)
