Testimony by  
Scott Morelli, City Manager, City of South Portland 
In Support of  LD 71 
 
Dear Chairpersons Stacy Brenner and Lori Gramlich and esteemed members of the Energy and Natural 
Resources Committee:  
 I am here  on behalf of the City of South Portland  to urge your support of LD 71, which would fast track 
the implementation of substantive changes to Chapter 171 of the Rules of the Department of 
Environmental Protection (DEP). Specifically, these changes would requ ire marine tank facilities to install 
so-called “fence -line” air quality monitors to help regulators and our community have a more definitive 
understanding of the types and quantities of emissions being released in to the air we breathe.  
 
Currently , we are unable to say whether the air in South Portland is or is not safe to breathe. Some 
initial data from air monitoring stations  placed across our city  suggest the air is in fact relatively safe, 
with the Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) measured resulting in  only one additional cancer in the 
population over a 70-year  period , according to the Maine Center for Disease Control. This gives some 
comfort, but these monitoring stations were not placed  at the property lines of the tank facilities,  nor 
were they place d in residential neighborhoods abutting these tanks. Therefore, we do not know the 
localized emissions from the facilities or the associated health risks  in those neighborhoods . 
 I understand the chair of the Board of Environmental Protection is concerned that fence -line monitoring 
will be inconclusive because there are sources of VOCs other than the tank farms, and that the emissions measured may not be able to be attributed to a specific facility due to wind direction and 
their close proximity to one another. While I appreciate this nuance, such a possibility is not guaranteed, 
and it should not be the reason that no monitoring units are installed. Best case, we can ascertain the 
emissions from each operator. Worst case, we have a better understanding of the hundreds of tons of combined VOC emissions from various tank farm facilities and other sources. Make no mistake, t his data 
will be vitally important to either help assure the public that our air is safe to breathe, or to take 
mitigating action to ensure  that it is.  
 
Thank you for your consideration and support.  
Scott Morelli
City of South Portland
LD 71
Signed up last week but had not yet crafted my testimony. Now attached.
