February 8, 2023
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
Maine State Legislature
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 4333
RE: Testimony in Support of Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 171: 
Control of Petroleum Storage Facilities, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department 
of Environmental Protection
Chairs Brenner, Gramlich, and members of the Environment and Natural Resource Committee: 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of this Resolve, Regarding 
Legislative Review of Chapter 171:  Control of Petroleum Storage Facilities, a Major Substantive 
Rule of the Department of Environmental Protection
This testimony is submitted on behalf of Conservation Law Foundation (“CLF”). CLF is a 
member-supported nonprofit advocacy organization working to conserve natural resources, protect 
public health, and build healthy communities in Maine and throughout New England.  With respect to 
the major substantive rule before you, we have been working with the residents of one community in 
particular, the City of South Portland, for close to a decade to address the burdens that community faces 
by dint of being home to 120 petroleum tanks which are permitted by the Maine DEP to emit 630 tons 
per year of volatile organic compounds and 104 tons per year of hazardous air pollutants.  
When the Legislature enacted L.D. 163, An Act Concerning the Regulation of Air Emissions at 
Petroleum Storage Facilities under the leadership of Senator Carney and Representative Millet, now 
codified at 38 M.R.S.A. § 590, it took a significant step in addressing those burdens.  Today, you have 
the opportunity to take the next step in providing protection for those people as well as people in 
communities across the state that are home to petroleum storage facilities. And that protection comes by 
way of obtaining and making available information concerning the emissions of pollutants.  
Specifically, the requirement in the new rule to conduct fence line monitoring, in 
addition to the required testing of heated tanks, is a significant, simple and effective, EPA 
approved way of knowing the scope and nature of emissions from the storage tanks into the 
community.  While we appreciate the Board of Environmental Protection’s concerns with 
whether the fence line monitoring will be able to identify whether one specific tank is 
responsible for all of the emissions identified by the fence line monitoring devices at that 
facility, that is not cause for dispensing with the obligation.   The primary purpose of the fence 
line monitoring is to give the communities surrounding the storage tanks and the Department 
better information than currently available to determine if there are emissions that threaten 
public health.  Assigning blame for any such emissions is a separate matter altogether.   
2The changes to Chapter 171 before you today respond to the public health concerns of the 
communities that have born the burden of housing petroleum storage tanks for decades.  CLF strongly 
urges this Committee to not only approve of those changes but also to require that they be put into effect 
no later than 9 months from the effective date of this rule, rather than the 15 months proposed by the 
Board.  
Thank you for the opportunity to present this testimony. 
Very truly yours,
Sean Mahoney
Executive Vice President
Director, CLF Maine
