Dear Members of the Environmental and Natural Resources Committee:
I provide testimony in support of LD 71.  Over the years of the petroleum industry’s presence in South 
Portland, our knowledge has changed.  Our scientific knowledge now informs us that our environment is 
not for us to conquer and subdue, rather, that we must interact with and respect a complex eco-system 
upon which our survival is dependent.  We now know about the effects of chemicals on human health. 
We know that pollution is not just about smells, an occasional cough and ugly views. We know that 
babies are born with over 500 chemicals in their cord blood. We understand the miracle of billions of 
cell replications orchestrated from a one cell beginning to form an adult human with ability to love, 
learn, work and reproduce. We understand that minute amounts of chemical exposure at critical times 
of growth and development can cause severe damage. Cancers, asthma, respiratory disorder are more 
obvious problems, but things like endocrine disruption and impairment of neurological function maybe 
more subtle to recognize but no less severe. We know that it is extremely difficult to prove cause and 
effect relationships with chemical exposures. We know now that while chemicals have been considered 
innocent until proven guilty, this had not been a prudent policy for public health.
When our great nation was founded, it was said that “all men are endowed by their Creator with certain 
inalienable rights…  Now our socio-economic and ethical knowledge informs us that Men refers to all of 
the Creator’s children, not just white, male property owners. In previous years, industry owners 
assumed and were allotted the right to risk the lives of their workers in the work place and poison the 
air, water and land on which the workers lived. The state of our knowledge makes such practices no 
longer acceptable. 
The data presented in the original Complaint of the Environmental Protection Agency and in the 
recommendations of South Portland’s Clean Air Advisory Committee identify a lack of best practices in 
measuring and monitoring emissions from the petroleum industry. Inadequate measuring and 
monitoring practices can provide data that is deceptively reassuring and unsafe for our residents.  
Patronization by half-truths is demeaning; a violation of our human dignity.  It is the responsibility of 
industry to use best practices such as 24/7 fence line monitoring to protect the health of the public. 
South Portland has 120 petroleum tanks in a densely populated area. Additionally, there is pollution 
from cars, trains, planes, ships, heat/cooling devises and other industries. This does not make it 
acceptable for the oil industry to add more pollution with impunity or to claim the pollution comes from 
another source. People have a right to clean air, food and water and not be harmed by industrial 
pollution. If we are to survive, we must move forward with integrity to implement the justice mandated 
by our knowledge. Please support LD 71 and support the common good of the people of South Portland 
and Maine. 
Sincerely,
Susan Henderson RN BS MA
9 E Street South Portland Maine
shenders@maine.rr.com
207 831 1398 (mobile)
susan henderson
South Portland
LD 71
Dear Members of the Environmental and Natural Resources Committee:
I provide testimony in support of LD 71.  Over the years of the petroleum industry’s presence 
in South Portland, our knowledge has changed.  Our scientific knowledge now informs us that
our environment is not for us to conquer and subdue, rather, that we must interact with and 
respect a complex eco-system upon which our survival is dependent.  We now know about 
the effects of chemicals on human health. We know that pollution is not just about smells, an 
occasional cough and ugly views. We know that babies are born with over 500 chemicals in 
their cord blood. We understand the miracle of billions of cell replications orchestrated from a 
one cell beginning to form an adult human with ability to love, learn, work and reproduce. We 
understand that minute amounts of chemical exposure at critical times of growth and 
development can cause severe damage. Cancers, asthma, respiratory disorder are more 
obvious problems, but things like endocrine disruption and impairment of neurological 
function maybe more subtle to recognize but no less severe. We know that it is extremely 
difficult to prove cause and effect relationships with chemical exposures. We know now that 
while chemicals have been considered innocent until proven guilty, this had not been a 
prudent policy for public health.
When our great nation was founded, it was said that “all men are endowed by their Creator 
with certain inalienable rights…  Now our socio-economic and ethical knowledge informs us 
that Men refers to all of the Creator’s children, not just white, male property owners. In 
previous years, industry owners assumed and were allotted the right to risk the lives of their 
workers in the work place and poison the air, water and land on which the workers lived. The 
state of our knowledge makes such practices no longer acceptable. 
The data presented in the original Complaint of the Environmental Protection Agency and in 
the recommendations of South Portland’s Clean Air Advisory Committee identify a lack of 
best practices in measuring and monitoring emissions from the petroleum industry. 
Inadequate measuring and monitoring practices can provide data that is deceptively 
reassuring and unsafe for our residents.  Patronization by half-truths is demeaning; a violation
of our human dignity.  It is the responsibility of industry to use best practices such as 24/7 
fence line monitoring to protect the health of the public. South Portland has 120 petroleum 
tanks in a densely populated area. Additionally, there is pollution from cars, trains, planes, 
ships, heat/cooling devises and other industries. This does not make it acceptable for the oil 
industry to add more pollution with impunity or to claim the pollution comes from another 
source. People have a right to clean air, food and water and not be harmed by industrial 
pollution. If we are to survive, we must move forward with integrity to implement the justice 
mandated by our knowledge. Please support LD 71 and support the common good of the 
people of South Portland and Maine. 
Sincerely,
Susan Henderson RN BS MA
9 E Street South Portland Maine
shenders@maine.rr.com
207 831 1398 (mobile)
