Tess Nacelewicz
SOUTH PORTLAND
LD 71
Dear Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and
Natural Resources Committee:
I can’t attend the Feb. 8 public hearing on LD 71 because I have to work, so I am 
writing to you instead in favor of LD 71. It is crucial to me and my neighbors in South
Portland that live near the many petroleum tanks in our city that you preserve strong, 
mandated fence-line monitoring, in addition to required biannual testing of heated 
tanks. Fence-line monitoring is a simple and effective, EPA-approved way of 
knowing how much of the tank emissions are going into the surrounding 
neighborhoods. 
There are 120 petroleum tanks in South Portland, which are permitted by the Maine 
DEP to emit 630 tons per year of volatile organic compounds and 104 tons per year of
hazardous air pollutants. It is essential to know what toxic chemicals are coming out 
of the tanks and how much is going over the fence line into the neighborhoods like 
mine that are closest to the tanks. Fence-line monitoring is crucial to providing me 
and my neighbors with that information!
My husband and I own a home at 25 Robinson Street. Our neighborhood is called 
Pleasantdale, but it’s decidedly unpleasant when the emissions from the tanks just 
blocks away fills our lungs. The smell and taste is similar to the fumes given off 
during a street-paving operation or at a gas station while filling up a car.
Those emissions from the tank farms don’t just smell bad – they are pollution that 
also make our neighborhood unhealthy. Everyone in our city has learned that tank 
farms in South Portland have been exceeding air pollution limits for years. That 
makes the air in our neighborhood unsafe to breathe.
We bought our home in South Portland twenty years ago. I was diagnosed in recent 
years with asthma, although I’ve never had breathing problems before. My husband 
has had asthma since childhood but his has worsened since we moved here. While we 
can’t say for certain that tank emissions are the cause, I’m concerned about the 
long-term impact that significant amounts of toxic emissions, some of them 
cancer-causing, are having on our health.
I don’t know all the history of the tank farms here, although I know some have been 
in the neighborhood for many decades. But they don’t predate the people here – our 
house, built in 1834, was one of the first in the neighborhood, and we have many 
older homes here. Regardless of when they were established, the tank farms are not 
being good neighbors. They exist right next to many residences, filled with people of 
all ages, from infants to seniors, but they are fighting these efforts to more closely 
monitor their frequent toxic emissions that negatively impact their neighbors. What 
are they trying to hide?
Although it would be paid for by the oil companies, fence-line monitoring and 
biannual testing of heated tanks is relatively inexpensive. The oil industry is making 
enormous profits and the cost of testing and monitoring is minimal compared to the 
healthcare burdens and financial costs that their neighbors bear.
Like many other Mainers, I drive a car and use petroleum products. However, South 
Portland bears a larger health burden in providing petroleum products for most of the 
state of Maine to heat homes, fuel cars, and pave roads.
People like me and my husband and our neighbors close to the tank facilities are 
exposed to higher levels of emissions than those who live further away.  Please don’t 
make allow my neighborhood and my city to be a "sacrifice zone,” where the oil 
companies can continue to profit at the expense of residents’ health and quality of life.
Instead, preserve fence-line monitoring, and ensure that the raw monitoring data and 
analysis of that information is available to our city and the public in an accessible 
way. Also, I ask you reduce the maximum time between passage of the rules and 
implementation from 15 months to 9 months so these safety measures can be put in 
place as soon as possible. Please act swiftly and decisively – our health is in your 
hands!
Sincerely,
Tess Nacelewicz
25A Robinson Street,
South Portland, Maine
