/%\ Natural Resources Council of Maine . 
3 Wade Street - 
Augusta, Maine 04330 - 
(207) 622-3101 - 
Fax: (207) 622-4343 - www.nrcm.org 
Testimony by the Natural Resources Council of Maine 
' 
In Support 
LD 71, Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 171: Control of 
I Petroleum Storage Facilities, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department of‘ 
' 
Environmental Protection. 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Todd Martin. I am 
the Director of NRCM Rising at the Natural Resources Council of Maine. NRCl\/l is 
Maine's leading environmental advocacy organization with more than 25,000 
members and supporters. l am testifying today in support of LD 71, Resolve, 
Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 171: Control of Petroleum Storage 
Facilities, a Major Substantive Rule of the Department of Environmental 
Protection. 
This bill is the result of several years of work by this committee, the Department 
of Environmental Protection, the Board of Environmental Protection, and the 
citizens of the communities who live in close proximity to these above ground 
petroleum storage tanks, many whom are here today. This bill is critical to the 
health and safety of Mainers across the state as these above ground petroleum' 
storage tanks are located in South Portland, Bucksport, Hampden, and Searsport. 
As the so-called tailpipe state of the nation, l\/laine bears the burden of unhealthy 
air pollution generated in states to our south and west. According to the l\/laine 
Centers for Disease Control, more than 18,000 children under the age of 18 and 
more than 140,000 adults in Maine have asthma(1). We have no control over air 
pollution in other states. What we can control is air pollution that originates 
within our borders. 
There are 120 licensed above ground petroleum storage tanks in South Portland 
alone, a high density in an already densely populatedcity of about 27,000 
Protecting the Nature of l\/laine 
Printed on postaconsumer recycled, processed chlorine~free paper
residents. Collectively, the Maine DEP permits those 120 tanks to emit 630 tons of 
volatile organic, compounds and 104 tons of hazardous air pollutants per year. 
One of those VOCs, Benzene, is classified as a Group A known carcinogen by the 
EPA(2). The tanks in South Portland are sited in close proximity to Kaler 
Elementary School, South Portland High School, Children's Time daycare center, 
and the Betsy Ross House senior living community. In Searsport, the tanks at 
Mack Point are located within a mile and a half of Searsport Public Schools as well 
as Bayview Manor, an assisted living facility. In Bucksport, the tanks are located 
about a mile and a half from Bucksport Senior High School and only half a mile to 
Jed Prouty Assisted Living Facility. In Hampden, the tanks are located just down 
river from downtown Bangor and just across the river from residential areas in 
Brewer. Air pollution disproportionately affects our children and our elderly. It is 
critical to minimize their exposure to VOC and HAP air emissions. LD 71 will help 
accomplish that. 
To ensure the greatest public health benefit from these revisions to chapter 171, 
NRCM encourages the committee to ensure the final bill maintains the 
Department's recommendation for mandated fence line monitoring, paid for by 
the regulated entity, to ensure the public know which VOCs and HAPs are being 
emitted by which facilities, how often, and at what levels to help determine their 
prevalence in nearby residential neighborhoods. Fence line monitoring isa 
proven, low-cost solution and is particularly useful with floating roof tanks where 
emissions are more difficult to track. Second, we encourage the committee to 
consider expediting the implementation of the rules. Thank you and I am happy 
to answer any questions. 
(1) - https:[/www.maine.gov/dhhs/mecdc[population-health/mat/index.shtm| 
(2) - https:[/www.epa.gov/sites/defauIt/files/2016-O9/documents/benzene.pdf
