Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and honored members of the Environment and 
Natural Resources Committee, my name is Tom Keefe. I am here representing Global Partners 
LP which operates a petroleum storage terminal in South Portland, Maine. I am here today to 
speak neither for nor against, LD 71. 
Provision 590. l1A(7) of the statute requires that regulated entities conduct emission monitoring 
consistent with the requirements of United States Environmental Protection Agency’s Method 325A and 
325B. It is important to note that the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (MEDEP) 
and the Board of Environmental Protection (BEP) both have considerable reservations regarding 
the efficacy of the fenceline monitoring program. Below are excerpts from relevant DEP and 
BEP documents. -' 
Report to the Joint Standing Committee on the Environmentand Natural Resources - 
Measurement and Control of Emissions from Above Ground Petroleum Storage Tank— 
MEDEP, January 1. 2021 at 9.8. 
“The Department does not recommend fenceline monitoring at this time. Fenceline 
monitoring is most commonly used around the perimeter of large facilities, such as 
petroleum reﬁneries, with few or no other emissions sources nearby. Given the proximity 
of petroleum storage facilities in South Portland to. one another an.d to other signiﬁcant 
emissions sources such as highways, railways, marine vessels, and even local traffic and 
home heating combustion sources, as well as expected emission release points at tank top 
levels, and considering typical air movement and dispersion characteristics, fenceline 
monitoring for any given facility is not expected to provide much useful data." 
Board of Environmental Protection ’s recommendation regarding the provisionally adopted 
DEP rule Chapter l7l — BEP Letter to Committee on Environment and Natural Resources ‘ 
July 7, 2022'
L 
“the Board heard from regulated entities and discussed with Department staff concerns 
regarding the ability to utilize the collectedfenceline monitoring data in a meaningful way at 
facilities that are proximate to one another.... the obligation imposed by the new law on the 
Department and the regulated community may not provide the intended outcome to members 
of the public seeking clear information about the potential contribution of a singlefacility on 
ambient air quality. The Board, encourages the Committee to consider these concerns as it 
conducts its legislative review of the provisionally adopted major substantive Chapter 17I 
rule.”‘ 
While we do not oppose the fenceline monitoring program as a whole, we ask that the legislature 
give serious consideration to the analysis afforded them by their experts so that the fenceline 
monitoring is implemented and maintained in a manner that aligns the program with the concerns 
expressed by DEP and the BEP.'
-i
We urge the Committee to consider the nature of the data collection either by amending or 
clarifying the intent of the statue to the DEP. The DEP should be allowed to use their expertise to 
modify individual sampling programs and the frequency of sampling should the monitoring data 
be below actionable levels, or the program not achieve the intended result. This approach is 
entirely consistent with the EPA regulation for fenceline monitoring at reﬁneries (§ 63.65 8(e)(3)) 
to ensure useful data is collected in the most cost-efﬁcient manner. i 
Sincerely, 
Tom Keefe 
Vice President Environmental, Health and Safety
