Tom Mikulka
Cape Elizabeth
LD 71
Please note that this is my abbreviated testimony that stays within the 3 min limit. I 
have also sent a longer statement with more supporting information. 
LD71 testimony
Testimony by Tom Mikulka, Ph.D., CIH (ret) in favor of LD 71 
Dear Chairpersons Stacy Brenner and Lori Gramlich and esteemed members of the 
Energy and Natural Resources Committee. and Natural Resources Committee.
 I am a resident of Cape Elizabeth and a member of the Clean Air Advisory 
Committee of South Portland. The opinions expressed here do not necessarily 
represent the position of the Committee. 
After 3 years of monitoring by the Maine DEP we cannot definitively conclude that 
the 6 tank farms are a significant source of hazardous petroleum air pollutants known 
as BETX. I have analyzed the 3 years of data and I do think there is evidence that the 
tank farms and transportation are the two major sources of BETX. However, it is not 
as strong as it could be because from the outset the DEP refused to target the tank 
farms despite the fact that the EPA’s National Emissions Inventory clearly shows that 
the tanks farms are the largest source of hazardous air pollutants in South Portland. It 
should be noted that  the Clean Air Advisory Committee has spent two years asking 
the DEP to place two monitors at critical sites near the Citgo and Gulf tank farms. It 
does not appear that we will succeed.   
I can say with confidence that LD71 will provide the definitive answer. The residents 
of South Portland are entitled to know how much BETX the  tank farms are 
contributing to the air they breathe. It is a little known fact that in 2016 a team of EPA
scientists proposed doing a fence line study of South Portland tank farms using 
Method 325 A/B for the expressed purpose of assessing the impact of the tanks farms 
on ambient BETX levels. I have attached that proposal in my unabbreviated 
testimony.
This is the strongest possible endorsement of LD71. The EPA was confident that a properly 
designed study could isolate the BETX impact of the tank farms from the impact of other 
possible sources such as transportation. Please read their proposal that is part of my 
unabbreviated testimony. 
I urge you to resist attempts to discredit  LD71 and pass it as written. 
