 
 
 
 
  
 
 
April 10th, 2023   
Senator  Henry Ingwersen  
Representative  William D. Pluecker  
Members of the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry  
RE: Testifying Neither For Nor Against , LD 1441 , An Act to Enhance State Oversight of Water Use and 
Water Resources   
The development and use of sustain able water sources is an important component  of the wild blueberry  
producers ’ crop management  and is the most critical tool producers employ to mitigate the devastating 
effects of drou ght. We support  continued  sustainable use of Maine ’s wate r resources  and recognize that 
sustainable use require s oversight.  
It is for this reason that we have taken  an active role  with  the Agricultural Water Management Board. 
This board , 
works in conjunction  with the Department of E nvironmental Prote ction to oversee and 
coordinate environmentally sound and affordable development of water sources for agricultural 
use. The board can make recommendations for impro vements to federal and state permitting 
processes  for the development of farm ponds and other water sources for agricultural use; work 
to secure funding for the  construction of environmentally sound; efficient and affordable water 
sources for agricultural use; and facilitate the implementation of sustainable agricultural water 
source programs.1 
This board  relies on information provided  by the Hydrog eologist for the Maine Geological Survey  to 
underst and and m ake recommendations to appropriate agencies or legislative  committees for 
improvements to current permitting proces ses.  In fulfillment of its obligat ions, this committee  was 
instrumental in (and I quote from the bill bef ore you today) : 
Identifying measures to enhance or supplement the State ’s monitoring of an d data collection 
regarding wa ter use and water re sources  and the support of that data and, as necessary, 
identifying funding opportunities to support thos e measures .2 
 
1 Maine Department of Agri culture, Conservation and Forestry . Agricultural Resource Development Division, 
Agricultural Water Management Board. https://www.maine.gov/dacf/ard/water_management/ag -water -
board.shtml .  
2 LD 1441 , An Act to Enhance State Oversight of Water Use and Water Resources (excerpt ) as presented t o the 
Agric ulture, Conservation and Forestry Committee on April 10th, 2023.  
 
 
5784  York  Complex  Suite  52  Orono,  ME 04469 -5784   207-581-1475   wbcm@maine.edu  
 
 
 
To that end, and w ith the assistance of the Department of Agricu lture, Conservation and Forestry,  the 
input of th e Agricultural  Water Management B oard contributed to the development of  LD 315 , An Act to 
Provi de Funding for Drought Relief and Other Programs Benefiting  Maine Farmers . LD 315 was 
sponsored by Senator Ingwerson, and unanimously voted OTP -A by this Committee on March 1st. The 
bill prov ides funding for a one -time consultant to the Land Use Planning Commission and ongoing 
fundi ng for 3 full -time permanent  positions to add capacity t o the State ’s agricultural water with drawal 
and permitting processes.  
The Agricultural Water Management Board is also engaged in  (and I quote from the bill before you 
today) , 
Develop[ing] recommendations for measures to enhance  drough t preparedness and drought 
resilience by agricultural producers …3 
To this end, the Agricultural Water Management Board in Feb ruary of 2022 submitted a letter to 
Governor Mills  that asks her to engage with our Congressional Delegation to help secure sources of 
Federal fu nds to help Maine farmers increase their drought re silience.  
To summarize, while the wild blueberry industry nominally supports the objectives as described in LD 
1441, an effective structure is alrea dy in place , in the form of the Agricultural Water Management 
Board,  to protect,  oversee and coordinate environmentally sound and affordable development of water 
sources for agricultural use .  
I am uncertain  why  the Water Resources P lannin g (WRP) Committee would  take up topics and make 
recommendations that are duplicative of the work that the Agricultur al Water Management Board 
already carries ou t, or why th e WRP  Committee , which has only a single agricultural producer, w ould 
seek to  add requirements to  the work of the Ag ricultural Water Management Board —work that is 
already being carri ed out.  
Thank you fo r your time. I would b e happy to try and answer any questions that you may have.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
Eric Venturini  
Executive Director  
Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine  
Eric.Venturini@maine.edu  
(207) 478 -7612  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 LD 1441 , An Act to Enhance State Oversight of Water Use and Water Resources (excerpt ) as presented t o the 
Agric ulture, Conservation and Forestry Committee on April 10th, 2023.  
