150 ca PITOL smss T, sum:5 
AUGUSTA . ms 04:: so 
OFFICE 1207; s22-em 
Maine Water Utilities Association F“ 12°77 5719577. 
organized 1925 wwwmwua.orQ 
April 10, 2023 
Honorable Henry Ingwersen, Senate Chair 
Honorable William D. Pluecker, House Chair 
Joint Legislative Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony to LD 1441, Neither for Nor Against An Act to Enhance State Oversight of Water 
Use and Water Resources 
Dear Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker, and Members of the Committee on Agriculture, 
Conservation, and Forestry: 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) appreciates the opportunity to provide testimony 
regarding LD 1441. MWUA testiﬁes neither for nor against LD 1441. We hope that our comments 
add value to this discussion. 
About MWUA. The Maine Water Utilities Association is a nonproﬁt association based in Augusta that 
provides support for water works professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for safe 
drinking water through educational and technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, state, 
and national level. The Association was formed in 1925 and counts approximately 109 water utilities in 
Maine as members. 
LD 1441: As noted in the bill title, this bill seeks to “enhance” state oversight of water use and water 
resources. Currently, numerous state agencies play a statutorily deﬁned role in regulating water 
resources and water use in Maine. These laws and regulations are very effective in ensuring the 
sustainability of these renewable resources. 
The Water Resources Planning Committee (WRPC), which was created in 2007, dismantled in 2012 
and resurrected in 2019, has been very effective in fulﬁlling its mission, which is to plan for the 
sustainable use of water resources. This bill contemplates that, in addition to the annual WRPC report 
to the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, reports would also have to be provided to 
four joint standing committees of the Legislattue. Each of those committees would in turn have the 
option of reporting out legislation to implement any recommendation included in the armual report. 
While these proposed amendments may be well intentioned, the existing effective regulatory process 
will not be well served by new statutory requirements which are overly prescriptive. It has been our 
experience that regulatory agencies are better situated to establish prescriptive standards rather than the 
Legislature. We cite an example below. 
We note a particular concern regarding the proposed deﬁnition of “low ﬂow” in Section 5 of the bill. 
As it turns out, Maine DEP Chapter 587 In-stream Flows and Lake and Pond Water Levels includes 
deﬁnitions for Natural Drought Condition, Natural Variation of F low, and Seasonal Aquatic Base 
Flow. These deﬁnitions were proposed by some very competent staff scientists at the DEP at the time 
that rule was enacted. The views and concerns of water users were respected and thoughtfully 
considered during this process. Chapter 587 and the associated deﬁnitions struck an appropriate
MVVUA Testimony re LD 1411 
April 10, 2023 
Page2 
balance between the needs of water users like water utilities, who utilize Water sources for public 
drinking water, and protection of the aquatic ecosystem itself. Creating a deﬁnition of “low ﬂow” by 
statue could create a conﬂict with the above mentioned deﬁnitions. These deﬁnitions were established 
by a credible regulatory process which included, among other things, a consideration of the 
consequences of these deﬁnitions, which are, in and of themselves, standards. 
We are compelled to provide a quick history. We know that there were droughts in the l920’s and in 
the 1940’s, and in the 1960’s, the impact of a year’s long drought provided the data which engineers 
utilized to create design criteria for the selection and development of new water supplies in the 
Northeast. More recently, 2001 was dry, as was 2016. In 2016, when we saw it coming, water utilities 
were asked to report to the Maine Public Utilities Commission (MPUC) on the status of their Water 
resources. A database was developed which allowed water utilities and the regulatory community to 
Work collaboratively on continuing assessments and prioritizing short and longer term solutions, as and 
where necessary. 
State agencies that have in role in the sustainable management of Maine’s water resources maintain 
websites that contain a wealth of water resources infonnation. We would encourage anyone to access 
this information. One that we feel is particularly relevant to what we do is the MPUC website. Find the 
Water section and click on Maine Drought Information. 
Conclusion: Water users in Maine have an inherent stake and interest in utilizing and appropriately 
managing water resources, for the beneﬁt of our population. Regulatory oversight by numerous state 
agencies is effective in helping to ensure that an appropriate balance between the needs of the water 
using population and the aquatic ecosystem is maintained. Any statutory amendments which could 
serve as an impediment to this existing effective process should be viewed with caution. 
Respectfully, 
%“%/ Jeffrey McNelly, Liaison 
Maine Water Utilities Association 
cc: Bruce Berger, Executive Director, MWUA 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counsel
