April 10, 2023 
\ Th<=Nature 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director COI1S€I‘V8I1Cy 
The Nature Conservancy in l\/laine 
. Maine 
ka|tlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org 
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
RE: LD 1441 - An Act to Enhance State Oversight of Water Use and Water Resources 
Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo andl 
am the Government Relations Director for The Nature Conservancy in l\/laine. I 
appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of LD 1441 - An Act to Enhance 
State Oversight of Water Use and Water Resources. 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on~the-ground solutions to our world's toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners. The Nature 
Conservancy has been leading conservation in l\/laine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres. We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our changing climate. 
LD 1441 would enact two recommendations from the Commission To Study the Role of 
Water as a Resource in the State of l\/laine by making changes to both the Water 
Resources Planning Committee and the l\/laine Agricultural Water Management Board. 
ln both cases, the changes would result in collecting and compiling new and existing 
data and focusing on ensuring the Legislature and the public has easy access to 
information about water in l\/laine. . 
My former colleague Rob Wood served on the Commission which met five times 
between September and December 2022. TNC voted in favor of all five 
recommendations from the Commission. l currently represent TNC on the Water 
Resources Planning Committee in the seat designated for “a member of the public with 
expertise in the environment and conservation" . Given our involvement in both of 
those entities, TNC supports LD ' 
441. 
According to survey of l\/laine voters TNC commissioned in January 2023 with FM3 
Research (Democratic Polling Firm) and New Bridge Strategy (Republican Polling Firm), 
nearly all Mainers say that clean water, natural areas, and wildlife are important to 
their quality of life. Voters also indicated strong support (89% strong or somewhat 
support) for increasing funding to protect sources of drinking water in Maine. Clearly 
water is a treasured resources for l\/laine people, and efforts to consolidate 
information, monitor, and collect data will help us ensure the best decisions are made 
regarding this resource. We hope the committee will consult with the Department and 
the l\/laine Geological Survey to ensure the changes are not duplicating existing efforts. 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment in support of LD 1441. 
14 Maine St., Suite 401 Brunswick, Maine 04011 natureorggmaine
