 52 WATER STREET 
HALLOWELL, ME 04347 
(800) 464-5767 
 
 LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Director of Community 
Programs 
(207) 622-5767  ￿ HannahL@namimaine.org  POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
www.namimaine.org/advocacy 
POSITION STATEMENT IN SUPPORT  
LD 1742, An Act to Enhance the Use of Critical Incident Stress Management Teams and to 
Require Peer Team Support 
Presented to Maine’s Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
As the state’s largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine supports the passage of An Act 
to Enhance the Use of Critical Incident Stress Management Teams and to Require Peer Team Support. Law 
enforcement is called to respond largely to individuals experiencing their worst days or the toughest experiences in 
their lives. While many of us go to work day to day with the potential of stress, law enforcement, and other first 
responders know they will only be called upon if someone requires their assistance for safety or acute stress.   
The average individual will experience 2-3 critical or traumatic incidents during the course of their lifetime, often 
involving law enforcement presence or response. However, law enforcement will experience 168-170 critical 
incidents of traumatic stress throughout the course of their career. Due to this, first responders are classified as 
the highest-risk population for suicide death, with higher rates of depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress, and 
substance use disorders. The results of these challenges often lead to officers experiencing high rates of divorce, 
struggles to maintain their career longevity, retention concerns in the profession, as well as multiple medical 
concerns such as high rates of cancer and cardiovascular disease.  
Critical Incident Stress Management (CISM) is an international best-practice model for supporting first responders 
in navigating critical incidents. It also fosters an environment in which first responders can seek support within a 
community of peers that understand the complexities that they face on a day-to-day basis. Research following the 
9-11 attacks found that CISM, completed with fidelity, was as impactful, and at times more impactful, than 
psychotherapy. Previous members of this committee have supported the importance of ensuring access by passing 
previous legislation with the protection of confidentiality, and structure that is required to support those who give 
so much to others. However, many departments and agencies still do not provide structured interventions. Those 
that move forward with attempting the initiatives struggle with securing funding and the resources necessary.  
The International Critical Incident Stress Foundation (ICISF) is an internationally recognized model and organization 
that provides researched, best-practice structure for first responder programming. This committee has previously 
ruled on the structure and requirements of both peer and group support provided to first responders. Information 
regarding the legal protections, and the ability for support to be provided outside of the department, with 
confidentiality ( Title 25, §4202: Critical incident stress management teams (maine.gov) ). By delegating a 
single point of contact and organization, this committee will be providing support and resources for an 
underserved and high-risk population. Because of this, NAMI Maine strongly supports the passage of 1747. 
 
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the National Alliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) 
is the state’s largest grassroots mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the 
agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine 
engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state’s mental health system through 
collaboration and education. 
