 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1742 - An Act to Enhance the Use of Critical Incident Stress Management Teams and to Require Peer 
Team Support 
May 2, 2023 
Sen. Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury and distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I providing testimony neither for nor against LD 
1742, An Act to Enhance the Use of Critical Incident Stress Management Teams and to Require Peer 
Team Support on behalf of the Maine Municipal Association, which represents the interests of municipal 
government before the Legislature. The positions of the Association are established by our 70-member 
Legislative Policy Committee (LPC), who are elected by the councils and selectboards of municipalities 
in each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts. 
Municipal officials support the idea of this bill but have significant concerns around the language, 
the lack of consultation with services implicated in this bill, and the lack of recognized public safety 
specific culturally competent providers included in the behavioral health section. Additionally, the bill 
under section 6 would preempt existing and locally provided, employee approved programs in favor of a 
centralized state model for all public safety services, not just fire department volunteers and employees.  
In many parts of Maine, there are no culturally competent providers, and the use of public safety 
specific telehealth options has connected individuals with providers they trust fully, are licensed in Maine, 
but available through an app-based platform at hours the meet first responder scheduling needs. Their 
teams are also locally established with trained peers and increasingly use a model that matches the 
different needs of agencies such as a law enforcement experienced leadership peer support teams to 
address issues for other law enforcement leadership after a critical incident. These are important because 
they provide peer support for a supervising officer that would not be able, or comfortable sharing with 
individuals they are responsible for supervising. Nothing in this bill recognizes that peer structures should 
include the needs of differing responsibility levels within an incident response.  
Maine Municipal Association at the direction of our Legislative Policy Committee has introduced 
a bill that puts these key professions in charge of selecting and utilizing their own chosen providers to 
normalize selfcare, mental health and wellness provision at all times, not just following a critical incident 
described in this bill. Our bill LD 1857 , An Act to Create the Public Health and Wellness Reimbursement 
Fund to Benefit Public Safety Workers and Volunteers, would also allow all fire departments regardless of 
construction, employment type, volunteer or full time status, to have access to funds in support of 
culturally competent recognized service provision they chose in tandem with existing, often regional, peer 
support teams. This is vital because many services do not have extensive experience, or administrative 
staff to navigate how to find additional help for volunteers and provide no health insurance for such per 
diem employees.  

LD 1857 levels the playing field for all services and allows them to tap into nationally recognized 
service tools without local expenditure or choose local providers.  
Officials agree that CISM training is vital and important. That training is happening across the 
state now, for free, and with one of the few recognized trainers in the state. While section 6. Subsection 4 
codifies that training for every department, it is equally vital to allow for the fact that not all agencies may 
employee individuals who are willing or appropriate for such training. Thus, this section should be 
expanded to allow sharing of willingly trained individuals between adjacent or interconnected agencies or 
service providers. It should also provide a provision that such training needs to be regionally available 
across the state to avoid the consistent 4 hour drive for state mandated training often experienced by 
services north of Augusta. 
For cognitive behavioral therapy to be effective, the individual seeking the support needs to 
define and control the relationship with their provider and have full confidence that such services are 
independent of their employment relationships. Rather than mandate relationships without understanding 
needs or barriers on a state-wide basis, legislation should empower and seek to remove them.  
No employee should be forced to receive care that is not deemed beneficial from their point of 
view or not connected with a provider they trust, or feel comfortable with engaging, including peer 
support. As drafted in Sec 6. Subsection 2 E, this bill allows a state agency to define that ongoing 
provision, without engagement from the individual or service level. This section should be changed to 
simply collect information as to how this is being provided by each service, and only to provide it if that 
service is unable to do so.  
For all these reasons, officials ask that you carefully unpack what is missing and necessary as you 
sort through this bill and if the state departments defined in the legislation are appropriate to navigate 
such offerings for all of the public safety agencies impacted by this proposal. Additionally, officials ask 
that if you support the concept of these vital services to be provided to all first responders, please consider 
supporting LD 1857 that provides those individuals agency in creating and managing their relationships 
locally. 
 
