 
  
 
 
 
 
LD 1742, An Act to Enhance the Use of Critical Incident Stress Management Teams and to Require 
Peer Team Support 
 
May 2, 2023 
 
Chair Beebe-Center, Chair Salisbury, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee in qualified support of LD 1742. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
What does LD 1742 do?  LD 1742  directs the Director of the Maine Emergency Management Agency to 
provide critical incident stress management team services and peer team support services to all firefighters and 
employees or members of a public safety agency, fire department, or organization involved in emergency care or 
response in the State by establishing critical incident stress management teams and providing critical incident 
stress management team services. Additionally, this bill directs the Director of MEMA to establish a program 
for critical incident stress management training, provide educational, training, and promotional programs and 
materials, provide access to behavioral health care services after a critical incident, and provide peer team 
support for issues not necessarily related to a critical incident. 
 
Further, LD 1742 requires the MEMA to designate a full-time employee to oversee implementation of these 
services, and requires public safety agencies, fire departments, and organizations involved in emergency care or 
response to have at least one person who has received critical incident stress management training and to 
provide education and access to behavioral health care services related to post-traumatic stress resulting from a 
critical incident. 
 
Discussion.  Emergency care personnel, firefighters, and public safety employees provide a necessary and great 
service to our communities, including counties, and deserve appropriate support services to manage the stress 
and potential mental health impact that results from their work. To the extent that LD 1742 works to provide 
such critical services through the Maine Emergency Management Agency and does not negatively affect county 
funding, our Association writes in support. 
 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
Comments of MCCA re LD 1742 
May 2, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
