*' 
, 15 University Drive 
. A t , M ' 
04330 
Maine Water Utilities Association ugg%?_62§ig§11 Organized 1925 
February 7, 2023 
Honorable Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair 
Honorable Stanley Zeigler, House Chair 
Joint Legislative Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 211, An Act To Amend the Laws Governing Water Supply 
Protection F weds 
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology : 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) appreciates the opportunity to provide 
testimony in support of LD 211. 
The Maine Water Utilities Association is a nonproﬁt association based in Augusta that provides 
support for water works professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for safe 
drinking water through educational and technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, 
state, and national level. The Association was formed in 1925 and has approximately 109 water 
utilities in Maine as members. 
All water utilities in Maine have an interest in protecting the quality of their water supply. As 
Superintendent of the York Water District, l have learned ﬁrst-hand that one of the best and most 
cost-effective methods of protecting water quality is to assure that watershed land remains 
undeveloped and in its natural state. York Water District owns 90 percent of the watershed lands 
around its water source, Chase’s Pond. This type of approach saves money for the rate payers by 
reducing the cost of treatment. 
The present State Statute, 35-A M.R.S.A. §6l 13 provides that a water utility can accumulate a 
water supply protection fund to a maximum amount of 15% of annual revenue or $100,000, 
whichever is greater. These funds must come from a utility’s surplus. Under the same statute, 
these funds can be used by the water utility to acquire interest in real property to protect the 
water supply. The term “interest in real property ” is not deﬁned further in the statute. 
Due to the high cost of land today, LD 211 would allow a water utility the option, if needed to 
partner with a land trust or other non-proﬁt entity. Water utilities would gain the protection 
needed at a fraction of the cost in many cases. Water Utilities ’ primary focus is maintaining the 
safety, quality, and quantity of their supply.
By allowing water supply protection funds to be granted to non-proﬁt entities for acquisition of 
watershed land the utility will reap the beneﬁt of protection of its water supply source. All 
parties beneﬁt from this approach, including most importantly, Water ratepayers. 
We urge you to support LD 211. 
Respectfully submitted, 
5;;/;,.<Q/( T)! ‘7)7;_2z//;/,»rM.£» -' 
Donald D. Neumann Jr., 
Legislative Committee Member, Maine Water Utilities Association 
Superintendent, York Water District 
cc: Bruce Berger, Executive Director (MWUA) 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counsel
