February 7 , 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
 
RE: LD 211 – An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Water Supply Protection 
Funds  
 
Senator Lawrence , Representative Zeigler , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on  Energy, Utilities and Technology , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I 
am the Government Relations Director  for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I 
appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of LD 211, An Act to Amend 
the Laws Governing Water Supply Protection Funds . 
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization 
dedicated to conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided 
by science, we create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s 
toughest challe nges so that nature and people can thrive together. We use a 
collaborative approach that engages local communities, governments, the 
private sector, and other partners.  The Nature Conservancy has  been leading 
conservation in Maine for more than 60 years an d is the 12th largest landowner 
in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres.  We also work across 
Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the Gulf of Maine 
to rebuild groundfish populations and  develop innovative solutions to address 
our changing climate.  
 
LD 211 provides greater flexibility for an existing fund. Under current law, a 
consumer -owned water utility may  use surplus funds to  establish a water 
supply protection fund. Th is fund can be used to support watershed protection, 
groundwater protection, or wellhead protection to minimize potential of 
contamination to the water supply. The tools that can currently be used to 
accomplish this include acquisition of conservation easements, access 
easements, or other permanent interests in land or long -term leases of land.  LD 
211 would allow the available funding to be used by the holder of a 
conservation easement. It would also add another tool – the acquisition of “3rd-
party rights of enforcement o f a conservation easement”.  
 
In practice, the current structure limits the use of these funds to just the 
consumer -owned water utility , which greatly  constrains the ability for those 
utilities to maximize the intent of the funding source. As you have hear d from 
Paul Hunt from the Portland Water District, these consumer -owned water 
utilities are not set up to own and manage land but  are experts at conveying  
and treating water resources. Through partnerships with land trusts and land 
conservation organizatio ns, both partners – the water utilities and the land 
conservation groups – can bring their expertise to the table and work together 
to protect these critical resources.  
 
One clear example of how a water utility and conservation partnership can 
achieve collaborative success is the Sebago Clean Waters Partnership (SCW). 
You’ve also heard from Karen Young who is the Partnership Director for the 
Sebago Clean Waters coalition. SCW is a coalition of nine conservation 
organizations and the Portland Water District working collaboratively to protect 
water quality, community well -being , a vibrant economy and fish and wildlife 
habitat in the Sebago region through voluntary forestland conservation and 
stewardship. TNC has been an active participant in this coalition from the 
outset and we are extremely proud of the model of success that has been  
developed.  
 
SCW has worked together to protect 9,581 acres of forestland and 
approximately 32 mile s of buffered rivers and streams, now permanently 
protecting 15% of the watershed. LD 211 would further accelerate this great 
work by opening up a new tool for water utilities to accomplish their goals, and 
a new source of funding for these important conse rvation projects. According 
to a study conducted by the University of Maine, and funded by TNC and 
Highstead Foundation, every $1 invested in Sebago land conservation equals $8 
in community benefit through biodiversity habitat, recreation, air purification , 
wood supply, sediment retention, phosphorus retention, nitrogen retention, and 
carbon sequestration. Allowing consumer owned water utilities to use water 
supply protection funds to support these projects would leverage these 
additional benefits.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 211. I’m happy to 
answer questions at any time regarding this bill.  
