 
 
January 27, 2023  
 
TESTIMONY OF MAHOOSUC LAND TRUST IN SUPPORT OF  
LD 211 – AN ACT TO AMEND THE LAWS GOVERNING WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION 
FUNDS  
   
Chair Senator Lawrence, Co -Chair Representative Ziegler and Members of the Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology. I am Kirk Siegel, Executive Director of Mahoosuc Land Trust  (MLT) , and am 
providing this testimony in support of LD 211.  
 
MLT was inco rporated in the State of Maine in 1989 and is dedicated to conserving land for current  and 
future generations. We presently hold in fee  ownership  or under conservation easement approximately 
22,000  acres of largely forested lands. Our service area is partl y within the watershed of Sebago Lake, 
so the nearly 13,000 acres of forested lands we conserve within the Sebago Lake watershed provide a 
wealth of benefits to the residents of the communities in the Lakes Region and also help to naturally 
clean the water  supply for Greater Portland. Because of this, we have worked in concert with the 
Portland Water District on conservation projects for many years and together we have been able to do 
much more conservation than either we or the District could have done wor king separately. Our 
partnership benefits both organizations.  
  
We are asking that you support this bill because the most significant barrier to our ability to help 
landowners in our service area to meet their goal of conserving their land is money. Conser vation 
projects are brought to a closing often after a year or more of work just piecing together the financing. 
Fiscal support from Portland Water District will help us to bring more projects to closing more quickly, 
increasing our ability to provide our communities with the many benefits of conservation: healthy 
fisheries and wildlife habitat; resilient landscapes; better water quality for our local ponds, lakes and 
streams; opportunities for outdoor recreation; and cleaner air.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Kirk G. Sie gel, Executive Director  

