 
 
 
 
8 Depot Street, Suite 4, Bridgton, ME 04009  
207-647-4352  •  www.lelt.org  •  info@lelt.org  
 
Honorable Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair  
Honorable Stanley Zeigler, House Chair  
Joint Legislative Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
100 State House Stat ion 
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
TESTIMONY OF  LOON ECHO L AND TRUST IN SUPPORT OF  
LD 211 – AN ACT TO AMEND T HE LAWS GOVERNING WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION FUNDS  
  
Dear Chair Senator Lawrence, Co -Chair Representative  Ziegler  and Members of the Committee 
on Energy, Utilities and Technology ,  
 
I am writing this testimony on behal f of Loon Echo Land Trust  and in support of LD 211.  Our 
501c3 land trust  was established in  1987  and is dedicated to conserving Maine lands for the 
benefit of current  and future generations. We currently  own in fee or conserve via easement  
8500 acres of forested lands  in the Lake Re gion . Our service area is mostly  within the wa tershed 
of Sebago Lake, so the forested lands we conserve provide a wealth of benefits to the residents 
of the communities in the Lakes Region and help to naturally clean the water supply for Greater 
Portland. Because of this, we have worked in concert with the Portland Water District on 
conservation projects for many years and together we have been able to do much more 
conservation than either we or the District could have done working separately. Our 
partnership benef its both organizations.  
  
We are asking that you support this bill because the most significant barrier to our ability to 
help landowners in our service area to meet their goal of conserving their land is money. 
Conservation projects are brought to a closing often after a year or m ore of work just piecing 
together the financing. Fiscal support from Portland Water District will help us conserve more 
land  more quickly, increasing our ability to provide our communities with the many benefits of 
conservation: healthy fish eries and wildlife habitat; resilient landscapes; better water quality 
for our local ponds, lakes and streams; opportunities for outdoor recreation; and cleaner air.  
 
Thank y ou or your consideration of thi s testimony.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Matt Markot  
Executive Director, Loon Echo Land Trust   

