Jessica L. Fay
141 Spiller Hill Road 
Raymond, ME 04071
Phone: (207) 655-5020
Jessica.Fay@legislature.maine.gov
H
OUSE OF
R
EPRESENT ATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
MAINE RELAY 711
February 7, 2023
Testimony of Repr esentative Jessica Fay pr esenting 
LD 211,
An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Water Supply
Protection Funds 
Befor e the Joint Standing Committee on Ener gy, Utilities and T echnology
Good afternoon Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and honorable members of the Joint
Standing Committee on Ener gy Utilities and Technology . My name is Jessica Fay , and I 
represent House District 86, which includes Casco, Frye Island, Raymond and a part of Poland.
I am here today to present LD 21 1, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Water Supply 
Protection Funds.
In 2019 I attended the Sebago Lake Symposium at St. Joseph’ s College in Standish. The 
day-long meeting had some very interesting break-out sessions. One of those sessions was titled
“The Value of Ecosystem Services and Forest Conservation in the Sebago Lake Watershed”
1
and 
one of the presenters was Dr . Adam Daigneault of the University of Maine School of Forest 
Resources. It was fascinating to me to learn about the economic value of forest protection to
water resources, and specifically have some quantified info for the Sebago Lake Region.
When the Portland Water District approached me about this proposal, I immediately recalled the 
discussion at that symposium four years ago. Preserving land and protecting forested land in
areas where there is potential for increased negative pressure on our drinking water resources
makes financial sense for ratepayers–vegetation protects water quality , good water quality means 
less expensive treatment and filtration whose costs would be passed on to ratepayers.
Under current law , water utilities are allowed to create their own water supply protection fund 
that comes from a utility’ s surplus and is capped at 15% of annual revenue, or $100,000 
(whichever is greater of the two amounts). Currently these funds can be used to purchase land for
water quality protection, but imagine how much further those funds could stretch if water
utilities could use those funds in partnership with others.
Water utilities are in the business of providing and maintaining clean drinking water for their
customers. Land trusts are in the business of conserving land for all of us. Allowing them to 
work together to preserve land for hiking, hunting, fishing and other types of outdoor activities
while at the same time protecting our water resources seems like a common sense approach.
1
https://www.sjcme.edu/centers/sustainable-communities/sebago-lake-symposium
/
District 86, including Frye Island

Jessica L. Fay
141 Spiller Hill Road 
Raymond, ME 04071
Phone: (207) 655-5020
Jessica.Fay@legislature.maine.gov
H
OUSE OF
R
EPRESENT ATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
MAINE RELAY 711
You will hear from the Department of Agriculture Conservation and Forestry regarding some 
tweaks to the language as presented. I believe everyone supports those changes and I hope that
you will incorporate them into your Committee report and pass this bill OTP-A.
I am looking forward to working with you on this bill.
Thank you for your time.
3.  Use of water  supply pr otection fund.
Except as
provided in subsection 4, a water supply 
protection fund may be used by a consumer -owned water utility only for the acquisition
, by itself 
or by the holder of a conservation easement,
of interests
in real property reasonably necessary for 
the protection of a public water supply , including, but not limited to, the acquisition of 
conservation easements
which may subject to 3rd-party
rights of  enforcement
, access easements, 
other permanent interests in land or long-term leases of at least 99 years
and 3rd-party rights of 
enforcement of a conservation easement
.
This bill has bipartisan support from all four chambers, land trusts, water utilities, and other
non-profit or ganizations concerned with protecting Maine’ s water supply .
Thank you for your time and consideration. While I am happy to answer any questions you may 
have, those speaking after me will be better suited to address your questions.
District 86, including Frye Island

