 
Testimony to the Joint Sta nding Committee on Housing  
in support  
LD 724, An Act to Expand Workforce Housing in Rural Maine by Funding th e Maine State Housing 
Authority's  Rural Affordable Rental Housing Program  
 
4/14/23 
Amy Winston, Senior Director, State Policy  
 
Dear Senator Pierce , Representative Gere , and Distinguished Mem bers of the Committee:  
 
My name is Amy Winston, and I am Senior Director, State Policy, for Coastal Enterprises, Inc. (CEI). I live 
in Edgecomb. I am submitting t his testimony on behalf of CEI, to express our organization’s support for 
LD 724, An Act to Expand Workforce Housing in Rural Maine by Funding the Maine State Housing 
Authority's Rural Affordable Rental Housing Program .  
 
CEI is a non -profit Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI) based in Brunswick. CEI w orks to 
build a just, vibrant, and climate resilient future for people in communities in Maine and other rural 
regions. We do this by integrating finance, busin ess expertise and policy solutions in ways that make the 
economy more equitable. Since 1977, CEI has worked to increase access to affordable housing and 
homeownership. As an economic development organization, CEI has long understood the necessity of 
stable , affordable housing as an economic lifeline for  individuals , families , and communities.  Laura 
Buxbaum, CEI’s SVP of Public Policy and Resource Development, has spent decades as an advocate and 
expert in the field of affordable housing. She is a Maine State Housing Authority (MaineHousing) 
commissioner.   
 
As part of the Maine Jobs and Recove ry Act, i n an effort to offer solutions to the current affordable 
housing crisis, which  disproportionately impacts low and moderate income Maine households, and to 
compensate for the lack of federal resources  that are directed at rental housing in rural areas, 
MaineHousing created the Rural Affordable Rental Program to facilitate the development  of affordable 
workforce rental housing in areas and at a size and scale where traditional Low Income Housing Tax 
Credit projects  are not feasible. LD 724 extends th is program  to incent ivize  investment in the acquisition 
and adaptive re -use of existing buildings, the acquisition and rehabilitation of existing non -rent 
restricted housing, and the  construction of new  buildings with units that will remain affordable for 
decades .  
 
The Recovery Act -funded program was quickly oversubscribed , so it is clear that there is strong demand  
for these funds.  Many private developers of smaller projects do not have the capacity to effectively use 
the LIHTC program , which is best suit ed for larger developments in more densely populated areas . And 
yet there is a great need for housing that is affordable for seniors and working families - and at the 
appropriate scale  - in our smaller towns and rural areas.  
 CEI strongly supports this investment in critical infrastructure that is needed to grow Maine’s workforce 
and economy, especially in rural areas where signature industries and heritage -based pursuits such as 
 
sustainable farming, fishing, and forestry are our state’s en during assets and competitive economic 
advantage. For communities to be sustainable and thriving, they must be economically and socially 
diverse  with equitable access to affordable housing . 
 
Thank you for considering our testimony in support of LD 724. We encourage the committee to vote in 
support of this bill to invest in Maine’s economy by investing in workforce housing.  
