      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
April 14, 2023  
 
Re: LD 724, An Act to Expand Workforce Housing in Rural Maine by Funding the Maine State 
Housing Authority's Rural Affordable Rental Housing Program  
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, 
my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of Maine 
(CHOM ).  CHOM  has created, and currently owns , and manages 88 housing sites in 31 
communities spanning 11 counties  in Maine , offering 1010 units of affordable housing for 
people in Maine with the lowest incomes and highest vulnerabilities , including homeless and 
special needs populations .  I also chai r numerous committees working to end homelessness .  
 
I am testifying in strong support of LD 724, An Act to Expand Workforce Housing in Rural 
Maine by Funding the Maine State Housing Authority's Rural Affordable Rental Housing Program .  
This bill provides one-time funds in the amount of $10M each year in fiscal year s 2023 -24 and 
2024- 25 to the Rural Affordable Rental Housing Program within the Maine State Housing 
Authority for the development of smaller affordable rental housing projects.  
 
As you know, t here is an overall shortage of affordable housing for all populations in Maine .  
Currently, Maine only has enough resources to build 200- 250 affordable homes of all types 
each year.  Without creating solutions at a more significant scale, we won't make a real difference in the lives of Main ers in dire need of housing that is affordable .  This bill would 
provide a greatly needed injection into the supply of affordable housing for Maine’s small 
rural communities.  LD 724 would address this shortage of safe, affordable housing by 
injecting additional resources into MaineHousing’s successful Rural Affordable Rental 
Housing Program.    
 
LD 724 would substantially invest in neighborhoods across Maine, fulfilling multiple public 
purposes:  Job cr eation, increased affordable housing, the bettering of existing housing stock, 
neighborhood improvement, community investment, and serving homeless and vulnerable 
populations.  
 
Please support this legislation, and please consider a carve- out to ensure a portion goes to 
support homeless and special needs populations.  Not everyone experiencing homelessness 
lives in larger, service- center communities .  They deserve housing with support  so they can 
become stable and included in the communities in which they re side – as all vulnerable 
populations in Maine deserve.   Having access to affordable, stable housing in their rural home 
communities is essential to ending their homelessness and also works to create vibrant communities all across Maine in which everyone can thrive.  
 
Please support LD 724  so that we can all work together to  create more affordable housing in 
Maine’s rural communities, and work  to end and prevent homelessness in our state at the same 
time.    
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.   
  
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
