Sound Money E re E N s E x... E. A cs UE i‘ 
Pecunia vriiiztcz 
Support for LD 1270 Before the Joint Health Coverage, Insurance 
and Financial Services Committee 
Chairwoman Bailey, Chairwoman Perry, and the rest of the members of the Joint Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services Committeee, thank you for the opportunity to testify 
before you today 
That’s why I strongly urge you to vote YES on LD 1270 — a bill that’s before the Joint Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee — when it comes time for a vote. 
The rampant inﬂation facing Americans today is largely a federal problem, but Maine doesn’t 
have to sit idly by while citizens suffer from a broken monetary system. 
Article 1 Section 10 of the U. S. Constitution says: “No state shall make any Thing but gold 
and silver Coin a Tender in Payment of Debts” 
Legislation known as “Sound Money” or “Legal Tender” acts are being introduced in states 
across the country. These bills recognize that precious metals such as gold and silver are money, 
and since money itself is not taxed, the bills (should) exempt precious metals from taxation. 
America’s 52-year experiment in fiat currency has gone exactly as followers of the Austrian 
school of Economics predicted: a continuing decline in the purchasing power of the Federal 
Reserve Note “dollar” accompanied by a series of Federal Reserve-created booms (caused by 
interest rate manipulation) followed by increasingly severe busts — and explosive growth in 
government spending. 
Maine should stop taxing money, and LD 1270 will correct this. 
Trading one form of money for another should not trigger any tax. Unfortunately, there is 
currently a sales tax in Maine when customers swap their Federal Reserve Note “dollars” for 
precious metals. 
When individuals are concerned about inflation, they often choose precious metals over fiat 
currency. 
Despite the indifference toward gold from many modern politicians, gold played a formal role in 
U.S. monetary policy for another sixty years after the creation of the Federal Reserve. Then, in 
1971, as concerns over the U.S. government ’s increasing deﬁcits led manyforeign governments 
to redeem their holdings of U.S. dollars for gold, President Nixon “temporarily suspended ” 
redeemability.
For four decades, the federal government actually deemed it illegal to have possession of 
more than five ounces. Maine should ensure Mainers are protected from draconian actions 
like this in the future. 
In 1933, America’s paper notes were backed by physical gold. In a desperate measure to create 
inﬂation to counteract deﬂation, then-President Franklin D. Roosevelt issued Executive Order 
6102, a measure that required U.S. citizens to deliver their gold coins, bullion, and certiﬁcates to 
the Federal Reserve, under penalty of $10,000, ten years imprisonment, or both. 
People turned in their gold in exchange for the market price of gold at the time. Immediately 
after people turned their gold in, FDR’s Treasury artiﬁcially set the price of gold at almost 
double the price. 
LD 1270 would ensure that Mainers may possess any amount of gold or silver coins or bars 
without fear of government conﬁscation. 
Policies that penalize savers in precious metals reduce the likelihood that Maine citizens will 
take prudent steps to insulate themselves from the inﬂation and ﬁnancial turmoil caused by the 
Federal Reserve. 
On behalf of Maine savers, Wage earners. and all those who use gold and silver to insulate 
against the devastating effects of inflation, we strongly urge you to vote YES on LD 1270 so that 
the State of Maine can beneﬁt from the establishment of sound money policies.
