1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance  
and Financial Services 
Hearing Date: April 4, 2023, at 1:00 PM 
  
L.D. 1270 – “An Act to Protect Maine People from Inflation by Restoring Gold 
and Silver as Legal Tender” 
 
 
 Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services Committee – good afternoon, my name is 
Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner for Tax Policy in the Department of 
Administrative and Financial Services.  I am testifying at the request of the 
Administration Neither for Nor Against L.D. 1270, “An Act to Protect Maine 
People from Inflation by Restoring Gold and Silver as Legal Tender.” 
My testimony today is limited to Section 2 of the bill, which would enact an 
exemption from the sales and use taxes for “gold and silver as legal tender.”  The 
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation has seen numerous proposals to exempt 
gold and silver coins and bullion from the sales tax in this and past legislative 
sessions, including this session’s L.D. 1051, “An Act to Protect Maine People from 
Inflation by Exempting Gold and Silver Coins and Bullion from the State Sales and 
Use Tax,”  which was heard on Tuesday, March 28, 2023 in the Taxation 
Committee.   
The Administration would like to note the following considerations with the 
proposal.  First, the terms “gold or silver” and “coin or bar” are ambiguous, and 
could be defined, possibly by grade, purity level, or elemental.  As written, any 
amount of gold or silver content could potentially make a coin or bar both exempt 
2 
 from sales tax and “legal tender.”  Additionally, based on the bill’s language, gold 
or silver coins and bars that are not intended “to be used” as legal tender would not 
qualify for the sales tax exemption.  It may be difficult for retailers to determine 
whether a coin or bar is bought “for use as legal tender.”  Furthermore, the 
requirement that “buyer and seller agree on the fair market value of the gold or 
silver” could complicate the determination of a transaction’s sale price.  The 
administrative concerns listed above would make administering the sales tax 
exemption very difficult.  L.D. 1051 has been heard by the Taxation Committee 
and the sales tax implications of gold and silver transactions are better discussed 
during the work session for that bill.  
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions.   
