TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: Mar 28, 2023, 2:00 p.m. 
L.D. 1051 — “An Act to Protect Maine People from Inﬂation by Exempting Gold 
and Silver Coins and Bullion ﬂorn the State Sales and Use Tax” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
here today at the request of the Administration to testify Against LD 1051, “An Act 
To Protect Maine People ﬁom Inﬂation by Exempting Gold and Silver Coins and 
Bullion from the State Sales and Use Tax.” 
Similar bills have been introduced in ﬁve of the six most recent legislative 
sessions. When prior bills have been heard, testimony has suggested that the 
proposal is premised on the theory that sales of gold or silver coins and bullion are 
exchanges of currency and should be exempt as such, not taxed as a sale of 
tangible personal property. 
While this proposal ’s ﬁscal note is relatively small, it is one of many sales 
tax exemption bills introduced this session. In the aggregate, these exemptions 
would continue to erode an already narrow sales tax base. 
If the committee chooses to move forward with this proposal, deﬁnitions for 
“gold and silver coins” and “bullion” should be added to the bill. As written, any 
amount of gold or silver content could qualify the coin or bullion for exemption. 
Alternatively, “gold coin” and “silver coin” could be deﬁned in terms of grade,
1
purity level, or elemental content. For context, some states with coin or bullion 
exemptions limit application by transaction value, stating for example that “only 
sales of bullion worth more than $1,000 are exempt.” 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
