Testimony in Support of LD 1051 / Gould/ Page 1 of2 
March 28, 2023 
Testimony in Support of LD 1051 
An Act to Protect Maine People from Inﬂation by Exempting Gold and Silver Coins and Bullion from 
the State Sales and Use Tax 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation: 
My name is Nathan Gould. Today l am here give testimony in support of LD 1051, ”An Act to 
Protect Maine People from inﬂation by Exempting Gold and Silver Coins and Bullion from the State 
Sales and Use Tax." 
Since ancient times, people have recognized that remarkable quality of gold to hold its value. It 
is written that the patriarch Abraham was wealthy in livestock, silver, and gold. l've heard a wealth 
management advisor use this example to illustrate that wealth is divided into three categories: 
investment for growth, cash for expenses, and a means of wealth protection. And history has proven 
gold's ability to preserve buying power. 
The same advisor said that money is “perishable ” and must be "refrigerated." Gold, by 
comparison, is “non-perishable," a means of "refrigerating" money. Its stability is attested by 
millennia. We all all aware of the unstable nature of the current economy, with levels of inﬂation that 
bring back haunting images of last century's Weimar Republic. Though ﬁscal responsibility seems to be 
a virtue that eludes government, my fellow citizens should be allowed to protect their wealth in 
uncertain times, to exercise prudence and protect their families, and exempting gold and silver coins 
and bullion from sales and use tax gives the People of Maine a better foothold to do so. 
lf people are given more power to take responsibility for their own ﬁnancial well-being, they 
will be better able to help those around them who suffer hardship, and it will allow the government to 
focus its efforts on the truly needy. We should remove those obstacles that stand between Mainers 
utilizing these precious metals to lay a ﬁrm financial foundation.

