STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
_ _ MAINE STATE POLICE _ 
Colonel Wulham Ross LTC Brian Scott 
CHIEF DEPUTY CHIEF 
TESTIMONY OF MATTHEW RUEL 
DIRECTOR, STATE BUREAU OF IDENTIFICATION 
In Opposition to LD’s 739, 848, 1550, 1646 
Members of the Committee: 
My name is Matthew Ruel, and I am the Director of the State. Bureau of 
Identiﬁcation within the Department of Public Safety. I provide this testimony on behalf 
of the Administration in Opposition to LD’s 739, 848, 1550, 1646. Testimony on all bills 
has been combined because of the overlap of concerns and issues with the LDs as drafted. 
SBI serves as the repository of all criminal history information in the state, and 
currently provides criminal history for law enforcement and public purposes. We are 
responsible for providing this information to law enforcement across the country, from the 
officer roadside all the way through the criminal justice process up to judges making 
sentencing decisions. This information is also used as part of hiring, certiﬁcation, and 
licensing requirements on a state and national level. Many organizations rely on this 
information to vet potential employees or volunteers that have direct contact with 
vulnerable populations. SBI completes more than 500,000 public searches annually. 
Having an accurate, complete, timely criminal history is our mission and a key component 
in public safety. My purpose in providing this testimony is to point out concerns and 
challenges I would see in incorporating proposed changes into our work process. 
Let me begin with sealing and expungement. We currently have a sealing process 
in place where we get a sealing order from a court proceeding and make the necessary 
changes within our system to limit dissemination of the record for law enforcement 
purposes. Expungement is something that doesn’t currently exist at the repository and 
would require programming changes just to implement, as well as raise numerous other 
questions. For example, if something is expunged or deleted its gone. What happens if 
45 COMMERCE DRIVE, SUITE 1, 41 STATE Housn STATION, AUGUSTA, ME 0433;-0042 
TEL: (207) 624-7zoo I TTY: (888) 524-7900 I FAX: (207) 287-3042
the person commits new criminal conduct, how would it be used as an enhancement toa 
crime? Can someone expunge crimes, commit new crimes, and expunge again? Criminal 
history is used across state lines for charging purposes, if its expunged and can’t be used is 
that what is intended? What about research? If I expunge records how do researchers 
identify performance on crime statistics and or address recidivism? What about gun 
checks? Criminal history is used for many checks of people working with vulnerable 
populations. Is the intent to hide or delete that information from the person looking to 
hire someone working with those populations? Or is the intention to “expunge” records 
and move it to a “super conﬁdential ﬁle” like some other states do where information is 
not disseminated, but is maintained and checked against new criminal conduct we receive 
which “reactivates ” the dissemination of all the history? Is the intent here to really 
expunge? In many states, as I have seen here in Maine, there is a tendency to say expunge 
when really the intent is to seal. 
For consistency and to avoid confusion I believe that following along with the 
court review process that is already in statute is the best process to follow as it is already 
established between the courts and SBI. 
Some proposed LDs imply that SBI would be responsible for sealing or expunging 
“all” records. I think it needs to be clear that SBI can address history that is maintainable 
by SBI only. I have no control over local record systems or the courts records and would 
not be able to do anything to seal or expunge history in those systems. Further, SBI doesn’t 
have anything to do with civil offenses and would not be able to address those records. 
Any reference to time requirements for action on SBI’s part is also concerning. 
Many older records may be in archives, not in our possession, or possibly destroyed. They 
also may be in a format that is not easily reviewed by staff or need further legal review to 
make a determination. 
As I have indicated in prior legislative sessions, how do I identify old records of drug 
crimes when they may have been classiﬁed as schedule Z drugs or some simpliﬁed drug 
charge and would take a legal review of case reports to make a sealing/expungement 
decision? Any action on these cases will require a hand search of records and a legal review 
process to make a decision. There are also going to be numerous records that may have 
been destroyed as part of record retention policies. 
For these reasons and many others, the Administration is in opposition of these 
LDs. I apologize for not being there in person but had a prior commitment. I think that if 
this is a path we want to explore there needs to be a workgroup that can address all these 
issues and provide clear direction on what should be implemented and how it will work in 
the day-to-day dissemination of records. I will also try to attend work sessions and work 
with the committee as needed to answer any further questions. 
45 COMMERCE DRIVE, Sum: 1, 41 STATE Houss STATION, Aueusm, ME 0433;-0041 
TEL: (207) 62.4-7200 I TTY: (888) 524-7900 I FAX: (207) 287-3042
