eff; 1; P0 Box 7860 
(207) 774-5444 
- www.aclumaine.org Portland, ME @4112 
AMERICAN CIVIL UQERTIES Ulliﬁﬂ 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
Ought to Pass — LD 739 
RESOLUTION, Proposing an Amendment to the Constitution of Maine to Empower the 
Legislature to Allow the Expungement or Sealingof Certain Criminal Records 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON JUDICIARY 
April 27, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative _ Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Michael Kebede, and I am Policy 
Counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing and preserving 
civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our 
members, we urge you to support this bill because it would help the legislature expand ways to 
free Mainers from the debilitating unintended consequences of criminal records, extending the 
promise of our constitution to all people in our state. 
Thisis how criminal law was designed to work. The legislature decides that something is 
a crime and designates consequences for committing the crime. These consequences can include 
a prison sentence, rehabilitation or mental health services, community service, supervised' 
release, and more. Unfortunately, for as long as there have been criminal laws —- but 
exponentially more in the digital age — these punishments often far outweigh the crimeI 
committed. Past convictions can make people ineligible for job opportunities, professional 
licenses, housing assistance, education, volunteering with their chi1dren ’s activities, and more. In 
short, a criminal record has prevented millions across the country, and thousands across Maine, 
from moving on with their lives, pushing them into second-class status even after they completed 
their sentences. Keeping people from being able to fully reenter and contribute to their 
communities also makes it more likely they will become entangled in the legal system again. 
Some members of Maine’s legal‘ community have argued that any expungement system 
established by the legislature would unconstitutionally infringe upon the governor ’s exclusive 
power to pardon. The Law Court has not decided this question, coming closest in the 1982 
decision of State v. Hunter, in which the Court ruled that a resentenoing statute that allowed 
deductions of a prison sentence was an unconstitutional encroachment on the governor ’s
commutation power. 447 A.2d 797, 800 (Me. I982). The words “expungement ” or “sealing” or 
“vacatur” do not even appear in Hunter, although some lawyers cite that case to support their 
contention that a legislatively established expungement is unconstitutional. We disagree. A 
pardon is fundamentally different from an expungement. A pardon frees you from serving any 
remainder of your sentence, or any other penalties attached to the pardoned crime. A pardon is 
available for any crime, at any point after conviction. In contrast, expungement simply removes 
records about the worst moments of a person’s past, and perhaps also makes it unlawful to 
disseminate those records. Indeed, expungement is simply a more thorough, and a more 
accelerated, way to do two things the state already does: make certain records conﬁdential 
pursuant to the Criminal History Records Information Act, l6 M.R.S. §701 et seq., and destroy 
records under state agency retention schedules. 
Still, this constitutional amendment is a wise way to settle any lingering questions of 
constitutionality. If enacted, this resolution would give voters a chance to add this language to. 
the constitution:" 
The Legislature may enact laws to allow for the expungement or sealing of a criminal 
record on the completion of a sentence served by a person convicted of certain crimes, as 
the Legislature considers best to rehabilitate convicted persons, protect the public safety 
and advance restorative justice. 
This language would end any debate about whether the legislature has the power to allow the 
expungement of criminal records. The ACLU recommends striking the words “or sealing” from 
the amendment. That is because criminal records sealing, the second-best way to free people 
from the collateral consequences of criminal records, is already available in Maine for a range of 
crimes. See, e.g., 15 M.R.S. § 2261 (allowing for sealing of certain criminal records), § 3010 
(designating certain youth criminal records as conﬁdential). The legislature has already 
established a criminal records sealing system without issue, so an amendment granting the 
legislature the power to seal criminal records would be superﬂuous. 
People with convictions need a fair chance to move forward with their lives. We urge you 
to vote ought to pass.
