May 24, 2023 
To: Appropriations and Financial Aﬁ°airs Committee 
From: Patty Barber Hiram Maine 
I am here in SUPPORT for LD 1957 :An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue to Invest in Maine's Railroad 
Infrastructure.‘ 
Dear Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and Members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee: 
My name is Patty Barber from Hiram, a town directly on a State Owned Railroad- the Mountain Division. 
This line has current interest from a successful railroad company that wishes to run a tourist and freight operation along these 
tracks. 
There are also multiple local companies who have expressed interest in using this freight service as part of a proﬁtable business 
plan, some of which are agricultural-based. 
This line also connects to Portland, a large interrnodal facility. 
Holding this project back is state investment into upgrading the railroad inirastructure. A state investment would improve the 
chances of matching Federal Funds, of which there are currently billions of dollars available for rail expansion._ 
An investment in railroad infrastructure is an incredible Retum On Investrnent- for the useful life of a railroad tie is 50 to..l0O 
years, and the steel tracks last a hundred years or more. A one-time track rehab would not have to be done again for generations. 
Where else in inﬁastiucture does this return occur? 
Our State-Owned Rail Corridors, purchased speciﬁcally to bring rail service to Maine people, have been underfunded for far too 
long, and their worth greatly underestimated. 
They have immense value and purpose as transit corridors, bringing equitable options to rural and urban citizens alike. 
They are immeasurably the greenest mode of land~based transportation, and because of this they fit perfectly into Governor Mills 
"Maine Won't Wait" Climate Action Plan. 
Modern rail technology is evolving rapidly and offers multitudes of options for transit and freight services. 
This rail bond could accomplish so much, interconnecting every citizen of Maine. ‘- 
Please give our railroad corridors a chance to shine. Ipromise, you will be incredibly glad that you did. 
Please support LD 1957. 
Thank You, 
Iwill gladly take any questions 
"ml.
