Maine Rail Transit Coalition: “. . .  to elevate rail transportation to its proper balance in transportation investments, planning and decision -making.”  
               5/24/2023  
               1 | P a g e    
* Please consider the environment before printing this message . 
 
 
To:  Maine Legislature Committee On  Appropriations and Financial Affairs  
From:   Maine Rail Transit Coalition , Tony Donovan, Managing Director  
Date:    May 24, 2023  
Re: In Support of LD 1957 General Fund Bond Issue to Invest in  
            Maine's Railroad Infrastructure.   
Senator Rotundo , Representative Sachs, Esteemed member of the Appropriations  Committee  
 
My name is Tony Donovan, I am a Portland resident and founding Member of the Maine Rail 
Transit Coalition (MRTC). The Maine Rail Transit Coalition (MRTC) lobbies for federal, state, 
and local policies that promote equitable funding of transit services for all. MRTC’s vision is a 
comprehensive transit design connecting passenger rail service with local transit systems to 
promote economic and environmental sustainability.    
 
The MRTC is here  entirely in support of LD 1 957 General Fund Bond Issue to 
Invest in Maine's Railroad Infrastructure.   
 
I want to take this opportunity to talk about the best use of Maine -owned railroads. Rail 
advocacy organizations have submitted Bond bills every one of the last 4 or 5 sessions.   Whether 
it was Bethel, or Bangor, Lewiston/Auburn, Westbrook or Portland, there were rail projects 
being discussed.   We always were passed aside for road bonds.   
 
This session you have heard a lot about Maine’s Railroads.   At least I hope you have.   Between 
using them for train tra nsportation and using them for recreational trails, I believe there may be 
15 bills.  
 
Certainly,  this is a state policy and investment issue that is of great importance  to local  
economies and return on investments to any state resources.   This is Certainly  not a time to be 
rushing into design and engineering for ripping railroads  up. 
 
Maine is at a great advantage right now in terms of transportation infrastructure investing.   We 
expect the special purpose general fund bonding of $400 million this session, matching $1 billion 
in federal funding. A long with the previous $500 million in federal pandemic subsidies for roads 
and bridges MeDOT does not need to Bond.   
 
There is enough bonding capacity for funding alternatives, like trails.   And, like rails .  In fact, if 
done right it can fund rails with trails.   Passenger train expansion  projects that include  funding 
and design for trails, have been done before in other locations around the nation.  These are 
Green ways ; Corridors for transportation using all modes possible, including passenger rail. 
Specifically, passenger rail. Rails with Tra ils projects are eligible for  Federal Transit  
Administration Capital  Infrastructure  Grant funding  (FTA CIG) funding.  
 
The fastest growing business in Maine’s economy is the services industry.   The entire Portland 
working waterfront hosts thousands of new services jobs.   Service businesses from schools to 
hospitals to high tech benefit town centers everywhere.   People need to get to these places.    
Maine Rail Transit Coalition: “. . .  to elevate rail transportation to its proper balance in transportation investments, planning and decision -making.”  
               5/24/2023  
               2 | P a g e    
* Please consider the environment before printing this message . 
 
Maine owns 125 miles of railroad infrastructure, in four transportation corridors connecting over 
25 village centers on these corridors.   Twenty -five locations w here the service industry can 
locate, or provide housing, services, education and, yes, Recreation.   
 
For example, a design for a Greenbelt between the Portland downtown waterfront 30 miles to 
Auburn connects the town centers of Falmouth and Yarmouth, the Downeaster at Yarmouth 
Junction, Cumberland, Pownal at Pineland, the Auburn -Lewiston municipal airport.   A good 
design would also get you 6 miles into Lewiston, soon followed by the route north through 
Bethel to Montreal.   
 
All for the want o f a of a nail.  
 
I want to make a proposal.   Let’s do both.   Trails and Rails. Combining both bonds into one 
reasonable amount.   Let’s work together to make the nicest Greenbelt in the Northeast, and fund 
outdoor trails throughout the state.   At least let u s discuss this along with the debates concerning 
the best use of the state -owned railroads.   
 
Our coalition of rail advocates recommends the Appropriations Committee carry this both LD 
1957 and LD 1156  over to 2024 when a clear understanding, perhaps even  a compromise, will 
bring the rails and trails folks to the table.   
 
I think we can all agree that we need to address Climate Change. The future of Maine, much less 
the entire globe requires thinking big.    The Governors Climate Council set big goals.   This plan 
for a bond to fund alternative transportation can help achieve that goal.  
 
MRTC Speaks entirely in support of LD 1857 General Fund Bond Issue to Invest in 
Maine's Railroad Infrastructure.   We also respectively request that this bill and the Trails 
Bond bill be carried over.  
 
Anthony J. Donovan,  Director  
 Maine Rail Transit Coalition  
84 Middle St.   Portland, Me. 04101  
(207) 329 -6732 Mobile  Mailto:  MElikesRail@Gmail.com  
  
Train Time  
Tony Donovan
Maine Rail Transit Coalition
LD 1957
To:Maine Legislature Committee On Appropriations and Financial Affairs
From:Maine Rail Transit Coalition, Tony Donovan, Managing Director
Date: May 25, 2023
Re:In Support of LD 1957 General Fund Bond Issue to Invest in 
            Maine's Railroad Infrastructure. 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, Esteemed member of the Appropriations 
Committee
My name is Tony Donovan, I am a Portland resident and founding Member of the 
Maine Rail Transit Coalition (MRTC). The Maine Rail Transit Coalition (MRTC) 
lobbies for federal, state, and local policies that promote equitable funding of transit 
services for all. MRTC’s vision is a comprehensive transit design connecting 
passenger rail service with local transit systems to promote economic and 
environmental sustainability.  
The MRTC is here entirely in support of LD 1957 General Fund Bond Issue to Invest 
in Maine's Railroad Infrastructure. 
I want to take this opportunity to talk about the best use of Maine-owned railroads. 
Rail advocacy organizations have submitted Bond bills every one of the last 4 or 5 
sessions.  Whether it was Bethel, or Bangor, Lewiston/Auburn, Westbrook or 
Portland, there were rail projects being discussed.  We always were passed aside for 
road bonds. 
This session you have heard a lot about Maine’s Railroads.  At least I hope you have. 
Between using them for train transportation and using them for recreational trails, I 
believe there may be 15 bills.
Certainly, this is a state policy and investment issue that is of great importance to 
local economies and return on investments to any state resources.  This is Certainly 
not a time to be rushing into design and engineering for ripping railroads up.
Maine is at a great advantage right now in terms of transportation infrastructure 
investing.  We expect the special purpose general fund bonding of $400 million this 
session, matching $1 billion in federal funding. Along with the previous $500 million 
in federal pandemic subsidies for roads and bridges MeDOT does not need to Bond. 
There is enough bonding capacity for funding alternatives, like trails.  And, like rails. 
In fact, if done right it can fund rails with trails.  Passenger train expansion projects 
that include funding and design for trails, have been done before in other locations 
around the nation.  These are Greenways; Corridors for transportation using all modes
possible, including passenger rail. Specifically, passenger rail. Rails with Trails 
projects are eligible for Federal Transit Administration Capital Infrastructure Grant 
funding (FTA CIG) funding.
The fastest growing business in Maine’s economy is the services industry.  The entire 
Portland working waterfront hosts thousands of new services jobs.  Service businesses
from schools to hospitals to high tech benefit town centers everywhere.  People need 
to get to these places.  
Maine owns 125 miles of railroad infrastructure, in four transportation corridors 
connecting over 25 village centers on these corridors.  Twenty-five locations where 
the service industry can locate, or provide housing, services, education and, yes, 
Recreation. 
For example, a design for a Greenbelt between the Portland downtown waterfront 30 
miles to Auburn connects the town centers of Falmouth and Yarmouth, the 
Downeaster at Yarmouth Junction, Cumberland, Pownal at Pineland, the 
Auburn-Lewiston municipal airport.  A good design would also get you 6 miles into 
Lewiston, soon followed by the route north through Bethel to Montreal. 
All for the want of a of a nail.
I want to make a proposal.  Let’s do both.  Trails and Rails. Combining both bonds 
into one reasonable amount.  Let’s work together to make the nicest Greenbelt in the 
Northeast, and fund outdoor trails throughout the state.  At least let us discuss this 
along with the debates concerning the best use of the state-owned railroads. 
Our coalition of rail advocates recommends the Appropriations Committee carry this 
both LD 1957 and LD 1156 over to 2024 when a clear understanding, perhaps even a 
compromise, will bring the rails and trails folks to the table. 
I think we can all agree that we need to address Climate Change. The future of Maine,
much less the entire globe requires thinking big.   The Governors Climate Council set 
big goals.  This plan for a bond to fund alternative transportation can help achieve that
goal.
MRTC Speaks entirely in support of LD 1857 General Fund Bond Issue to Invest in 
Maine's Railroad Infrastructure.  We also respectively request that this bill and the 
Trails Bond bill be carried over.
Anthony J. Donovan, Director
 Maine Rail Transit Coalition
84 Middle St.  Portland, Me. 04101
(207) 329-6732 Mobile Mailto: MElikesRail@Gmail.com
 
Train Time

