 
 
 
Testimony of Benjamin Hawkins, Director of Public Affairs  
Maine Health Care Association  
 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Health & H uman Services  
 
March 27, 2023 at 10:00 AM 
 
Neither For Nor Against LD 1099, An Act to Protect Vulnerable Populations in Residential 
Facilities from Extended Power Outages  
 
Good morning  Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Health and  Human Services. I am  Ben Hawkins , and I serve as the  Director of 
Public Affairs  for the Maine Health Care Association . We represent approximately 200 nursing 
homes , assisted living , and residential care facilities (also known as Private Non -Medical 
Institutions or PNMIs) across the state. Our mission is to e mpower members to ensure the 
integrity, quality, and sustainability of long term care in Maine.   
 I am here today to provide testimony neither for nor against LD 1099, An Act to Protect 
Vulnerable Populations in Residential Facilities from Extended Power Outages.  This bill requires 
that every residential facility that services or houses elderly persons, persons with disabilities , 
or other vulnerable populations be equipped with a backup source of electrical power to power 
an on -site area that , at a m inimum,  allows for warming, cooling, charging electronic devices and 
other basic needs for the entire population of the facility.  
 
Every resident has the right to a safe, clean, comfortable,  and homelike environment. The 
comfort and temperature of resident s’ living environments  are critical to physical, mental, and 
emotional well -being. Our facilities already have requirements for meeting these goals. For 
example, during  a power outage, residents must be protected from loss of body heat, risk of 
hypothermia  or hyperthermia, and be kept comfortable.  
 
 
2 
  
Residential care facilities are required to have a comprehensive disaster plan. This plan shall include the following : 
1 
 
 Nursing homes, b y contrast, are required by CMS to have an emergency electrical power supply 
adequate at least for the lighting of entrances and exits, and equipment to maintain the fire 
detection, alarm, and extinguishing systems .
2 Additionally, if  life support systems ( e.g.,  
venti lators  and suction machines if necessary to maintain an airway) are used, the facility must 
provide an emergency generator that is on the premises.3 
 Moreover,  in Maine, a more general  requirement for a generator is already being implemented 
over time to our  nursing facilities. Per Maine’s regulations,  “all new facilities, facilities changing 
ownership, or facilities proposing major renovations which require a Certificate of Need shall require the installation of an emergency generator. ”
4 And regardless of having an emergency 
generator, facilities are  currently  required to continue essential electrical services  during a 
power outage , albeit not necessarily from a generator:  
 
1 Regulations Governing the Licensing and Functioning of Assisted Housing Programs: Residential Care Facilities, 
Part of 10 -144, Chapter 113 (3.31.6, page 9). Maine DHHS, Division of Licensing and Certification. Effective (Last 
Amended Date: August 20, 2008) : Chapter 113 of the Department of Health and Human Services (Maine) . 
Accessed March 20, 2023.  
2 Title 42. Chapter IV. Subchapter G. Part 483. Subpart B. Sec tion § 483.90.  
3 Ibid. 
4 Code of Maine Rules, 10 -144 C.M.R. Chapter 110.  Regulations Governing the Licensing and Functioning ff Skilled 
Nursing Facilities and Nursing Facilities. Chapter 20 . 

 
 
3 
 20.B.5.  Standards for All Facilities in the Case of Electrical Pow er Outage  
 
  a. All licensed facilities shall provide continuing sources of emergency power (electrical or otherwise) 
needed to maintain the following essential services:  
 
   1. The fire detection and alarm systems;  
   2. The telephone system;  
   3. Boiler room burners, fans, or pumps;  
   4. Exit and corridor lights;  
   5. Call systems;  
   6. Lights at the nurses station;  
   7. Food preparation;  
   8. Adequate heat for specified areas of the building for resident comfort, if electrical heat is  
provide d     
   9. Pumps for water supply; and  
   10. Pumps for private septic system.  
 
  b. When life support equipment or life support systems are used, the facility must provide sufficient 
emergency electrical power to ensure the safe and uninterrupted operation of the life support equipment or 
system with an emergency generator that is located on the premises.5 
 
Finally , as drafted, the bill does not include any specific language on an appropriation of funding 
to support the requirement of a backup power source  for those facilities  that provide care to 
residents on MaineCare. Current reimbursement rates do not cover the cost of care , and LD 
1099 would  further increase our industry’s shortfall.  
 Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments today.   
 
5 Ibid.  
