District 15: Brooklin, Deer Isle, Eagle Island Township, Frenchboro, Southwest Harbor, 
Stonington, Swan’s Island, Tremont, Isle au Haut, VinalhavenMarch 27, 2023
Testimony of Representative Holly Eaton
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services
Presenting L.D. 1099
An Act to Protect Vulnerable Populations in Residential Facilities from Extended Power 
Outages
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, I am Representative Holly Eaton of House District 
15, and I am testifying before you today as the sponsor of L.D. 1099, An Act to Protect 
Vulnerable Populations in Residential Facilities from Extended Power Outages. 
The extreme cold stretch we had in February, when temperatures were in the negatives and over 
11,000 Versant and CMP customers were without power overnight, served as a keen reminder 
that Maine winters can be harsh, and that our power grid is not always reliable in dangerous 
weather. The communities in my district were very thankful to the line workers who were 
dispatched to restore power and who worked efficiently in difficult subzero conditions. 
In planning for another extreme weather event where the power may go out, this bill requires 
every residential facility that services or houses older Mainers, persons with disabilities or other 
vulnerable populations, be equipped with a backup source of electrical power to power an on-site 
area. This on-site area would, at a minimum, allow for warming, cooling, charging electronic 
devices and other basic needs for the population of the facility.
This bill is about public safety, emergency preparedness, and protecting the health and wellness 
of our most vulnerable citizens. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I would be happy to answer questions from the 
committee. 
Holly Rae Eaton
63 Church Street 
Deer Isle, ME 04627
Phone: (207) 610-9281
Holly.Eaton@legislature.maine.govHOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002
(207) 287-1400
TTY:  Maine Relay 711
Holly Eaton
District 15 Representative 
LD 1099
Testimony of Representative Holly Eaton
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services
Presenting L.D. 1099
“An Act to Protect Vulnerable Populations in Residential Facilities from Extended Power 
Outages”
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, I am Representative Holly Eaton of House District
15, and I am testifying before you today as the sponsor of L.D. 1099, An Act to Protect 
Vulnerable Populations in Residential Facilities from Extended Power Outages. 
The extreme cold stretch we had in February, when temperatures were in the negatives and 
over 11,000 Versant and CMP customers were without power overnight, served as a keen 
reminder that Maine winters can be harsh, and that our power grid is not always reliable in 
dangerous weather. The communities in my district were very thankful to the line workers who
were dispatched to restore power and who worked efficiently in difficult subzero conditions.
 
In planning for another extreme weather event where the power may go out, this bill requires 
every residential facility that services or houses older Mainers, persons with disabilities or 
other vulnerable populations, be equipped with a backup source of electrical power to power 
an on-site area. This on-site area would, at a minimum, allow for warming, cooling, charging 
electronic devices and other basic needs for the population of the facility.
 
This bill is about public safety, emergency preparedness, and protecting the health and 
wellness of our most vulnerable citizens.
 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I would be happy to answer questions from the 
committee.
District 15: Brooklin, Deer Isle, Eagle Island Township, Frenchboro, Southwest Harbor, 
Stonington, Swan’s Island, Tremont, Isle au Haut, Vinalhaven
