61 Winthrop Street -= 
Augusta, i\/it: {E4330 
1-*800~499~O229 * Fax 207~é52i~O5U9
k 
. . 
, .;. ,. llli‘ l\’i1tiil<‘: :mn»1~ termE . ma: 
()l\/EBUDSMAN Pmszr:.:s1i 
TESTIMONY 
In Support of 
LD 1099 An Act to Protect Vulnerable Populations in Residential Facilities from 
Extended Power Outages 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
March 27, 2023 
Maine Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services. 
My name is Laura Harper. l am a Senior Associate at Moose Ridge Associates. l am here today 
on behalf of the Maine Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program. The Ombudsman Program isa 
state-wide non-profit organization that provides advocacy for older adults and adults with 
disabiiities who receive long-term services and supports across the state. The program serves 
residents in nursing homes, residential care, assisted living facilities, adult day programs and 
recipients of home care services. Additionally, we serve patients in hospitals who experience 
barriers in accessing long-term care services when they are ready for discharge. 
This legislation requires that every residential facility that services or houses elderly persons, 
persons with disabilities or other vulnerable populations be equipped with a backup source of 
electrical power to power an on-site area that at a minimum allows for warming, cooling, 
charging of electronic devices, and other basic needs for the entire population of the facility. 
This requirement would apply to nursing homes, assisted housing including assisted living and 
residential care facilities as well as other settings. 
Current Maine nursing homes regulations do provide protection for residents in the event ofa it/iLTCOP@it/laineOmbudsman org
power outage. Regulations Governing the Licensing and Functioning of Skilled Nursing Facilities 
20.B.5 Standards for all Facilities in Case of Electrical Power Outage 
a. All licensed facilities shall provide continuous sources of emergency power (electrical 
or otherwise) needed to maintain the following essential services: 
1. The fire detection and alarm systems, 
2. The telephone system, 
3. Boiler room burners, fans or pumps, 
4. Exit and corridor lights, 
5. Call systems, 
6. Lights at the nurses station, 
7. Food preparation, 
8. Adequate heat for specified areas of the building for resident comfort, if electrical 
heat is provided, 
9. Pumps for water supply; and 
10. Pumps for private septic system. 
b. When life support equipment or life support systems are used, the facility must provide 
sufficient emergency electrical power to ensure the safe and uninterrupted operation of 
the life support equipment or system with an emergency generator that is located on 
the premises. 
The current regulations for residential care and assisted living facilities are not as 
comprehensive as those of nursing homes and do not provide the same protection in the event 
of a power outage. These facilities are required by regulation, Chapter 113: Regulations 
Governing the Licensing and Functioning of Assisted Housing Programs to have a disaster plan 
for loss of power, heat, lights, water and/or sewage disposal. 
Section 3 Licensing 
3.31.6 Disaster plan. Each facility/program shall develop a comprehensive disaster plan. This 
plan shall include the following: 
3.31.6.1 Contingencies for loss of power, heat, lights, water and/or sewage disposal;
3.31.6.2 Contingencies for short term and long-term emergencies: and 
3.31.6.3 if a facility has no back up power source that can be used to continue 
operation of heat, lights, water, and sewage disposal, the plan shall include 
contingencies for evacuation that include contractual arrangements with other agencies 
or facilities for temporary living accommodations. 
Nursing homes, residential care and assisted living facilities provide care to a very vulnerable 
population. While nursing home regulations provide protection for residents in the event ofa 
prolonged power outage, the regulations for residential care and assisted living do not provide 
these same protections. Evacuation of a facility is disruptive to residents and should be 
prevented whenever possible. Residents in both residential care and assisted living facilities 
would benefit if these settings were required to provide a backup source of electrical power to 
protect the health and safety of residents in the event of a power outage. 
Thank you for your consideration.
