MAINE iiEiii§t'6 ’R"s“" 
Your Real Estate Experts 
19 Community Drive I Augusta, Maine 04330 0 (207) 622-7501 I Fax: (207) 623-3590 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 1490 
(“An Act to Reduce Rental Housing Costs by Eliminating Additional Fees at or Prior to the 
Commencement of Tenancy”) 
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS® 
May 18, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary, my name is Andy Cashman. l am the Founder of Resolve Government 
Relations and we represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade 
association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow 
Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers 
involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also 
includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, 
building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National 
Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country. 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® opposes LD 1490. The bill would prohibit a 
property owner, at or prior to the commencement of a tenancy, from being able to charge 
any fees beyond rent for the first full month of occupancy, a security deposit and the purchase 
and installation cost for a key and lock. 
Rental housing needs are best met through private investment and incentives to accomplish 
the development of rental housing, not additional regulations. This bill would negatively 
impact the ability of the private sector to meet the needs and demands for rental property 
efficiently and effectively by making the market unfavorable to enter or conduct business. 
Similar to LD 691, heard earlier this session, this bill unfairly targets the real estate industry 
by regulating business practices and the ability for small business owners to be able to cover 
expenses, including rental application fees. As it was expressed in previous testimony, fees 
associated with the onset of tenancy do not generate revenue for housing providers, they are 
necessary business expenses to protect their assets and ensure a successful tenancy. 
This bill could also deter property owners from continuing to lease their property, or force 
rental increases to cover expenses in different ways, both resulting in a decrease of much 
needed rental housing supply. Property owners who lease their units are operating Maine 
businesses. A property owner needs to be able to generate revenue from their business to 
at least match expenses (property carrying costs and administration) for the business to 
REA‘-TORQ - is a registered mark which identiﬁes a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS® g%%%'r'°:'w$ 
12781773 I
WW ASSOCIATION or. 
1| REALTORS Yourkealisralefxpem 
Page2 
continue to be viable. This bill is an overreach that unfairly dictates real estate business 
operating procedures. Prohibiting a property owner from charging a fee to cover business 
expenses wrongly targets housing providers. 
For these reasons, we respectfully urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1490. Thank 
you for your time and consideration. 
127817731
