 
 
 
 
 
May 16, 2023 
 
 
Testimony in OPPOSITION to LD 1490: An Act to Reduce Rental Housing Costs 
 
To the Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary: 
 
The Central Maine Apartment Owners Association (CMAOA) is a landlord membership organization of over 
650, as well as a cooperative team member of other landlord associations across the State of Maine including: 
Southern Maine, Lewiston Auburn, Greater Bangor Area, and Augusta Area.  We provide educational events, 
sponsor community events, provide access to discounts on supplies and industry needs like fuels, flooring 
materials and paint. Our overall goal is to support Landlords in providing safe and affordable housing in 
collaboration with the valuable good renters in our area.  CMAOA and the other organizations are neutral, 
nonpartisan, member led groups that have the common goal of keeping the rental housing industry safe, 
educated, and competitive.   
We are asking you to Oppose LD 1490 as it is written. 
Our membership has expressed mixed feelings on fees.  Overwhelmingly our membership report that they only 
charge the standard first month rent and one-month equivalent security deposit. Should they start charging a 
key/lock change fee as a standard entry cost?   
Maine has a wide array of units that are often specific to geographics, cost, and tenant amenities desired and 
supported by the rental market. Unique needs like garage door openers, common area amenities, parking fees 
etc. should be left to supply and demand to regulate.   We fear that laws such as this will cause rents to go up on 
everyone to pay for amenities associated with “extra” fees that are only wanted or afforded by select renters 
willing and able to pay them. 
In this housing crisis we should not be looking to create more limits on the types, styles, costs, aesthetics of 
rental housing.    We should be looking at ways to keep the smaller landlords continuing to provide that 
personal, one/one experience.  A cookie cutter approach is always going to hurt the availability of choices 
that tenants are looking for. 
We urge you to oppose LD 1490.   
Board of Directors of Central Maine Apartment Owners Association, Waterville, Maine   
Click Here for CMAOA Website and Contact Information  

