T H? LAW OFFIQE §’F’"" DANIEL]. BERNIER 
r C __..‘§ ;,I 
‘ ; _t_'. .;. __. ,_.__ _- 
M" _ LL 
May 15, 2023 
To The Distinguished Members of the Judiciary Committee 
From Daniel J. Bernier, representing the 
Central Maine Apartment Owners Association working in conjunction with the Rental 
Housing Alliance of Southern Maine, the Greater Bangor Area Owners’ and Managers ’ 
Association, the Capital Area Housing Association, and Lewiston Auburn Landlord 
Association. 
Re: LD 1490 An Act to Reduce Rental Housing Costs by Eliminating Additional Fees at or 
Prior to the Commencement of a Tenancy 
I am submitting this testimony in opposition to this legislation. 
The reality is we are not sure what this bill does. I do apologize I do not believe I can be 
at the hearing on this legislation due to Court scheduling. I would have liked to have listened to 
the sponsor’s intent. In three where it would say you can charge a fee to purchase an 
installation of a key and lock, we do not know of a landlord who charges a new moving in 
tenant for key and lock. It is common to charge a leaving tenant for the key and lock if they do 
not return the key. That is usually covered right in the lease that you would charge against the 
security deposit for the tenant’s failure to return the key. The legislation appears to be telling us 
we can charge a fee that nobody charges. 
’ 
From there, the legislation would limit landlords to charge ﬁrst month rent and a security 
deposit. I am wondering if that is getting an application fee which the committee addressed in 
other legislation- , and we have already had extension discussions of. I do not believe you want 
to eliminate application fees and I would refer the committee to discussions and testimony on 
other bills on this subject. - 
The other thing it might be doing is going after the practice of getting the ﬁrst month’s 
rent and last month’s rent up front. As an attorney, I generally do not like the practice when 
landlords get last month’s rent upfront, because it makes it harder to evict tenants. A thirty (30) 
day notice of eviction ends up being a sixty (60) day notice of eviction when landlords get last 
month’s rent up front. A thirty (30) day notice must expire after the last date through which the 
landlord has collected rent. So, if the tenant has paid their current month’s rent and they paid 
their last month’s rent you need to put the expiration date out further than thirty (30) days for 
the notice to be legal. Essentially getting last month’s rent up front works with honest tenants, 
Page 1 of2 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Waterville, Maine 04901 * t207.877;8969 * dan@bernierlawof ﬁce.oom
but it makes it harder to evict dishonest tenants. That being said, I do not think that is 
something the legislature should address, but rather lawyers like myself should continue 
educating landlords that getting last month’s rent up front is not in their best interest. 
The other issue that this may be addressing is landlords requiring tenants to buy renters 
insurance. I suggest that would be bad public policy. Often landlords will require renters’_ 
insurance to put up with something from a tenant that they might not otherwise rent to. For 
example, a lot of landlords if you have a dog, particularly certain breeds of dog, will let you 
have the dog if you get renters insurance. That way if the dog bites someone there is insurance 
to cover it. If you prohibit the practice of requiring renters’ insurance, landlords will simply not 
rent to people with dogs or other issues. 
We have seen a rise in tenants offering to pay several months’ rent up front. This is 
something tenants are offering, not landlords requiring. I have been a bit curious how many 
people I evict ﬁnd a new place to rent. In asking around, some of these evicted tenants will 
offer to pay six months’ rent up front if the landlord over looks their eviction. While I ﬁnd it 
interesting how the tenants are coming up with the money, I do not know that this is something 
the legislature should prohibit. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Very truly yours, 
4/ 
/ /, 
*lDanielJ.' 1er
/ 
DJ B/hb 
Page 2 of2 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Waterville, Maine 04901 * t207.877.8969 * dan@bemierlawof ﬁce.com
