"' Moine People's 
' 
Alliance 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of 
the Joint Standing Judiciary Committee: my name is Gina Morin, l am 
a resident of Auburn and a volunteer leader with the Maine People’s 
Alliance. Our 32,000 members stretch from Kittery to Fort Kent and we 
believe in a Maine where everyone has what they need, contributes 
what they can and no one is left behind. 
I'm here to testify in favor of LD 1490, “An Act to Reduce Rental 
Housing Costs by Eliminating Additional Fees at or Prior to the 
Commencement of Tenancy." 
Renters in Maine are struggling to pay the rapidly rising cost of 
housing in our state. According to Maine Housing, 41.5% of Maine 
renters are cost-burdened, paying more than 30% of their income on 
housing. More than two out of five of all renters in Maine earn less than 
50% of the Area Median Income. Approximately forty thousand renter 
households are extremely low-income, of whom nearly 60% are paying 
more than half their income on rent. These are primarily people who 
are working, older Mainers, and people with disabilities such as 
myself.‘ 
ln 2005, l moved to a mobile home park in Oxford. About a year later,a 
new person started managing the park. That is when all the write ups 
started. Attached to each write up was a fee. The fees ranged from $25 
to $65. I lived there for ll years and the write ups with attached fees 
never ceased. Before l left the trailer park l was so buried in feesl 
couldn't decipher whether I was paying rent or fees. Now, imagine 
being buried in fees before you even begin your tenancy. 
After living over four years in a motel room, ljust wanted a place to call 
home. lt didn't seem to make a difference when calling for apartments, 
they wanted application and other fees. That was the biggest barrier that 
stood between me and an apartment. I would still be living in that motel 
1 
https:/lnlihc.orglhousing-needs-by-state/maine
if it wasn't for a fellow volunteer. She offered me an apartment with no 
miscellaneous fees. This is how apartments should be rented. 
Housing is a human right. A safe, decent place to call home that folks 
can afford is the foundation for everything else in our lives. Landlord 
profit shouIdn’t be prioritized at the expense of someone’s ability to 
afford a safe, decent home. 
We ask this committee to see what a ban on miscellaneous fees could 
do for folks across Maine by voting ought to pass for LD 1490. 
Thank you.
