Re: LD 1490 - An Act to Reduce Rental Housing Costs by Eliminating Additional Fees at or 
Prior to the Commencement of Tenancy 
I oppose LD 1490. 
I am a manager in a rental housing business in the greater Waterville area. There are 
many reasons why landlords may wish to collect move-in fees which help to reduce vacancy 
or meet the unique needs of different properties and arrangements.
The most important fee in our business is the holding fee. We charge a holding fee to 
guarantee an applicant a spot in the unit once their application is approved. Once the 
application is approved, the holding fee is considered payment towards the first month’s rent. 
If the application is denied, the entire fee is refunded. This is good for both landlords and 
tenants – tenants who are serious about moving in get prime consideration for the unit, and 
landlords save time and costs by avoiding processing multiple applications. Prior to adopting 
this fee model, our business lost many, many hours processing applications for tenants who 
ultimately walked away to rent in other homes instead. Sometimes, our preferred applicants 
would make false promises and delay committing to the lease for 2-3 weeks before ultimately 
ghosting us. Our units would go empty for excess of a month in some cases. This fee frees up
our time and energy for rehabbing additional units, rather than sitting at our computers calling 
and emailing applicants. This helps to reduce costs and helps to keep rent prices down. As 
this bill is written, I am afraid that we can no longer collect this fee even though it counts 
towards the tenant’s first-month’s rent. It is important to keep it as a fee instead of “first 
month’s rent” so we are not legally obligated to return it. If we are legally obligated to return it 
if the tenant ultimately decides not to sign the lease, then there is no incentive for the tenant 
to be honest about their intentions to rent from us. 
There are other move in fees that landlords may charge for a variety of reasons. If, for 
example, a tenant chooses to delay move-in, we may charge a fee to mow the lawn in their 
absence. This keeps the property nice and helps to protect the property from vandalism and 
squatters, as an unkempt appearance signals that a property is abandoned. Some landlords 
charge a pet fee at move-in to cover the additional damages that pets inevitably incur. This 
additional fee makes it feasible for landlords to allow pets, as the costs of repairing claw 
marks and remediating pet odors can be significant. Maybe some landlords provide off-street 
parking for a fee in winter, or a one-time garage-use fee, or a one-time septic pumping fee, or 
a laundry fee, or a one-time professional cleaning fee, etc etc that some tenants can opt into 
or out of depending on the tenant’s needs and desires separate from the monthly rent. 
Please vote “no” on this bill – I feel this blanket ban on move-in fees will most likely 
overlook the nuances that allow landlords and tenants to negotiate the terms of move-in that 
best serve their interests and the unique needs of different areas, different buildings, and 
different people. 
Jamie Nickerson
Fairfield Maine
