Legal S€I'V1C€S 
Elderly Legal. 1-a~;:1> for Ma.ine"s 5eniC)1‘S 
May 13, 2023 
Testimony of John Brautigam, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in support of LD 1490 — An Act 
to Reduce Rental Housing Costs by Eliminating Additional Fees at or Prior to the Commencement 
of Tenancy. 
Good aﬁzernoon, Senator Carney and Representative Moonen. On behalf of Legal Services for the 
Elderly I Would like to offer brief comments in support of LD 1490. Legal Services for the Elderly 
(LSE) is a nonproﬁt legal services organization with the mission of providing free legal assistance 
to Maine’s older adults when their basic human needs are threatened. Next year we will mark 50 
years of service. 
We recently testiﬁed before the Select Committee on Housing that there is not one aspect to the 
housing crisis in Maine, but several. One aspect of the crisis that We see most vividly is that those 
challenged by the loss of housing are having great difﬁculty making the transition to a new rental. 
Their difﬁculties go beyond the unprecedented increase in rent. The sheer number of applicants 
competing for the same rental unit ensures a long search that requires an enormous amount of 
energy and is sure to produce multiple disappointments. They must bear all this With the pressure to 
have a roof over their head by a date certain. 
But one other challenge stands out: the difﬁculty of saving up enough funds to afford the transition. 
The initial payment required by a landlord can add up to far more than the disposable funds that 
many individuals or families are able to accumulate. Sometimes a tenant can roll over a security 
deposit from a prior lease, but not always. 
The requirement of large payments at commencement of a tenancy has far-reaching consequences. 
It could exacerbate the already precarious ﬁnancial situation faced by many low-income older 
renters, deepening inequalities in our housing system. In the Worst case, a large up-front payment 
becomes a de facto disquali ﬁer for low-income applicants. 
For example, a two-bedroom rental currently listed in Lewiston requires $1875 for the ﬁrst month’s 
rent plus $3750 for a security deposit for a total payment of $5625. 
Many Maine families simply do not have any savings. Typically, more than sixty percent of 
Mainers have $1,000 or less in savings: 
LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC. 
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333 
(207) 621-0087 Fax (207) 621-0742 
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle 
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/T TY) 
www.mainelse.0rg
May l8, 2023 page2 LD 1490 
$0 in savings: 46.15% 
$1-$1,000 in savings: 15.38% 
$1,000 or more in savings: 38.46%‘ 
The ﬁgures are even lower for women and racial or ethnic minorities. 
A rental may be prohibitive where a person has next to no cash on hand and is asked to deposit 
upfront costs that may add up to thousands of dollars. As a result, many are left with no choice 
but to continue living in substandard or unsafe conditions, perpetuating a cycle of housing 
instability and compromising their well-being. I do not know of statistics showing how often 
tenants move from one rental to another, but we suspect that it is near an all-time high. There are 
more and more evictions and terminations for economic reasons as landlords attempt to improve 
the ﬁnancial performance of their properties. To the extent that turnover increases, there are 
more.renters facing these obstacles. 
For years our landlord-tenant law has required no more than the equivalent of two months of rent 
as a security deposit. This reﬂects a public policy that believes larger upfront payments would 
unduly burden tenants and especially those older renters who may be facing health issues or 
other challenges associated with aging. Their limited mobility and increased medical costs may lead to higher living expenses and ever-tightening financial constraints. Some leave their 
apartment because they simply can no longer afford the rent. The resulting stress and anxiety 
ﬁirther erode ﬁnancial stability and have a profound impact on their overall quality of life, 
exacerbating health conditions and hindering their ability to age with dignity and security. It 
becomes avicious cycle. 
The amount of rent initially paid has not been regulated but paying more than one month ata 
time was not a common practice. Some landlords also charged a fee for changing the lock. 
Although these levels strained many tenants, it has worked well for landlords. Unfortunately, we now know that a practice common in other states of charging two months’ rent as the initial rent 
payment is becoming more prevalent in Maine. This bill would prevent this practice from 
becoming the expected norm. Pre-payment of a second month’s rent or additional fees such as “move in fees,” “administrative fees,” or “cleaning fees” are not necessary and would not be allowed if LD 1490 becomes law. 
It is our responsibility as a society to ensure that all individuals, regardless of their 
socioeconomic status, can ﬁnd and maintain safe and affordable housing, allowing them to live 
their years with dignity and peace of mind. We believe that it is fair and reasonable to cap the 
costs of commencing a rental at the level that does not disadvantage landlords and gives 
everyone a fair chance to ﬁnd a place to call home. LD 1490 strikes this balance. 
We support LD 1490 and thank Representative Kessler for bringing this proposal forward. Thank you. 
1 
https://www.gobankingrates.com/saving-money/budgeting/how-much-savings-americans-have-every-state/ Even with inﬂation, these 2019 ﬁgures are probably similar in 2023.
2
The website wwW.nolo.co111/legal~encyc1opedia includes the following compilation of state 
security deposit laws? 
State Security Deposit Limits 
State Limit 
Alabama One month's rent, except for pet deposits, deposits to cover undoing tenant's 
alterations, deposits to cover tenant activities that pose increased liability 
risks. 
Alaska Two months‘ rent, unless rent exceeds $2,000 per month. Landlord may ask 
for an additional month's rent as deposit for a pet that is not a service anima 
but may use it only to remedy pet damage. l. 
Arizona One and one-half months‘ rent 
Arkansas Two months‘ rent, but this limit does not apply to landlords who own 5 or 
fewer properties, unless the landlord has hired a third party to manage the 
property. 
California Two months’ rent (unfurnished); three months’ rent (furnished). If the tenant 
is an active service member, no more than one month's rent (unfurnished) or 
two months‘ rent (furnished). Add extra one-half month's rent for waterbed. 
Colorado No statutory limit 
Connecticut Two months‘ rent (tenant under 62 years of age); one month's rent (tenant 
62 years of age or older). Tenants who paid a deposit in excess of one 
month's rent, who then turn 62 years old, are entitled, upon request, toa 
refund of the amount that exceeds one month's rent. 
Delaware One month's rent on leases for one year or more. For month to month 
tenancies, no limit for the first year, but after that, the limit is one month's 
rent (at the expiration of one year, landlord must give tenant a credit for any 
deposit held by the landlord that is in excess of one month's rent). No limit 
for furnished units. Tenant may offer to supply a surety bond in lieu of or in 
conjunction with a deposit, which landlord may elect to receive. 
District of 
Columbia One month's rent 
Florida No statutory limit 
Georgia No statutory limit 
Hawaii One month's rent. Landlord may require an additional one month's rent as 
security deposit for tenants who keep a pet. 
Idaho No statutory limit 
Illinois No statutory limit 
Indiana No statutory limit 
lowa Two months’ rent 
2 https://www.nolo.com/|egal —encyclopedia/chart —security-deposit-limits-state-29020.html
Kansas * One month's rent (unfurnished); one and one—half month's rent (furnished); 
for pets, add extra one-half month's rent. 
Kentucky No statutory limit 
Louisiana No statutory limit 
Maine Two months‘ rent 
Maggland Two months‘ rent 
Massachusetts One month's renti 
Michigan One and one-half months‘ rent 
Minnesota No statutory limit. if landlord collects a "prelease deposit" and subsequently 
rents to tenant, landlord must apply the prelease deposit to the security 
deposit. 
Mississippi No statutory limit 
Missouri Two months’ rent 
Montana No statutory limit 
Nebraska One month's rent (no pets); one and one-quarter months‘ rent (pets). 
Nevada Three months‘ rent; if both landlord and tenant agree, tenant may usea 
surety bond for all or part of the deposit. 
New Hampshire One month's rent or $100, whichever is greater; no limit when landlord and 
tenant share facilities. V 
New Jersey One and one-half month's rent. Any additional security deposit, collected 
annually, may be no greater than 10% of the current security deposit. 
New Mexico One month's rent (for rental agreement of less than one year); no limit for 
leases of one year or more. 
New York One month's limit for units other than those subject to the City Rent and 
Rehabilitation Law or the Emergency Housing Rent Control Law. 
North Carolina One and one-half months‘ rent for month—to—month rental agreements; two 
months‘ rent if term is longer than two months; may add an additional 
"reasonable" nonrefundable pet deposit. 
North Dakota One month's rent. If tenant has a pet, an additional pet deposit of up to 
$2,500 or two months‘ rent, whichever is greater. To encourage renting to 
persons with records of felony convictions, landlords may charge these 
applicants up to two months‘ rent as security. Applicants who have had 
courtjudgments entered against them "for violating the terms of a previous 
rental agreement" can also be charged up to two months‘ rent (this appears 
to refer to prior evictions and might not apply to evictions based on conduct 
not prohibited by the rental agreement). 
Ohio No statutory limit 
Oklahoma No statutory limit 
Oregon No statutory limit. Landlord may not impose or increase deposit within first 
year unless parties agree to modify the rental agreement to allow for a pet 
or other cause, and the imposition or increase relates to that modification.
Pennsylvania Two months‘ rent for first year of renting; one month's rent during second 
and subsequent years of renting. 
Rhode Island One month's rent 
South Carolina No statutory limit 
South Dakota One month's rent (higher deposit may be charged if special conditions posea 
danger to maintenance of the premises). 
Tennessee No statutory limit 
Texas No statutory limit 
Utah No statutory limit 
Vermont No statutory limit 
Virginia Two months’ rent. Alternatively, landlord may permit a tenant to provide 
damage insurance coverage in an amount not more than two months‘ rent in 
lieu of the payment of a security deposit. The damage insurance coverage 
must meet the requirements listed in Virginia Code Annotated sections 55.1- 
1226(i)-(K). 
Washington Landlords must allow tenants to pay the deposit and fees in installments 
(does not apply if the deposit and any nonrefundable fees are less than 25% 
of the monthly rent, or the landlord has not demanded the last month's rent). 
Tenants with tenancies of three months or more may pay in three equal and 
consecutive installments, beginning at the start of the tenancy; two 
installments for shorter tenancies. installment schedules must be written 
and signed. Does not apply to holding deposits (which may not be more than 
25% of the first month's rent). 
West Virginia No statutory limit 
Wisconsin No statutory limit 
Wyoming No statutory limit
