5/17/2023  
RE: LD 1490  An Act to Reduce Rental Housing Costs by Eliminating Additional Fees at or Prior 
to the Commencement of Tenancy.  
 
Committee on Judiciar y, 
I’m opposed to LD 1490.  
Once a n applicant is ready to secure a unit, we collect a holding fee not  to exceed o ne month ’s 
rent. This fee gets converted to the first month ’s rent once their lease begins. Before we 
implemented  holding fees years  ago, we had a lot of  accepted  applicants play games with us. 
They would tell us they were going to take the unit  only to wait several days and tell us they 
found something else.  We would waste hours  doing backg round che cks and references as well.   
In the meantime,  we could not move forward with another applicant and sometimes we ’d lose a 
whole month ’s rent because  of this.  
It's my understanding  that it’s important to call a holding fee, a fee , and not a deposit . If we 
charge d a holding deposit , we would need to refund that money should the new tenant  decide to  
no longer move forward with t aking the home  as it would fall under security deposit  law and 
therefore be refund able. If we did not char ge a holding fee , there would be nothing to hold the 
incoming tenant to the unit.  
We have n ever had an applicant pay the holding fee and then lose that money. If applicants are 
ready to put mon ey down, they always  move fo rward with the ir lease. If for some reason we 
refused the applicat ion afte r they g ave us any holding fee money, we fully re fund that amount a s 
well. Once the holding fee is converted to the fir st month ’s rent, we would be in compliance with 
this proposal  as we really only charge the first month ’s rent and the security deposit . The holding 
fee does not generate any profit for our business . We just use it as a tool so that the 
applicant /incoming t enant  has skin in t he game.  
Based on read ing this proposal , it is unclear if a holding fee  would be legal going forward  if this 
passes. This would increase our vacancy  cost and time vetting applica nts. During a housing 
shortage increas ing our vacanc y rate, would be counterproductive.  
I don’t see the need for this red tape that prevents housing providers from determining the fee 
structure they need to stay in busin ess. For example, what if a single -family home has a septic 
tank? Perhaps one would charge the fee to pump the septic tank each year at the start of the 
tenancy  to ensure that it was paid . Perhaps the house has a pool or professionally manicured  
garden , so they have an annual maintenance charge to keep those great property features.  
Although  we don ’t charge move in fees for pets and instead  charge a monthly fee for pets , some 
housing providers  charge a one-time fee to allow pets into units. In some  ways this makes sense  
because on ce the pet is allowed into the unit the d amage is already done.  The cleaning and 
damage to the unit will be increased with a pet and it may not be possible to rent to a non -pet 
owner in the future due to pet odors  that linger . I believe housing providers should be a ble to 
choose  the fee structure  that works for them and their resident s to make hou sing pets make s ense 
for both parties.  
As you can see this bill creates a blanket ban that may work in some  situations, but it will cause 
issues in other situations  that I ’ve outl ined and in situations  that we cannot foresee. We don’t 
need more anti -renta l housing legislation. Instead , we need legislation that will increase the 
number of housing units in our state. V ote NO!  
 
Regards,  
Justin Giroux  
Manager, Habitat For ME LLC  
Fairfield, ME  
