Kenneth LaVoie
Southern Angel Properties & CMAOA
LD 1490
We are Deb and Ken LaVoie, owners of Southern Angel Properties which was 
founded in 2009 and has owned and operated as many as fifty-two residential rental 
units in Waterville & Winslow, Maine. My wife and I have been landlords in this 
community since 2009 and are the “unofficial” preferred rental agency for two local 
universities and enjoy one of the more favorable reputations of housing providers in 
this area. I believe these “credentials”, albeit subjective, lend above-average 
credibility to our opinions & perspective and I thank you in advance for your 
consideration. 
The purpose of this piece is to give what I hope is fair, reasonable and balanced 
perspective and context to the recent legislative efforts in regards to regulating the 
housing industry; in particular LDs 1490.
Even as a conservative voting, capitalism loving businessman, I recognize the need 
for some regulation. Let’s face it: As landlords, we’re asking our “customers” (The 
residents of our buildings) to fork over about a third of their income in exchange for 
putting a roof over their head. That cannot be ignored, yet we cannot regulate away 
every compelling story or complaint. Additionally, land lording has many unique 
stresses and risks that set it apart from other industries. It can be lucrative but the 
stress, unpredictability, hard work and dealing with the (hopefully occasional) 
unsavory character is such that a government is advised to help make the barrier to 
entry and continued ownership easier, not harder.  
Unfortunately, landlords are at the helm in an industry where a good percentage of 
their prospective customers lie to them to become customers. Often they’ve been 
evicted from another place, leaving thousands of dollars in cleaning and other 
damages. In fact, we ourselves are owed more than $55,000 spread over forty tenants,
consisting of unpaid rent, cleaning, painting, smoke and pet-urine mitigation, and 
other damages. 
The dangers of placing limits on rent increase & move-in costs: (i.e. proposing that 
landlords cannot increase rent more than 10%, or a certain percentage more than the 
CPI, for example): Many of us small landlords who value long-term tenants have 
deliberately foregone rent increases for multiple years. Additionally, any savvy 
property investor will tell you that it’s wise to budget approximately 8% per year for 
vacancy, to account for move-outs, vacancies or evictions. When a resident stays put 
for a decade, they’ve (potentially) saved us 8% per year for 10 years. Our response 
(assuming the tenant is desirable otherwise) is to return part of that savings to the 
tenant by foregoing (at least some) rent increases.  We often go 5-7 years without 
increasing rent of good, stable, tenants who pay on time. We have a nice couple 
who’ve lived with us in 3 different apartments over a decade. They’re paying $765 
per month for their 2-bedroom apartment in a building where we just rented a similar 
apartment for $1,200. If we were to catch wind of an annual limit on rent increases, I 
can promise you that the first thing we’d do is to immediately raise the 
aforementioned couple’s rent by at least $200 per month, so that we aren’t potentially 
caught in a situation where are hands are tied in bringing that unit up to market rent. 
As for limiting the funds a landlord can collect upfront, one must bear in mind that 
up-front collections are a profoundly necessary risk mitigation strategy. Again, 
landlords have very few tools at their disposal to offset the risk of a non-paying, 
bothersome or destructive tenant. Here in Central Maine, I don’t think it’s an 
exaggeration to say that 1 out of 3-4 applicants are high risk (i.e. insufficient income 
or financial history, record of judgements, unpaid debt, criminal history, etc.) That’s a
25%-33% of applicants. Our two tools for mitigating those risks are relatively quick 
evictions, the ability to craft our own leases with adaptive language, and the “paying 
down” of that risk by up-front collections of at least 3x the monthly rent. We 
ourselves collect first month’s rent, then a security deposit equal to about 1.5 month’s 
rent. This amount of security allows us to mitigate a full month’s unpaid rent as well 
as cleaning and touch-up painting or repairs. Many landlords collect first, last and 
security. Frankly I don’t think that’s enough in many cases. 
I do understand the issue of sudden large rent increases that sometimes happen when 
buildings are sold to more “business minded” landlords, especially absentee out of 
state landlords. I have to ask whether or not this is a widespread problem that justifies 
legislation which potentially single handedly eliminates the desirability of owning 
rental property. I don’t make such a statement lightly.  
The first thing that happens when any law is passed that poses a threat to profits is 
that the owners of that business raise rates to mitigate the damage done by the 
regulation. Laws are to society what medications are to the human body: They are 
designed to fix a problem but often create two or three other problems as a result.
LD 1904 - An Act to Enact the Maine Fair Chance Housing Act. I found the verbiage 
a bit unclear, but my basic understanding is that we cannot use past criminal history 
as a criteria on suitability until the applicant has passed on all other fronts (for 
example, the applicant makes enough income, sufficient credit history, etc.)  I don’t 
believe the typical high school educated landlord will be able to properly translate the 
current wording into a clear and trackable best practice, but more concerning is that it 
appears to remove a very reasonable and effective risk management strategy from our 
toolbox. First, I’m very keen to the fact that many people make mistakes, have their 
brush with the legal system, and then go on to lead very productive lives. But there’s 
an old saying, “History doesn’t always repeat itself, but it tends to rhyme!” People 
don’t generally commit and become convicted of a felony or handful of 
misdemeanors by chance. There’s generally a pattern of behavior that’s well 
established and doesn’t go away. Additionally, that history usually contains a dozen 
or so incidents that were overlooked or missed. People can change; they usually don’t.
To tell a property owner that they have to do business with someone who has a 
history of violence, theft or other legal trouble is unconscionable. It forces 
uncomfortable--even unsafe--situations on people that they didn’t sign up for. 
I thank you all for reading my testimony. I would be honored and happy to be 
consulted in the future in any advisory capacity. 
Sincerely
Ken & Deb LaVoie
Owners, Southern Angel Properties LLC
manager@sangelproperties.com
(207) 873-9321
www.sangelproperties.com

