LD 1798
An Act to Support School Choice by Establishing Empowerment
Scholarship Accounts 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs,
My name is Abigail Beal of Cherryfield, and I am here in opposition of LD 1798. 
I object to this bill for many reasons.  I have a great aversion to government subsidies.  It all comes 
from the sweat and toil of hard-working taxpayers who may or may not approve of the way those 
monies are used.
But, setting that aside, I'd like to draw your attention to Section 4 of this bill where it discusses 
oversight and specifies that the Treasurer of State would review all expenditures from the 
empowerment scholarship program accounts to make sure they are in accordance with the requirements
of this bill.  
This means that automatically, right from the get-go, the government would suddenly begin reviewing 
all purchases we make with the money we receive and watching how we spend the funds they would 
give us.  
It makes sense to me that the government would want to do that, seeing they are in charge of handing 
out the money.  What doesn't make sense to me is why this idea would be viewed as a good thing for 
those of us who have purposefully chosen to be free and independent from the government school 
system.
The oversight requirement means that if we as homeschoolers start taking government funds, we would
be putting ourselves directly under the thumb of the government.  In essence, we would be choosing to 
become beholden and answerable to the state as to the education of our children, and I can only 
imagine that the restrictions would grow greater and more intrusive as time goes on.
This is dangerous territory.  It puts our hard-earned freedoms at stake, and it's just not worth it.  With 
government money does come government oversight, and we must refute and refuse that at every turn 
if we would retain the liberties we now enjoy.
It is for these reasons and many more that I urge you to oppose LD 1798.  Thank you for your time.
