STATE or MAINE ‘1* DEPARTMENT on EDUCATION 
-,, 23 STATE HOUSE STATION ' 
AUGUSTA, ME 04333-0023 
11 Q). 
Erﬁﬂ 
IAN ET MILLS FENDER MAKIN GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
May 8, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Senate Chair 
Representative Brennan, House Chair 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs . 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Distinguished Members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee:i 
As a Whole, bills that propose to fund schools with an increasingly limited scope of public input are 
detrimental to the long-standing and successful democratic process of determining local school budgets. 
Each bill presented today (LDsl74l, 1798, 183 8, 1841, 1860) proposes to reduce funding for public 
schools in favor of the limited interest of private choice. Lowering the amount of subsidy for local 
public schools would reduce the state share of local public education, thereby placing more of the 
burden on our Maine cities and towns. Diverting public funds to private schools in this manner reduces 
local control over education and accountability of public tax dollars. In addition, diverting subsidy to 
private schools severely diminishes the ability of Maine public schools to provide equitable access to 
high quality education for all students. 
The Essential Programs and Services (EPS) formula determines both the state and local share of funding 
needed for each school administrative unit (SAU) as determined by the total cost of public education. 
The funding formula is designed to respond to public school student needs. In the last biemiium, 
$68,677,546 Was diverted from subsidy to the local communities in order to support the charter and 
magnet schools in Maine. This funding is subtracted from the total cost of education before the EPS 
formula calculates schools and state shares for SAUs. Diverting these funds to accounts speciﬁcally 
designated for private schools which may not be approved for the receipt of public tuition creates a 
dearth of funding for Maine’s public schools and jeopardizes the environment of access and equity that 
Maine strives for. Currently, 45% of General Purpose Aid (GPA) is the tax burden that local 
communities contribute to the education of their local students. If funding is diverted away ﬁ'0m subsidy 
to support local communities in supporting their local schools the local school would either need to cut 
programming, services, or staffing, or else the local taxpayers would have to contribute signiﬁcantly 
more to maintain schools at current operational levels. 
Using public fuds for private school tuition limits parental and community input and oversight of 
education. Because private schools do not have a school board, parents and communities do not have the 
same amount of access or control over the decisions relating to curriculum or budget initiatives. Private 
schools are not required to participate in the State accountability system, nor are they required to follow 
the Maine Learning Results. Further, private schools do not provide the same amount of transparency in 
their financial disclosures. When tax dollars are invested to support students at private schools, the local 
taxpayers lose voice and control over school budgets, as private schools are not required to holda 
OFFICES LOCATED AT THE BURTON M. CROSS STATE OFFICE BUILDING AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER 
PHONE (207) 624-6600' 
FAX: (207) 624-6700 ITY USERS CALL MAINE RELAY 711 ONLINE: WWW .MAINE.GOV/ DOE
I STATE OF MAINE "‘.'?I 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION i 
\- I 
23 STATE HOUSE STATION 1‘ 
_ .4 I
_ AUGUSTA, ME 04333 0023 
*lnm'¥~ 
IANET MILLS FENDER MAKIN GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
referendum to pass their budgets, they don’t have to disclose line items and costs in a transparent 
manner, and they do not involve taxpayer input into their budgeting decisions. 
Diverting subsidy from local schools may create a gap in access and opportunity for Maine’s neediest 
students. In addition to the supports and protections provided by IDEA and MU SER, Maine public 
schools work with students and parents to ensure that they have the resources they need to succeed. 
Reallocating funding from public schools to private schools will undermine the ability of schools to 
address the needs of our most vulnerable students. The Department of Education remains committed to 
supporting equitable access to a high-quality education for all students. These bills jeopardize that 
promise. 
The Department will be available to provide additional information on and respond to any questions 
during the upcoming Work session. 
Sincerely 
Courtney Belolan" 
Director of Polipiy and Government 
OFFICES LOCATED AT THE BURTON NI. CROSS STATE OFFICE BUILDING AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER PHONE (207) 624-6600 FAX: (207) 624~67O0 TTY USERS CALL MAINE RELAY 711 ONLINE: VVWW.MAIN'E.GOV/DOE
