Edward Green 
337 Hatchet Mountain Rd. 
Hope, Maine 04847 
 
RE: LDs 1798 and 1860  
 
Greetings Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, 
Please amend LDs 1798 and 1860 to specifically exclude homeschoolers. 
Simply put, School Choice/Education Savings Accounts, or ESAs, allow parents to withdraw their 
children from public schools and receive a deposit of public funds into a savings account to be 
used for multiple educational purposes.  
It would take little time to create a long list of the possible abuses that would occur (and have 
already occurred in other states).  
Many homeschoolers are opposed to the public funding of homeschooling and wish to be 
specifically excluded from any legislation seeking to include them. Excellent and affordable 
resources are widely available in the homeschool marketplace. Many are available for free. 
Today's homeschool community is vastly diverse. Homeschoolers are well represented on both 
the left and the right, politically. They hold many different philosophical beliefs and are from a 
wide range of backgrounds. When you have met one homeschooler, you have only met one 
homeschooler. Yet, there is a common thread. They love their children and want what is best 
for them. They are driven by that love alone, not by money in their bank account.  
Once the motivation becomes about the bank account, fraud enters in. Motivation, ethical 
practices, and the use of funds all become less pure.  
To maintain purity of intent, we urge you to specifically exclude homeschoolers in any 
legislation seeking to publicly fund private education. Homeschooling thrives because of the 
muscle, endurance, sacrifice, creativity, and ingenuity of the families who have made it their 
choice in good conscience.  
As Maine lawmakers, we urge you to carry this torch for the Maine homeschool community as 
you consider School Choice/ESA legislation today and in the future. Please choose to stand for 
the families in Maine who have worked for decades (at times in the face of great adversity) to 
preserve this successful and viable educational option for their children.  
Thank you for your time and consideration and thank you for the arduous work you do as you 
serve the people of Maine.  
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Edward Green, President 
 
 
