Testimony of Emmeline Beal
Against LDs 1741, 1798, 1838, 1841, and 1860
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Committee on Education and Cultural
Affairs,
I am Emmeline Beal of Cherryfield, and I am testifying in opposition to L Ds 1741, 1798, 1838,
1841, and 1860.  I am grateful that my parents home educated me for my entire childhood through my
graduation in 2013.  Since then, in addition to college-level studies and writing projects, I have tutored
homeschooled students  in  various subjects,  and  in the future I  hope to  have  and  home  educate
children of my own.
Years ago I heard a message by a homeschooling mother about wisely stewarding the limited
time entrusted to us each day.  Though the message concerned scheduling, not school choice, the part
that I best remember applies to both.  The speaker exhorted other mothers to guard their families'
time from myriad activities—even those suggested by well-meaning friends—that sounded appealing
but would actually distract and detract from what the household was supposed to be accomplishing.
She had her listeners practice a gracious but firm response:  "Thank you, but no, that would just not be
best for my family."
That is my response to the bills in question this afternoon.  As for school choice, I absolutely
agree that parents have the right and responsibility to decide where, how, and what their children
should be taught.  But I do not think that they should expect public funding for it.
As a Christian, I should not be forced to pay for my neighbors' children to be educated in atheism
and other ideologies contrary to my beliefs.  Likewise, my atheist neighbors should not be forced to
subsidize my future children's Christian education, which would be contrary to  their beliefs.  Two
wrongs don't make a right, and Thomas Jefferson w rote, "To compel a man to furnish contributions of
money for the propagation of opinions which he disbelieves and abhors is sinful and tyrannical.” 1
Though the sponsors of these bills may have good intentions and a real desire to help Maine
families, I would posit that this is not the way to do it.  Whether the proposal is call ed education
savings  accounts,  empowerment  scholarship  accounts,  hope  accounts,  educational  opportunity
accounts,  school  vouchers,  or  something  else,  the  net  result  is  more  governmental  control  over
education.   If  homeschoolers  acc ept  taxpayer  funding,  they  are  willingly  submitting  to  increased
oversight and restrictions that will likely tighten over time.  Within only a few years the state could
mandate what curricula we use, from what viewpoint we must teach, and what immunizations our
children must receive in order to benefit from these accounts.  Instead, we as homeschoolers want to
remain free and privately funded, not become dependent on state dollars.  Groups such as HSLDA
Compassion2 already exist to help homeschoolers who are struggling financially, and many individuals
and families will gladly come alongside one another as well.
In Maine we are blessed with great homeschool freedom due to God's grace and to the sacrifices
of those who have gone before us.  Galatians 5:1 says, "Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith
Christ hath made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage."
I  hope  many  other  Mainers  will  join  me  in  saying,  "Thank  you,  but  no,  state  funding  of
homeschooling would just not be best for our families."  Please vote "Ought Not to Pass" on these bills.
I appreciate your time and consideration.
1from the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, https://www.monticello.org/research-education/thomas-jefferson-
encyclopedia/virginia-statute-religious-freedom/
2https://hslda.org/community/grants-for-homeschooling
