ifvg 
i; a" 
eta‘ 
James Libby, Ph.D. THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 22 131st Legishture Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator James D. Libby 
Sponsor of L.D. 1798, “An Act to Support School Choice Empowerment by Establishing 
Empowerment Scholarship Accounts ” 
Public Hearing, Thursday, May 8, 2023 
Senator Raﬁferty, Representative Brennan, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, 
My name is Jim Libby, and I am a State Senator representing Senate District # 22, comprised of the 
towns of Naples, Sebago, Baldwin, and Standish in Cumberland County; Hiram and Porter in Oxford 
County; and, Limington, Limerick, Cornish, Parsonsﬁeld, Newﬁeld, Acton, and Shapleigh, in the 
County of York. t 
It is my honor to bring to your attention the contents of L.D. 1798, “An Act to Support School Choice 
Empowerment by Establishing Empowerment Scholarship Accounts. ” 
This bill directs the Treasurer of State to establish and the Department of Education to administer 
individual empowerment scholarship accounts, based on similar accounts established in the state of 
Arizona, which may be used by parents to pay for the education of their children outside of the public 
school system, including private schools or online schools. An additional, yet-to-be amendment to 
this document would exempt homeschoolers from the bill. The funding for these empowerment 
scholarship accounts comes from shifting 90% of the essential programs and services funding that 
would otherwise be provided by the State and by the school administrative unit for each child into an 
empowerment scholarship account. The bill speciﬁes what educational expenditures are permitted, 
including additional expenditures for children with disabilities, and provides for review of spending 
from the accounts. 
An Empowerment Scholarship Account (ESA) program allows parents who are not happy with their 
local schools to “opt out” of public district and receive a portion of the public funding deposited into 
an account (called a class wallet) for deﬁned uses including private school tuition, online education, 
education therapies, private tutoring or future educational expenses. This program is a 90% program 
as stated earlier. 
Arizona was the ﬁrst state in the nation to authorize this program, and since its inception, it has 
become a “universal ” program. All students in Arizona are eligible to participate — over 53,000 
students at present. 
Allowable expenses for all students include (from Arizona DOE website): 
~ Tuition or fees at a qualiﬁed school 
0 Textbooks required by a qualiﬁed school
Tutoring and teaching services provided by an individual or facility accredited by a state, 
regional or 
national accrediting organization 
Tuition or fees online learning program (non-public) 
Fees for nationally standardized norm referenced achievement test, an advanced placement 
exam, 
or any exams related to college or university admission 
Tuition or fees at an eligible postsecondary institution 
Textbooks required by a postsecondary institution 
Fees to manage the Arizona empowerment scholarship account 
Services provided by a public school, including individual classes and extracurricular programs 
Insurance or surety bond payments 
Uniforms purchased from or through a qualiﬁed school 
Public transportation services from the qualiﬁed student’s residence to a qualiﬁed school, in 
Which the student is enrolled 
Transportation network services 
Rideshares 
Commuter pass 
Computer hardware and technological devices (primarily used for an educational purpose) 
Calculators 
Personal computers 
Laptops 
Tablet devices 
Microscopes 
Telescopes 
Printers 
Curricula and Supplementary Materials 
CURRICULA 
Curricula for all educational subjects 
Textbooks (including audio/ digital/USB) 
Supplemental Materials (see the two sections below on what requires documentation 
and What does not) 
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERLALS (N o documentation needed) 
All reasonable education-related expenses will be allowed. The below list is considered 
educational and does not require any documentation, to be purchased. Please keep in mind 
that each student’s ESA account is funded for the individual student’s education. This list is not 
exhaustive but is intended to provide examples of What is allowable without documentation. 
Books (including audio, digital, players) / Coloring books / Magazines 
Educational workbooks / Planners / Calendars 
Dictionaries / Thesaurus 
Educational ﬂash cards / Prompt cue cards 
Periodic tables 
Writing utensils (pens, markers, pencils, highlighters, crayons, chalk) 
Art supplies/ kits — Education based 
School supplies (index cards, poster boards, paper, folders, binders, notebooks, staplers, 
scissors, tape, glue, eraser, white out, sharpener, educational poster, small desk/ reading 
lamps, pencil grips, bookmarks, envelopes, rubber bands, dividers, hole punch) 
Backpack / Lunch bags 
Atlases / Maps / Globes 
STEM Kits/ Items (Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics)
In addition to the Allowable Expenses for All ESA Students list, students that qualify for an ESA with STEAM Kits/ Items (Science, technology, engineering, the arts, and mathematics) 
Educational kits 
Manipulatives: items that help with counting, time, measurement, shapes, addition, etc. 
math cubes, Legos, dominoes, blocks, shapes, etc.) 
Calculators (standard, graphing, scientiﬁc, etc.) 
Compass / Navigation / Protractors / Rulers 
Educational DVDs and CDs 
Audio / Visual players 
Physical Education — Sporting items / Gym memberships 
Microscopes / Telescopes 
Board games / Strategy games / Puzzles 
Timers / Clocks / Watches 
Dry erase boards / Easels 
Bulletin board and accessories 
Single tickets for educational events (zoos, science or art centers, museums, plays, 
ballet, orchestra, musicals, etc.) 
Educational subscriptions 
Educational software & apps 
School Desk (Reasonable and proportionate to qualiﬁed student’s size) 
School Chair (Reasonable and proportionate to qualiﬁed student’s size) 
Small bookshelf 
Desk organizer / Small ﬁle drawer 
School Mat / Rug 
Printing and binding services (for educational items for qualiﬁed student) 
Personal-sized laminators and supplies 
Computer Accessory Items (warranty, protective cases, chargers, mouse, stylus, 
keyboard, small speakers, etc.) 
a disability, are eligible to use ESA funds for the following: 
The idea behind this bill is thatbﬁrmot improve Maine schools until We subject them to competition Assistive Technology 
Educational/Psychological Evaluations 
Educational Therapies and Services 
Paraprofessional 
Life Skills / Vocational 
Associated Good 
Items on Qualifying Documentation 
Any item that is listed in the student’s documentation from their qualiﬁed examiner and/ or 
qualiﬁed service provider is an allowable expense. 
Providing parents with school choice will quickly hone schools and make them far more customer 
friendly. 
I appreciate the time you have granted me today, and will remain to respond to questions.
