,, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
lg, AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Colleen Ni: Madigan TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
colleen. 13 Gilman Street 
Waterville, ME 04901 
Phone: (207) 692-7143 
madi2an@le2islature.maine.gov 
Testimony of Rep. Colleen Madigan introducing 
LD 637, An Act to Promote the Use of Free Annual Wellness Visits 
by Ensuring Proper Medical Billing 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Good afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee. My name is Colleen Madigan and I live 
in Waterville. I am here today to present LD 637, An Act to Promote the Use of Free Annual 
Wellness Visits by Ensuring Proper Medical Billing. 
This bill comes out of a concem expressed by a constituent. He has employer-sponsored health 
insurance and a free annual Wellness visit is part of that plan. However, he received a bill for this 
visit. So, he brought the problem to me. We discussed it. It didn't seem to be a problem with his 
insurance. The visit was covered as part of his plan. The doctor knew it was his free annual 
wellness visit, so that wasn't the problem either. 
I started talking to other people about this. A few reported that the same had happened to them. 
They thought it was a depression screening that triggered the bill. To be honest, I am shocked 
that a basic depression screening is not considered part of an armual wellness visit. My 
constituent shared that he thought the problem was when, in the course of that free annual visit, 
you discuss with your doctor what may be a problem. Maybe it's a current or past medical issue 
you have. Maybe it's something new. But, that diagnosis is put in the medical record and it goes 
to billing. Every diagnosis has a code. And then it's not the free annual wellness visit code any 
longer, and the patient gets a surprise bill. 
I thought about this some more. The Affordable Care Act said people should have access to free 
annual Wellness visits. We want people to have a good relationship with their primary care 
provider. Good care means your PCP should ask you about those issues you may have had 
before or those you may be at risk for. Recently, I had my annual wellness visit. My doctor asked 
me if I was still seeing my dermatologist every 6 months for cancer screening since I have had 
melanoma and basal cell skin cancer. I answered that I am. We also discussed how my chronic 
eczema was doing. She also asked about other things. These things are all part of good care. This 
bill just says that whatever the code is for a free annual wellness visit, it should supersede any 
other diagnostic code as far as billing, so patients don't get a surprise medical bill. 
Thank you and I would be pleased to answer questions. 
District 64: Part ofWate1ville and part of Winslow
