 
 
Testimony Neither For Nor Against  
LD 637,  An Act to Promote the Use of Free Annual Wellness Visits by Ensuring Proper Medical Billing  
 
Submitted by Kimberly Cook , Esq.  
March 1 4, 2023  
 
As Maine’s only nonprofit CO -OP health insurance company, we are focused on providing affordable, high -
quality  benefits that promote health and wellbeing.   We appreciate Representative Madigan’s effort to 
address concerns related when a patient receive s a bill after  a pre ventative or well patient  visit.  After listening 
to the public hearing and discussing this issue internally, we are submitting these comments to provide 
information and our perspective for your consideration . 
As you have heard, the Affordable Care Act est ablished that  certain  health plans cover preventative services on 
a first dollar basis1 (i.e., without cost sharing from the enrollee/patient).  Included in these preventative 
services are a host  of screening and prevention services many of which are often bundled into an annual visit  
referred to as a  well-patient  or well -child visit.  Well ness vi sits include services recommended by the United 
States  Preventative  Services Task Force  (USPSTF) and the Health Resources & Services Administration (HRSA)2 
such as he alth screenings, prevention counselling, vaccinations, etc. dependent on the patient’s age and 
gender.  These services include a patient history and examination, guidance/recommendation regarding 
personal risk factors, and any laboratory and/or diagnostic procedures ordered.   The CPT codes used depend  
upon the patient's age , and sometimes gender.  This means that there is  no single CPT code that represents 
the entirety of a well -patient visit.  
As Representative Madigan noted, sometimes patients will receive  a bill from their PCP after a well -patient 
visit.  This situation can occur when  health care services are rendered during the visit that are not designated 
as preventative  under the guidelines of the ACA and state law .  Although this can be confusing and upsetting 
for a patient, we believe that for patients to receive high -quality, cost -effective care, providers must be able 
to be compensated for treating their patients who present with an active health concern  during a well -
patient visit .  If providers were not allowed to bill for such services, then  patients could be faced with waiting 
for another appointment with their PCP or utilizing an  urgent care facility or the emergency room .  As an 
example, a patient mentions a sore throat at the w ell-patient visit, and upon examination, the provider 
determines that a strep test is indicated, which then produces a positive result and a prescription.  No one 
would be well served if providers were not allowed to submit codes for this diagnosis and tre atment . 
On balance , we believe that patient education is the best policy for addressing this issue.   Some form  of 
notice, e.g., a simple sentence in a confirmation call or text, a sheet of paper provided at  time of check in , or a 
sign in the providers office, that alerts the patient  that if they need medical services that go beyond the 
preventative services included in a well -patient visit , they could  receive a bill for their portion of those 
services.    
 
1  HealthCare.gov @ https://www.healthcare.gov/coverage/preventive -care -benefits/   
2 Health Resources & Services Administration, Women’s Preventive Services Guideline s @ 
https://www.hrsa.gov/womens -guidelines   
 
 
As the committee members may be aware, another bill , LD 1191, An Act Regarding Transparency of Medical 
Billing  dealing with cost transparency was recently printed .  This bill  also appears to provider the Committee 
with a path forward to ensur e patients have accurate information about health care services a nd the cost of 
those services.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this information and our perspective .   
 
 
 
