S'r,u‘1-1 or IViAl1\'F. 
()Fl?!(fE or THE C()\*ERZ\i()R 
Q z 1S"r.u‘r~:H(>vsr: STA'I‘l()E\‘ 
Av(;vs"iz>., MAl.\‘E 
04333-0001 
<--~.-\.,=...- 
J;-\:\’E'l‘ NHL LS DAN BI ?R(i I-ISS 
G()\’F.R.\‘OR DIRECTOR or G()\"ERN()R ’S 
ENERGY OFFICE 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE 
An Act to Provide Maine Ratepayers with Equitable Access to Interconnection of Distributed 
Energy Resources 
L.D. 327 
GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFICE 
May 10, 2023_ 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology (EUT): My name is Caroline Colan, and l am the Legislative Liaison for the 
Governor ’ s Energy Office (GEO). 
The GEO testifies in support of L.D. 327. 
The GEO appreciates the opportunity to comment on this legislation. Since taking office, Governor Mills 
has prioritized advancing clean energy in Maine to mitigate the impacts of climate change, reduce 
Maine's dependence on expensive imported fossil fuels, and grow Maine's own clean energy economy 
with jobs for Maine people. increasing the number of Maine homes and businesses with renewable 
generation and energy storage facilities contributes toward meeting these policy goals, as well as 
helping to provide resiliency in the face of increasingly volatile weather and natural gas prices. 
Our office has recognized the important role interconnection procedures play in facilitating the 
deployment of new renewable energy needed to achieve our state's requirements. Two years ago, in 
response to reports of significant cost changes and other unexpected delays related to interconnection 
agreements for distributed energy resources, Governor Mills sent a letter to the Public Utilities 
Commission (the Commission) requesting an investigation into the genesis of the problems reported to 
avoid future challenges with interconnection of distributed energy resources. Additionally, in the letter 
Governor Mills requested the initiation of a broader review "to ensure that Maine's electric utilities have 
the systems and planning in place to accommodate the growth of renewables and distributed energy 
resources that will allow our state to reduce our historically high dependency on high cost fossil fuels.“ 
Later in 2021, the legislature passed L.D. 1100} An Act to Support the Continued Access to Solar Energy 
and Battery Storage by Maine Homes and Businesses. Pursuant to that act, the Commission engaged 
experts at the interstate Renewable Energy Council (IREC) to "evaluate Maine's procedures and 
practices to ensure solar and storage projects that serve a customer's own electricity needs are 
interconnected efficiently and without bearing costs for distribution grid upgrades." The GEO 
appreciates the work of the Commission and IREC on this topic; their report was thorough, engaged 
stakeholders, and provides useful recommendations based on national best practices. 
1 https:1/www.maine.gov/energy/sites/maine.gov.energv/files/iniine-fiies/Mills%20PUC%20i_etter.pdf 
Z P.L. 2021, Ch. 264
1
The Commission issued a Notice of lnquiry (NOI) in late 2022 requesting comments on potential changes 
to its interconnection rules, Chapter 324, based on the recommendations of lREC's report. The GEO 
submitted comments in response to the NOI, several of which relate to portions of L.D. 327. l have 
attached the GEO's full comments to this testimony for the Committee's reference. Regarding this 
legislation, the GEO's previous comments express support for: 
0 The establishment of an interconnection ombudsperson role at the Commission, which we 
believe will improve dispute resolution and reduce costs for Maine people and businesses over 
the long-term, and provide equitable options for interconnecting customers that lack the 
resources to participate effectively in the existing dispute resolution process; 
0 The inclusion of specific energy storage interconnection procedures; and 
0 Various approaches aimed at expediting interconnection applications. 
We understand that the Commission is likely to initiate a rulemaking in the near future regarding several 
of the topics addressed in l..D. 327. The GEO will remain engaged in the Commission's process on this 
inquiry, but is also open to other approaches, such as this one, to address interconnection challenges 
that have often led to increased costs, unpredictable timelines, and limited transparency into renewable 
energy development in Maine. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
QMi~_Ca4.»\ Caroline Colan, Legislative Liaison 
Governor's Energy Office 
Page 2 of2
STATE OF MAINE DOCKET NO. 2022-00345 
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION 
January 20, 2023 
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION COMMENTS OF THE MAINE 
Interconnection Procedures (Chapter 324) GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFICE 
The Maine Public Utilities Commission (Commission) issued a Notice of Inquiry (NOI) on 
December 5, 2022 requesting comments regarding "potential changes to Chapter 324 based on 
issues raised in the Interstate Renewable Energy Council, INC (IREC) Report in Docket No. 
2022-00071 including a straw proposal (the straw proposal) the Commission attached with the 
Inquiry (NOI at 1).‘ The Commission notes that it intends to open a rulemaking proceeding 
following this Inquiry.' 
The Governor's Energy Office (GEO) submits these comments in response to the NOI. The 
GEO appreciates the Commission's initiation of this Inquiry to address changes needed to small 
generator interconnection procedures, and the inclusion of a straw proposal with specific 
proposed changes to Chapter 324 for input from interested parties. 
To summarize, the GEO supports inclusion of specific energy storage interconnection 
procedures, enhancing dispute resolution processes particularly for small and on-site 
interconnecting customers, adoption of a table-based screening approach for expedited 
interconnection applications, and adoption of IEEE 1547-2018 standards. Additionally, the GEO 
encourages the Commission to use this Chapter 324 Inquiry to solicit speciﬁc interconnection~ 
related performance metrics, as required by P.L. 2021, Chapter 702 (LD 1959). For clarity, the 
GEO has organized its comments following the structure of the NOI. 
Background 
IREC was engaged by the Commission pursuant to P.L. 2021, Ch. 264 (LD 1100, An Act To 
Support the Continued Access to Solar Energy and Battery Storage by Maine Homes and 
Businesses) to “evaluate Maine’s procedures and practices to ensure solar and storage projects 
that sen/e a customer ’s own electricity needs are interconnected efficiently and without bearing 
costs for distribution grid upgrades" (NOI at 1). In the NOI, the Commission stated “pursuant to 
the Act, IREC also evaluated the transparency of the screening process for these projects as 
well as the dispute resolution process" (NOI at 2). The GEO appreciates the work of the 
Commission and IREC pursuant to P.L. 2021, Chapter 264 (LD 1100); It was thorough, obtained 
input from stakeholders, and provided clear recommendations based on national best practices. 
1 “The IREC report" is Interconnection Standards, Practices, and Procedures to Support Access to Solar 
Energy and Battery Storage for Maine Homes and Businesses. Report Prepared for the Maine Public 
Utilities Commission. Interstate Renewable Energy Council. February 2022. Available online at 
https://mpuc-cms.maineqov/CQM.Public.WebUI/CommonNiewDoc.aspx?DocRefld={2882E685-4281- 
4280-B921-A63EBDDOBEDB}&DocExt=pdf&DocName={2882E685-42B1-4280-B921- 
A63EBDDOBEDB}.Qdf
1
1. Review requirements that on-site solar and storage projects sewing . 
customer load must pay for distribution upgrades in some circumstances 
in light of direction contained in L.D. 1100. 
a. Waiver of Distribution Upgrade Costs 
P.L. 2021 Chapter 264 (LD 1100) §2 requires the Commission to ensure, based on an. 
independent expert review (the IREC report), that "the timelines and requirements for 
interconnection do not unduly limit the ability of residential and nonresidential customers to 
install on-site solar energy generation and battery storage systems to offset a customer's 
electrical consumption and that interconnection costs for these customers are limited to 
interconnection facility upgrades and do not include the cost of distribution upgrades." To 
implement this directive, the Commission proposes changes to Chapter 324 that would exempt 
projects up to 500 kW from paying any Distribution Upgrade costs, including operations and 
maintenance. t t. 
The Commission requested comments on “whether limiting the exemption to projects 500 kW is 
a reasonable way to meet the definition in LD 1100" (NOI at 4). instead of adopting the 
proposed 500 kW exemption, the Commission should establish in rule an appropriate definition 
related to the “on~site...systems to offset a customer ’s electric consumption" requirement 
contained in P.L. 2021 Chapter 264 (LD 1100). Chapter 313 of the Commission's rules 
establishes a seemingly equivalent definition of “collocated ” facilities that could be instructive 
here: ““Collocated" means an eligible facility that is located on the same premise, property, or 
development area of a net energy billing customer facility-or facilities that are subscribed to that 
eligible facility" (Chapter 313, §2). A definition for “on-site” or “collocated ”2 adopted in Chapter 
324 should be modified to remove reference to net energy billing or any other specific programs 
that may not be relevant to all interconnecting facilities. Adopting this approach would obviate a 
potentially arbitrary designation of 500 kW as the limit for a distribution upgrade cost waiver, 
instead aligning the implementation of the distribution upgrade cost waiver with its clear intent to 
avoid allocating costs to projects that are intentionally planned to offset customer load on-site. 
The GEO also recommends that table-based eligibility criteria for Level 2 projects be adopted as 
recommended on pages 37-38 of the IREC report, rather than lowering the Level 2 threshold 
capacity from 2 MW to 500 kW. A table-based approach better serves the intent of P.L. 2021 
Chapter 264 (LD 1100) by basing screens on the capacity of the distribution system at the 
proposed interconnection location. Linking project capacity to location-related factors that affect 
the likelihood of having an adverse impact on the electric system through a table-based 
approach will increase the likelihood of efficiently utilizing existing infrastructure. That, in turn, 
may help minimize the overall cost of interconnection upgrades, reducing overall costs and 
enabling more renewable distributed generation consistent with P.L. 2021 Chapter 264 (LD 
1100). The table-based approach is discussed further in section 5 below. 
The Commission should also consider whether implementation of any cost waivers could be 
accomplished through a mechanism that would preserve the ability for interconnecting 
customers to leverage the forthcoming eligibility for certain interconnection costs to be included 
2 The GEO uses these terms interchangeably throughout these comments.
2
in the basis for the federal Investment Tax Credit and Clean Energy Investment Tax Credits 
under the inflation Reduction Act. 
b. Waiver of Distribution Upgrade O&M Costs 
The GEO agrees with the Commission's interpretation of P.L. 2021 Chapter 264 (LD 1100) as 
intending to relieve eligible customers of distribution cost O&M charges. 
c. Flat Fee for interconnection Facilities- 
The Commission seeks comments on “whether a flat fee approach for the cost of 
Interconnection Facilities would be appropriate for customers with projects 500 kW or less asa 
means of streamlining the process for small projects" and specifically whether adopting a ﬁxed 
$14 per kW— New York’s ﬂat fee - would be appropriate. (NOI at 5). The Commission also 
seeks comments on "how to recover the costs of Distribution Upgrades for projects. 500kW and 
under” (NOI at 5). _ .. 
The GEO supports a flat fee approach for all Level 1 and Level 2 projects, in conjunction with 
the adoption of a table-based screening approach. Flat fees are more time-efﬁcient and thus 
consistent with expedited review intended for Level 1 and Level 2 projects. The Commission 
may wish to consider whether a flat fee should be reconciled periodically based on actual 
prudently incurred interconnection facility and distribution upgrade costs. . 
d. Distribution Upgrade Definition 
The GEO supports the clarified definition of “Interconnection Facilities" proposed by the 
Commission.- 
2. The definition of “Aggregated Generation ” leaves gaps in how projects will 
be studied and upgrade costs allocated. 
As explained in the IREC report, "The issue of the deﬁnition of “Aggregated Generation ” 
highlights the need to balance two factors: on one hand, the State's policy interest in moving the 
(generally smaller) solar projects serving on-site load forward with minimal delay, and on the 
other, the need to ensure that interconnection is an efficient and predictable process for 
proposed DER of all sizes” (at 20). The Commission has proposed that once a project has paid 
distribution costs, it will be counted as Aggregated Generation. 
The GEO notes two other potential options for consideration: inclusion of projects with 
completed i.3.9 study results (these projects might not yet have been invoiced for all 
transmission costs, but may be reasonably certain to proceed); and reservation of a certain 
amount of capacity on each circuit for small or on-site projects, as discussed by IREC report on 
pages 23-24. 
The GEO also notes that using a table-based approach in conjunction with a ﬂat fee per kW 
cost allocation structure would streamline the interconnection process and likely reduce the 
number of projects that withdraw, whether formally from the Level 4 queue or by failing to move
3
forward after an adverse Level 1 or Level 2 screen?’ A table-based approach would reduce the 
likelihood that a feasible project fails a screen and a flat fee would improve predictability. 
3. The current manner in which “automatic sectionalizing devices” are- 
defined in the screen contained in Section 7(A) results in excessive screen 
failure without safety and reliability benefits. 
The GEO supports the Commission's proposed changes to the definition of “automatic 
sectionalizing device” and Section 7(A) screen consistent with lREC’s recommendation and 
national best practices. 
4. The screen contained in Section 7(E) relies on an assumption of 
transformer size that may be insufficiently conservative in some cases and 
overly conservative in others. 
The GEO supports the Commission's proposed changes to the Section 7(E) screen 
recommended by lREC. The GEO also supports additional amendments to Chapter 324 that 
streamline storage interconnection consistent with lREC’s best practices, as discussed further in 
section 9 below. 
5. Level 2 eligibility is fixed at 2 MW instead of relative to the-likely capacity of 
different feeder types. 
The lREC report notes that the FERC and multiple states have moved away from a 2 MW cap 
for Level 2 review, to a table-based approach based on location~related factors (lREC Report at 
37). lREC further notes that it has “|ong recommended the table-based approach to Level2 
eligibility in nearly all circumstances because it strikes a reasonable balance between taking into 
account factors that could limit safe and reliable interconnection of a project without upgrades, 
while ensuring the maximum number of small projects receive faster review" (at 38). 
The Commission states that “While the table-based approach is more nuanced than a hard cap, 
it appears to be more complex and gives the utilities the opportunity to exercise more discretion, 
which could subsequently reduce transparency. At this time, the Commission is more inclined to 
learn from the experience of FERC and other states that have begun this approach and re- 
examine the table-based approach in the future. Thus, while the attached draft does not usea 
table-based approach, the Commission welcomes comments on lREC’s recommendation. ” (NOI 
at 9). 
The GEO believes transparency can be required regardless of the level of discretion available to 
the utility on this matter. Furthermore, as discussed above, the GEO supports lREC’s 
recommendation that the Commission adopt a table-based approach to Level '2 eligibility (at 38- 
39). A table-based approach supports the public interest in minimizing interconnection costs, 
expanding access to renewable energy, and most efficiently utilizing existing infrastructure. A 
table-based approach would reduce the likelihood that a feasible project fails a static screen, 
3 The number of projects in these latter categories is presumably known to the interconnecting utilities, 
but not reported publicly on a regular basis to the GEO's knowledge.-
and a flat fee would improve cost predictability and avoid some scenarios where one project 
gets stuck with “the whole tab" and needs to withdraw as a result. Reducing the Level 2 size 
from 2 MW to 500 kW could simply result in an increase in the number of 499 kW projects, with 
the same results for “|eap-frogging ” and queue unpredictability. indeed, IREC states that it “is 
not persuaded that reducing the size limit of the Level 2 process would benefit the process and 
may contribute instead to more delays and potentially expose applicants to more review than is 
necessary to ensure safety and reliability ” (at 38). 
The table-based eligibility approach is consistent with best practices and broader grid 
modernization principles that seek to utilize existing infrastructure more efficiently. To support 
the Commission ’s laudable interest in transparency, the GEO suggests robust and standardized 
reporting requirements and performance metrics as discussed later in these comments. 
6. Maine's Procedures lack a well-defined “Supplemental Review” process 
that utilitiesmust offer to applicants. . . 
The GEO supports adoption of lREC’s supplemental review recommendations, as proposed by 
the Commission, to "require that utilities offer applicants who fail screening the option to 
proceed with Supplemental Review instead of going on to Level 4 detailed study...and that the 
Supplemental Review process add three new screens: the 100% of minimum voltage screen, 
the voltage regulation screen, and the safety and reliability screen" (NOI at 11). The 
Commission has also requested comments on specific technical standards to be included in the 
new screens. The Commission, GEO, and other interested parties may benefit from examples 
of recent, real-life supplemental reviews (currently named ‘additional reviews’) to-obtain a better 
understanding of how the existing process is implemented and what information would be 
helpful to be included. The GEO would welcome an opportunity for interested parties to submit 
examples to this docket, such as through reply comments. 
Regardless of the specific technical standards, the GEO supports clear and consistent 
standards and templates for the provision of required information at each stage, including 
information provided on interconnection screen failures discussed in section 8, below. 
The GEO also recommends that the supplemental review process “allow for a short period of 
design change and review, as necessary, to help projects move forward quickly with minimal 
effects on the queue" as recommended by the national Toolkit and Guidance for the 
Interconnection of Energy Storage and Solar-Plus-Storage ‘ (BATRIES Toolkit) (at 21). This 
would require a section in interconnection procedures that provides guidance on whether and 
how design changes can be accommodated without submitting a new application. IREC also 
recommends that "Impact study results provide an analysis of potential changes to the DER 
system that could eliminate or reduce the need for upgrades. Utilities should provide, ata 
minimum, a limited analysis of alternative DER conﬁgurations, ideally during the normal 
4 Building a Technically Reliable interconnection Evolution for Storage (BATRIES) is a three-year project 
focused on developing solutions to a suite of critical barriers to energy storage interconnection to the 
distribution system. BATRIES is supported by the Department of Energy's Solar Energy Technologies 
Office and is led by the interstate Renewable Energy Council with its partners, the Electric Power 
Research institute, Solar Energy industries Association, California Solar & Storage Association, New 
Hampshire Electric Cooperative, lnc., PacifiCorp, and Shute, Mihaly & Weinberger, LLP. The BATRIES 
Toolkit includes model rule language, which has been adopted by Commissions in otherjurisdictions, 
most recently New Mexico. For more information, see httios:/fenerqystoraqeinterconnection.orq1
5
timeframe of the study process (rather than requiring restudy after study results are delivered) ” 
(BATRIES at 20). 
7. The utilities ’ technical requirements for.interconnection may not reflect 
best practices and thus may unnecessarily increase interconnection costs. 
lREC recommended that a technical working group be formed to address five specific technical 
requirements. The Commission has indicated that it does not expect to create a technical 
working group but instead seeks comments in this Inquiry, especially from Versant since “it 
appears that these technical issues are largely Versant-specific ” (NOI at 12). 
As a general matter, the GEO supports the recommendation by IREC related to adoption of 
lEEE’s latest standards, IEEE 1547-2018 (IREC Report at 80), and believes this would help 
resolve some of the technical issues. lEEE 1547-2018 includes many new requirements that 
would clarify technical requirements and improve safety, including voltage and frequency ride- 
through and regulation, power quality, intentional islands, and new concepts including the 
Reference Point of Applicability (IREC Report at 81). 
While lEEE 1547-2018 is not mentioned in the NOl, the GEO believes it important to develop a 
schedule for addressing all 1547 adoption topics whether within a working group, as 
recommended in the IREC Report (at 82), or on an alternative Commission-specified schedule. 
lREC noted that "|SO-NE has published guidelines for 1547-2018 implementation which can be 
followed by Maine, and which can help simplify the process” (at 82). 
8. Information provided on interconnection screen failures may be insufficient 
to inform customers about next steps. 
While “The Commission declines to adopt lREC's suggestion that the Commission convene a 
working group to create a standardized form for reporting screen failures" (NOI at 13), the GEO 
suggests that the Commission direct the utilities to jointly propose, with input from stakeholders, 
a standard form that incorporates the detailed information recommended by IREC. The. 
Commission could delegate approval of such a standard form, and any updates that may be 
proposed from time to time, to the Director of the Electric and Gas Division. 
9. Chapter 324 is not prepared to accommodate the unique features and 
capabilities of energy storage systems. 
P.L. 2021 Chapter 298 established statewide energy storage deployment goals of 300 MW by 
2025 and 400 MW by 2030. it also directed the GEO to conduct an energy storage market 
assessment, which was completed with stakeholder input and released in March 2022.5 Among 
the policy considerations identiﬁed in the energy storage market assessment was: 
5 Maine Energy Storage Market Assessment. March 2022. 
https:/ivmm/.mainegov/energy/sites/maine.Qov.enerqyi ﬁlesiinline- 
files/GEO State%20of%20Maine%2OEnerw/%20Sto2'aqe%20Market°/620/Assessment March%202022.g 
Q3
6
Supporting actions that ease the development process for storage resources. Stakeholders 
A identiﬁed roadblocks to permitting, interconnection, siting, and customer identification as 
hurdles to storage deployment in Maine. Specific strategies to alleviate these hurdles 
include... 
0 Establish policies and guides for storage interconnection that reduce uncertainty for 
storage developers, as well as support utilities aligning their interconnection 
processes with ISO-NE to streamline the process for developers and reduce costs. 
0 Support updating interconnection procedures to encourage energy storage 
development, including, as identified by stakeholders, how storage is treated in 
System Impact Studies as a load during peak events instead of a generator, which 
can often run contrary to typical battery operations." (Energy Storage Market 
Assessment at 64). 
The GEO urges the Commission to integrate energy storage into interconnection procedures by 
adopting the national best practices documented in the BATRIES report recommendations and 
model rule in whole, as applicable, including: 
Require utilities to update all related interconnection documents, studies, agreements, 
and application forms to include energy storage (i.e. whether energy storage is used, 
where export controls are used, and what type/equipment settings) 
Amend Ch.324 Subsection 1 “Scope” to include “These Interconnection Procedures are 
applicable to all state-jurisdictional Interconnection Customer Generator Facilities,C 
including Energy Storage Systems" (adopted from BATRIES at 41) 
Insert a deﬁnition for Energy Storage Systems (ESS) that clearly states that the 
interconnection procedures apply to new standalone ESS and ESS paired with other 
generators, such as the model definition provided: "Energy Storage System or ESS 
means a mechanical, electrical, or electrochemical means to store and release electrical 
energy, and its associated interconnection and control equipment. For the purposes of 
these Interconnection Procedures, an Energy Storage System can be considered part of 
a DER or a DER in whole that operates in parallel with the distribution system’-’ 
(BATRIES at 41). 
identify a list of acceptable methods that can be trusted and relied upon by both 
interconnection customer and utility for both non-export and limited-export to avoid 
customized reviews. There is model language at BATRIES pgs. 57-59. This might fit well 
in Chapter 324 Section 5, "Standards for the certiﬁcation of generators and 
interconnection equipment" . 
Amend the definition of interconnection Customer Generator Facility to mean, 
"lnterconnection Customer Generating Facility means the equipment used by an 
interconnection Customer to generate, store, manage, interconnect, and monitor 
electricity. An Interconnection Customer Generating Facility includes the interconnection 
equipment required to safely interconnect the facility with the distribution system." 
(BATRIES at 41) 
Add a deﬁnition of Operating Schedule and Operating Profile. Model language for each 
is provided in BATRIES.‘ 
Deﬁne and describe requirements and use of Power Control Systems. 
Add a question in the interconnection Application to flag whether or not grid services will 
be utilized because different functionalities and technical requirements might be required 
(BATRIES at 24) 
In the pre-application report, require utilities to provide basic distribution system map 
data for substation and feeder (BATRlES at 96).
7
10.Construction of interconnection upgrades may not be occurring in a timely 
manner, resulting in delays. 
IREC recommended that the Commission adopt regular reporting for small projects to ensure 
compliance with the timelines established in Chapter 324 (IREC Report at 63-64). The 
Commission “is not inclined to adopt additional reporting requirements at this time” (NOl at 13) 
and instead suggests that updating the interconnection agreement to “include greater level of 
detail regarding construction timelines may be appropriate and less burdensome" (Id at 14). 
The GEO believes the Commission should both require regular reporting and require greater 
detail in interconnection agreements. Timely interconnection would be an appropriate 
performance metric well in line with the requirements of LD 1959 and other metrics discussed 
below. 
11.Dispute resolution procedures may need improvement to resolve disputes 
in an efficient and fair manner.I 
The GEO supports establishment of an interconnection ombudsperson role at the Commission. 
The NO! states: 
“lREC’s interviews with the utilities and developers revealed that the current process is 
resource intensive and that parties are concerned with the time and cost required to 
, engage in'dispute resolution. lREC Report at 66. Utilities and developers also 
expressed concern that Commission staff does not always have sufﬁcient resources to 
resolve these disputes and that they often still result in a formal proceeding. Id. at 67. 
IREC pointed to Massachusetts and New York, which have staffed an interconnection 
ombudsperson to resolve disputes. Id. ln addition to an ombudsperson, Massachusetts 
also has a process for resolving disputes through neutral mediators and technical 
experts. Id. at 68. IREC recommended Maine adopt a similar approach to 
Massachusetts, including creating an ombudsperson position, having pre-qualified set 
of neutral mediators and technical experts and a three-phase process for non-binding 
arbitration. Id. at 69-70. 
Given the costs needed to hire additional staff, the Commission declines to adopt lREC’s 
suggestion at this time. However, the Commission seeks comments on how Section 15 
of Chapter 324 could be amended to ensure that disputes are resolved efficiently. For 
instance, could the timeframes listed in Section 15 be shortened? Are certain steps 
unnecessary?" 
The Commission should consider adoption of a modest per-kW fee for all Chapter 324 projects 
that is sufficient to fund the necessary staff.“ The GEO believes improved dispute resolution will 
reduce costs for Maine people and businesses over the long-term, and provide equitable 
options for interconnecting customers that lack the resources to participate effectively in the 
existing dispute resolution process. 
6 Reports filed by Central Maine Power and Versant Power in docket 2020-00199 indicate more than 160 
megawatts of distributed generation became operational in 2022. A per-kW fee designed to fund an 
ombudsperson role could be modest if spread across such a volume of projects.
I
8
The Commission should incorporate development of performance standards as 
required by P.L. 2021, Chapter 702 (LD 1959) in this proceeding 
The GEO supports public reporting by utilities regarding performance of interconnection 
procedures. P.L. 2021, Chapter 702 (LD 1959) instructed the Commission to adopt metrics 
pertaining to “distributed energy resources interconnection" among others (35-A MRSA §301, 
sub-§1-A (A)(4)). The Commission stated in Docket No. 2022-00052, “With respect to 
distributed energy resources interconnection...the Accountability Act [LD 1959] requires that 
metrics, standards, and reporting requirements be established. Although not included in this 
Chapter, Chapter 324 of the Commission's rules governs utility small generation interconnection 
procedures, including timing requirements for the interconnection process. The Commission 
may consider additional provisions and metrics in a future Chapter 324 rulemaking ” (2022- 
00052, Order Adopting Rule and Statement of Factual and Policy Basis dated July 29, 2022 at 
5). The GEO believes that this Inquiry is an opportune time to incorporate performance metrics 
for interconnection and encourages the Commission to request comments from all parties on 
applicable performance metrics that would meet the requirement of P.L. 2021, Chapter 702 (LD 
1959). 
The GEO appreciates the Commission ‘s consideration of these comments and looks forward to 
actively participating throughout this Inquiry and subsequent rulemaking processes. 
Dated at _Augusta, Maine this 20”‘ day of January 2023. 
_ Respectfully submitted,
W Claire Swingle 
Governor's Energy Office 
Energy Policy Analyst 
(207) 530~7376 
claire.swingle@maine.gov 
ﬂea: 
Ethan Tremblay 
Governor ’s Energy Ofﬁce 
Energy Policy Analyst 
(207) 530-2603 
ethan.tremblay@maine.gov
9
