My name is Doug Hylan and I am chair of the Brooklin Climate 
Response Committee.  I want to thank you for the chance to 
comment on this issue.  
Our committee  was set up last fall by our town’s select board to 
help them enroll in the Community Resilience Partnership 
Program.  Since then we have moved on with a program to help 
town residents increase the efficiency and comfort of their 
homes by taking advantage of renewable technologies supported 
by Efficiency Maine and the federal tax codes. 
As part of our program, we have been assisting the select board 
and the school committee in planning for a solar array on our K-
8 school.  This would save the town money, reduce our carbon 
footprint, and show our school children that we care about their 
future.  We also work with individual property owners to help 
them understand the possibilities for solar on their homes, 
churches and businesses.
Last Fall, my friend and neighbor, Mike Sealander, learned that 
the solar array recently installed on his barn had been refused a 
connection agreement by Versant Power.  Inscrutable reasons 
were given, with no timeline for resolution.  Mike is now 
involved in a prolonged dispute resolution process with the PUC,
while his expensive solar array sits idle.  BROOKLIN CLIMATE RESPONSE COMMITTEE
Helping Brooklin, Maine Transition to Energy Efficiency and Climate Resilience
On April 27th, we were advised by Revision Energy that our 
school project had hit an interconnection dead end with Versant 
Power, and would have to be paused for the foreseeable future.  
I don’t know if the members of this committee are familiar with 
the process of building a small solar array with one of our Maine
installers.  First, the installation company makes a proposal, 
usually based on Google Earth images of your roof.  If you want 
to proceed with this project, you are asked for a deposit, usually 
around one third of the estimated cost.  This deposit goes toward 
completing the project design, applying for a connection 
agreement and starting to assemble the resources to build the 
array.  If the utility refuses to grant a connection agreement, the 
installer will refund your deposit -- except for 1000 dollars to 
cover their efforts to that point.
You can imagine the reaction when our committee tells a 
Brooklin neighbor that they could stand to lose a thousand 
dollars if Versant refuses to grant permission to connect!  Now, 
not only is our school roof project in limbo, a large segment of 
our committee’s work has come to a halt as well.  We can’t even 
explain the problem to our neighbors, or offer any timeline for 
it’s resolution.
A full understanding of the workings or our electrical grid is 
beyond the capabilities of our committee, but we know that this 
problem must be resolved if the residents of Brooklin are to take 
part in our distributed energy future and do their share to help 
mitigate climate change.   We feel that the laws and regulations 
that govern our utilities should be rapidly changed to incentivize 
the building of a smart grid and the distributed energy resources 
we need for the future.  
Thank you for your time.
