VERSANT POWER 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 327 (sponsor amendment) 
An Act to Provide Maine Ratepayers with Equitable Access to Interconnection 
of Distributed Energy Resources 
May 10, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the committee, my name is James Cote and I am here 
today on behalf of Versant Power in respectful opposition to portions of the LD 327 Sponsor's Amendment. 
Since the legislature signiﬁcantly expanded the Net Energy Billing program in 2019, Versant Power has been 
working diligently and effectively to interconnect distributed energy resources to the grid. We have developed 
interconnection processes that we believe appropriately balance efficiency with the need to maintain safety and 
system reliability for all customers. We have upgraded our technological tools and added numerous new staff 
resources to accommodate these sometimes very complex arrangements in a reasonable timeframe. No system 
is ever perfect of course, and Versant Power is constantly looking for ways to improve our approach, including by 
reviewing national best practices, talking with other utilities across the country, and working in partnership with 
stakeholders and governmental entities like the PUC, OPA, and GEO. 
While much work certainly remains, we have made signiﬁcant progress. In 2021 and 2022, Versant Power 
worked with developers to process more than 675 applications and to interconnect more than 68 megawatts of 
solar energy to the distribution grid. We are currently working with the owners of more than 432 active projects 
to integrate an additional 500-plus megawatts of renewable energy in northern and eastern Maine. And through 
all this, fewer than 10 projects have chosen not to move forward because the local circuit has reached capacity 
and necessary interconnection upgrades would have been prohibitively expensive for these projects. 
That said, in Maine, and in the Versant Power territory in particular, we ﬁnd ourselves on the cutting edge of 
working through the interconnection challenges which will soon face states across the country as the DER 
penetration levels continue to rise. Versant Power's Maine Public District's (MPD) average system load in the 
summer is approximately 7Ol\/IW but nearly 200MW of distributed generation pending interconnection. That 
means the MPD is experiencing penetration levels exceeding those in places like Hawaii or California. This high 
penetration level presents novel and complex system challenges that Maine must address without the beneﬁt of 
considering how other states have done so. Versant is working to solve the challenges this situation has created. 
Regarding Section 1 (Appointment), Versant Power generally supports additional PUC resources to help certain 
customers navigate the sometimes complicated and technical interconnecting process. We believe that 
dedicated and impartial PUC staff resources with relevant technical expertise (e.g., an electrical engineer ora 
consultant versed in the T&D utilities ’ infrastructure, such as EPE) could help inform customers aboutthe 
interconnection process, provide important information to customers considering new projects, and help resolve 
minor disputes informally without needing to expend more signiﬁcant PUC, utility, and developer resources in 
formal proceedings. ln the future, such a resource could also potentially be well situated to help guide customers 
through new customer-facing technology implementation processes, e.g. regarding home energy storage, virtual 
power plants, demand response programs, etc. 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District — PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209
\l§CEV%ESF ‘iANr 
interconnection studies and utility infrastructure upgrades "causes the interconnection of the generator to be 
uneconomic." 
The term "uneconomic" is undeﬁned, vague, and will, undoubtedly, be interpreted subjectively. Further, we are 
concerned that no source of funding has been identiﬁed nor an estimate of the costs necessary to support 
establishing a rule directing that ”a so/ar generator is not required to pay an amount of such costs that causes 
the interconnection of the generator to be uneconomic ” has been calculated. Without further clariﬁcation, it 
appears that ratepayers would likely be tapped to fund this proposal. We do not believe that this would be fair to 
our customers. Should the committee choose to move forward with this policy, we suggest that the speciﬁc 
qualiﬁcations for a project to be eligible for interconnection funding should be clearly deﬁned through a formal 
process. In addition to the interconnection costs, we believe consideration should be given to the potential value 
of a project to the grid and thus other ratepayers, e.g., how well the generation is sited to provide locational 
beneﬁts as deﬁned by the ongoing PUC integrated Grid Planning process (Docket No. 2022-00322). Determining 
the overall size of the fund in question initially (e.g., by capping the assessments from interconnection fees or 
ratepayer dollars to no more than a certain amount) could also help the PUC prioritize the way such funding is 
distributed to maximize the beneﬁts to state policy goals and ratepayers alike. 
Finally, if this bill moves forward, we believe that the same evaluation directed in Section 4 of the bill, which 
requires the PUC to evaluate the total cost of interconnection compared to the "common system beneﬁts" 
resulting from that interconnection should be required as part of these rules to ensure that there is a favorable 
cost-bene ﬁt outcome for ratepayers as a whole. 
Versant Power ﬁrmly believes that a long-term planning process is critical to ensure that limited ratepayer 
resources are being deployed in the most efficient manner possible to meet state goals. In our experience, the 
current "popcorn" approach to adding DERs to the system has led to very few instances in which 
interconnections have also resulted in "common system beneﬁts." A more strategic planning process, such as the 
ongoing Integrated Grid Planning exercise authorized by LD 1959 in the last legislature could result in an 
outcome whereby carefully sited and sized DERs providing "common system beneﬁts" to all customers is the rule 
rather than the exception. 
For these reasons, we would urge you to vote ought not to pass on LD 327. Thank you for your consideration. 
Bangor Hydro District — PO Box 932, Bangor, ME 04402-0932 
Maine Public District — PO Box 1209, Presque Isle, ME 04769-1209
