May 10, 2023  
 
The Honorable Nicole Grohoski  
Senator  
3 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Dear Senator Nicole Grohoski  
I am writing to provide testimony on LD 327 proposed legislation that I understand is the subject of 
today's public hearing.   
For the past 27 years I have owned a home in Brooklin, Maine , in your District;  I am a summer 
resident.  My home has been a three -season cottage .  For many years, I have wanted to install an 
energy efficient heating/cooling system so I can live in Maine bey ond the late spring and summer 
months.  Converting to solar has provided me th e opportunity to achieve that outcome  and to do my 
part to address global climate change.  
I engaged Revision Energy after interviewing several other solar firms in Maine.  Revision Energy 
has been very helpful, providing expertise and sharing their knowled ge.  Every step of the way, 
Revision Energy has outlined the opportunities and some of the challenges.  One of the biggest 
challenges has been engaging Versant Power.  Versant's process lacks transparency and, as a resident 
and Versant customer, I was not well informed by Versant about their fees or their process.  While I 
was pleased to have Revision Energy as an intermediary with Versant Power - the system should 
simply work better.  And the State of Maine and its regulatory agencies should be more active ly 
engaged - and should have greater oversight and the authority to hold energy providers accountable.  
Figuring out what Versant is doing, what my rights are, how to navigate the situation was 
challenging  to say the least.  Luckily,  because of my backgroun d and experience , (former Deputy 
Chief of Staff to President Clinton, Chief of Staff to the Mayor of Washington, DC and counsel to 
the Senate ), I know how to navigate state, local and federal government s.  I was able  to get answers 
to my individual questions - but that should not be the test of a system.  The system should be 
responsive to every Mainer. Frankly, the system should work better.    
Based on my experience, the current operating framework, the intersection between state 
government, the regulator (Maine's Public Utility Commission) is not working for the citizens of 
Maine.  There is no one person or agency a citizen can engage to figure  their rights, responsibilities 
and the process for moving forward to solar power their homes or businesses and how to engage and 
hold energy providers, like Versant, accountable.  No matter how good a private company is - and I 
believe Revision Energy is quite good - it cannot substitute for a responsive and knowledgeable 
regulator and regulatory process.   
That is why I believe the provisions of LD 327 are essential.  Provisions that would require Maine's 
Public Utility Commission (MPUC) to hire an interconnection ombudsperson would not only help 
MPUC navigate technical issues but also it would assist customers with their issues resulting from 
utility interconnection - we need to be well -informed about the interconnection process - a process 
that sho uld be transparent.  
Further, LD 327 would require MPUC to hire an expert to evaluate the implementation of the 
recently passed net energy programs.  It is important for the Government of Maine as well as the 
public to know what has worked and what ha s not and whether the MPUC has maximized the 
benefits for ratepayers.  
If the State of Maine is going to meet its net carbon goals, it is imperative that the MPUC report the 
benefits of alternate energy sources, specifically solar.  To date, we have learned about  loss revenue 
to traditional energy providers, but the MPUC has not  analyzed and shared with the public the many 
tangible benefits of solar conversion.  Accurate and complete information is vital not only for 
Maine's legislature and executive branches of g overnment but also for the public.  LD 327 would 
make comprehensive reporting mandatory.  
Finally, I know first -hand that the MPUC's failure to act on the distribution cost waiver has real 
consequences.  As you know, the cost waiver provides a flat interco nnection fee for all 
interconnection customers who are installing solar. I paid the fee, but I had to pay upgrade costs 
before I could begin the project.  Moreover, and more disturbing in my initial engagement with 
Versant, the company attempted to include  additional fees many of which I did not understand and 
were not transparently identified. Without Revision Energy's assistance and my outreach to the 
Governor's office I fear Versant would have continued to demand payment for unnecessary 
distribution upgr ade costs.  The implementation of the cost waiver coupled with oversight of these 
upgrades would allow the MPUC to lead the implementation of the law to its fullest extent.  
It is incumbent upon all of us to help address the global climate change crisis we are facing.  I am 
trying to do my small part.  The Governor has made addressing climate change a priority - this 
legislation LD 327 would help the MPUC play its essential ro le.  
Thank you for the opportunity to present my testimony.  
Sincerely,  
 
Karen A. Tramontano  
