some may es mom or MAINE 
Testimony in Support of the Sponsor's Amendment to LD 327 
An Act to Provide Maine Ratepayers with Equitable Access 
to Interconnection of Distributed Energy Resources 
Steven Weems, Board Member, Solar Energy Association of Maine 
President, Dirigo Community Solar Group 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
May 10, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and other distinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology: 
my name is Steve Weems, Board Member of the Solar Energy Association of 
Maine (SEAM); also founder and President of Dirigo Community Solar Group 
(Dirigo CSG), a nonprofit association of 14 small, member—owned community solar 
farms. SEAM and Dirigo CSG strongly support the Sponsor's Amendment to 
LD 327. It addresses two vitally important issues constructively — (i) grid 
interconnection of renewable resources and (ii) equitable treatment of electricity 
customers. It is a direct and thoughtful approach to moving forward to address 
interconnection delays and cost allocation issues. lt would establish a rational 
approach to evaluating the true benefits and costs of distributed energy resources 
to all ratepayers, as a precursor to both renewable energy program design and 
considering rates by the Public Utilities Commission (PUC). We ask you to see the 
value and fairness ofthis bill, and move it forward with a strong Ought-to-Pass 
endorsement. 
The appointment of an interconnection ombudsman is a sorely—needed 
44 Thompson St. Brunswick, ME 04611-3026 207.751.9437 www.solarenergymaine.org
institutional improvement. The funding mechanism is neutral to ratepayers. 
Creation of this position will not resolve the myriad of grid inadequacies, 
bureaucratic delays, and cost allocation issues resulting in the interconnection 
horrors renewable energy applicants, large and small, are facing. However, It will 
get undivided attention on this issue and should to help. 
Section 3 of the sponsor's amendment (35-A MRSA Section 3473, 
subsection 1 is amended to read) is especially meritorious. lts monitoring 
requirements and the complementary reporting specified in Section 4 (35-A 
MRSA Section 3473, subsection 1-A is enacted to read) would lead to a much 
higher, informed level of understanding of the actual benefits and costs of solar 
energy resources. The specified list of benefits and costs to monitor are widely- 
accepted, established phenomena, with national and regional data bases. They 
encompass the type of economic analysis that is necessary to undertake to arrive 
at both thoughtful program design (e.g., distributed generation, including net 
energy billing programs), and innovative electricity rate design. We believe it 
would be highly desirable — in the pursuit of both knowledge and ratepayer equity 
— to enact this as a statutory requirement, as these two sections would do. 
Without changing their essential character, we suggest some modest 
alterations to the factors that would be considered in Section 3 as follows: 
A. Revenue from the sale of renewable energy certificates (RECs); 
B. Market price effects [Demand reduction induced price effects (DRlPE)]; 
C. Avoided or reduced costs associated with: 
1) Electricity capacity requirements; 
2) Environmental compliance requirements; 
3) Portfolio requirements established in section 3210; 
4) Renewable energy certificate suppression; 
5) Electricity transmission costs; 
6) Electricity distribution costs; and 
D. Societal benefits associated with reduced greenhouse gas emissions and 
other air pollutants (e.g., nitrous oxides).
2
Sections 5, 6, and 7 of the sponsor's amendment seem excellent, with our 
only reservation being the limited time available to think about them before 
writing this testimony. We might have supplemental thoughts based on 
commentary at the public hearing or further review. 
ln Section 8. Solar interconnection cost allocation method and rules, we 
think it would be helpful to specify that the evaluation and report specified in the 
last paragraph 4 must include a consideration of all the factors specified in 
Section 3 of the sponsor's amendment as listed above. 
In sum, we conclude enactment of this bill would be highly constructive in 
raising the process of renewable energy program design and electricity 
ratemaking to a higher level of knowledge and fairness. We urge a strong Ought- 
to-Pass report. 
We are attaching two pages from the final report of the DG Stakeholder 
Group. These are from Appendix A of that report, which covers the work of the 
two economic consultants [Synapse Energy Economics (Synapse) and Sustainable 
Energy Advantage (SEA)] who were engaged to do the underlying economic 
analysis. This contains further explanation of the list in Section 3 of the sponsor's 
amendment, as modified above. 
Appendix A (attached) 
SEAM LD 327EUT Committee Testimony 5 10 23
3
Table 6. Benefits and Costs Included in the Maine Test 
Transmission 
Distribution 
Societal 
Table 7 provides brief definitions for the benefits listed above. See Appendix Section A.3 for more 
details. For full definitions, methodologies, and resources, see the Methods, Tools, and Resources (MTR) 
manual published by the National Energy Screening Project (NESP).36 
36 lbid. 
E Synapse Energy Economics, Inc. and Sustainable Energy Advantage Distributed Generation Successor Program in Maine 18
Table 7. Definitions of Benefits Included in the Maine Test 
impact Definition 
Utility sysiéiiiiiilie ﬁiiﬁfs‘ , . 
Avoided energy costs Avoided fuel and operating costs associated with producing 
or procuring energy. 
Avoided capacity costs Avoided cost of building or procuring capacity to meet the 
peak demand of the generation system. 
Avoided environmental compliance costs The avoided cost of complying with environmental 
requirements for air emissions or other environmental factors. 
Avoided RPS compliance costs The avoided cost of complying with a renewable portfolio 
standard (RPS) or similar policy such as clean energy 
standards (CES) or clean peak standards (CPS). 
Market price effects/demand reduction The price reduction effect in competitive wholesale electricity 
induced price effects (DRIPE) markets price impacts from reducing system demand or 
increasing low-cost supply. 
Avoided transmission costs The avoided (or increased) cost of upgrading the 
transmission system to safely and reliably transfer electricity 
between regions. This avoided cost applies if the DERs 
passively defers investments by reducing load during 
transmission peak periods or if the DER is strategically placed 
to avoid transmission investments and is operated for that 
purpose. Alternatively, DERs can increase costs on the 
transmission system by adding new load. 
Avoided distribution costs The avoided (or increased) cost of upgrading the distribution 
system (including substations) to transfer electricity in local 
electric grids. If peak demand exceeds capacity of a circuit, it 
will require investments to increase distribution capacity toa 
level that preserves safety and reliability. Similar to 
transmission avoided costs, DERs can passively or actively 
reduce strain on the distribution system. Alternatively, DERs 
can increase costs by adding new load. 
REC revenue Revenue from selling renewable energy certificates (RECs). 
RECs are credits designed to represent the clean energy 
attributes of renewable energy generation. 
Societal ‘befniéfif§;I- 
.i
. 
Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions The benefit associated with reducing GHG emissions 
impacts because of DERs. GHGs are created during fossil fuel-based 
energy production, transmission, and distribution. DERs that 
produce clean energy can avoid GHG emissions from other 
sources. in the BCA, this impact represents the avoided 
societal cost of GHG emissions. 
Using the sources of data shown above, described in further detail in the ensuing subsections, we 
calculated the avoided costs (used interchangeably with ”benefits") of each program by multiplying the 
estimated level of generation (in MWh) for aggregated time periods by the expected price or value (in 
S/MWh) in the applicable time period. We aggregated hourly time periods across each year for energy 
”peak” (8 am-11 pm) and "off-peak" hours (11 pm-7 am) for each season (winter and summer), 
according to designations of these periods by ISO-NE. Generation capacity, transmission, and 
distribution avoided costs were calculated by multiplying the maximum output (in kW per year) during 
Synapse Energy Economics, Inc. and Sustainable Energy Advantage Distributed Generation Successor Program in Maine 19
