REVISION ENERGY 
May 10, 2023 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Chairman Lawrence, Chairman Zeigler, and honorable members of the Energy, Utilities, and 
Technology Committee, 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 327, An Act to Provide Maine Ratepayers with 
Equitable Access to Interconnection of Distributed Energy Resources. 
i speak to you today as the Vice President of Workforce Development and interconnection Policy for 
Revision Energy, a 400-person, employee-owned B Corp headquartered in Maine and guided bya 
mission of building ourjust and equitable electric future. ReVision works towards this mission through 
the design, installation, and service of solar photovoltaic (PV) systems, electrical storage systems, 
electric vehicle charging infrastructure, and heat pumps in Maine, New Hampshire, and Massachusetts. 
My role is to support our efforts at addressing two of the most critical constraints for our business 
related to the deployment of solar energy systems: workforce development and utility interconnection. 
We were strong proponents of LD 1100, An Act to Support the Continued Access to' SoIar Energy and 
Battery Storage by Maine Homes and Businesses, which was passed by the 130*“ legislature in 2021. 
LD 1100 was a response to significant barriers faced by Revision Energy and other solar companies in 
Maine with interconnecting fast track solar projects for utility customers. We were pleased with the 
legislature ’s leadership in passing LD 1100 to modernize the state’s interconnection rules to reflect the 
important lessons learned in other states that had experienced significant growth of interconnected 
solar facilities. We recognized in 2021 that — left unaddressed — issues that were being experienced by 
customers seeking to interconnect facilities of several hundred kilowatts would soon affect customers 
seeking to install facilities of just a few kilowatts.' 
interconnection issues are increasing in frequency and complexity 
in the time since LD 1100 was enacted, we have seen our concern about the expansion of 
interconnection challenges come to fruition. Customers seeking to interconnect even the smallest of 
residential facilities have been told by Versant Power that the grid is insufficient — even on circuits 
where no large, megawatt-scale facilities are interconnected. Customers who have sought resolution 
through the Maine Public Utilities Commission (MPUC) have found an inability to get the relief afforded 
them under the state's interconnection rules or have found the cost of representation by an individual 
with sufficient technical expertise to assist with their effort prohibitive. 
This has put companies such as ours in the position of needing to represent customers at MPUC or risk 
the precedent that customers are denied the rights afforded them under the state’s interconnection 
rules. Without intervention, these issues will continue to grow and affect wider swaths of the state. 
Additionally, these interconnection issues need to be addressed to ensure Maine can fulfill the state’s 
climate plan. 
-4 __ _.._ " "'1' ———':: **** """I_”T __ _ *r';I;7'"'""':T:i%F.';.T£3Frs;:s.";t-$eEz*r' ¢~,@-=¢<waar 
AN EMPLOYEE-OWNED SOLAR COMPANY ~ BASED IN ME, MA 8NH
The complexity of interconnect will continue to grow with the rapid increase in the use of energy storage 
systems (batteries) and of vehicle-to-grid devices that allow homes and businesses to utilize an electric 
vehicle to reduce peak load for a customer or for the grid requires Maine to be proactive in its 
regulatory environment. As has been experienced over the past 3-4 years, a reliance on antiquated 
interconnection rules provides unnecessary obstruction to Maine utility customers seeking to invest in 
distributed energy resources. 
Results of interconnection evaluation from LD 1100 
We are extremely appreciative of the technical challenges interconnection poses to utilities and their 
regulators. We are also supportive of and outspoken proponents for protecting the safety and reliability 
of Maine's electrical grid. With these priorities, we were pleased to see the Interstate Renewable 
Energy Council (IREC) awarded the contract resulting from LD 1100 to evaluate Maine’s 
interconnection rules. IREC is the foremost authority in the U.S. related to the interconnection of 
renewable energy facilities and periodically publishes its Model Interconnection Procedures. Maine’s 
small generator interconnection procedures (SGlPs), as detailed in MPUC Chapter 324, were originally 
based on the 2005 edition of lREC’s Model Interconnection Procedures. In the thirteen years since 
Maine adopted Chapter 324, lREC has updated its procedures three times, including its most recent 
publication in 2019. During that same period, Maine has made minor changes to its SGlPs. 
lREC’s SGlPs are aligned with those of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 
As a result of LD 1100, lREC authored a report for MPUC entitled Interconnection Standards, 
Practices, and Procedures to Support Access to Solar Energy and Battery Storage for Maine Homes 
and Businesses. This report provided an evaluation of Maine’s interconnection rules and made 
recommendations on how to best modernize them in a manner consistent with national best practices 
as represented by the improvements to lREC’s Model Interconnection Procedures between 2005 until 
2019. The report also highlights model interconnection procedures for batteries, or energy storage 
systems, as detailed in the Toolkit & Guidance for the Interconnection of Energy Storage & Solar-P/us- 
Storage. This report is also known as the BATRIES report, as it was developed under the Building a 
Technically Reliable Interconnection Evolution for Storage (BATRIES) project team. This team included 
lREC, the Electric Power Research Institute, New Hampshire Electric Co-op, Solar Energy Industries 
Association, California Solar and Storage Association, and PaciﬁCorp. 
In its report, lREC concluded the following: 
0 improvements in Maine’s dispute resolution procedures for customers who are experiencing 
interconnection issues “may need improvement to efficiently and fairly resolve disputes. ” One 
key recommendation by IREC for improving the process is the creation of an Ombudsperson 
position. 
o “Maine’s Procedures are not prepared to accommodate the unique features and capabilities of 
energy storage systems. ” 
~ The technical screening criteria for small projects “results in excessive screen failure without 
safety and reliability benefits." 
0 Interconnection of small projects could be streamlined by including a supplemental review 
process that has been outlined in lREC’s Model Interconnection Procedures since 2013. 
o Maine would benefit from increased utility transparency when the utility concludes thata 
proposed project has failed a conservative technical screen. V
0 The interconnection rules could be strengthened by further clarifying when larger 
interconnection facilities can reserve capacity of the distribution system during the development 
process. g 
In addition, lREC’s report highlighted additional technical requirements being implemented by Versant 
Power that were inconsistent with utility best practices and may unnecessarily increase interconnection 
costs. 
The report also provided recommendations on how MPUC could implement the provision of LD 1100 
that prohibits certain residential and nonresidential customers - namely those who install solar to offset 
on-site electrical consumption — from paying for distribution upgrades without the cost of those 
upgrades being shouldered by ratepayers. 
l have attached the IREC report and the BATRIES reports referenced by lREC with our digital filing for 
the committee ’s reference. . 
We are very appreciative of the work done by Senator Grohoski to bring light to these issues and to 
offer practical and tangible solutions that directly address several of the issues currently facing Maine 
homes and businesses seeking to interconnect solar and batteries and several issues for which Maine 
will see benefit in addressing proactively rather than reactively. . 
Interconnection Ombudsperson 
As highlighted by IREC and experienced by Maine’s interconnection customers, all related parties 
would beneﬁt from a position within MPUC that has specific technical expertise related to 
interconnection issues. Currently, Maine customers are largely dependent upon local solar construction 
companies to represent them in technical proceedings at MPUC. This type of representation is costly 
and unsustainable, especially for small projects where the true costs to participate successfully in 
MPUC’s dispute resolution process can be nearly as much as it costs to construct the facility. 
Funding an interconnection ombudsperson through fees assessed on all interconnection customers 
subject to Maine’s SGlPs will provide benefit for MPUC, the utilities, interconnection customers, and 
solar construction companies by reducing the number and complexity of conflicts for all parties." 
While we appreciate MPUC’s attempts to support interconnection customers through the dispute 
resolution process, it has been clear that additional and nuanced expertise is needed for 
interconnection customers to receive the relief outlined in LD 1100. 
We are appreciative of the inclusion of provisions in LD 327 that establish an interconnection 
ombudsperson and stipulate the funding of that position primarily through interconnection fees and 
optionally through contributions from public sources, such as federal grants, and private sources. With 
significant federal investments in expanding the use of renewable energy, this would position Maine to 
potentially leverage those funds to defer interconnection costs and further decrease barriers to_ 
renewable energy development in Maine.' 
Battery interconnection 
As highlighted by IREC, Maine’s current SGlPs provide insufficient guidance for the interconnection of 
batteries. Customers are already experiencing increased barriers to interconnection and would benefit 
- as would utilities — from having clear requirements for systems that use batteries to avoid exporting
power to the grid. The provisions in Maine’s SGlPs related to non-exporting facilities, also known as 
Level 3 facilities, date back to the original Chapter 324 rules adopted in 2009, which are in turn based 
on model SGlPs from 2005. Much has changed with regards to battery storage in the nearly two 
decades since those procedures were established. 
We are seeing increasing adoption of grid-interconnected batteries and an increasing opportunity for 
them related to the value they can provide for customers and for all ratepayers. The Distributed 
Generation Stakeholder Group, which was formed in response to LD 936, issued a final report that 
concluded that “given proper dispatch incentives, battery storage can be deployed in conjunction with 
solar PV at incremental costs that are significantly less than incremental benefits." 
As has been experience with the interconnection of solar photovoltaic systems, deployment of these 
technologies will be highly dependent upon the forethought of adopting interconnection procedures that 
are aligned with industry best practices, in this case the aforementioned BATRIES report. 
Revision Energy is appreciative of the clarification LD 327 makes in state law to specify the need for 
MPUC to adopt rules that are inclusive of energy storage systems. 
Distribution cost waiver 
ln late 2022, MPUC opened a Notice of Inquiry (NOI) related to proposed changes to Maine’s SGlPs 
that included provisions related to the distribution cost waiver required by LD 1100. In its NOI, MPUC indicated that it was considering the size of a facility as the criteria for eligibility for the cost waiver. ln 
LD 1100, it appears that the legislature intended that the cost waiver exclusively serve residential and 
nonresidential customers that are "on-site solar energy generators." Our interpretation of this provision 
in LD 1100 is consistent with that of LD 327; namely that the cost waiver is intended for customers who 
are seeking to use solar energy to offset energy consumed at the same site. 
This delineation is important, as it recognizes that utility customers are subject to the grid infrastructure 
serving them — something over which they have little to no influence. The distribution cost waiver- 
something well outlined in lREC’s report for MPUC — serves to buffer individual interconnection 
customers from excessive utility upgrade costs by spreading those coasts across all interconnection 
customers. 
There have been a number of issues since the October 2022 deadline for MPUC to adopt a method for 
implementing the distribution cost waiver that would have been more readily resolved through the 
methods recommended by IREC. We appreciate the language in LD 327 that clariﬁes the intent of this 
provision in LD 1100 and provides explicit guidance to MPUC related to language that may have been 
less clear in the original legislation. 
Monitoring provisions 
While unrelated to the interconnection provisions of LD 1100 and the report issued by IREC, the 
clarification of MPUC’s responsibilities related to Monitoring as outlined in Section 3 of LD 327 and the 
report related to the implementation of the C&l tariff rate are critical provisions of this legislation. 
Revision Energy has significant concern with the manner in which net energy billing (NEB) costs have 
been presented to the legislature and the public. lt appears that lost utility revenue is being equated 
with ratepayer costs. This has resulted in the legislature and the public attempting to evaluate the 
merits of energy policy with incomplete information. ln responsibly evaluating the cost effectiveness of 
Maine’s NEB policy, it is critical that — through this committee — the legislature is provided with accurate
data related to the real costs to ratepayers of the program and the real benefits. Thus far, it appears the 
legislature and the public is receiving neither. 
Maine state law requires MPUC to monitor “the likely relative costs and benefits for ratepayers from 
solar energy development" (my emphasis). To date, the only analysis that we have seen that 
contemplates the costs and benefits of Maine's net energy billing program is a 2021 report from 
Daymark Energy Advisors. The Daymark study provides a far different conclusion about the net costs 
and benefits of solar development in Maine. The managing consultant on this study was Carrie Gilbert, 
Governor Mills’ nominee to replace Randall Davis at MPUC. 
In adopting the Maine Solar Energy Act a decade ago, the legislature identified the importance of 
having MPUC provide complete numbers to policymakers to inform decisions related to state energy 
policy. Revision Energy supports the language in Section 3 and Section 4 of LD 327 that explicitly 
details which benefits of solar energy development need to be captured to inform responsible political 
debate and the requirement that MPUC provide this reporting annually. The benefits are consistent with 
those evaluated by Daymark and those evaluated by the Distributed Generation Stakeholder Group 
when considering a successor for Maine's current NEB program. . 
Report on the C&l Tariff 
In addition to providing a more comprehensive analysis of the costs and benefits of NEB, LD 327 also 
requires MPUC to perform a thorough evaluation of the manner in which previous legislation has been 
implemented. Specifically, LD 327 requires a thorough evaluation of the way MPUC opted to implement 
the commercial and industrial tariff for NEB facilities. 
As this committee is aware, there have been concerns about the costs of NEB resulting from the 
passage of LD 1711 in 2019. Such concerns led to the protraction of Maine's NEB program by reducing 
the eligible facility size and decoupling the C&l tariff from retail electricity rates. 
The original purpose of the C&l tariff was to increase the accessibility of NEB to medium-sized 
businesses subject to demand charges. The solution was to provide those customers witha 
compensation mechanism at a rate less than that received through NEB by small business customers. 
It is concerning that a program that was explicitly designed to maximize benefits for all ratepayers and 
established an NEB rate that is less than the standard NEB credit would be deemed as much more 
costly to ratepayers. Yet, the Daymark study concluded just that. In its report, Daymark concludes, “The 
kWh program provides net benefits, while the Tariff Rate program is more costly to non-participating 
customers. This is due to the structural differences between the two programs." 
The structural difference is that the kWh program is settled as load reduction (much like energy 
efficiency) and the tariff program is settled as wholesale generation. This is a striking conclusion and 
one that — to our knowledge — has not been fully evaluated by either the legislature nor MPUC. LD 327 
requires MPUC to perform that evaluation. We are confident that the evaluation will identify key steps 
that can be taken to implement the C&l tariff in a manner that extracts greater value for ratepayers. 
Conclusion' 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on this important legislation. While technical and 
nuanced in scope, LD 327 is an example of solid legislation that serves to clarify key policy priorities in 
a manner that allocates costs where they are most appropriate, strengthens policymaking by providing 
complete information to legislators for consideration in their decision-making process, and seeksto
address long-term liability to ratepayers by evaluating whether directives from the legislature have been 
implemented to the greatest public benefit. 
l appreciate your consideration of this testimony and will plan to attend the work session on this bill to 
assist the committee in any manner that l can. » 
Sincerely, 
ﬁwml Vaughan Woodruff 
VP of Workforce Development and Interconnection Policy
