 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 13 1st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony of Hannah A. Hudson on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
April 7 , 202 3 
 
In Opposition To : 
LD 1194 , “An Act to Implement Work Requirements Under the MaineCare Program ” 
 
Sponsored by Senator Stewart  
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services, I am Hannah Hudson, Policy and Communications Manager at Maine Primary Care 
Association (MPCA) .  
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers (CHCs), 
also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the largest  
independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable primary and 
preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people (1 in 6  Mainers ) at 
more than 70 service delivery site s in all 16 Maine counties.  
We are opposed to LD 1194. Based on our experience , as well as national research on this topic, we 
believe w ork requirements are bad policy  and certainly do not reflect what is in the best interest of a 
Medicaid program , such as MaineCare,  or the people it is meant to serve. When states consider  work 
requirements for Medicaid, studies consistently show that there is “substantial coverage loss  and 
potential adverse health effects.”1 2 In our state, a significant loss in coverage would  also have a negative 
impact on the financial stability and success of Maine’s Community H ealth Centers .  
 
Work requirements lead to a significant loss of coverage, negating the purpose of Medicaid  programs . 
 
The Trump Administration approved Section 115 waivers that conditioned Medicaid coverage on 
meeting work and reporting requirements  for 13 states. Of that group , only Arkansas implemented this 
waiver , which  led to the disenrollment of more than 18,000 people . They halted the requirement after 
just 10 months.3 Other states paused their attempts due to litigation and/or the COVID -19 pandemic. In  
the New England region , New Hampshire, when faced with the potential of approximately 20,000 
people losing coverage, decided to suspend plans for a Medicaid work require ment in 2019.4 
 
 
1 Medicaid Work Requirements in Nine States Could Cause 600,000 to 800,000 Adults to Lose Medicaid Coverage. 
The Commonwealth Fund. Accessed here: https://www.commonwealthfund.org/blog/2019/medicaid -work -
requirements -nine -states -could -cause -600000 -800000 -adults -lose-coverage   
2 States’ Experie nces Confirm Harmful Effects of Medicaid Work Requirements. Center on Budget and Policy 
Priorities. Accessed here : https://www.cbpp.org/research/health/states -experiences -confirm -harmful -effects -of-
medicaid -work -requirements   
3 States’ Experiences Confirm  Harmful Effects of Medicaid Work Requirements. Center on Budget and Policy 
Priorities . Accessed here: https://www.cbpp.org/research/health/states -experiences -confirm -harmful -effects -of-
medicaid -work -requirements   
4 NH Medicaid Work Requirement Suspension Confirms: Policy Can’t Be Fixed. Center on Budget and P olicy 
Priorities. Accessed here: https://www.cbpp.org/blog/nh -medicaid -work -requirement -suspension -confirms -policy -
cant -be-fixed   
 
 
 
 
 mepca.org  A 2018 report from the  Kaiser Family Foundation laid out how work requirements run counter to the 
intent of Medicaid programs :5 
 
“Potential loss of Medicaid among eligible enrollees highlights how work requirement programs 
might undo prog ress in helping eligible individuals access Medicaid coverage and could return 
Medicaid to welfare rules.  In recent decades, as Medicaid has “de -linked” from cash assistance 
and developed into a health coverage program for low -income individuals without ac cess to 
other coverage, states have implemented enrollment and renewal simplification measures to 
streamline Medicaid administration and make gaining and keeping coverage easier for eligible 
individuals. Increased documentation requirements stemming from w ork requirement waivers 
could reverse these changes and shift Medicaid from a health insurance program for low -
income families back to one that operates  under welfare rules.”  
 
The Biden Administration had since concluded that these  work requirement  provisi ons reduce coverage , 
and therefore, do not promote the objectives of the Medicaid program . The Administration withdrew 
these prior approvals for the Section 115 waiver.6 
 
Loss of coverage from the implementation of a work requirement would have a n egative impact on 
the financial stability of the health centers.  
 
Community Health Centers are required to provide care without regard to a patient’s insurance status 
or ability to pay – which is a  mandate unlike any other primary care provider. Ensuring that the 
patients they serve have  access to MaineCare coverage allows our primary care providers to fully 
utilize the wraparound services that are necessary for the overall health of the whole perso n.  
 
Being able to bill for these services is critical for the financial health of CHCs , as they continue to 
recover from the COVID -19 pandemic and are dealing with inflationary wage pressures and 
increasing costs of care. Without reimbursement for these visits, it would become  increasingly 
harder for health centers to keep their doors open and uphold their mandate and commitment to 
provide high quality and equitable care for their communities.  
 
Loss of coverage from the implementation of a work requirement would have a negative impact on  
Maine’s already strained health care system.  
 
Any gap in coverage has the potential to create additional burdens on both individuals as well as the 
health care system. Many  of our CHCs report  that when patients lose health coverage, they will wait 
until their medical issues become serious and end  up hospitalized. Using an emergency department for 
an issue that could have been prevented or treated by a primary care provider (PCP) becomes a 
common occurrence. Implementing barriers , such as the work requirements proposed in this bill , drive 
patients away from seeking the care they need and deserve.  
 
 
5 Implications of a Medicaid Work Requirement : National Estimates of Potential Coverage Losses. Kaiser Family 
Foundation. Accessed here: https://www.kff.org/medicaid/issue -brief/implications -of-a-medicaid -work -
requirement -national -estimates -of-potential -coverage -losses/  
6 An Overview of Medicaid Work Requirements: What Happened Under the Trump and Biden Administrations? 
Kaiser Family Foundation. Accessed here: https://www.kff.org/medicaid/issue -brief/an -overview -of-medicaid -
work -requirements -what -happened -under -the-trump -and-biden -administrations/   
 
 
 
 
 mepca.org  Imagine a diabetic patient who has just stabilized due to  obtaining treatment with a new PCP because 
she has Medicaid coverage. She has a part time job, but her hours are reduced suddenly to below the 20 
hours per week threshold and she cannot get additional hours. She loses Medicaid coverage so has to 
stop treatment , and is also now unable to pay for her maintenance medication. As a result, she ends up 
in the emergency department  repeatedly and costs the system more money than if she’d had 
continuous coverage.  
 
Enrollees would  have to navigate a c omplex bureaucracy  (and the taxpayer would  pay for these 
increased administrative costs)  without achieving the purported desire of this  legislation – more 
people in the workforce . 
 
Research shows that h aving health insurance results in higher labor force participation, employment 
levels, and earnings overtime.7 On the other hand, when states add work requirements to Medicaid 
coverage, such as Arkansas ’ implementation of a Section 115 waiver in 2018, there is no consistent 
evidence to show that these  requirements do anything t o lead to more participation in the work force.  
Employment in Arkansas actually declined from 2017 to 2018 and self -reported disability increased.8  
 
A 2018 review by the Kaiser Family Foundation of Arkansas’ implementation of the Section 115 waiver 
looked at the requirements and their impact on enrollees  through focus groups and interviews.  The 
“new requirements [did] not appear to provide an additiona l incentive to work beyond economic 
pressures, but [added]  anxiety and stress to enrollees’ lives .9 In particular, t hose in rural areas  found it 
hard to find work opportunities, a situation that could easily be seen in  Maine  as we are one of the most 
rura l states in the nation .  
 
Monthly reporting requirements would  be a challenge for many enrollees, especially the most 
vulnerable members of our community such as those experienc ing homelessness , or those with severe 
physical or mental disabilities.  Incorrectly reporting work activities is often a reason that many lose 
coverage, not because of failure to work.10 Staff at health centers already provide outreach and 
enrollment support for patients. These new administrative hurdles would add an undue  burden on care 
teams that are already stretched thin. If these requirements  were  to be  implemented, we would also  
expect to see higher administrative costs from state agencies  as they try  to monitor the work 
requirements . 
 
 
7 The Relationship Between Work and Health: Findings from a Literature Review. Kaiser Family Foundation. 
Accessed here: https://www.kff.org/medicaid/is sue-brief/the -relationship -between -work -and-health -findings -
from -a-literature -review   
8 “Employment declined from 42.4 percent to 38.9 percent among 30 -to-49-year -old Arkansans, a drop of 3.5 
percentage points. Employment rates in the other comparison groups experienced a similar decline. There were no 
significant changes in hours worked in Arkansas eith er.” Arkansas’s Medicaid Work Requirements Contributed to 
Higher Uninsured Rate and No Change in Employment . The Commonwealth Fund. Accessed here:  
https://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/journal -article/2019/jun/arkansas -medicaid -work -
requirements -higher -uninsured -rate  
9 Medicaid Work Requirements in Arkansas: Experience and Perspectives of Enrollees. Kaiser Family Foundation. 
Accessed here:  https://www.kff.org/medicaid/issue -brief/medicaid -work -requirements -in-arkansas -experience -
and-perspectives -of-enrollees/   
10 Implications of a Medicaid Work Requirement: National Estimates of Potential Coverage Losses . Kaiser Family 
Foundation. Accessed here: https://www.kff.org/medicaid/issue -brief/implications -of-a-medicaid -work -
requirement -national -estimates -of-potential -coverage -losses/   
 
 
 
 
 mepca.org  At the end of the day , if someone is sick,  they will still receive care in an emergency department  or at a 
safety net provider such as a  Community Health Center  – where we are required to provide care 
regardless of a patient’s insurance status or ability to pay. A work requirement would  not increase work 
force participation ; however, it would  further disadvantage those who are already in need of support , 
greatly increase costs and fragmentation of care,  and undermine the stability of CHCs , the health  care  
safety net in our state.  
 
On behalf of Maine’s Community Health Centers, we urge you to oppose this bill. T hank you for 
considering our comments. Please do not hesitate to contact me directly at hhudson@mepca.org  with 
any follow up questions.  
Hannah A. Hudson, MA  
Policy and Communications Manager  
Maine Primary Care Association  
