 
April 6, 2023 
 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 778 An Act Regarding Work Requirements for Able-
bodied Adults Without Dependents Under the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance 
Program 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 784 An Act to Establish Welfare Work Requirements for 
Able-bodied Adults without Dependents.   
Testimony in Opposition of LD 1194 An Act to Implement Work Requirements Under the 
MaineCare Program.   
Senator Baldacci Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee,  
My name is Kile and I live in Fort Kent. I am a self-advocate, meaning I am a person who lives 
with a disability. I am also an employee of Speaking Up For Us, Maine’s Self-Advocacy 
Network. 
 
I am in opposition of LD 778, LD 784 and LD 1194 because a person who has a disability are 
always having a hard time to find a job. When we get a job we are always afraid that if we work 
too much that we would lose our benefits from Social Security. People with disabilities want to 
work, but we don’t want to lose our benefits. The system also makes it hard to find and keep jobs 
because we need support to work.  
 
This bill is important to me because people with disabilities have struggles to go to work. We 
have a lot of barriers in our lives and we need to have food stamps so we can have food to live. 
Food is a basic human need. I don’t think you should pass these bills because it puts feelings of 
regret onto people of having to go to work to continue to get food to eat. Keeping our social 
security and food benefits separate is helpful to us. Telling people who are already living on a 
fixed income, oh now you have to go to work or you will also lose your food benefits is not right.  
 
We need to fix the barriers to employment before we take away food. Thank you for your time 
and consideration and if you have any questions for me you can call me or e-mail me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Kile Pelletier 
Fort Kent 
kpelletier@sufumaine.org  
 
