April 6, 2023 
 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against of LD 778 An Act Regarding Work Requirements for 
Able-bodied Adults Without Dependents Under the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance 
Program 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against of LD 784 An Act to Establish Welfare Work 
Requirements for Able-bodied Adults without Dependents.   
Testimony Neither For Nor Against of LD 1194 An Act to Implement Work Requirements 
Under the MaineCare Program.   
Senator Baldacci Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee,  
My name is Regina Bowie and I live in Presque Isle. I am a self-advocate, meaning I am a 
person who lives with a disability. I am the board chair for Speaking Up For Us. I am testifying 
Neither for nor Against LD 778, LD 784, and LD 1194.  
 
I am neither for nor against these bills, but I do think it needs to be more clear. I also would like 
to share with you some things to consider on this decision and caution you to consider 
individuals on a case-by-case basis. These bills are not taking into consideration that each 
individual may have different circumstances and situations that may change over time.  
Some people do not have the capacity to work due to ongoing health issues and they are trying 
their best to deal with it. Especially people who have emotional and physical health problems. 
This includes people who have been the victim of abuse. 
 
I was a victim of emotional abuse and I lost my benefits in 2016 when I lost my family and 
children to unfair circumstances and they were adopted. I was seen as a single adult without 
dependents. It was very hard for me and I went through therapy. I didn’t work for a while and it 
was too devastating for me. Without these benefits I didn’t have Mainecare, I didn’t have Food 
Stamps. This was very hard to get the help I needed to get better to live a more sustainable life 
and help others in return. I didn’t get diagnosed with my disability until this difficult time. I 
certainly had my disability, just not that diagnosis that would allow me to receive social security 
or benefits.  
 
After the divorce I didn’t work for awhile because I needed to recuperate from what had 
happened to me. I needed support and turned to church, SUFU, and the Hope and Justice Project. 
I got into therapy and I built back my confidence. Going to church and therapy helped me to get 
to the point to get back to work and get a job. I didn’t get benefits until I was finally diagnosed 
with autism. It was when I got the benefits and had my needs met that I was finally able to 
recuperate, recover and get the confidence I need to get back to work.  
 
There are many Mainers out there like me who are undiagnosed. Those of us who have been 
dealing with abuse may not always know how to fix things. A person who has lost their 
confidence and hit the bottom is vulnerable. Pulling away the food that they need is just not 
right. This is important to help them to get their basic needs met while they work to get the help 
they need and deal with the pain that they need to heal from.  I would ask you to consider not to 
unfairly target a vulnerable population. If you do not allow the people to get stability and their 
basic needs met they cannot move forward and contribute to our communities.  
I am not saying that people shouldn’t work, but I am saying that these bills will be targeting an 
already vulnerable population of people who have few resources. Our system for employment 
has many barriers, especially people who live with disabilities. People need reliable 
transportation to get to work and right now the transportation system is in crisis. We have a 
staffing shortage in the direct care system and people are not getting the hours of support they 
need to live their lives, let alone to get the support needed to go to work. Attitudes and misbeliefs 
about people working are also another barrier. How well does the employment system receive 
the people who are entering the workforce?  
These are all things that should be considered before taking a resource that gives people food on 
their table.  
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
Sincerely,  
Regina Bowie 
Presque Isle, ME  
charitywork2022@myfairpoint.net   
 
 
