April 6, 2023 
 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 778 An Act Regarding Work Requirements for 
Able-bodied Adults Without Dependents Under the Supplemental Nutritional 
Assistance Program 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 784 An Act to Establish Welfare Work 
Requirements for Able-bodied Adults without Dependents.   
Testimony in Opposition of LD 1194 An Act to Implement Work Requirements 
Under the MaineCare Program.   
Senator Baldacci Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee,  
My name is Nicole and I live in Presque Isle. I am a self-advocate, meaning I am a 
person who lives with a disability.  
 
I'm against this bill because of the wording. Many questions can be raised about how 
these bills are worded, and it's difficult for someone like me who has times when I take 
things literally.  If you tell me I’m able-bodied, what does that mean?  Where is the 
information that describes that? You can't see that I have a disability until you talk with 
me. I am physically not disabled but mentally, and emotionally I am disabled, and I look 
perfectly fine. I've been able to work physically but there are times that I have setbacks 
because of my disability. Sometimes I'm able to work but there may be a point where 
my emotions are haywire and I'm unstable and there are times when I can overachieve 
in different things. 
There are jobs that I could do because I'm physically able but that doesn't mean every 
job will work for me because of my disabilities. Someone who has one type of disability 
can clean the bathroom or bus tables at a restaurant. However, my friend Josie is blind 
but yet she can still organize, and she can sort things, but people don't see her as an 
able body because she's visually impaired. You're setting people up for failure. And that 
is not fair.  It hurts everyone that may have a disability. 
With the way that these bills are worded. I think they should put it aside until they give a 
better guideline for an able body and then bring it back in after you have a full 
description of what you mean by the able body.  
Sincerely,  
 
Rosana Belanger 
Presque Isle 
rose_32_1990b@icloud.com  
 
