 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maine  LD 1194  
 
Presented to the Committee on Health and Human Services  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scott Centorino  
Opportunity Solutions Project  
 
 
 
 
 

Good morning. I’m Scott Centorino. I’m a Senior Fellow at the Foundation for Government 
Accountability and I’m testifying in my capacity as a Visiting Fellow at Opportunity Solutions Project,  a 
non-partisan, non -profit organization  founded with one clear goal —getting more Americans into the 
workforce to achieve the American Dream.          
To that end, I really appreciate the opportunity to speak today in enthusiastic support of LD 1194.  
I’m sure everyone on the committee agrees that Medicaid simply must work over the long -term. Why?  
As it was originally designed , it provides health coverage to individuals who don’t really have anywhere 
else to go . The blind, individuals with disabilities , seniors, and children  in low -income households —the 
truly needy . And t hey—the truly needy —need Medicaid to work . They rely on it.   
The problem is that over tim e and with good  intentions  every step of the way , MaineCare and Medicaid 
across the country ha s been expanded again and again to include more and more able -bodied adults 
who do have other places to go on the private market . 
The numbers may surprise even th e members of this committee. According to the most recent federal 
data available, of the 375,000 Mainers on MaineCare, 69,000 are able -bodied adults enrolled in the 
expansion population and another 74,000 are able -bodied adults enrolled in the parent -caret aker 
category.1  
That means that nearly 40 percent of MaineCare enrollees are able -bodied.2 If you only count adults 
enrolled in MaineCare, more than half are able -bodied.3  
That dynamic —the growth in enrollment of able -bodied adults —plays a big role in two big problems  for 
Maine today, problems this committee knows all too well .  
First, Maine’s  Medicaid budget  continues  to grow  both in raw terms and as a percentage of the state’s 
budget .4  
Second, this drives our long -term problem with a decline  in labor force participation. Why? 52 percent 
of able -bodied Medicaid enrollees do not work at all —zero earned income .5 
This bill, b y asking able -bodied Mainers to work, train, or volunteer part -time to receive benefits, aims 
to tackle both of those problems —big increases in the Medicaid budget  and big decreases in available 
workers .  
And, under this bill,  even many  able -bodied adults will receive exemptions —if a Mainer  is in drug or 
alcohol treatment programs, pregnant, has a young child, has a child of any age with a disability, or is on 
unemployment, that Mainer is  exempt from this work requirement.  
This should be commonsense. Work requirements in welfare programs, going back at least as far as  the 
Clinton administration’s welfare reform in 1996, have a history of bipartisan support and a history of 
working.  
Some might say that this approach is not  a viable option in Medicaid —that M edicaid is  different. But 
states have submitted waivers to do this and received permissi on in the past, including Maine’s 
neighbor, New Ham pshire.   
My organization tracked the progress of  one of the states which submitted a work requirement waiver 
and was able to  implement  the requirement —Arkansas. E nrollment declined  there  by 14,000 able -
bodied adults as individuals left the program with increased incomes.6 
And, as we speak, Georgia is in the process of implementing work requirements in their Medicaid 
program after the Biden administration chose not to litigate the issue further.7  
Work requirements are happening in Medicaid —they are a viable option. And they work.  
This modest, commonsense bill is exactly the right approach the legislature sh ould take to address two 
of Maine’s biggest problems today —worker shortages and a Medicaid budget growing uncontrollably.  
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.  
 
 
1 “Medicaid and CHIP database 2022,” Medicaid and CHIP Payment Access Commission (2023), 
https://www.macpac.gov/wp -content/uploads/2022/12/EXHIBIT -14.-Medicaid -Enrollment -by-State -Eligibility -
Group -and-Dually -Eligible -Status -FY-2020 -thousands.pdf . 
2 Ibid.  
3 Ibid.  
4 Nicholas Horton, “The Medicaid Pac -man: How Medicaid is consuming state budgets,” (2019), 
https://thefga.org/research/medicaid -pac-man/ . 
5 Jonathan Ingram and Nicholas Horton, “The Future of Medicaid Reform: Empowering Individuals through  Work,” 
Foundation for Government Accountability (2017), https://thefga.org/wp -content/uploads/2017/11/The -Future -
of-Medicaid -Reform -Empowering -Individuals -Through -Work.pdf.    
6 Nicholas Horton, “Arkansas’s work requirement was working,” Foundation for Go vernment Accountability (2019), 
https://thefga.org/research/arkansas -medicaid -work -requirement/ . 
7 Rebecca Grapevine, “Georgia moves ahead with Medicaid work requirement plan,” Capitol Beat News Service 
(2022), https://capitol -beat.org/2022/11/georgia -move s-ahead -with -medicaid -work -requirement -plan/ . 
