 
Testimony to the J oint Standing Committee  on Housing  
in support  
LD 226, An Act to Address Maine's Affordable Housing Crisis  
 
4/14/2023 
Amy Winston, Senior Director, State Policy  
 
Dear Senator Pierce , Representative Gere , and Distinguished Members of the Committee:  
 
My name is Amy Winston, and I am Senior Director, State Policy, for Coastal Enterprises, Inc. (CEI). I live 
in Edgecomb. I am submitting this testimony on behalf of CEI, to express our organization’s support for 
LD 226, An Act to Address Maine’s Affordable Housing Crisis .  
 
CEI is a non -profit Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI) based in Brunswick. CEI work s to 
build a just, vibrant, and climate resilient future for people in communities in Maine and o ther rural 
regions. We do this by integrating finance, business expertise and policy solutions in ways that make the economy more equitable. Since 1977, CEI has worked to increase access to affordable housing and 
homeownership.  While CEI has  stepped bac k from housing property development, ownership,  and 
management , we continue to finance  commercial real estate and housing related projects . Our Financial 
Development Services team provides  housing and financial wellness counseling  to help people avoid  
eviction and foreclosure. CEI has long underst ood the necessity of stable , affordable housing as an 
economic lifeline for individuals , families,  and communities . Laura Buxbaum, CEI’s SVP of Public Policy 
and Resource Development, has spent decades in the field of affordable housing . She is  a Maine State 
Housing Authority commissioner.   
 The Commission  to Increase Housing O pportunities in Maine by Studying Land Use and Regulations and 
Short -term Rentals  was established in 2022 to continue the work of a 2021  Commissi on created to 
address Maine’s housing shortage . The Commission has documented the humanitarian crisis  of 
homelessness and the growing number of people who are living in Maine unhoused. In testimony to the 
Commission, the Maine State Housing Authority (MaineHousing)  noted the pre-pandemic disparities 
that existed and continue to persist, with many lower -income households facing evicti on or foreclosure 
due to economic pressures  and a tight housing market . Affordable rental availability and vacancies have 
declined  and limited inventories continue to drive rental prices up . As a result, the average Maine  
renter, whose median income is nearly half of that of the average Maine homeowner , cannot afford  a 2-
BR apartment at Fair M arket rates (as  established by HUD – the Department of Housing and Urban 
Development) anywhere in Maine.  While recent trends reflect growing inter est in  homeownership , the 
median house price in the State is  unaffordable for the median income household in all State counties  
except in Aroostook County . Even m any residents in “middle -class” professions , such as firefighters, 
teachers, day care providers, and those working in the construction trades and natural resource 
industries, occupations mak ing up the backbone of thriving  communities , would qualify for 
MaineHousing- financed affordable housing  given t he ability to find eligible housing . Maine’s aging 
housing stock does not match the growing preference of today’s smaller households for smaller, more 
 
energy efficient homes. And t here are persisting disparit ies between white and Black  homeownership 
rates  that urgently need to be addressed . As a state , to sustain our communities, to address the 
pernicious workforce shortage, we need to address the chronic shortage of  affordable housing.   
 
By appropriating $200 million to Maine Housing ov er two years, this bill provides Maine Housing with 
resources to ameliorate the crisis  and take needed steps  toward achieving established longer -term 
production goals . Thank you for considering our input on this important bill. We encourage you to vote 
Ought to Pass  on LD 226.  
  
