?,,T,c,,..av,,N.,,i,f.s. .,assa.s ﬁ...oi.‘<o.o,WWW. ‘M3; 
HOLDINGS GRQUP,1NC~ 
HOULTON, MAINE 
Testimony in Support of LD 226 
An Act to Address Maine's Affordable Housing Crisis 
Committee on Housing 
Friday, April 14, 2023 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Committee on Housing, 
my name is Cameron Clark and I am a resident of Houlton where I own and manage 
residential rental properties and here in support of LD 226. 
Throughout high school and summers in college, I worked hard mowing lawns, and 
one of them had a for sale sign on it for an entire summer. I joked with my colleague 
that I was tired of mowing around that sign and I was going to buy the building. That 
day was my start in housing.- 
Years later I have 40 market-rate units in Houlton across 12 buildings and a waiting 
list of over 100 people who have ﬁlled out an application for housing. Aroostook 
County is not immune to this housing crisis and the need for more units but many 
property owners and small developers in my area have thrown their hands up due to 
the environment of high-interest rates and costly building materials. 
However, l have not. Two weeks ago I received unanimous support from the Houlton 
Planning Board for a 7-unit multi-family building in preparation to submit an 
application for MaineHousing ’s Rural Affordable Rental Housing Program. I havea 
construction budget from a local general contractor who is ready to build and my site 
is prepared for the project. While Houlton lacks a sufﬁcient number of affordable 
rental units we also are in need of affordable homes. Many of my younger working 
tenants tell me they won't be renting forever and dream of buying their ﬁrst home. 
554 North Street, Houlton, Maine 04730 (207) 538-0998 kehoIdingsgroup@grnail.comI
I
I
s
HOLDINGS GR0UP,IN<l HOV ULTON, MAINE 
This is why I am currently working to develop a small subdivision on land l already 
own and plan to submit an application to utilize MaineHousing ’s Affordable 
Homeownership Program. 
While the projects l am working on will be deemed affordable for income-eligible 
tenants, building up any supply of units to meet demand will have an impact on 
keeping market-rate rents competitive. The opportunity to apply for assistance 
through these programs is just the beginning of my endeavors in developing 
affordable housing and making a fulfilling impact in my community. I ask for your 
support of LD 226 and other legislative bills that provide more funding for affordable 
housing. 
Best Regards, 
/ 4/., 1; 
i/éétiiiwt 
Cameron Clark 
President 
K & E Holdings Group, lnc. 
554 North Street, Houlton, Maine 04730 (207) 538-0998 kehoidingsgr0up@gmail.com
