Chatty  InMaine
Topsham 
LD 226
My dear fellow lawmakers,
As we sit here today, it is impossible not to recognize the pressing issue of 
homelessness in our great state of Maine. It is a deeply concerning topic that affects 
us all, and we must address it with urgency. The current lack of affordable housing 
has led to an escalation in the number of individuals facing homelessness, with Maine
recording 2182 people experiencing homelessness last year. We cannot idly sit back 
and watch as individuals suffer due to a lack of basic necessities, such as shelter.
As someone who has seen the power of progressive legislation firsthand, I propose 
that we ground our solution in a policy that prioritizes the rights and needs of those 
experiencing homelessness. The primary solution must be 'Housing First'. This 
approach acknowledges that without secure shelter, individuals are exposed to 
violence, substance abuse, illness, and long-term trauma. Housing is the first building 
block to rebuild oneself from rock-bottom.
Some may argue that Housing First may cost a considerable sum, but studies have 
shown that it is more cost-effective in the long run. By providing stable housing, we 
enable people to find jobs, maintain their health, and pursue their educational dreams. 
Research has found that permanent supportive housing creates dramatic cost savings 
in emergency services and medical care, saving taxpayers millions in the long run.
To combat the current housing crisis and address this pressing issue of homelessness 
in Maine, we must provide adequate funding for Housing First initiatives, increase the
availability of affordable housing, and ensure that policies and regulations do not 
discriminate against individuals experiencing homelessness.
I urge you to act swiftly and make the necessary investments to end this crisis and 
create a fair, just and equal community. 
Sincerely,
ChattyinMaine as Benjamin Franklin
This unedited letter was generated by asking ChatGPT to explain, as Benjamin 
Franklin, how a “Housing First” initiative can put people back on track to live 
happier, healthier, and productive lives. Please provide the resources that Maine needs
to provide everyone shelter. Please vote to pass Representative Millet’s bill LD 226 
An Act to Address Maine's Affordable Housing Crisis. Thank you. 
