 
 
 
 
Committee on Housing 
Testimony in Support of LD 226 – “An Act to Address Maine’s Affordable Housing Crisis” 
April 14, 2023 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and distinguished members of the Housing Committee. My name is 
Deborah Laurie, Bangor City Manager, and I’m providing testimony on behalf of the Bangor City Council 
in support of LD 226, “An Act to Address Maine’s Affordable Housing Crisis.” 
We urge the Committee to not only support LD 226, but to also clearly identify how funding for affordable 
housing investment should be allocated programmatically to ensure equity within the housing market.  As 
a member of the Community Health Leadership Board, the City of Bangor supported a project to develop 
a Pilot Penobscot Housing Fund Feasibility Study in partnership with Maine Housing Coalition and 
ConsultEcon, Inc. The study provided relevant housing information as it relates to the Bangor Labor 
Market Area.  We believe this data clearly shows the need for housing investment across a wide spectrum 
of income levels and housing types. 
 
 

 
 
The study also highlighted the need for additional funding to spur the housing investment needed within 
our state.  Area median income is one piece of economic data that is relied upon heavily in the 
determination of affordability housing, which can result in large disparities in what affordability housing 
looks like from community to community.  Below are the respective median income levels by community 
that are available on the census.gov quick facts website for the Bangor Labor Market Area, which clearly 
demonstrated how program guidelines tied to area median income may not result in the intended housing 
investment: 
Bangor   $49,652   Orono   $47,412 
Brewer  $50,614   Hampden $94,800 
Old Town $43,474   Hermon $82,962 
In order to ensure the safety, health, vibrancy and prosperity of our communities and state, it is imperative 
that we each do our part to invest in housing.  The City of Bangor is committed to working in partnership 
with all interested parties in the development and support of housing opportunities.  We had previously 
implemented many of the strategies identified in LD 2003 as it relates to zoning (i.e. accessory dwelling 
units, density and parking consideration).  We have also earmarked housing as one of our highest priority 
uses of our ARPA funding; allocations to date have provided support for over 200 units within the City.  
Earlier this week, the City Council authorized the allocation of funding to fill the funding gap for a project 
that will provided 41 units of permanent supportive housing in our community.  
Bangor, like the rest of the state, is facing an affordable housing crisis.  Passage of LD 226 is a critical 
element in addressing this crisis.  We also ask for consideration to allow municipalities to have the 
opportunity to be an active participant in the development of any programs through which funding would 
be made available.  As is demonstrated above, the term affordable varies by community and we have a 
front row seat to the housing needs within our respective community.  With the full support of the Bangor 
City Council, I urge you to pass LD 226, and bring more affordable housing to areas in Maine where it is 
needed the most. 
Thank you for your consideration. Please do not hesitate to reach out with questions.  
 
Debbie Laurie, City Manager, debbie.laurie@bangormaine.gov  
Courtney O’Donnell, Assistant City Manager, courtney.odonnell@bangormaine.gov   
Richard Fournier, City Council Chair, richard.fournier@bangormaine.gov  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
