3. Ks-'-‘ ~71 
MaineHousing 1 M/\lNE STATE HOUSING AUTHORITY 
Testimony of 
Erik C. jorgensen 
Senior Director of Government Relations & Communications 
Maine State Housing Authority 
Before 
The ]oint Select Committee on Housing 
In Support of 
LD 226: An Act to Address Maine's Affordable Housing Crisis 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the ]oint Select Committee on Housing, I am 
Erik jorgensen Senior Director of Government Relations and Communications at the Maine State 
Housing Authority (MaineHousing) and I am submitting this testimony in support of An Act to Addrem 
Maine ’.r Aﬂordala/e Housing C rz' .rz' r. 
MaineHousing has been helping Maine people own, rent, repair, and heat their homes since 1969. 
We are an independent state authority (not a state agency) created to address the problems of 
unsafe, unsuitable, overcrowded, and unaffordable housing. We are authorized to issue bonds to 
finance single family mortgages for ﬁrst time homebuyers and for affordable multi-family housing. 
We are also authorized to administer a number of state and federal programs, including rental 
subsidies, weatherization, fuel assistance, two housing block grants, the low-income housing tax 
credit program, and homeless grant programs. We receive state general fund revenue for homeless 
programs and receive a dedicated portion of the real estate transfer tax for the Housing 
Opportunities for Maine (HOME) Fund. 
This is a one sentence bill that features a very large number as a proposed appropriation for 
increasing affordable housing stock. We do not know if the sponsor intends this solely to provide 
construction subsidy, but we applaud its simplicity and appreciate the fact that it provides maximum 
ﬂexibility that would allow MaineHousing to allocate any funds in the most efficient and effective 
way possible. 
We have to see this bill in the context of the housing proposal from the Governor in the state 
budget, and the very exciting unanimous vote of this committee to more than double that proposal 
to $40,000,000 per year for the biennium. As you know, this is the ﬁrst time in memory thata 
general fund appropriation has been proposed for affordable housing production.
1
In the context of those budget discussions, we did talk with you about our production capacity, and 
we suggested that we could accommodate $40,000,000 per year for the biennium. The most 
important issues for us are predictability and ﬂexibility. And if that $40,000,000 could become an 
ongoing stream of funding in a form that was predictable to the development community, we could 
be sure that there would be a steady pipeline of projects in various stages of underwriting. If we are 
granted ﬂexibility to allocate funds as needed in programs, we can move resources around between 
development programs to assure that funding availability and needs were aligned. We need more 
affordable apartments; we need more affordable single family housing; we need more rural housing. 
And all of that, in today’s market, requires subsidy. We also need to remain ﬂexible to meet needs 
and opportunities currently unknown. 
If, on the other hand, it looks that we will get funding in one budget cycle and not beyond, then the 
value of a larger allocation that could be stretched is very clear to us -- and this bill could provide an 
answer. There is no doubt that we could use $200,000,000 for housing production, but we would 
not likely be able to do that over the course of a single biennium. We are grateful to Representative 
Millett for her willingness to make such a bold proposal - something that would, in fact, makea 
difference. 
I know you are going to be sorting through many proposals over the coming days and weeks and the 
proposals before you will total far more than the funding that is available. I also know that there is 
welcome determination on this comrnittee to move the needle on the housing shortage in Maine. What 
we applaud about this bill, and offer thanks again to Representative Millet for, is the fact that it can 
support existing and proven programs, and that means that we could start allocating funds as soon as 
the ink on the budget is
2
