 
19 Community Drive ∙ Augusta, Maine 04330 ∙ (207) 622 -7501 ∙ Fax: (207) 623 -3590  
 
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS®   
 
 
Testimony in  Support of  LD 226 (“An Act to Address Maine’s Affordable 
Housing Crisis ”)  
 
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  
 
April 14, 2023  
 
Senator Pierce , Representative Gere  and members of the Joint Select  Committee on 
Housing , my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations. 
We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association 
established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s 
economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved 
in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes 
industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing  agents, title agents, appraisers, building 
inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association 
of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.  
 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® supports  LD 226. The bill proposes a $100 million 
appropriation to build affordable homes and is a well -reasoned approach to address the 
affordable housing need in our state.  
 
We support this bill because it focuses on t he fundamental cause of the affordable housing 
problem: a lack of supply.  We do not have enough housing in Maine and need to build more 
– either through development or by modifying existing structures.  We have opposed other 
bills that would raise taxes  through an increas e in the Real Estate Transfer Tax or by creating 
new “fees” (taxes) on non -primary residential properties.  Ultimately, those proposals do not 
ensure that funding will go directly to housing – much less building new affordable housing.  
LD 226 does both: it appropriates funds that can only be used to build affordable housin g.  
 
For these reasons, we support  LD 226 and respectfully urge you to vote Ought to Pass. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
 
