   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Lee Webb, Ph.D., Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Barbara Burt, Vice -chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lucy Van Hook  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
 
Testimony in support  of LD 226, “An Act to Address Maine’s Affordable Housing Crisis,” 
and LD 724, “An Act to Expand Workforce Housing in Rural Maine by Funding the Maine 
State Housing Authority's Rural Affordable Rental Housing Program.”  
Josie Phillips , Policy Fellow  
4/14/2023  
 
Good afternoon, chairpersons Gere and Pierce, and all members of the Housing Committee. My 
name is Josie Phillips, and I am representing Maine Center for Economic Policy. I am testifying 
in favor of LD s 226 and 724  because large -scale investment is needed to address Maine’s 
affordable housing crisis.  
 
Over the past 20 years, the cos ts of homeownership in Maine and renting in the Northeast 
region have grown more quickly than Mainers’ median household income .iii This indicates that , 
for a majority of Mainers who rent or are looking for a new home, keeping a roof over their head 
has consistently become more challenging over time. It is worth noting that, as identified by 
Maine Housing, affordability is an issue in both urban and rural areas of the state,iii making the 
targeted funding included in LD 724 particularly important.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
   
 Across the state, the lack of affordable housing is hurting the economy.  The state economist 
has acknowledged it as one of the most significant challenges facing Maine’s economy , 
particularly in relation to the difficulty it adds to attracting working age adults into the state .iv 
Even when solely considering the residents already in Maine, however, a lack of affordable 
housing can be a serious impediment to the wellbeing of families’ personal finances and the 
prosperity  of Maine’s state economy.  
 
For instance, we know that experi encing housing insecurity can jeopardize  people’s physical 
and mental healthv and make them significantly more likely to lose a job .vi We also know that  
being in good physical and mental health is foundational to people’s ability to be productive at 
their jobs and provide  for themselves and their families. Depression alone costs the U.S. 
economy more than $200 billion per year,vii and experiencing a bout o f clinical depression leads 
people to earn 24 percent lower annual wages  on average , even decades after the initial 
depressive episode .viii Similarly, absences and lost productivity due to chronic illnesses and 
injuries cost employers across the country an estimated $530 billion per year ,ix and poor 
physical health can also cause severe reductions in personal lifetime earnings.x By increasing 
the stock of affordable housing across the state , LDs 226 and 724  would improve the health of 
Mainers, wh ich would in turn improve the productivity of the state economy.  
 
While the investments laid out in LDs 226 and 724 are necessary and long overdue, it is 
important that Maine provide ongoing support for urban and rural affordable housing 
development, prior itizing housing as an investment included in future baseline budgets. The 
affordable housing crisis has been decades in the making, and it will likely take many years of 
sustained public and private investment to resolve. Once the state has met its housing  
production goals, ongoing funding will help ensure that the previous decades of 
underinvestment are not repeated, landing us right back where we are today.  
 
Mainers’ needs for housing are not going away anytime soon, and the state government’s 
investment in housing should reflect this reality. Until these needs are sustainably met, they will 
present as a significant threat to the health and stability of Maine’ s families and economy at 
large. The funding included in LDs 226 and 724 are a critical first step in undoing the damage of 
the past two decades, and I urge this committee to vote yes on both of these bills. And I also 
encourage members to consider ways in  which we can provide ongoing investment to this 
crucial component of Maine’s economic wellbeing.  
 
 
i Federal Reserve Economic Data, “ Median Household Income in Maine” and “All -Transactions House Price Index  
for Maine.” https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/?g=12h7w  
ii Federal Reserve Economic Data, “Median Household Income in Maine” and “ Consumer Price Index for All Urban 
Consumers: Rent of Primary Residence in Northeast.” https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/?g=12h88  
iii Maine Housing, “Housing in Maine: An Overview.” https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/8866  
iv The Courier -Gazette, “ State Economist sees challenges fr om inflation, housing crisis, work force shortage .” 
https://knox.villagesoup.com/news/state -economist -sees -challenges -from -inflation -housing -crisis -work -force -
shortage/article_794367c9 -2155 -591c -b393 -7d23a191e4ae.html  
v Health Affairs, “Housing and Health:  An Overview of the Literature.” 
https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/hpb20180313.396577/  
vi National Low Income Housing Coalition, “Housing Instability Increases Likelihood of Job Loss.” 
https://nlihc.org/resource/housing -instability -increases -likeliho od-job-loss 
vii American Psychiatric Association, “ The Economic Cost of Depression is Increasing; Direct Costs are Only a Small 
Part.” https://www.psychiatry.org/News -room/APA -Blogs/The -Economic -Cost -of-Depression -is-Increasing  
 
 
   
  
viii Brookings Institute, “ Lasting scars: The impact of depression in early adulthood on subsequent labor market 
outcomes .” https://www.brookings.edu/research/lasting -scars -the-impact -of-depression -in-early -adulthood -on-
subsequent -labor -market -outcomes/  
ix John Hopkins Medicine, “The Cost of Employees’ Poor Health.” https://www.johnshopkinssolutions.com/the -
cost-of-employees -poor -health/  
x National Bureau of Economic Re search, “The Lifetime Costs of Bad Health.” 
https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w23963/w23963.pdf  
