Testimony of Workforce Housing Coalition — Western Maine Mountains 
Mark Green 
Maine Legislature 
4/14/2023 
My name is Mark Green. I am a resident of Carrabassett Valley and those of you who are skiers know that 
it takes an issue of great importance to draw a skier off the mountain on a beautiful early April day and 
this is one of them. The lack of workforce and family housing in our region and for that matter most of 
the State is keeping many businesses and communities from taking full advantage of the demand for the 
services and goods we offer and produce. Restaurants that were always open seven days a week are now 
closed two of those days and local sawmills are operating below capacity for lack of help. 
Our Work Force Housing Coalition began its work in the Fall of 2021 when the Select Board in 
Carrabassett Valley became concerned that the lack of workforce housing in the region was one of the 
primary reasons that local employers were struggling to find employees. We used some of our ARPA 
funds, to hire, an economic development consulting sen/ice to study the problem and report back. 
To no one’s surprise the consult found that found that: 
0 Approximately 285 households in the region spend more than 30% of their income on housing. 
0 Recently home prices have increased between 25% and 40% pricing most local workers out of the 
housing market. 
¢ The median sale price of a home in the region (CV, Eustis, Kingfield, Coplin, Wyman) in 2021 was 
$380,000 requiring a household income of more than $100,000, roughly double the $53,000 area 
median income. 
0 Many local employers struggle to fill available positions, jeopardizing the long term economic and 
social well~being of the communities. 
0 There is a need for as many as 312 units of year-round housing in our region. 
Once the study was complete and the problem clearly identified the municipalities of Kingfield, 
Carrabassett Valley, Eustis and Coplin Plantation, signed memoranda of understanding to work together 
and each made financial contributions to the effort. 
In early November 2022, the Franklin County Commissioners, after several months of careful deliberation, 
voted to allocate $308,275 of County ARPA funds to help the group hire staff, purchase land, and get the 
new organization up and running. This was the only group outside of County government to receive an 
allocation, indicating the importance and consensus surrounding the need for workforce housing. 
Since the allocation of funding by the Franklin County Commissioners we have acquired an option on7 
acres of property in Kingfield and received our 501(c)(3) designation from the IRS. In addition, we are 
working with Kingfield and Carrabassett Valley to submit zoning amendments to their June Town 
Meetings that if approved would allow the housing density necessary to make affordable workforce 
housing possible in these communities. 
We hope over the course of the next several years to build a mix of single and multi-family housing in all 
of our communities but to do this we need help with funding because without a subsidy its impossible to 
make housing affordable to people in our communities who earn entry level wages. For example, we 
think that our first project will be a 12 unit multi-family building with a mix of 1 and 2 bedroom units. Thisi 
r
i 
2' 
ii 
:5
. 
ll 
=3.
s
l 
iil 
fl 
~,l 
fl 
‘i
4 
l" 
it
l
will cost about $3.5 million to build. lf the rents are kept at about $1100 for a 1 bedroom and $1300 fora 
2 bedroom which would be affordable for folks earning 80% of the adjusted median income we would 
need a subsidy of almost $2 million just to break even. Please note that we are working to raise private 
funds but the real life saver for us is the proposed rural rental program which would provide funding for 
projects like we are proposing in rural areas of the State. 
In closing l was thinking how it is different today than when I was young. I was able to buy my first house 
in Windham in 1983 for $55,000. l remember that paying the mortgage was a struggle but at least l could 
get it financed for it and over time build equity. Unfortunately, that would not be possible in our region 
and much of the State today and at least in my opinion this need goes right to heart of maintaining strong 
and vibrant communities. Without housing for young people and the people who provide the services we 
all enjoy we will over time lose the strong communities that make Maine such a special place. 
Thank you for your time and attention to this matter.
