Dear Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing,
My name is Michael Beck, and I'm the Advocacy Team Lead for Dignity First, a Bangor-based nonprofit,
working to create and sustain a village of no-barrier, recovery-oriented, permanent supportive housing for
unhoused people and intentional neighbors. We are writing to express our strong support of LD 226 and
urge you to vote ought to pass on this bill. 
LD226 is not just a bill. It is an opportunity for the state of Maine to make a profound and lasting investment
in its people. For too long, affordable housing has been an elusive dream for many Maine residents,
including those in the Greater Bangor area. As a recent study by the Bangor City Council has shown, the
need for affordable housing is dire, with a projected funding shortfall of $26.2 million over the next 5 years
for workforce housing alone. 
Since 2009, the City of Bangor’s Fiscal Report shared simultaneously a slight increase in foreclosures and
lien rates and an essentially slowed or flat rate of new housing construction. Further, the City of Bangor
conducted an extensive housing study in 2019. Having reported Maine’s housing stock is older than the rest
of the country (75% of homes were built before 1990 vs. 68% nationally), the longitudinal unaffordability of
rental units, and the lack of data and accountability for the quantity, quality, and safety of units, the Housing
Workgroup recommended taking swift action to create and implement an affordable housing production
plan. For years, the City of Bangor has reported lack of financial resources hinders planning and
development of affordable housing. 
The current vacancy rate for rental units in the city of Bangor is less than 5%, which is, in reality, even lower
for people with low or no income, criminal history, low or no credit, previous evictions, or are currently
unhoused. Despite the reported Housing Choice Voucher waitlist of more than 15,000 applicants, those
who do have vouchers in this area are unable to use them due to a lack of housing options. For example, in
June of 2021, Penobscot Community Health Care (PCHC) granted over 150 housing vouchers to applicants,
yet only seven were able to be used. 
The creation of affordable housing is not just about building new structures. It is about providing a
foundation for dignity, security, and opportunity for our fellow Mainers. LD226 represents a critical step
towards addressing this urgent need. By investing in affordable housing, we can ensure that Mainers have
access to safe, stable, and affordable homes. This will not only benefit individual families, but also have
ripple effects throughout our communities and economy. Affordable housing means more money spent in
local businesses, fewer evictions, healthier residents, more job opportunities, and increased revenue for
municipalities. LD226 is an investment in the people of Maine, and the benefits will be felt for generations
to come. 
We urge you to support this critical bill to make affordable housing a reality for all Mainers.
Thank you,
Michael Beck
April 14, 2023
109 State St. Ste 6, Bangor, Maine 04401-5343ADDRESS PHONE
 (207) 331-4489 info@DignityFirst.MEEMAIL
