 
 
 
  
 
April 14, 2023  
 
Nate Howes  
Avesta H ousing  
307 Cumberland Avenue  
Portland, ME 04101  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing . 
My name is Nate Howes. I’m a development officer with Avesta, a former MaineHousing employee, a MAHC 
board member , and a Portland renter. As a reminder to those unfamiliar with our work, Avesta Housing is a 
non-profit developer and manager of affordable housing in Maine and New Hampshire.  
 
I want to leave you with three central thoughts today:  
1. We have a housing crisis in the state of Maine.  
2. Avesta has hundreds of affordable units in the pipeline to help alleviate the issue.  
3. Significant a dditional funding is required if we are to make any serious reduction in the crisis.  
 
On the crisis itself, I don’t want to repeat too much of what’s already been  said at various hearings over 
the last co uple of months. However, I would like to reiterate Avesta’s perspective on current housing 
challenges.   
 
Avesta  Housing Stats :  
 
1. We had 9,000 applications in 2022 , 30%  more than 2021  and double  2020 . 
2. The number of applications was 12x the number of homes that came available during that same 
period.   
3. Available v acant units are sometimes only online for 24 hours because we’re inundated with 
applications ; A recent vacancy at Pearl Place in Portland recei ved 40  complete  applications in  
less than 24 hours .  
4. We receive approximately 80-100 phone and email  inquiries per day . 
5. We received 1,000 applications  for a recent 52-unit project .  
6. Just below half (43%)  of our applications processed in 2022 were from households that 
identified as homeless . 
7. Additional state directed funding, via MaineHousing,  is critically needed to increase the 
production of more safe, affordable housing in both  rural  and urban  areas ac ross the state.  
8. These funds are also essential to leveraging  federal resources  such as the low -income housing 
tax credit, Federal Home Loan Bank below market financing, federal and stat e historic credits, 
and other subsidies to fund the construction of new affordable housing.  
Avesta Production:  
1. Avesta has 200 units  in pre -constr uction  right now, meaning we are in the process of obtaining 
municipal approvals and funding.  
2. These units are not currently funded . They are  applications,  some with highly detailed 
conceptual drawings,  pending new MaineHousing programs . These MaineHousing programs, for 
example the 4% tax credit  program, will require additional funding.  
3. Without  the requested  additional funding, these units will either never come to fruition  or will 
be massively delayed , thus prolonging the suffering of those without homes or  those who are 
rent burdened.  
4. If the funding were made available in this budget cycle, construction could start within a year.  
5. In addition to these units already in pre -development, Avesta is evaluating new land leads daily .  
6. Currently, the parcels that w e are pursuing could lead to another 200 units  with the next 3 -5 
years . 
7. However, our appetite for pursing such leads requires that we have confidence that programs 
will be available when we are ready to apply to MaineHousing for financing. The State is 
therefore a critical partner in ensuring that there is money available for affordable housing 
development.  
 
Solutions:  
1. We need direct investment in affordable housing.  
2. We have not met the housing needs in decades ; 2008 was an inflection point but the lack of 
public investment has been an issue for a while.  
3. This can and should  be a bipartisan process . Affordable housing means jobs, affordable housing 
allows our state’s population to grow , and affordable housing means a healthier more stable 
population.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
Nate How es 
Avesta Housing  

