 
April 13, 2023 
 
Senator Teresa Pierce 
Representative Traci Gere 
Committee on Housing 
Maine State Legislature 
c/o Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE: Testimony in support of LD 226: An Act to Address Maine's Affordable Housing Crisis  
Dear Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Honorable Members of the Housing Committee, 
 
My name is Richard A. Hooks Wayman, and I am a resident of Maine and serve as the President & CEO 
for Volunteers of America Northern New England which is headquartered in Brunswick.  I offer this 
written testimony in support of LD 226. 
 
Volunteers of America (VOA) Northern New England is a faith-based community nonprofit that works 
with households experiencing deep poverty, disabilities, and homelessness. We produced and manage 
nearly 600 units of affordable housing, and many of our housing sites are in rural towns across nine 
counties in Maine.  We are a proud provider of quality, affordable housing for low-income older 
community members, veterans, and persons with disabilities. 
Maine is facing a housing crisis not witnessed in generations.  Many grandparents and parents worry that 
their children and grandchildren will never accomplish a part of the American dream – owning your own 
home.  The median home in Maine now costs $334,200 (March 2023), up from $256,000 in 2020.  Lack 
of housing supply is driving up housing prices. In February 2018 there were over 10,000 listings of 
homes.  In February 2022 there were only 1,913. Maine is short of more than 20,000 homes for low-
income people. As a result, Maine’s incidence of homelessness has increased and many of our 
metropolitan areas are seeing rising numbers of outdoor encampments. 
In response to this crisis, VOA has prioritized our agency’s resources to construct and preserve affordable 
housing.  Currently, we have plans to develop new affordable housing units for seniors, persons with 
disabilities, and veterans experiencing homelessness in Bangor, Waldoboro, and Augusta.  As a member 
of the Maine Affordable Housing Coalition, we are aware that other nonprofit and private developers 

have plans to produce over 2,400 homes in the next 2-3 years.  We believe this is a low estimate given the 
fact that not every small developer was surveyed.  However, our plans for the creation of new units 
depend on a combination of public financing, private investments, and community philanthropy. 
The significant public investments of $200 million proposed by LD226 will support Maine in reducing 
the tremendous gap between housing demand and housing supply. Local communities and economies 
would benefit from this large infusion of capital funding. Not since the 1970s has the state of Maine been 
poised to produce over 1,000 units of affordable housing a year.  Without concerted and significant public 
financing, marginalized households and the next generation of Mainers may remain out of reach in 
securing their own housing.   
Housing is the foundation of family life and a social determinant of health.  Affordable housing should be 
prioritized by the Legislature.  Thank you for considering my remarks and for your public service to 
Maine. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Richard A. Hooks Wayman 
President & CEO 
VOA Northern New England 
14 Maine Street, Suite 100 
Brunswick, ME  04011 
www.voanne.org  
rich.hookswayman@voanne.org 
207-373-1140 
 

