 
 
mainehousingcoalition.org                              info@mainehousingcoalition.org 307 Cumberland Street, Portland, ME 04101   
131st Legislature 
Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Testimony of Seth Parker, VP of Development at Silver Street, Vice President of the Yarmouth Housing Collaborative on April 14, 2023 
in favor of LD226 An Act to Address Maine's Affordable Housing Crisis   
Good afternoon, Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing. My name is Seth 
Parker. I am a Vice President of Development at Silver Street Development Corporation, a developer, owner, and manager of 
affordable housing based here in Maine but working nationally. I also serve as Vice President of the board of the Yarmouth Housing 
Collaborative, a non-profit based in Yarmouth working to develop affordable housing in our community.  
Thank you for this opportunity to speak to you in favor of LD226 An Act to Address Maine's Affordable Housing Crisis sponsored by 
Representative Millett. In my role at Silver Street, I am actively engaged in looking for opportunities to develop additional affordable 
housing in our country. However, our group is not frequently active in Maine due to the limited resources available to affordable 
housing developers, oversubscription to available programs, and long waitlists for project funding. I am aware of several high profile 
and potential affordable housing project opportunities in Maine and this bill would provide the type of resources to enable us to 
pursue these projects in earnest.  
In my role on the board of the Yarmouth Housing Collaborative we are working on potential affordable housing developments in our 
community. However, to make these developments happen we need the financial programs available to us to be properly funded so 
that they are not oversubscribed immediately upon release.  Maine Housing is currently out of funding to build more affordable 
housing in Maine. LD226 will provide the funding necessary to keep these programs running and open to more communities.  
Maine needs to be building at least 1,000 new units of affordable housing a year for Maine’s housing supply to begin to meet the 
current demand. Maine hasn’t done that since the 1970s. The number one barrier to addressing Maine's housing crisis is a lack of 
funding to build affordable housing. The policy solution is to invest in building affordable housing. 
I am testifying today in favor of LD 226 and urge you to support this step forward. Because all people in Maine deserve a home. Thank 
you. 
 
