Preble Street 
BOARD Oi? DIRECTORS 
Terry Sutton 
Pre.rir/e/// 
Chip Leighton 
I/ire Pmin'e/12 ‘ 
Yenmyu St. Clair 
Serra/my 
_]cnnlfcr Wilson 
Tm/I//re/' 
Joann Buudstn 
'l‘ e1'1"y Davies 
Lauren Gauthier 
_]ol1n Roberts 
Elaine Rosen 
Kinl Schoop 
Maurice 1\. Sclinger Ill 
jay Tanscy 
Lannie Welch 
Lori \Vl1ynot 
l\'lﬂ1'l( R. Swann 
Exer//Ii1'e Dirrvfo/' 
55 Portland Street 
Portland, ME 04101 
207.775.0026 
info@preblesUeet.org 
\v\v\v.preblestreet.org 
United' 
w3Y ;~ 
Unileﬂwiy 
ul Southern Maine 
CHARITY 
‘\ NAVlGAl0li
. 
_ * it it it 
f FourSiarG|arlly Hello Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee 
on Housing. My name is Taylor Cray and I am the Outreach Team Leader for Preble 
Street’s Advocacy Team. l am here today to ask that you please vote in favor of LD226: An 
Act to Address Maine's Affordable Housing Crisis. 
Housing is a cornerstone of stability. Having a safe and consistent place to call home 
provides a sense of security and safety, allowing individuals and families to go about their 
lives without having to worry about where they will spend the night. Unfortunately for 
many Mainers, affordable housing is becoming increasingly unattainable. At Preble 
Street, we work with individuals who are struggling immensely to access not only 
housing, but also shelter. The lack of affordable housing options in Maine has led to an 
increased need for shelter, a need that is proving difficult to meet. With the end of the 
Emergency Rental Assistance program, we are seeing individuals and families alike 
struggle to figure out how they will pay their rent without this program. Communities 
that have been housed in hotels for extended periods of time are now being told that 
they must leave these spaces, regardless of the fact that many have no other place to go. 
The growing need for shelter has surpassed the point of crisis; it now feels as though we 
are consistently living in an emergency. No one in Maine should be forced to live outside 
due to a lack of affordable housing. 
Though not an immediate solution, the creation of more affordable housing will help to 
alleviate the burden on our shelter system. Not only will building affordable housing 
provide more options for individuals looking to exit the shelter system, it will also help to 
prevent folks from becoming homeless. Maine needs 20,000 units of affordable housing 
to meet the current need. Fortunately, we have multiple developers and construction 
companies who are ready and able to begin work on these projects. All they require is the 
funding to do so. Passing LD226 would provide this funding, and begin the process of 
creating more affordable housing units in Maine. By investing in affordable housing, we 
are investing in the future of our communities, our neighbors, and our state. l urge you to 
be a part of this process, and to vote in favor of LD226. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Taylor Cray 
Advocacy Outreach Team Leader 
Preble Street 
Meeting urgent needs I Empowering people 0 Advocating for change 0 Creating solutions to homelessness and hunger
