Testimony of Kalie Hess in support of LD 954: An Act to Improve Indoor Air Quality at Child Care Facilities 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services. My name is Kalie Hess, I live in Southwest Harbor, and I’m here to testify in support of 
LD 954: An Act to Improve Indoor Air Quality at Child Care Facilities. I’d like to offer my sincere gratitude 
to Representative Millett for putting this bill forward as a natural next step given her past efforts to 
improve air quality in schools. 
I often come in front of you in my professional capacity, but today I’m here as a mom. I have 20-month-
old twin daughters who we are fortunate to have in childcare. When we first started sending them to 
childcare, I did the math and was horrified to realize that with the hours that I work, we’d actually have 
fewer waking hours with them than their childcare teachers would have. Oh, how naïve I was.  
In March, we had a total of 12 days of childcare due to a covid outbreak at childcare. My husband and I 
joke that we can’t even count the number of times we have been sick this year from the various illnesses 
that our adorable germy daughters have brought home. And this is not just us, obviously – anyone with 
young children knows how disruptive all the sickness from having children in childcare can be. 
I’m not under any delusions that we can totally prevent children from getting sick, but improving air 
quality has been linked to a reduction in airborne virus transmission (which is helpful as covid continues 
to circulate at high levels in the state), and it can help with reducing allergies and asthma symptoms. It’s 
simple to do a search for indoor air quality and see the myriad benefits that come with improving air 
quality through HEPA filtration. 
Children are notoriously good at spreading germs, and the ripple effects of this are hard on families, 
businesses, and communities. As we live the reality of dealing with the childcare crisis, this is one piece 
of the puzzle to ensure that childcare workers have safe working conditions.  I have had a handful of 
requests from childcare to pick up children early because of staffing issues due to illness. This can also 
ensure that other parents who work outside of the home can have less disruption from the plethora of 
illnesses circulating at any given time. Not to mention, our youngest children are at highest risk of 
severe complications from respiratory illnesses. Improving air quality can only help on all these fronts. 
I’m fortunate to have a partner who can share childcare coverage when our daughters are sick and to 
have a flexible job. I want to point out that reducing the amount of time children can’t be in childcare 
due to illness or staffing challenges is an equity issue – families who don’t have any or sufficient paid sick 
time, people living in poverty, and single parents would stand to greatly benefit from any reductions in 
the number or duration of illnesses their children bring home. As childcare staff often fall into the 
underpaid category, this benefit could be doubly supportive of this critical workforce. 
The legislature passed a similar bill to address air quality in schools. It makes just as much sense to 
extend this concept of the benefits of air quality to our youngest children and the staff who support 
them. 
Thank you for your consideration of my testimony on this issue. 
