122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  In Support of : 
LD 954: An Act to Improve Indoor Air Quality at Child Care Facilities  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Room 209, Cross State Office Building Monday, April 10, 2023  Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and executive director of Maine Public Health Association.  
 MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied 
to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that responsibility seriously.  This bill would require the Department of Health and Human Services to provide information about how to 
improve  indoor air quality at childcare facilities on a publicly available website ; and would a lso provide funding 
for grants so these same facilities can adopt recommended measures . 
 According to a 2017 review, people spend about 90% of their time in both private and public indoor environments, such as homes, gyms, schools, workplaces, and transpor tation vehicles; thus, indoor air quality 
(IAQ) has a significant impact on health and quality of lif e. For many people, the health risks from exposure to 
indoor air pollution may be greater than those related to outdoor pollution. Poor IAQ  can be harmful to 
vulnerable groups such as children, young adults, the elderly, or those suffering chronic respiratory and/or cardiovascular diseases.
1 
 According to this same review, i ndoor environments represent a mix of outdoor pollutants prevalently 
associated with vehicular traffic and industrial activities, which can enter by infiltrations and/or through natural and mechanical ventilation systems, as well as indoor contaminants, which originate inside the building, from combustion sources (such as burning fuels), emissions from building materials and furnishings, central heating and cooling systems, humidification devices, moisture processes, electronic equipment, products for cleaning, pets, and the behavior of building occupants ( e.g., painting).
1 
 
Poor IAQ, such as from mold, dust mites, water leaks, and poor ventilation, can expose people to conditions 
that contribute to poor health; a longer review of these associations is available from the American Lung 
Association . These exposures increase the risk of developing infections, lung cancer and chronic lung illnesses, 
such as asthma. According to the  2023 American Lung Association’s State of the Air Report , 19,797 Maine 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  children and 116,217 adults have asthma.  Furthermore, a ccording to the US Environmental Protection Agency , 
a school’s physical environment, including heating, ventilation , and air conditioning systems, can also  play a 
major role in schoolchildren’s behavior and performance; as well as teacher and staff productivity and retention. 
 
Like many public health challenges, we see disparities in the burden of respirator y health problems  – like those 
associated with poor IAQ – such that there is a greater prevalence of disease burden among rural, low -income , 
and racial minority populations.  We believe th e provisions in this bill will  improve  air quality, health equity  and health outcomes for Maine  
children  and teachers . Thus, MPHA support s LD 954, and we respectfully request  you to vote “Ought to Pass .” 
Thank you.  
 
 
1 Cincinelli A, Martellini T. Indoor a ir quality and health. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2017;14(11):1286.  
