‘=. 
_. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
, ‘ 5 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
A §,_, AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 *‘ 
(207) 287-1400 
Rebecca Millett TTY3 MAINE RELAY 711 
50 Market St., Ste lA PMB 162 
South Portland, ME 04106 
Residence: (207)415-3770 
Rebecca.Millett@legislature.n1aine.gov 
April 10, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Rebecca Millett presenting 
LD 954, An Act to Improve Indoor Air Quality at Child Care Facilities 
Before the Health and Human Services Committee 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed Members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Services. I am Representative Rebecca Millett, representing 
House District 123, most of the town of Cape Elizabeth. I present to you today for your 
consideration LD 954, An Act to Improve Indoor Air Quality at Child Care Facilities. 
We have long understood that there is signiﬁcant beneﬁt in reducing the spread of common 
airborne respiratory illnesses such as colds and ﬂu through improved ventilation and air quality. 
Other beneﬁts include reducing allergens in the air that trigger respiratory illnesses such as 
asthma; lessening inhalation of harmful respiratory particulates; and reducing other common 
indoor air pollutants such as mold, dust, carbon dioxide (CO2), and carbon monoxide. 
Importantly, by reducing illness, improving indoor air quality can provide stability for working 
parents’ schedules and reduce absenteeism and health care costs for children enrolled in child 
care as well as the early childhood professionals. 
The Maine Legislature recently changed Maine Department of Education rules to specify that 
Maine’s schools’ facilities must meet the best available practice national standards of the 
American Society of Heating Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) for 
inspection, maintenance, ventilation and ﬁltration in an effort to protect the health of all who 
spend many hours in these spaces. Our youngest children and early educators should have the 
opportunity as well for healthy environments. Unfortunately, we know that our early childhood 
programs are ﬁnancially challenged and have little to no room for additional expenses. This bill 
seeks to provide grant funding to allow investment in clean air and is broadly written to reﬂect 
the myriad of physical spaces and types of facilities in which early childhood programs are 
offered. 
Maine families should be conﬁdent, no matter where their children spend their days, that the air 
is healthy and safe to breathe. Passing LD 954 will help us attain this goal by taking real steps to 
protect the health of our children. The stakes couldn’t be higher. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I am happy to answer any questions.
