~ ~ ~ L»; . 
'r’,/ .. .. .. ,.
r W‘ ,= ’ " ;: 
Iv *1 
»1».»¢f23%.e/;%»¢zé4./.i,.:*s2 €:5»:.»..,/:i~=¢%,¢..r. 
solutions for Cl 
Toxic-Free Tomorrow 
Testimony of Sarah Woodbuiy, Director of Advocacy, Defend Our Health 
In SUPPORT of LD 954 "An Act to Improve Indoor Air Quality at Child Care Facilities ” 
Before the Health and Human Services Committee 
April 10, 2023 
Good Morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee. My name is Sarah Woodbury. I am the director of advocacy for 
Defend Our Health. Defend Our Health’s mission is the make sure that everyone has equal 
access to safe food and drinking water, healthy homes and products that are toxic-free and 
climate friendly. I am here to testify in support of LD 954 "An Act to Improve Indoor Air Quality at 
Child Care Facilities. ” 
LD 954 would require the Department of Health and Human Services to provide a publically 
available website with resources and information for childcare providers on indoor air quality 
issues that could impact children's health. It would also provide grants over the next two years 
to childcare facilities to help remediate when indoor air quality issues are discovered. 
Indoor air quality is important for children as children are particularly susceptible to air pollution 
due to the fact that lungs do not fully develop until adulthood. Children breath more air in 
proportion to their body weight, increasing the importance of breathing clean air. According to 
the American Lung Association, over 19,000 children in Maine have some form of childhood 
asthma‘ . The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency states that “Nearly 1 in 13 children of 
school-age has asthma, which is the leading cause of school absenteeism due to chronic 
illness. There is substantial evidence that indoor environmental exposure to allergens (such as 
dust mites, pests, and molds) plays a role in triggering asthma symptoms"? On top of the typical 
allergens found in a home or childcare facility such as dust mites and mold, Maine also hasa 
particular concern for radon. Maine’s unique geology means that high concentrations of radon 
are found throughout the state. One in three homes has high levels of radon compared with the 
1 in 15 nationally? 
We must do all that we can to make sure that we are protecting the health of our children, and 
this includes making sure that they have clean air to breathe. Because children spend so much 
of their time at childcare facilities, and much of that time is spent indoors due to a variety of 
factors, we must make sure that those facilities are safe for their developing lungs. This 
legislation will allow those facilities access to needed educational information and funds to help 
‘ Maine Air Quality Report Card. Maine | State of the Air I American Lung Association. (n.d.). Retrieved April 9, 2023, from 
https://www.lungorg/researchjsota/city-rankings/states/maine 
2 
Environmental Protection Agency. (n.d.). Why Indoor A ir Quality is Important to Schools. EPA. Retrieved April 9, 2023, from 
https1//www.epa.gov/iaq-sclrooIs/why-indoor-air-quality-important-schools 
3 
Radon policy. Maine Indoor Air Quality Council. (n.d.). Retrieved April 9, 2023, from lrttps://maineindooraiixorg/radon-policy 
565 Congress Street. Suite 204, Portland, ME 04101 I (207) 6995795 l info@defendourhealth.org I defendourhealtlrorg
those facilities to provide a safe environment for Maine’s children. Therefore, Defend urges the 
committee to vote unanimously “ought to pass” on LD 954. 
Thank you for your time. 
565 Congress Street, Suite 204, Portland, ME 04101 l (207) 699-5795 I info@clefen<lourhealthorg l clefendourhealth.o|"g
