Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
 
 
April 10 , 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 954 - An Act to Improve Indoor Air Quality at Child Care Facilities  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services : 
 
This letter is to provide information regarding LD 954, An Act to Improve Indoor Air Quality at 
Child  Care Facilities . This bill would require the Department to provide website resources and 
information about improving indoor air quality at child care facilities and appropriates $250,000 
per year for the next two fiscal years to provide grants to child care facilities to improve ind oor 
air quality.  
 
OCFS continually seeks to improve all aspects of the quality of early care and education 
opportunities throughout the state. Through this work , which involves ongoing  interaction with 
providers and other stakeholders,  OCFS  is not aware o f any significant  concerns within the 
industry regarding indoor air quality . There may be individual provider situations where concerns 
arise , but OCFS’ licensing team and early care and education team provide support for providers 
wherever possible.  
 
OCF S would require additional resources in order to implement this initiative. OCFS has no 
specific expertise in indoor air quality and will likely have to contract with an entity with this 
expertise to provide the resource s for publication. OCFS would likely  have to contract with this 
same entity or a similar one to inform the grant program since OCFS staff do not have this 
specific expertise. OCFS would also require an additional position as there is not sufficient 
capacity within OCFS to administer a new gr ant program. Alternatively, OCFS could contract 
with an entity for full oversight of the grant program, which would have  an associated cost.  
 
Finally, OCFS would draw the attention of the Committee to the language of this proposal  which 
refers to “child c are facilities .” This language could be construed to limit this program only to 
facilities (which are one type of child care provider) and thus exclude family child care programs  
(which are licensed under separate rules , 10-148, Chapter 33, Family Child Care Provider 
Licensing Rules) . It is unclear to OCFS whether this was the intent of the bill , but we would like 
to make the committee aware  as this would create a resource accessi ble to some but not all child 
care providers.  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Dr. Todd A. Landry  
Director  
Office of Child and Family Service s 

