a ‘ ' ' 
Q :,- 1..
A 
.~ 9~‘~-" :';="1=;f:;* ’ .‘ __.. 
Brad Farrin 1315‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 3 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Brad Farrin 
Presenting L.D. 731, An Act Regarding the Licensing of Persons to Conduct 
Advance Deposit Wagering 
Before the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
March 8, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs: I am Brad Farrin and I have the honor of representing the people of 
Senate District 3, which includes towns in Kennebec, Somerset and Penobscot counties. I am 
before you today to present L.D. 731, An Act Regarding the Licensing of Persons to Conduct 
Advance Deposit Wagering. 
While this may not be a new concept for some members of this committee, I want to start by taking 
a moment to explain Advance Deposit Wagering (ADW). ADW is a fonn of gambling where bets 
are placed on a horse race in person, by phone, online, or via a mobile device by an ADW account 
holder with a licensed ADW company. 
The current system allows for only one ADW license holder in the State of Maine to be selected 
through a competitive bid process. As part of that process, a handful of ADW providers submitted 
proposals listing various levels of revenue that they would collect to be distributed in various ways. 
In May of 2020, the Maine Gambling Control Board approved the licensure of Pemi ADW LLC, 
a subsidiary of Penn National Gaming, to accept wagers from Maine residents. The contract 
awarded was for ﬁve years — if the current law remained the same. 
The bill before you repeals the provision of law stating only one entity can provide ADW in Maine 
and it does away with the competitive bid process. Instead, this would allow for commercial tracks, 
off-track betting facilities, and multijurisdictional account wagering providers to become licensed 
to conduct ADW in Maine pending they meet the required conditions for licensure. 
In its original fonn, the bill also requires ADW licensees to remit one percent of gross wagering 
income to the Board for distribution. After hearing from some of the interested parties, I am 
proposing an amendment that would increase it from one percent to ﬁve percent. With more 
revenue coming in, more revenue can be distributed to the funds and entities outlined in the original 
law. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
