Pie-i:iFlaherty pW 
Augusta, ME 
’ Concord, NH 
" 
Dame! W_ Walker Boston, MA 
dwaIker@pret|.com 
Washington, DC 
i 
March 8, 2023 
Sen. Craig Hickman 
Rep. Laura Supica' 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and 
Legal Affairs' 
State House, Room 437H
' 
Augusta, Maine, 04333 
RE: Testimony of Churchill Downs in Support of LD 731_, An Act Regarding the 
Licensing of Persons to Conduct Advance Deposit Wagering 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs,_ 
My name is Daniel Walker, with PretiFlaherty, and I provide testimony in support of LD 731 on 
behalf of my client, Churchill Downs Incorporated (CD1). 
As you know, Churchill Downs is the parent company of Oxford Casino, which employs over 
400 Mainers, the vast majority with full beneﬁts (down from pre-pandemic employment of over 
500), with estimated Gaming taxes paid (state and local) of over $38.5M. Churchill Downs and 
Oxford Casino proudly contribute to the economy of both the local community and the state 
overall. Today, I would like to testify with regards to LD 731 and how it relates to their other 
business, TwinSpires.com. 
TwinSpires is the largest advance deposit wagering (ADW) operator in the United States. It 
operates in 40 states and over 80% of TwinSpires ’ customers do not regularly wager at 
racetraeks or off-track betting facilities, meaning that TwinSpires is bringing an entirely new 
group of customers to the sport. AI 
ADW operators are permitted to accept interstate wagers under Federal law, namely the 
Interstate Horseracing Act, or the IHA. 15 U.S.C §§ 3001-3007. The IHA’s purpose is to 
regulate interstate commerce with respect to wagering on horseraeing, in order to further the 
horseraeing and legal off-track betting industries in the United States. Maine passed a law in 
2016, limiting Maine to only one ADW provider and then ﬁnally implemented the law in 2020, 
awarding the ADW business in Maine to Penn National. 
If LD 731 were to pass, TwinSpires would promote Maine horse racing across the country by 
allowing residents of other states to place online wagers on Maine races. Maine residents used to 
be able to place bets on this platform on races around the country, such as the Kentucky Derby. 
Churchill Downs and TwinSpires wish to resume operating in Maine by participating in an open 
ADW market.‘ 
Preti Flaherty 
Bgli‘/‘@a“&l’“‘l‘i"5lLP' 45MemorialCirde,Augusla,ME04330 | POtloxi058,Augusla,ME04332-i058 | I'eI207.623.5300 l www.preti.c0m 
/utolneys at Law 
201769491
PRETI FLAHERTY 
March 8, 2023- 
Page2 
We have worked with the bill sponsor, Senator Farrin, in an effort to revise the existing program 
that limits the market to only one ADW provider. Under this newly proposed structure in LD 
731, multiple providers could apply for licenses. Competition is crucial. Multiple providers will 
lead to customers getting the best possible product without concerns that come from a single 
provider model, such as technical issues on a big race day. An open market would also result in 
signiﬁcantly more revenue for the State and various stakeholders in the distribution structure. 
The more variety you have, the more customers you will have, which will lead to more revenue 
for the State. 
We have proposed to continue the 5% tax rate on wagers placed in Maine. There are few states 
that tax ADW operations and this rate is at the high end of those that do. Given that this higher 
tax rate would apply to all ADW market participants, it is sure to generate signiﬁcantly more 
state tax revenue than the single operator model. 
We understand that there may be a concern that the State should not be “breaking ” its contract 
with Penn National (the current ADW provider), which expires in Spring of 2025. However, I 
have attached to my testimony language from the Gambling Control Board ADW RFP 
(#20l908135) Award Justiﬁcation Statement issued to Penn National, which makes it clear that 
Penn should not be surprised nor have any legal action if there is a law change allowing for more 
licenses. See p.2 -https://www.maine.govft0oiszfwhatsnew/attach.pl1p ‘?id=I 579306&anf5 
The RFP Award Justiﬁcation states:_ 
In the event the law changes to allow multiple advance deposit wagering licenses, the 
successful bidder’s exclusive advance deposit wagering license will revert to an ordinary, 
non-exclusive license provided that the successful bidder ﬁrst complies with any new 
licensing and suitability requirements under the new law. In addition, in the event the 
law changes to allow multiple licenses, the Board will have the right to terminate any 
contract resulting from this Request for Proposals 
CDI and TwinSpires wish to operate in Maine and further contribute to the state’s overall racing 
industry. We respectfully request an open licensure process and a predictable tax rate of 5% to 
ensure that we can participate in a proﬁtable and sustainable way. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Daniel W. Walker 
201769491
3/8/23 12:15 PM TVG Blames Third-Party Service Provider For Derby Day Crash 
TVG Blames Third-Party Service Provider For Derby Day 
Crash 
@ pauIickreport.com/horseplayers-category/tvg-blames-third-party-service-provider-for-derby-day-crash/ 
by Paulick Report Staff May 9, 2022 
CATALINA CRUISE 
Churchill Downs Inc. reported record wagering on the 14-race Kentucky Derby day program 
on May 7, but the total handle of $273.8 million would have been even higher were it not for 
a major technical failure of the TVG advance deposit wagering platform. 
Sometime between 3-4 p.m. ET, TVG customers using the company's app starting getting 
“bad connection" messages or account balances falsely displayingzero dollars for wagering. 
Horseplayers took to social media for the next several hours complaining they were unable 
to bet with the app or the TVG website.l 
The crash was reminiscent of a Kentucky Derby day outage in 2016 when TVG apologized 
to account holders, citing human error for the failure, and stating “this won't happen again.” 
On Monday,May 9, TVG issued the following statement on Saturday's crash: 
“We understand and. appreciate that the service interruptions we experienced Saturday 
were frustrating to many of our valued customers and we will be communicating directly with 
those affected customers over the course of the coming days. TVG takes seriously its place 
within the racing community and thel responsibiiity it has to deliver the very best fan 
experience. The issues our app incurred on Saturday did not meet those expectations. We 
have identified the cause, a technical issue related to a third-party sen/ice provider, and are 
actively making changes to our platform to ensure better performance moving forward. ” 
TVG and TwinSpires are the industry's two biggest volume advance deposit wagering 
companies. Churchill Downs |nc., which owns TwinSpires, said it handled $67.4 million on 
Derby day races at the Louisville, Ky., track. it isn't known how much TVG handled on the 
Derby day card. Kentucky Derby day is American racing's biggest betting day annually. 
TVG is part of the FanDuel Group, the leading sports betting company in the U.S., owned by 
lrish-based Flutter Entertainment.‘ 
htlps //wvvw.printfriendly.comlp/g/hETbZEa
_ Award Justiﬁcation Statement 
- 
RFP# 201908135 Advance Deposit Wagering 
I. SummaryA 
The Maine Gambling Control Board (Board) is seeking proposals to provide Advance 
Deposit Wagering as deﬁned in thisRequest for Proposals (RFP) document, awarding one 
bidder the privilege to be licensed to conduct advance deposit wagering. The Board, 
established as part of the Department of Public Safety pursuant to 8 M.R.S. § 1002(1) 
littp;//legis]ature.maine.gov/legis/statutes/8/title8sec_l,O()2.html, is issuing this RF P to invite 
advance deposit wagering vendors to submit proposals for the operation of advance deposit 
wagering in the State of Maine. Bidders must propose the method by which they will conduct 
advance deposit wagering that provides the maximum beneﬁt to the harness racing industry 
and the State in a manner that ensures wagering is conducted by residents of the State who 
are veriﬁed to be l8 years of age or older. _l 
In the event the law changes to allow multiple advance deposit wagering licenses, the 
successful bidder’s exclusive advance deposit wagering license will revert to_an ordinary, 
non-exclusive license provided that the successful bidder ﬁrst complies with any new 
licensing and suitability requirements under the new law. In addition, in the event the law 
changes to allow multiple licenses, the Board will have the right to terminate any contract 
resulting from this Request for Proposals. 
I The ﬁnancial suitability of the Bidder to operate advance deposit wagering, including 
purchase of a bond to secure the accounts of advance deposit wagering bettors; 
0 The extent to which the Bidder's proposal to conduct advance deposit wagering will 
beneﬁt the harness racing industry in the State and the General Fund;~ 
0 The percentage of wagers the Bidder proposes to pay to the Board to cover the costs 
of the Board for administration and oversight of advance deposit wagering and to 
make distributions required under 8 M.R.S. § 1072; »'
_ 
0 The likelihood that the Bidder will meet the requirements for licensure to conduct 
advance deposit wagering as prescribed by the rules of the Board; and 
II. Evaluation Process _ 
An Evaluation Team comprised of State employees and a Gambling Control Board member,
' 
applied the consensus method in scoring the Bidders Qualiﬁcations & Experience, and 
Proposed Services. Scores for the Cost Proposal were assigned using a predetermined _ 
formula. Below is a summary of the scoring:
1 
Rev. 7/11/2019
