Testimony of Xpressbet 
Before the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
ln Reference to: 
LD 731, An Act Regarding the Licensing of Persons To Conduct 
Advance Deposit Wagering 
Public Hearing: Wednesday, March 8, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and distinguished members of the Veterans 
and Legal Affairs Committee, my name is James Bass, and I'm here on behalf of 
Xpressbet. Xpressbet is an Advance Deposit Wagering (“ADW”) company which isa 
fully owned subsidiary of The Stronach Group (“TSG”). TSG owns premier tracks in the 
U.S. like Santa Anita, Golden Gate, and Gulfstream Park. TSG also hosts the second 
leg of the Triple Crown, “The Preakness" at Pimlico in Maryland each year. TSG knows 
how to conduct and support live horse racing. A critical support for live racing is ADW. 
For those of you that may not be familiar with ADW, Xpressbet functions like a small 
bank. Customers open an account after Xpressbet verifies their age, address, and 
identity. The customer deposits money into their account and can wager from that 
balance on any of the over 400 tracks Xpressbet offers from around the globe. When 
the wager wins, the customer receives the same amount in his or her Xpressbet 
account as if the customer was at a track. A customer can withdraw funds at any time 
once their deposit clears or they win. 
Xpressbet strongly supports LD 731, An Act to Amend the Advance Deposit Wagering 
Laws, because it will bring more choice and offerings to Maine residents looking to 
wager responsibly and increases revenue for the General Fund and other in-state 
enﬂﬂes. 
Currently, only one provider is licensed to conduct ADW in Maine. This limitation forces 
Maine players onto just one platform. Numerous residents of Maine have contacted 
Xpressbet many times asking to open an account. Unfortunately, Xpressbet cannot 
satisfy this request due to the current limitation on licensed ADWs. We are advocates 
for Maine residents being able to choose their ADW provider based on their individual 
preferences, not an ADW picked by the state. Competition breeds excellence in any 
field and, under this proposal, the more licensed ADW providers competing in l\/laine 
would create a better experience for Maine's players. 
Under this proposal, the state would continue to receive revenue from wagers placed on 
races both in and outside of Maine. The current cascade of beneficiaries and their 
portion of captured revenue remains the same under this bill. 
Xpressbet understands that the current proposal ’s 1% collection of gross ADW income 
has been increased to 5% for races located in and outside of Maine. Xpressbet 
recognizes the importance these funds provide to the state and the other stakeholders 
and is supportive of this increase.
This bill would open up Maine’s horse wagering industry and allow providers to offer 
innovative products and platforms to Maine consumers all while being licensed and 
regulated by the Gambling Control Board. 
Under LD 731, Maine players would have more choice in ADW provider, more races to 
wager on, including the Kentucky Derby, The Preakness, and many others. The state 
would see more revenue, both to the General Fund and to other in-state entities. This is 
a win for Maine players, Maine’s horse and harness racing community, and the state. 
Xpressbet respectfully asks that you support LD 731. Thank you.
