‘ , we @- 
.“
* g. .;;;:1:"* ‘ EST. was 
TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL CIANCHETTE. MANAGER ' 
FIRST TRACKS CUMBERLAND 
IN SUPPORT or 
LD 731 - An Act Regarding the Licensing of Persons to Conduct Advance Deposit Wagering 
Sponsor: Senator B. Farrin 
Senator Hickman, Rep. Supica, and Distinguished Members of the Committee: 
As you may be aware, First Tracks Investments, LLC is the licensed Commercial Track in 
Cumberland. Please let this serve as a statement of qualiﬁed support for LD 731. We 
understand that Senator Farrin will be presenting an amendment to align the commission rate for 
future Maine ADW licensees with current law and support that amendment. 
Current Maine law provided for a competitive bid process to license ADW providers in Maine. 
Penn National, operator of the Bangor track and casino, won that ﬁrst bid and is presently the 
sole legal ADW operator in the state. Any changes should afﬁrm their existing license status. 
Further, we understand that they may suggest that new licenses under LD 731 should not be 
effective until the expiration of their existing contract and, as a practical matter, that timeline is 
likely to be appropriate given the nature and length of the rulemaking process. We have no 
objection to clariﬁcation on that matter. 
Our support for LD 731 is qualiﬁed due to a few speciﬁc issues. One is likely a relatively minor 
clariﬁcation, While two are slightly more substantive. Our goal is to avoid any negative impacts 
on live, in-person Maine racing. The harness racing industry generates attendant economic 
activity supporting Maine blacksmiths, trainers, horsemen, hay farmers, veterinarians, auto 
dealers, and everyone else who has direct or indirect involvement in putting on these athletic 
events. 
The suggestions which follow focus on ensuring that in-person experiences are not supplanted by 
ADW activities, but rather place them together in an integrated fashion for fans. With these 
amendments, the tentativeness of our support would cease and We would look forward to 
encouraging enactment by the 131“ Maine Legislature. Speciﬁcally, we would propose 3 
substantive changes in order to ensure the strength of Maine’s harness racing industry in the 
future, draft language for which is appended hereto. They are: 
1. Require ADW providers to carry Maine racing, Maine off-track betting (OTBs) 
facilities are already legally required to carry races originating in Maine (see 8 M.R.S. 
.275-D(8)). The change proposed in the attached amendment would apply the same 
, requirement to an ADW provider. This Will both provide equal treatment between off-
track wagers of in-state races (e. g. OTBs and ADWs) as well as prevent an ADW from 
blacklisting Maine racing while still offering services to Maine residents. The draft 
provides a rulemaking “escape hatch” to prevent a track from unfairly constraining an 
ADW provider. 
Require ADW providers to offer their out-of-state races to Maine facilities. Many of 
the largest ADW providers who are likely to seek licenses under this statute, should it be 
enacted, also operate tracks outside of Maine. For example, Penn National operates the 
Plainridge harness racing facility, MGM through the Empire City Casino operates 
Yonkers Raceway, and Churchill Downs operates Churchill Downs, home of the 
Kentucky Derby. This requirement just provides a level playing ﬁeld for existing Maine 
operators to access those races, again with a rulemaking “escape hatch.” 
Include Geofencing Requirements. Many ADW providers have wonderful platforms. 
Additionally, customers may enjoy utilizing a single system whether they are at home or 
at a track. However, there exists a possible perverse outcome if a patron Wishes to bet on 
a live race while at a track through their mobile phone. The track itself incurs many 
operating costs to put on Maine races; track maintenance, buildings, infrastructure, and 
the like are signiﬁcant costs and generate direct economic activity in Maine. Those costs 
are paid through the delivery of gaming and entertainment products to customers, 
including the retention of commissions from on-track wagers. 
The attached language would essentially treat on-track wagers made through an ADW as 
a “normal” on-track wager. The ADW service provider would retain a reasonable fee, to 
be established by rule, for serving as a virtual teller. With this approach, the ADW 
provider gains customers for their platform and cams a fee for their service while the 
track is incentivized to get patrons attending live Maine racing in person generating new 
fans and excitement for the sport. In short, this would create a fairer system so that an 
operating track would not shoulder an outsized portion of the operating costs that go 
directly into the Maine economy without the corresponding revenues. 
We understand the geofencing may present a technical challenge for ADW providers. 
However, this regulation presently exists in California and many ADW providers operate 
in that jurisdiction.1 Enclosed herein are (l) an excerpt from the existing California law 
and (2) legislative language from a bill presented in the Arizona Senate which would 
functionally lead to the same result. We are very willing to work with the committee and 
other members of the industry to come up with workable language. 
As noted, we believe these are relatively minor tweaks to a good bill that provides licensing 
certainty moving forward, rather than an ongoing competitive bid process. We are happy to 
answer any questions the committee may have. Thank you for your time and service to the State 
‘ See, e.g., TOC Says TwinSpires Now In Compliance With Geolocation Trackivng. Restores Signal - Horse Racing 
News I Paulick Report (https://paulickreport.com/news/the-biz/toc-says-twinspires-now-compliance-geolocatiom 
tracking-restores-signalh; 2021-O8-Boar'd.pdf (delmarfairgrounds.com) 
(htms1//delma1'fairgrounds.com/pdf/2021/202l-O8-Boardpdf).
Proposed Amendment L_D 731 
Live Racing Support 
Amend Section ll of the Amendment presented by the sponsors (new 8 MRSA §l073): 
4. Conditions of licensure. An advance deposit Wagering licensee shall: 
A. Purchase a bond to secure the advance deposit wagering accounts; and 
B. Ensure that a person who establishes an account to place a wager on horse racing by means of 
advance deposit Wagering has attained 18 years of age and is a resident of this State; 
C. Provide geolocation checks prior to the acceptance of a wager; 
D. Make all parimutuel races originating at a commercial track in this State available on 
the wagering_platform of the advance deposit wagering licensee subiect to a written 
contract between the advance deposit wagering licensee and each commercial track or, in 
the absence of a written contract, by rule adopted by the board; and 
E. In the event a licensee is _a multiiurisdictional account wagering_provider,_provide access 
to any_parimutuel pools operated by tracks afﬁliated with the provider in jurisdictions 
other than this State to all persons licensed as pari-mutuel facilities subject to a written 
contract between the multiiurisdictional account wagering_provider and the pari-mutuel 
facility or, in the absence of a written contract, by rule adopted by the board. 
Amend Section 10 of the Amendment presented by the sponsors (amend 8 MRSA §l072, add 
new section): 
3. Distributions for Qn Premises Wagering ‘. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this 
section to the contraryg any wagers placed through an advance deposit wagering licensee that are 
determined to have been placed from the physical location of a pari-mutuel facilit _v_pursuant to 
any_geolocat _ion check shall be distributed pursuant to section 286 as if the wager was placed 
with the pari-mutuel facility. The advance deposit wagering licensee shall be entitled to retain an 
amount established by rule from the share due to the pari-niutuel facility for providing the 
service. The board shall adopt rules to enforce this subsection.
Selected Statutorv or Legislative Provisions 
California Law (Cal. B&P §19604(g)): 
A racing association. a fair. a satellite wagerirgiacility, or a minisatellite wageringjacilitv may 
enter into an agreement with an ADW_provider to accept and facilitate the placement of any 
wager from a patron at its fa_cilit_ v_that a California resident could make through that ADW 
provider. Deductions from wagers made pursuant to this agreement shall be distributed in 
accordance with the provisions of this chapter governing wagers placed at that facility, excep_t 
that the board may authcijize alternative divstributions as agreed to by the ADW provider. the 
gperator of the facility accepting the wager. the association or fair conducting that breed of 
racing in the zone where the wager is placed, _and the respective hors_emen ’s organization. 
Excerpt, Arizona Senate Bill 1442 (55"‘ Legislature): 
5-119. Geofencing; racetrack enclosures; additional wagering facilities 
A. ALL RACETRACK ENCLOSURES AND ADDITIONAL WAGERING FACILITIES 
THAT ARE LICENSED TO ACCEPT WAGERS SHALL USE A GEOFENCE SYSTEM TO 
DYNAMICALLY MONITOR THE PHYSICAL LOCATION OF PATRONS ATTEMPTING 
TO PLACE WAGERS ON MOBILE WAGERING PLATFORMS. 
B. THE GEOFENCE SYSTEM SHALL PERFORM A GEOLOCATION CHECK BEFORE 
THE PLACEMENT O_F A WAGER IN AN AUTHORIZED SESSION. 
C. THE GEOFENCE SYSTEM SHALL PERFORM RECURRING GEOLOCATION CHECKS 
THROUGHOUT A PATRON'S AUTHORIZED SESSION. 
D. WAGERS PLACED THROUGH A MOBILE WAGERING PLATFORM ATA 
RACETRACK ENCLOSURE OR ADDITIONAL WAGERING FACILITY SHALL BE 
TREATED AS A WAGER MADE BY THE PATRON ON THE GROUNDS OF THE 
RACETRACK ENCLOSURE. 
E. THE RACETRACK ENCLOSURE. THE ADDITIONAL WAGERING FACILITY OR THE 
GEOFENCE PROVIDER SHALL PROVIDE ACCESS TO REAL-TIME GEOFENCE DATA 
To THE DEPARTMENT AND COMMISSION.
