 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF  
MICHAEL CIANCHETTE, MANAGER  
FIRST TRACKS CUMBERLAND  
IN S UPPORT OF  
 
LD 731 - An Act Regarding the Licensing of Persons to Conduct Advance Deposi t Wagering  
Sponsor: S enator B. Farrin  
 
Senator Hickman, Re p. Supica, and Disti nguish ed Members of the Comm ittee:  
 
As you may be aware, First Tracks Investments , LLC is the licensed  Commercial Track in 
Cumberland .  Please  let this serve as a statement of qualified support for LD 731.  We 
unde rstand that Senator Farrin will be presenting an amendment to align the commission rate for 
future Maine ADW licensees with current law  and support that amendment .   
 
Current Maine law provided for a competitive  bid process to license ADW providers in Maine.  
Penn National, operator of the Bangor track and casino, won that first bid  and is presently the 
sole legal ADW operator in the state.  Any changes s hould affirm their ex isting license status.  
Further, w e understand that they may suggest that new licens es under LD 731 should not be 
effective until the expiration of their existing contract  and, as a practical matter, that timeline is 
likely to be appropriate given the nature and l ength of the rulemaking pro cess.  We have no 
objection to c larification on that matter.   
 
Our su pport for LD 731 is qu alified  due to a few specific issues.  One is likely a relatively minor 
clarification , while t wo are slightly more substantive.  Our g oal is to avoid any negative im pacts 
on live, in-person Maine racing .  The harness racing  industry generates  attendant economic  
activi ty supporting Maine blacksmiths, trainers, horsemen, hay farmers, veterinarians , auto 
dealers, and everyone else who has direct or indirect involvement in putting on these athletic 
events.   
 
The suggestions which follow focus on ensuring that in -person experiences are not supplanted by 
ADW activities, but  rather plac e them together in a n integrated fa shion for fans.  With these 
amendments, the tentativeness  of our support would cease  and we would look forward to 
encouraging enactment by the 131st Maine Legislature.  Specifically, w e would propose 3 
substantive changes  in order to ensure the strength of Maine ’s harness racing industry in the 
future, draft language  for which is appended  hereto .  They are:  
 
1. Require ADW provide rs to carry Maine racing.   Maine off -track betting  (OTB s) 
facilities are already leg ally required to carry rac es originating  in Maine  (see 8 M.R.S. 
275-D(8)).  The change pro posed in the attach ed amendment would apply the same 
requirement to an A DW provider.  This will both provide equal treatment betwee n off-
track wagers of in -state races (e.g. OTBs and ADW s) as well as prevent an ADW from 
blacklisting Maine racing while still offering services to Maine residents.  The draft 
provides a  rulemaking “escape hatch ” to prevent a track from unfairly constraining an 
ADW provider.  
 
2. Require ADW providers to offer their out -of-state races to Maine facilities.   Many of 
the largest ADW providers who are likely to seek licenses under this statute, should it b e 
enacted, a lso operate tracks outside of Maine.  For example, Penn National operates the 
Plainridge harness racing facility,  MGM through the Empire C ity Casino operates 
Yonkers Raceway , and Churchill Downs operates Churchi ll Downs, ho me of the 
Kentucky Derby.  This requirement just provides a level playing f ield for  existing  Maine 
operat ors to access those races, again with a  rulemaking  “escape hatch .” 
 
3. Include Geofencing Requirements .  Many ADW  providers have wonderful platforms .  
Additionally, customers may enjoy u tilizing a single system whether they are at home or 
at a track.  However, the re exists a  possible perverse outcome  if a patron wish es to bet on 
a live race while at a track  through their mobile phone.   The track itself incurs  many 
operating  costs to put on Maine races ; track maintenance, buildings, infrastructure , and 
the like are si gnificant costs and generate direct economic a ctivity in Maine.  Those costs 
are paid through the delivery of gaming and entertainment products to customers, 
including the retention of commission s from on-track wagers .   
 
The attached language  would essentially treat on -track wa gers made through an ADW as 
a “normal ” on-track wager.  The ADW service pro vider would retain  a reasonable fee, to 
be established b y rule, for servi ng as a v irtual teller.  With this approach, t he ADW 
provi der gains customers  for their platform  and earns a  fee for their service  while the 
track is incentivized  to get patr ons attending live Maine racing  in person  generating new 
fans and excitement  for the sp ort.  In short, this would create a fairer system so that an 
operating track would not shoulder an outsized portion of the operating costs that go 
directly into the Maine economy w ithout the corresponding revenues.   
 
We understand the geofencing may present a technical challenge for ADW providers.  
However, this regulation presently exists in Cal ifornia and many ADW providers operate 
in that jurisdiction.1  Enclosed herein are (1) an excerpt from the existing California law  
and (2) legislative language  from a bill presented in the Arizona Senate which would  
functionally lead to the same result.  We are very willing to work with the committee and 
other members of the industry to come up with workable l anguage . 
 
As noted, we believe these are relatively minor tweaks to a good bill t hat provides licensing 
certainty moving fo rward, rather than a n ongoing competitive bid process.  We are happy to 
answer any questions the committee may have.  Thank you for your tim e and service to the State.   
  
 
1 See, e.g., TOC Says TwinSpires Now In Compliance With Geolocation Tracking, Restores Signal - Horse Racing 
News | Paulick Report  (https://paulickreport.com/news/the -biz/toc -says-twinspires -now-compliance -geolocation -
tracking -restores -signal/ ); 2021 -08-Board.pdf (delmarfairgrounds.com)  
(https://delmarfairgrounds.com/pdf/2021/2021 -08-Board.pdf ).   
Proposed Amendment LD 731  
Live Racing Support  
 
Amend Section 11 of the Amendment presented b y the sponsors  (new 8 MRSA §107 3): 
4.  Conditions of licensure.  An advance deposit wagering licensee shal l: 
A. Purchase a bond to secure the advance deposit wagering accounts; and 
B. Ensure that a person who establishes an account to place a wager on horse racing by means of  
advance depos it wagering has attained 18 years of age and is a resident of this State ;  
C. Provide geolocation checks prior to the acceptance of a wager ;  
D. Make all parimutuel races originating  at a commercial track in this State available on 
the wagering platform of the advance deposit wagering licensee  subject to a written 
contract between the  advance  deposit wagering licensee  and each commercia l track or, in 
the absence  of a written c ontract, by rule adopted by the board ; and  
E. In the event a licensee is a multijurisdictional account wagering provider , provide access 
to any parimutuel pools operated by tracks affiliated  with the  provider  in jurisdictions 
other than this State to all persons licensed as pari -mutuel facilities  subject to a written 
contract between the  multijurisdictional account wagering provider and the pari-mutuel 
facility or, in the absence  of a written c ontract, by rule adopted by the board.  
 
Amend Section 10 of the Amendment presented b y the sponsors  (amend  8 MRSA §107 2, add 
new section ): 
3. Distributions for On Premises Wagering.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this 
section to the contra ry, any wager s placed through an advan ce deposit wagering licensee  that are  
determined to have been placed from the physical  location of a pari -mutuel facility pursuant to 
any geolocation check shall be distribut ed pursuant to section 286  as if the wager was placed 
with the pari -mutuel facility .  The advance deposit wagering licensee shall be entitled to retain an 
amount established by rule from the share due to the pari -mutuel facility for providing the 
service.  The board shall adopt rules to enforce this subsection.    
 
  
Selected Statutory or Legislative Provisions  
 
 
Califor nia Law  (Cal. B&P §19604(g)) : 
 
A racing association, a fair, a satellite wagering facility, or a minisatellite wagering facility may 
enter into an agreement with an ADW provider to accept and facilitate th e placement of any 
wager from a patron at its facility that a California resident could make through that ADW 
provider. Deductions from wagers made pursuant to this agreement shall be distributed in 
accordance with the provisions of this chapter governing wagers placed at that facility, except 
that the board may authorize alternative distributions as agreed to by the ADW provider, the 
operator of the facility accepting the wager, the association or fair conducting that breed of 
racing in the zone where the wager is placed, and the respective horsemen’s organization.  
 
 
Excerpt, Arizon a Senate Bill 1442 (55th Legislature):  
 
5-119. Geofencing; racetrack enclosures; additional wagering f acilities  
 
A. ALL RACETRACK ENCLOSURES AND ADDITIONAL WAGERING FACILITIES 
THAT ARE LICENSED TO ACCEPT WAGERS SHALL USE A GEOFENCE SYSTEM TO 
DYNAMICALLY MONITOR THE PHYSICAL LOCATION OF PATRONS ATTEMPTING 
TO PLACE WAGERS ON MOBILE WAGERING PLATFORMS.  
 
B. TH E GEOFENCE SYSTEM SHALL PERFORM A GEOLOCATION CHECK BEFORE 
THE PLACEMENT OF A WAGER IN AN AUTHORIZED SESSION.  
 
C. THE GEOFENCE SYSTEM SHALL PERFORM RECURRING GEOLOCATION CHECKS 
THROUGHOUT A PATRON'S AUTHORIZED SESSION.  
 
D. WAGERS PLACED THROUGH A MOBILE WA GERING PLATFORM AT A 
RACETRACK ENCLOSURE OR ADDITIONAL WAGERING FACILITY SHALL BE 
TREATED AS A WAGER MADE BY THE PATRON ON THE GROUNDS OF THE 
RACETRACK ENCLOSURE.  
 
E. THE RACETRACK ENCLOSURE, THE ADDITIONAL WAGERING FACILITY OR THE 
GEOFENCE PROVIDER SHALL PROVIDE ACCESS TO REAL -TIME GEOFENCE DATA 
TO THE DEPARTMENT AND COMMISSION.  
