PO Box 88Belfast, ME 04915Phone: (207) 761-5616www.sierraclub.org/maine
To:Commit tee on Marine R esour cesFrom:  Ania W right,  Sierr a Club MaineDate:March 15, 2023Re:Testimon y Neither f or Nor Ag ainst, LD 487: AnAct t o Establish Coas tal W aters andSubmer ged Lands R egional Planning Commissions
 Senate Chair Reny, Representative Chair Hepler, and members of the Marine Resources Committee, I amtestifying on behalf of Sierra Club Maine, representing over 22,000 supporters and members statewide.Founded in 1892, Sierra Club is one of our nation’s oldest and largest environmental organizations. Wework diligently to amplify the power of our 3.8 million members nation-wide as we work towardscombating climate change and promoting a just and sustainable economy. To that end, we are testifyingtoday neither for nor against LD 487: An Act to Establish Coastal Waters and Submerged Lands RegionalPlanning Commissions.
We would like to emphasize the need for regional planning for our coastline. Communities know theirenvironment best, and with over 3,478 miles of coastline in Maine, with highly varied bays, estuaries,islands and inlets, it is vital for communities with lived knowledge to have power in determining what isappropriate for our waters. We appreciate the intent of LD 487 to give regions control over importantissues not considered in State regulations.
However, we recognize the concerns over determining the best mechanism for coastal communities tohave a direct say in the use of their shared waters.We support local participation throughregional/ecosystem based planning and hope more specifics on planning areas can be clarified. All ourwater bodies should have community voices involved in their stewardship.
We encourage the Committee to work with the citizens who developed this bill to find a way forward forregional planning for our coastal waters. Due to the vast diversity of our coastline, the future of ourcoastal communities and their livelihoods is dependent on localized solutions. Sierra Clubwill remainvery interested in this and will monitor it closely and plan to weigh in again if possible in light of what thecommittee decides to do about the various issues that will be noted in the public hearing and worksession.Thank you for your time and consideration.
Sincerely,Ania WrightLegislative and Political SpecialistSierra Club Maine

