Ann Hirschhorn
Friends of Frenchman Bay
LD 487
TESTIMONY OF
Ann Michelson Hirschhorn Friends of Frenchman Bay 3/16/23
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Marine Resources, my name is Ann Hirschhorn. I am a member of Friends of Frenchman Bay
and am testifying in support of LD 487.
For the past 6 years, a group of us along with Representative Lynne Williams, have been 
following problems arising in the current system for management of uses of Maine’s Coastal 
Waters and Submerged Lands (CW&SL). There have been 5 examples in our Bay alone 
which have been delineated in submitted documentation and other testimony. These 
represent municipal and regional disenfranchisement, inappropriate industrial scale, potential 
overcrowding, piecemeal decision making, reactive- versus pro-active responses, lack of 
coordination among regulating entities, inadequate monitoring and enforcement.
Nearly every Maine newspaper you pick up has an article or an op-ed about larger and often 
unproven marine projects that offer 100’s of jobs. Does any one ask if the local citizens want 
those jobs? Or how the project will affect the existing socio-economic balance, the region’s 
culture, character, vision and values? Or the cumulative effect of multiple projects? Or why, 9 
towns (to date) are seeking to, or have declared, emergency moratoria to deal with the land 
based aspects of current submerged land lease applications? Or why citizens’ dissatisfaction 
with the current system has provoked headlines such as “frustrated bystander and “vexed 
voiceless”?
We have examined the existing system and reviewed relevant legislation, including a study 
done by the National Sea Grant Law Center of existing legislation in Maine and other coastal 
states. These include: the federal Coastal Zone Management Act
(CZMA - 1972); Maine’s landmark Mandatory Shoreland Zoning Act (MSZA - 1971), the 
Coastal and Lake Watershed Districts Act,
the Regional Planning Commission Act, The Saco River Corridor Commission Act (SRCC) 
and several Shellfish Conservation (SC) entities. Only MSZA, SRCC and SC have powers of 
enforcement.
We have concluded that regulatory revision at the state level is urgently needed but will not 
suffice. There is one glaring omission that is a necessary component of any successful 
management system: planning enforced by appropriate ordinance.
In searching for a solution, we began with the fact that the State of Maine owns the CW&SL 
and holds them in trust for the benefits, rights and use of the general public. The Legislature 
is the trustee and may delegate jurisdiction to governmental entities to manage the waters in 
compliance with its trust mandate.
 Maine is a Home Rule State, meaning the Constitution has delegated broad “home rule” 
ordinance powers to the cities and towns or regional groups of towns.
The landmark Mandatory Shoreland Zoning Act of 1971 delegated jurisdiction to 
municipalities in the Shoreland Zone to plan for land use zoning within their boundaries to 
prevent pollution of the CW&SL. The Legislature, despite its duties as trustee to protect and 
preserve Maine’s finite natural resources, has not addressed comprehensive usage planning 
and ordinance development for the CW&SL. The Departments, each of which manage 
aspects of water usage for the State, have not requested authority to do so and all, except for
DACF, have declined to have a substantive conversation with us about planning.
The Legislature has recognized that there are inevitable conflicts between development and 
environmental interests. LD 487 proposes a representative regional forum and planning 
process, with enforcement, for resolution of these exponentially increasing and intense 
conflicts.
By pro-active pre-vetting, it gives a decision-making voice and vote, which they do not 
currently have, to municipalities, organizations and citizens who have the most vested interest
in, and the most intimate knowledge about, their regional waters. NOAA’s Aquaculture 
Opportunity Area Development Program includes giving weighted consideration to local 
stakeholder interests. Maine’s 2022 Aquaculture Road Map endorses pre-vetting through a 
local planning process that accounts for regional nuances.
Without regional pre-vetting and planning, the mix of uses will be determined on a first- 
come-first-served basis, by larger local and out of state applicants, and by the single decision 
makers heading each department. With the onslaught of demands from larger and unproven 
aquaculture, windmills and wind ports, larger and more cruise ships, all added to existing 
farms, wild fisheries, lobstering, recreation and tourism, there will be longer and and more 
contentious delays, chaotic mix of uses and greater expense to all.
In summary, LD 487 adds regional planning and enforcement, a missing necessary 
component, to the usage regulation of the coastal waters and submerged lands. It ensures 
the State continues to fulfill its duty, as trustee of the waters, to preserve the general public’s 
rights to use and benefit from the CW&SL which can only be done by maintaining its finite 
natural resources in as pristine a condition as possible.
You will hear from the opposition that the the current system is working; that this is 
unnecessary, too complex and destabilizing for the Departments; that it creates an extra step 
for applicants in an already complicated application process; that it is NIMBYism from 
part-time residents; that it is anti-aquaculture; that it is not fair or feasible. It has been 
suggested that 8 regional planning commissions already exist and could be co-opted rather 
than creating a new system. We had rejected that proposal early on because: it is formed by 
municipalities who do not currently have jurisdiction
for the waters and have no experience in water use planning; they are an advisory agency 
and have no powers of enforcement; their voting membership does not include non-municipal
stakeholders; the districts are not organized by embayment, instead they are a mix of towns 
including those beyond the shoreland zone.
Adoption of, and transition to, a new system will require thought and effort, will not be easy, 
but at times it just has to be done. The landmark Mandatory Shoreland Zoning Act, which was
urgently needed at the time, provoked contention before it was passed, forbid the discharge 
of land-based sewage into the waters and required the installment of septic or sewage 
treatment systems. Maine did it anyway and it has worked for 52 years.
Please examine all the facts. Remember the Legislature’s responsibilities as trustee of the 
waters, Decide for yourselves if you see the system as out-dated and inadequate for current 
demands. Think about how to solve it and whether you agree with our proposal. If you don’t 
agree, please don’t toss the issue side: find an effective way to modify LD 487 or come up 
with a better solution.
The Governor has declared that Maine can’t wait on climate action. Neither can it wait to 
ensure the ongoing protection and preservation of its finite natural resources.
We have also submitted a Fact Sheet and a narrative overview which more completely 
describe the problems, history and rationale for the bill, the bill itself and its benefits.
Thank you,
Ann M. Hirschhorn, M.D. sunsetrockamh@hotmail.com Hancock Point, Maine Tucson, 
Arizona 510-906-3203
FACT SHEET FOR LD 487:
AN ACT TO ESTABLISH COASTAL WATERS AND SUBMERGED LANDS (CW&SL) 
REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSIONS
3/14/23
THE PROBLEM
In the current system:
There is regional disenfranchisement: Regional citizens, who have the most vested interest in
and the most intimate knowledge about their CW&SL, do not have a significant voice or vote 
in allocation of water usage in their region.
Regional, cultural and socioeconomic vision, values, impact, appropriateness and cumulative 
effects are not required considerations.
There is no provision for planning. Without it, the exponentially increasing competing 
pressures for private and public CW&SL usage and development enables “homesteading” 
(first come first served allocation).
The approach is reactive rather than proactive: In the absence of planning, community 
options for reacting to projects, which are inappropriate for their region or threatening to 
existing livelihoods and traditions, are often “too little and too late”.
Projects are examined vertically (in parallel) without mandated coordination among deciders.
In the Frenchman Bay region alone, there have been 5 examples of system failure in the past
6 years:
1) Bar Harbor megapier and Port Authority proposal: regional disenfranchisement, DOT 
determines Port Authority without consulting SLB, DMR, DEP;
2) American Aquafarms Salmon Pen application: inappropriate industrial scale;
3) overcrowding of aquaculture lease applications for Mount Desert Narrows;
4) Gouldsboro’s need to develop ordinances for the land-based installation for American 
Aquafarms at a cost of $100,000;
5) Black Island salmon pen die-off: 175,000 fish reported too late for proper investigation and 
considered “cost of doing business”.
HISTORY AND RATIONALE
State owns the CW&SL and holds them in trust for benefits and rights and use of the public.
The national Coastal Zone Management Act (CZMA) of 1972 mandated shoreland and 
coastal waters protection and preservation of natural resources.
Maine is a Home Rule State.
The landmark mandatory Shoreland Zoning Act (MSZA) of 1971 delegated jurisdiction to 
municipalities to plan, monitor and enforce land use planning. No one could engage in any 
use of land within a municipality’s shoreland jurisdiction without first obtaining a zoning permit
 from the municipality’s Planning Board and then complying with all municipal, state and 
federal regulatory, licensing and permitting requirements.
The MSZA required shoreland zoning to prevent land based pollution of the waters. Similarly 
pollution of the water impacts not only the marine ecosystem but the contiguous shoreland as
well. Uncontrolled usage and development risk pollution of both the waters and the land.
The Legislature has delegated jurisdiction for specific regional administration to the Saco 
River Corridor Commission and the Frenchman Bay and other Regional Shellfish 
Conservation Organizations.
NOAA is developing Aquaculture Opportunity Areas with weight given to local stakeholder 
input.
Maine Aquaculture Roadmap (2022): Goal 4, Item 2: “Explore Aquaculture development 
zones with help of municipalities, establishing areas pre-vetted through a local planning 
process that accounts for regional nuances”.
CW&SL Planning can’t be central:
1) Maine’s coastline is too long and diverse;
2) due to conflict of interest, planning can’t be done in a department or agency that is
regulatory, involves construction or promotion.
CW&SL Planning can’t be done by individual municipalities because the waters of a region 
commingle, flowing in and out with the tides or downstream from the rivers.
The Legislature, which has a duty to protect and preserve the waters for the rights, benefits 
and use of the public, has not addressed comprehensive CW&SL usage planning.
The Legislature has recognized that there are inevitable conflicts between development and 
environmental concerns.
This bill provides a forum and planning process for resolution of these conflicts.
PROPOSED SOLUTION: LD 487
This bill requires the establishment of regional planning commissions to develop and 
administer long-term water use plans and ordinances for the large bays and coastal areas of 
the state.
The commissions will have equal and inclusive representation of all vested regional 
stakeholders. These include, but are not limited to: regional municipalities; wild fisheries and 
aquaculture including lobsters, shellfish, sea vegetables and finfish; tourism; marine-based 
industries; recreation; navigation; private and public shoreland owners; conservation and 
environmental organizations.
The regions will be formed by mutual consent.
LD 487 delegates planning, ordinance development, administration and enforcement 
authority and powers to the commissions.
 Each region’s ordinance will define the categories of permissible activities which will be at 
least as restrictive as the state model. The commission will delineate which activities do not 
require a permit, which do require a permit and which are not permissible.
It requires the DEP
1) to develop model planning guides and ordinances
2) to provide assistance in formation of the regional commissions
3) to provide ongoing supervision and assistance to the commissions.
The commissions’ activities will be coordinated with and complementary to, not duplicative of,
the regulatory and management functions carried out by state and federal agencies.
The legislation establishes a 3-year process for development of state models, formation of 
commissions, and development of unique regional plans and ordinances.
BENEFITS
LD 487 gives a decision-making voice and a vote, which they do not currently have, to 
regional municipalities, organizations, and citizens who have the most vested interest in, and 
the most intimate knowledge about, their coastal waters.
It acknowledges and fulfills the principle of Maine’s Home Rule status.
It gives municipalities a jurisdiction, powers and authority, for their waters which they do not
currently have.
It adds planning, a necessary component of good management, to use and development of 
the
CW&SL.
It creates an appropriate regional forum and process to address and resolve the exponentially
increasing and competing demands for public and private usage and development of Maine’s 
waters.
It allows for weighted consideration of local factors and interests that are not considered in 
the current management system.
It provides proactively for regional pre-vetting of usage and development proposals. This will 
save time, effort, and expense at the municipal, state and federal levels.
By cost-sharing, it reduces municipalities expenses in planning for and responding to 
proposed projects in their regional waters.
It gives municipalities jurisdiction to plan for, administer and enforce usage development 
decisions in their contiguous waters similar to the jurisdiction they now have for the lands 
within their borders.
By planning and pre-vetting, it can reduce the number and expense of contentious 
evaluations and processes at the state and federal levels.
This bill adds regional planning, a missing necessary component, to the usage regulation of 
the coastal waters and submerged lands. It ensures the state continues to fulfill its duty, as 
trustee of the CW&SL, to preserve and protect its finite natural resources.
REFERENCES
“The State of Maine holds the Submerged Lands, as defined herein, in trust for the benefit, 
rights and use of the general public.” [Ch 53 Submerged Lands Rules 01-670]
The Legislature has found and declared “that the highest and best uses of the seacoast of the
State are as a source of public and private recreation and solace from the pressures of an 
industrialized society, and as source of public and private commerce in fishing, lobstering and
gathering of other marine life used and useful in food production and other commercial 
activities.’ [Title 38, Ch 3 Protection and Improvement of Waters, Subch 2-A #541]
The Legislature has further found and declared “that the preservations of these uses is a 
matter of the highest urgency and priority, and that such uses can only be served effectively 
by maintaining the coastal waters, estuaries, tidal flats beaches and public lands adjoining the
seacoast in as pristine condition as possible taking into account the multiple use 
accommodations necessary to provide the broadest possible promotion of public and private 
interest with the least possible conflicts in such diverse uses.” [Ibid.]
The Legislature subsequently found, in 1985, that “the Maine coast is an asset of 
immeasurable value to the people of the State and the nation, and that there is a state 
interest in the conservation, beneficial use and effective management of the coast’s 
resources; that development of the coastal area is increasing rapidly, and that this 
development poses a significant threat to the resources of the coast and to the traditional 
livelihoods of its residents; that the United States Congress has recognized the importance of 
coastal resources though the passage of the United States Coastal Management Act of 
1972...” [MRS Title 38, Ch 19 Coastal Waters Management Policies, #1801-2]
The Legislature also declares that “the well-being of the citizens of this State depends on 
striking a carefully considered and well reasoned balance among competing uses of the 
State’s coastal area.” {Ibid.]
AN ACT TO ESTABLISH CW&SL REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSIONS 3/10/23
SUMMARY
This bill requires establishment of Coastal Waters and Submerged Lands (CW&SL) regional 
planning commissions to develop and administer long-term water use plans and ordinances 
for the large bays and coastal areas in this state.
The legislation establishes a 3-year process for
1) creating a state coastal water use planning guide and model ordinance; and
2) forming large bay or coastal area commissions which will develop and administer water
usage plans and ordinances for the CW&SL of their unique regions.
OVERVIEW
The state of Maine owns the CW&SL from the low water mark to the 3-mile limit. It holds them
in trust for the benefit, rights and use of the public: its past, present and future generations. 
As trustee, the state has a duty to preserve, protect, restore and enhance the waters’ finite 
resources in accordance with Maine’s status as a Home Rule state.
Over 50 years ago, Maine undertook to clean up its waters polluted by discharges from land- 
based activities. In 1971, the legislature passed the Mandatory Shoreland Zoning Act (MSZA)
to prevent further pollution by providing effective land use controls. It does so through land 
use plans and ordinances created and administered by municipalities with Department of 
Environmental Protection (DEP) providing supervision and technical advice.
Subsequently the national Coastal Zone Management Act (CZMA) of 1972 required states to 
develop and implement programs to ensure shoreland and coastal waters protection and 
preservation of natural resources. Yet Maine has never extended the protections it provided 
to its shorelands by establishing a planning process for its CW&SL.
The State of Maine is experiencing exponentially increasing demands for public and private 
usage and development of its CW&SL with competing developmental, economic, ecologic, 
conservation and social/community pressures. This bill establishes a mandated forum and 
process for planning and its administration in order to achieve balanced, equitable and 
transparent resolutions, while ensuring the required preservation and protection.
At present, the legislature delegates jurisdiction, power and authority to regulate the CW&SL 
to multiple state departments working in parallel without mandated coordination. Usage 
demands are evaluated on an ad hoc basis. Many of the legitimate vested interests are not 
considered in the final decision making processes. Nor are many invested stakeholders 
empowered with a voice or a vote.
In this bill, the Legislature authorizes the establishment of regional commissions with 
jurisdiction, power and authority to plan for CW&SL usage. The bill sets up a planning 
structure that allows pre-vetting of regional issues and conflicts prior to the consideration of 
the proscribed regulatory requirements, ensuring a fair process as well as saving time, effort 
and expense for all parties.
CW&SL planning decisions must be made on a regional rather than a central or municipal 
basis. Maine’s coastline is too long and diverse for effective central government planning yet 
commingling of regional waters precludes administration by single municipalities. The 
Legislature has already delegated regional management authority to the Saco River Corridor 
Commission (1973).
Regional citizens have the most vested interest in, and the most intimate knowledge about, 
their local lands and waters. In this bill, regional commissions are formed by mutual consent. 
Voting members represent each municipality and each vested stakeholder interest. Each 
Commission is charged with forming a locally coordinated entity which will develop a planning
process to balance appropriate development with the region’s socio-economic needs and with
conservation of the finite natural resources in the CW&SL of its unique region. Its functions 
are analogous to a planning board’s role in carrying out land use zoning within the MSZA. 
Based on state models, developed by the DEP, each commission will
1) develop long-term plans and ordinances; and
2) monitor and enforce them on an on-going basis.
Each commission’s activities will be complementary to, not duplicative of, the regulatory and 
management functions currently carried out by state and federal entities.
In summary, this bill adds planning, a missing necessary component, to the usage regulation 
of the CW&SL. It ensures the state continues to fulfill its duty as trustee to preserve and 
protect its finite natural resources.

