My Name is Cameron Barner, and I am Co-Owner and operator of Love Point Oysters in
Freeport, Maine. I am writing in opposition to LD 487.
This bill is vague, duplicative, and is ultimately an unnecessary burden on coastal municipalities
and the people who make their living on the water.  Our Maine state waters are a public good to
which all residents have equal rights and responsibilities, no matter the region in which they live.
Our state waters should be governed by state agencies that represent all our residents. Adding
a layer of municipal or regional governance via the commissions described in this bill could
duplicate the authority of multiple state agencies, and would create a confusing hodge-podge of
regulations for users of the water to navigate. Fishermen, aquaculturists, and other commercial
users of state waters, are already subject to intense state regulation in order to maintain the
privilege of working on the water. Adding a layer of municipal regulation in addition to what is
already in place and functional, would adversely impact our long standing, and growing marine
economy. Furthermore, as real estate in coastal communities gets more expensive, a huge
portion of commercial fisherman and aquaculturists are being forced to live further inland, and
their voices would be quickly drowned out if they were unable to easily participate in the
proposed commissions.
As an aquaculturist, and business owner, I am deeply aware of the time and money it takes to
build a business on the water. Our state claims that our marine economy should be bolstered,
so that it can continue to thrive and be a model for sustainable economic growth in coastal
areas around the country. If this bill passes, it will not help to ensure that more voices are heard,
it will simply burden our coastal communities with unfunded and unorganized bureaucracy, and
cause more financial stress to businesses who operate on razor thin margins.  I urge you to
consider the flaws in LD 487, and vote it down before it wastes the time and resources of the
members of our coastal communities and marine economy.
Thank you,
Cameron Barner
