Carol Chappell
Bar Harbor
LD 487
Hello,
I am Carol Chappell, a retired Bar Harbor teacher. Every spring my third graders and 
I stenciled “Dump No Waste, Drains To Bay” next to storm sewer grates. The health 
of the waters of Frenchman Bay are of upmost importance to our community which 
relies heavily on traditional fishing, tourism, and scientific research institutions for 
our livelihoods. I am here in support of LD 487.
As we stenciled, ‘Dump No Waste, Drains to Bay’, little did we realize that there was 
no coordinated planing for the coastal waters of Frenchman Bay. Recently, I have 
watched increasing competitive pressures for the private and public coastal waters 
usage in Frenchman Bay. It appears that permits are processed on a first come, first 
served basis. The current process does not give the towns effected by proposed 
development close to their waters, any regulatory control. The waters of Frenchman 
Bay are surrounded by at least 7 different municipalities. Each has different governing
authority over different parts of the bay. But the waters of the bay do not stop at 
municipal boundaries. One town’s choices of water use effects all the rest of the bay 
and it is important to have  regulatory oversight for the whole bay into which each 
municipality has decision making input.
There have been several recent Bar Harbor issues that demonstrate the need for LD 
487. American Aquafarms has proposed building an industrial scale salmon farm in 
the bay. One set of 15 pens could be placed next to Bald Rock, owned by the Bar 
Harbor Village Improvement Society. A second set could be next to Long Porcupine 
Island which is owned by Acadia National Park. The pens are in close proximity to 
Bar Harbor and Acadia National Park but the Town of Gouldsboro has jurisdiction 
over those waters and therefor Bar Harbor and the park have no official input into 
potential licensing of this site.
There was a similar situation back in 2017. A plan was put forth, in Bar Harbor, to 
build a berthing pier for cruise ships. It was felt, by some folks, that having a port 
authority would help expedite this process. This port authority legislation would have 
opened the full Bar Harbor coast line not only to cruise ship berthing piers but also to 
commercial shipping. Many folks around the bay felt this was an inappropriate use of 
the waters that support traditional fishing and tourism activities, but it was the Town 
of Bar Harbor that would ultimately have had the power to vote on the proposal had 
the governor not vetoed the legislation.
I strongly support LD 487 because it requires the establishment of a regional planning
commission to administer long term water use plans and ordinances. Recent history 
has shown we need regional planning to protect the Waters of Frenchman bay and 
other large bays and coastal areas in our state.
