Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources please 
accept my testimony in opposition to LD 487 "An Act to Establish Coastal Waters and Submerged Lands Regional Planning 
Commissions". My name is Daniel Devereaux, and I am a co-owner of Mere Point Oyster Company, a retired Brunswick Harbor 
Master & Marine Warden (23 years).  I live and work on the coastal waters of Casco Bay, Maquoit Bay specifically. I'm also the 
Town of Brunswick’s coastal resource manager. My family and I have fished, dug clams, collected seaweed, lobstered, collected 
water quality, conducted coastal clean ups, executed shellfish research and last but not least camped on the various island in 
Casco Bay over the years. Needless to say, we love our home, we love our bay, and we love our state. We started our oyster 
farm in 2016, which has been able to provide a living for my adult children, and thirteen other young people who work on the 
water and live in the Brunswick community. Keeping younger generations here working is important, especially in today’s 
economic climate, where the costs of coastal property and living in Maine has skyrocketed.  
Usurping existing state agencies, citizen advisory boards, academia, and local municipal input and authority with a regional 
commission is a serious threat to ongoing climate adaptation and coastal resiliency strategies that are continually being 
developed to address ocean changes. Forced regionalization will create challenges by insurgent groups who propagate the 
feelings of fear of change with local communities. This is already taking place along certain areas of the Maine Coast.  With 
regionalism, local communities lose influence in the development of their own coastal areas. State agencies, municipalities, and 
NGO’s have built collaborative relationships involving engaged residents, multiple municipalities, academia, associations, and 
regulatory agencies. Adding an additional layer of bureaucracy to an already complicated regulatory system is a sure way to 
discourage interests from local coastal residents who have passion and interest for working on the water and continuing 
Mainers working heritage.  The vagueness of the bill language and the callous message it sends to state agencies, local residents, 
coastal communities, and others who are already investing money, time and effort into coastal initiatives and comprehensive 
plans is abhorrent. Forced regionalization is a misunderstanding the existing state and local structures currently in place that 
have ensured equitable usage of our coastal waters over time. I can assure you that if LD487 is passed as proposed, it will 
increase the pace of gentrification in our coastal areas, particularly areas Downeast. Is this really what this LD487 is about, 
increasing the rate of gentrification? 
If passed this will infect local coastal areas with outside interests who are more concerned with land values and views rather 
than the health of the waters, local residents, local coastal heritages, or local economies. It is important to recognize each 
coastal community’s cultural heritage and how the usage of towns coastal waters have defined those community identities.  The 
fabric of communities are built over centuries, not overnight. Bills like this threaten our very own coastal heritage. 
The legislation calls for mandatory participation, making this bill an unfunded mandate for municipalities, and putting additional 
burden on the local taxpayers of coastal communities. Average working folks can barely afford to keep living in many of these 
rapidly gentrifying communities. Based on over 30 years of coastal waters experience, what works in one municipality, often 
times doesn't not work in neighboring municipalities. We need to look no further than recent air boat legislation that has been 
deliberated by this Committee.  Furthermore, the entire legislations undermines existing climate action plans that are in place to 
help curb the impacts of changing ocean and coastal environments. .  
I continue to support the orderly development and ongoing efforts to seek constructive solutions to address ocean warming/
climate change, local resident aquaculture development concerns, coastal gentrification, and social licensing to work on the 
water. The data supports that the existing regulatory systems and collaborative initiatives are working. Please consider opposing 
LD487 "An Act to Establish Coastal Waters and Submerged Lands Regional Planning Commissions" and vote ought not to pass.  
Respectfully, 
Daniel  Devereaux  
Mere Point Oy ster Company Co -Owner 
1087 Mere Point Rd. ~ Brunswick ~Maine ~ 04011 
 www.merepointoyster.com ~ (207) 729-3 651 
Opposition Testimony  of 
Daniel R. Devereaux
LD 487” 
131st Maine Legislature
 Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources
Daniel  Devereaux
Mere Point Oyster Company Brunswick
LD 487
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Marine Resources please accept my testimony in opposition to LD 487 "An Act
to Establish Coastal Waters and Submerged Lands Regional Planning Commissions". My 
name is Daniel Devereaux, and I am a co-owner of Mere Point Oyster Company, a retired 
Brunswick Harbor Master & Marine Warden (23 years).  I live and work on the coastal waters 
of Casco Bay, Maquoit Bay specifically. I'm also the Town of Brunswick’s coastal resource 
manager. My family and I have fished, dug clams, collected seaweed, lobstered, collected 
water quality, conducted coastal clean ups, executed shellfish research and last but not least 
camped on the various island in Casco Bay over the years. Needless to say, we love our 
home, we love our bay, and we love our state. We started our oyster farm in 2016, which has 
been able to provide a living for my adult children, and thirteen other young people who work 
on the water and live in the Brunswick community. Keeping younger generations here 
working is important, especially in today’s economic climate, where the costs of coastal 
property and living in Maine has skyrocketed.  
Usurping existing state agencies, citizen advisory boards, academia, and local municipal 
input and authority with a regional commission is a serious threat to ongoing climate 
adaptation and coastal resiliency strategies that are continually being developed to address 
ocean changes. Forced regionalization will create challenges by insurgent groups who 
propagate the feelings of fear of change with local communities. This is already taking place 
along certain areas of the Maine Coast.  With regionalism, local communities lose influence in
the development of their own coastal areas. State agencies, municipalities, and NGO’s have 
built collaborative relationships involving engaged residents, multiple municipalities, 
academia, associations, and regulatory agencies. Adding an additional layer of bureaucracy 
to an already complicated regulatory system is a sure way to discourage interests from local 
coastal residents who have passion and interest for working on the water and continuing 
Mainers working heritage.  The vagueness of the bill language and the callous message it 
sends to state agencies, local residents, coastal communities, and others who are already 
investing money, time and effort into coastal initiatives and comprehensive plans is abhorrent.
Forced regionalization is a misunderstanding the existing state and local structures currently 
in place that have ensured equitable usage of our coastal waters over time. I can assure you 
that if LD487 is passed as proposed, it will increase the pace of gentrification in our coastal 
areas, particularly areas Downeast. Is this really what this LD487 is about, increasing the rate
of gentrification? 
If passed this will infect local coastal areas with outside interests who are more concerned 
with land values and views rather than the health of the waters, local residents, local coastal 
heritages, or local economies. It is important to recognize each coastal community’s cultural 
heritage and how the usage of towns coastal waters have defined those community identities.
The fabric of communities are built over centuries, not overnight. Bills like this threaten our 
very own coastal heritage. 
The legislation calls for mandatory participation, making this bill an unfunded mandate for 
municipalities, and putting additional burden on the local taxpayers of coastal communities. 
Average working folks can barely afford to keep living in many of these rapidly gentrifying 
communities. Based on over 30 years of coastal waters experience, what works in one 
municipality, often times doesn't not work in neighboring municipalities. We need to look no 
further than recent air boat legislation that has been deliberated by this Committee.  
Furthermore, the entire legislations undermines existing climate action plans that are in place 
to help curb the impacts of changing ocean and coastal environments. .  
I continue to support the orderly development and ongoing efforts to seek constructive 
solutions to address ocean warming/climate change, local resident aquaculture development 
concerns, coastal gentrification, and social licensing to work on the water. The data supports 
that the existing regulatory systems and collaborative initiatives are working. Please consider 
opposing LD487 "An Act to Establish Coastal Waters and Submerged Lands Regional 
Planning Commissions" and vote ought not to pass.  
Respectfully Submitted
Daniel R Devereaux
MPOC 

