Written Testimony 
David E. Dennison, Lamoine, Maine
for
LD487: An Act to Establish Coastal Waters and Submerged
Lands Regional Planning Commissions  
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the 
Committee,
My name is David E. Dennison. I am a resident of Lamoine, Maine. I do not currently belong 
to any particular organization, but have held many diverse positions that compel me to be in 
favor of supporting this bill.
My formal education includes a degree in Marine Biology from Texas A&M University.
I trained as the first manager of a large Atlantic Salmon fish hatchery located on the 
Kennebec River in Embden.
I have worked as a Marine Specialist for the Maine Department of Marine Resources,  Public 
Health Division, testing water quality and surveying the shoreline for pollution threats 
throughout the eastern half of our coastline.  I assisted with data collection for the 
Department’s Aquaculture Division, primarily in the vicinity of salmon aquaculture pens in 
Washington and Hancock Counties, both from the surface and utilizing SCUBA gear for visual
confirmation of data. I also collected commercial seafood landings data from Washington 
County in collaboration with the National Marine Fisheries Service office in Rockland.
I have been a commercial fisherman for scallops, sea urchins, lobster, clams, and marine 
worms. I have logged over 9,000 hours of SCUBA diving time, primarily in Jericho, Blue Hill, 
and Frenchman Bays.
I have and continue to fish recreationally statewide for shellfish and finfish, including large 
pelagics such as Bluefin Tuna.
I have held a 100 Ton USCG Master Captain’s license, which allowed me to work as relief 
captain and crew aboard a Bar Harbor based whale watch company that showed tens of 
thousands of visitors how beautiful our coast is from the water.
I have worked in the pleasure yacht industry, including managing and maintaining a fleet of 
Hinckley charter yachts.
I am also a shorefront property owner in Lamoine.
I list these jobs to point out that I have had the opportunity to see many different facets and 
aspects of our coastal waters and submerged lands.  I have interacted with thousands of 
groups, businesses, and individuals, with just as many viewpoints about what is best for our 
shared resources.
I strongly feel that no single interested party or entity should be allowed to control the 
resource(s) that we all have an interest in.  In my opinion, this bill allows for careful planning 
for the multiple uses of these resources, with guidance that is specific for each region of our 
coast.
From our spectacular sandy beaches and marshes in southern Maine, to the magnificent bold
coast of Downeast Maine, our coastline and coastal communities change dramatically from 
bay to bay.  A “one size fits all” approach cannot begin to address the uniqueness of each 
region of our coast.  I feel this bill is a great step in the right direction to ensure that future 
generations will have the same opportunities that I have enjoyed in my lifetime.
Thank you for your consideration.
