STATE OF MAINE
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION & FORESTRY
OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER
22 STATE HOUSE STATION
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333
JANET T. MILLSAMANDA E. BEAL
GOVERNORCOMMISSIONER
HARLOW BUILDINGPHONE: (207) 287-3200
18 ELKINS LANEFAX: (207) 287-2400
AUGUSTA, MAINEWWW.MAINE.GOV/DACFMarch 16, 2023
Dear Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Marine 
Resources, 
The Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry (DACF) is opposed to LD 487, An Act to 
Establish Coastal Waters and Submerged Lands Regional Planning Commissions, for the reasons 
outlined below.
As background and context, the State of Maine holds the title to submerged lands in all coastal waters 
and Great Ponds.  In coastal waters, submerged lands extend from the mean low-tide line seaward to 
the three-mile territorial limit of state waters.  The Submerged Lands Program (SLP) within DACF 
manages submerged lands through a leasing program that balances the public trust rights of fishing, 
fowling, and navigation with the demands of privately owned, water-dependent structures such as 
piers, floating docks, and submarine cables.  Aquaculture leasing, however, is managed by the Maine 
Department of Marine Resources (DMR).
LD 487 would undermine the State’s authority over submerged lands and add a layer of redundant 
review to an already comprehensive process in SLP reviews of submerged lands applications.  The 
SLP, for example, solicits comments from abutting property owners, the host municipality, the local 
harbor master, the public at large, and state agencies such as DMR.  The SLP’s review process, from 
the time we receive an application to issuing Final Findings and Decision and a conveyance to the 
applicant, typically takes 90 days.  The proposed coastal planning commission under LD 487 would 
almost certainly extend and complicate this review process.
The proposed legislation would also require DACF to increase staffing levels to address additional 
workloads necessary to attend the statewide coastal commission meetings envisioned by LD 487.  
Additional staffing would also be required to respond to the inevitable requests for information from 
the proposed commissions, all while continuing to deliver the SLP’s existing, efficient, and 
deliberative review process.
Further, LD 487 seeks to establish another group of regional planning commissions in addition to the 
eight regional planning organizations already serving coastal Maine municipalities.  The areas served 
by the proposed coastal planning commissions under LD 487 would include Maine’s large coastal 
embayments.  These areas would also cover a portion of the eight regional planning organizations 
already serving coastal municipalities.  LD 487 would create a duplicative series of regional planning 
organizations already prescribed under state law and would conflict with the mission and purpose of 
existing regional planning organizations (30-A MRS §2321).  A new set of planning organizations may 
also conflict with municipal planning boards and municipal land use regulations, usurping home rule 
authority while having potential direct fiscal impacts on municipalities.
Thank you for your consideration of these concerns.  We will be available to answer questions at the 
work session.
Sincerely, 
John E. Noll, Submerged Lands Program, Director
Bureau of Parks and Lands
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
