 March 16, 2022 
 Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources 
 Cross Building, Room 206 
 Augusta, ME. 04333 
 Representative Williams, Representative Dodge, Representative Graham, Representative 
 Milliken, Representative Warren, Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
 Marine Resources: 
 Thank you for taking the time to hear my testimony today. My name is Hillevi Jaegerman. I am 
 co-owner of Wolfe Neck Oyster Company which is located in the waters of Casco Bay and I live 
 in Portland. 
 I stand before you today to testify in strong opposition to LD 487, “An Act to Establish Coastal 
 Waters and Submerged Lands Regional Planning Commissions.” 
 LD 487 proposes an act that upends the mechanism of statewide regulation we currently have 
 in place. Instead of sound and fair statewide policies, the bill contains vagaries regarding 
 regulatory scope and regionality, and relies on unexpert local decision-making which could be 
 influenced by politics rather than science. 
 The fact that standards, rules, and regulations will vary by each regional planning commission 
 does not support the notion that this bill will provide “an additional layer of regulatory oversight” 
 but instead that it risks dismantling the framework of existing regulation and control measures 
 while setting up battles of unequal strength with no assurance of fair arbiter due to 
 inconsistencies of power and politics of different regional bodies. This bill will stifle investment in 
 the working waterfront and opens a door for arbitrary and discriminatory policies, diverting 
 resources from sustainable growth towards potentially exclusionary tendencies. 
 I support efforts to find constructive solutions that address public (and regionally specific) 
 concerns regarding marine waters and use, but solutions addressing the authority and 
 permissions to govern the policy that will impact the interests of aquaculturists and the interests 
 of local communities ought to be kept within the purview of existing regulatory bodies. 
 Finally, I want to thank the committee for your willingness to listen to those of us who make our 
 living on the water and help preserve Maine’s endangered working waterfronts. Please vote 
 Ought NOT to Pass on LD 487. Thank you for your attention. I would be glad to answer any 
 questions you have. 
 Respectfully, 
 Hillevi Jaegerman 
