Hello,
My name is Jeff Auger, I have lived in Maine for over 10 years working on the water farming oysters. I 
came to this state to be part of its rich working waterfront heritage and live life the way it should be. LD 
487 is a direct affront to my livelihood, the future growth of Maine’s waterfront, and the potential for 
others to experience the career I have had the fortune of finding in our state. 
LD 487 creates a patchwork authority structure with extremely vague boundary definitions. One 
commission could govern a few miles while another could encompass hundreds. Furthermore, different 
commissions will have different rules and regulations. Not only would this turn municipalities against 
each other but having different rules in different areas severely hinders our ability to diversify our 
locations and spread the risk in farming. Farming oysters is hard enough, adding rules and regulations 
specific to geography adds another unnecessary burden. 
My main opposition to LD 487 centers on creating yet another regulatory hurdle for our farmers to jump 
through when none is needed. Shellfish farming is hard: not only do we have harsh weather conditions 
to work through, but we have numerous regulations from state agencies we must comply with. This has 
translated to a lease process that can take up to 3 years (the current farm I work on has been in the 
lease process now for 2.5 years). Unlike other fisheries we also must wait for product to grow before we 
realize revenue…with such an intensive lease structure it can take a farm 5 years before they are able to 
sell any oyster. 
Adding to the leasing burden our state has will only prevent aquaculture from forming and dissuade the 
young professionals that make up our industry from coming to Maine to work. We operate in a truly 
sustainable industry, where the oysters we grow clean and improve our waterbodies while providing 
good year-round jobs. LD 487 is an attempt to rope off the coast and prevent Maine from continuing its 
working waterfront tradition. 
-Jeff Auger
