LaCroix, Linda M. 
From: Hepler, Allison 
Sent: Thursday, March 16, 2023 10:23 AM 
To: Legislature: Committee on Marine Resources 
Subject: Fw: LD 487: An Act to Establish Coastal Waters and Submerged Lands Regional Planning 
Commissions 
This testimony/email was inadvertantly sent to former members of the Marine Resources Committee. 
allison 
Allison Hepler 
House District 49 
Arrowsic, Georgetown, Phippsburg, West Bath and Woolwich 
P/ease be advised that any information sent to me in my capacity as a /eg/3/ator may become a matter of pub//c record as 
indicated in the Maine Freedom of Access Act http://www.ma/ne.gov/foaa.index.htm 
From: Vitelli, Eloise 
Sent: Wednesday, March 15, 2023 3:31 PM 
To: Hepler, Allison 
Subject: Fwd: LD 487: An Act to Establish Coastal Waters and Submerged Lands Regional Planning Commissions 
Sent from my iPhone 
Begin forwarded message: 
From: Jordi St John <merrittislandoysters@gmail.com> 
Date: March 15, 2023 at 2:03:58 PM EDT 
To: "Vitelli, Eloise" <Eloise.Vitelli@|egislature.maine.gov>, Jay McCreight 
<jay.mccreight@|egislature.maine.gov> 
Subject: LD 487: An Act to Establish Coastal Waters and Submerged Lands Regional Planning 
Commissions 
Hello Eloise and Jay, 
lam writing about LD 487: An Act to Establish Coastal Waters and Submerged Lands Regional 
Planning Commissions. I hope you will oppose this for the following reasons:
1
1. I support MAA and their efforts to find constructive solutions that address public 
concerns while allowing Maine aquaculture businesses to grow. 
2. The bill allows the establishment of commissions that would usurp and/or duplicate 
authority that at least three state regulatory agencies already have. 
3. The bill is vague and contains no definition of "large bays” or ”other coastal regions" to 
which it applies. 
4. The bill would create a checkerboard of standards, rules,and regulations that vary along 
the coast, pit municipalities against each other, and establish gated communities in 
public waters. 
5. The bill will create commissions that may establish rules and regulations which conflict 
with existing state and federal laws and regulations. 
6. The bill will allow the creation of additional permits and fees that will significantly 
increase the cost of doing business and put Maine sea farmers at a competitive 
disadvantage. 
7. The bill will give municipalities management responsibilities over state waters that they 
do not have the resources or expertise to implement. 
8. Section 2 ofthe bill constitutes an unfunded mandate to municipalities. 
9. The bill will significantly increase municipalities legal exposure in areas that they have 
no experience or knowledge in. 
Thank you both for your support and work on these issues! 
Best, 
Jordi St. John
2
