Kimberly Grindle
Islesboro
LD 487
March 16,2023
RE: LD 487 “AN ACT TO ESTABLISH COASTAL WATERS AND SUBMERGED LANDS 
REGIONAL PLANNING COMMISSIONS
 
Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Marine Resources:
 
My name is Kim Grindle, and I am a lifelong resident of Islesboro, ME where I run a small sea farm 
with my children. We currently produce oysters and kelp and plan on growing our operation into 
additional shellfish product.  I am also a member of our town’s Shellfish Subcommittee. Our farm is 
active with local schools building towards our community goals of sustainable fisheries, cleaning and 
protecting our waters, and assuring jobs for our children and grandchildren.
I appreciate the opportunity to share my concerns. I am writing today to testify in opposition to LD 487
which I believe will create a new, costly, unfunded, layer of regulatory oversight of our waters 
duplicating existing authority of the Department of Marine Resources, as well as our community.  
While I hear, and share, the concerns that very large industrial sea farms may have a negative impact, 
we have existing regulatory processes that allow for constructive public input and dialog in the 
permitting process. We do not need, nor can we afford, varying and differing standards and rules from 
one area to another in our waters. The impact of this legislation will create a checkerboard of 
regulations that usurp existing State and Federal law without additional benefits of better management 
of our shared marine resources.  
The outcome of this legislation introduces political solutions which can change with the winds of 
personality into what is, and should be, science-based oversight of our coastal waters. As farmers, we 
depend on predictable long-term regulations that evolve with science and have defined rule-making 
processes for our and public input.  
As a member of the Maine Aquaculture Association, I am dedicated to our constant effort to 
educate and address public concerns within the established regulatory processes.
As a small farmer, I believe this bill will create additional layers of rules, permits, and fees that
will increase the costs and complexity of our operation. Additionally, I believe this bill will 
create an unfunded mandate for our town which will not only create more regulatory burdens 
but legal exposure that our community cannot afford, nor needs.
I thank you for your time and consideration and urge you to vote ought not to pass on 
LD 487.
Kimberly Grindle
Islesboro Oyster Co.
