Dear Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and honorable members of the joint standing committee on Marine Resources:  My name is Krista Tripp, I’m the owner of Aphrodite Oysters, a small oyster farm in South Thomaston. I am also a full time commercial lobster boat captain and I come from a commercial fishing family that dates back many generations. Aquaculture has become an important diversification strategy for me and my family as we weather the volatility and uncertainty faced by our state’s iconic lobster fishery.   I am testifying today in opposition to LD 487. This bill would significantly increase my cost of doing business as an aquaculture farmer and put me at a competitive disadvantage due to the proposed additional fees and permits on aquaculture operations. Further, the bill would pit municipalities against one another and allow them to create gated communities in Maine’s public waters. Maine’s aquaculture industry is just beginning to grow, with less than 1 percent of state waters being dedicated to leases and LPAs. We need as many options as possible to keep our working waterfront alive, and by unfairly targeting aquaculture operations, this bill is threatening to take away that option.  I strongly encourage the committee members to vote that LD 487 “ought not to pass”. Thank you for your consideration.  Sincerely,  Krista Tripp      
Krista Tripp
South Thomaston
LD 487
Dear Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and honorable members of the joint 
standing committee on Marine Resources:
My name is Krista Tripp, I’m the owner of Aphrodite Oysters, a small oyster farm in 
South Thomaston. I am also a full time commercial lobster boat captain and I come 
from a commercial fishing family that dates back many generations. Aquaculture has 
become an important diversification strategy for me and my family as we weather the 
volatility and uncertainty faced by our state’s iconic lobster fishery.
I am testifying today in opposition to LD 487. This bill would significantly increase my cost of 
doing business as an aquaculture farmer and put me at a competitive disadvantage due to 
the proposed additional fees and permits on aquaculture operations. Further, the bill would pit
municipalities against one another and allow them to create gated communities in Maine’s 
public waters. Maine’s aquaculture industry is just beginning to grow, with less than 1 percent 
of state waters being dedicated to leases and LPAs. We need as many options as possible to
keep our working waterfront alive, and by unfairly targeting aquaculture operations, this bill is 
threatening to take away that option.
I strongly encourage the committee members to vote that LD 487 “ought not to pass”. Thank 
you for your consideration.
Sincerely, Krista Tripp
