Morgan Fogg
Machias
LD 487
As someone who owns and operates a small aquaculture business on the coast of 
Maine, I understand the importance of promoting and protecting Maine’s coastline, 
but I cannot support the proposed LD 487 “An Act to Establish Coastal Waters and 
Submerged Lands Regional Planning Commissions.”
First and foremost, the bill allows the creation of commissions that would duplicate 
authority that at least three state regulatory agencies already have. This would lead to 
unnecessary bureaucracy and confusion, hindering the growth of Maine's aquaculture 
businesses. 
Furthermore, the bill is vague and contains no definition of “large bays” or “other 
coastal regions” to which it applies. This ambiguity would create a checkerboard of 
standards, rules, and regulations that vary along the coast, pitting municipalities 
against each other, and establish gated communities in public waters. Such a situation 
would be detrimental to the growth and success of Maine's aquaculture industry.
The creation of commissions that may establish rules and regulations which conflict 
with existing state and federal laws and regulations is also a significant concern. This 
could lead to legal disputes and costly litigation, further burdening Maine's already 
struggling aquaculture businesses.
Moreover, the bill will create additional permits and fees that will significantly 
increase the cost of doing business and put Maine sea farmers at a competitive 
disadvantage. This is the last thing that Maine's aquaculture businesses need as they 
are already struggling to keep up with the competition.
Lastly, the bill will give municipalities management responsibilities over state waters 
that they do not have the resources or expertise to implement. 
I support the Maine Aquaculture Association (MAA) and their efforts to find 
constructive solutions that address public concerns while allowing Maine aquaculture 
businesses to grow. I cannot support this bill. The potential negative consequences of 
this bill significantly outweigh any benefits it may provide to the aquaculture 
industry.
