 
 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on Marine Resources  
IN OPPO SITION   
LD 487, An Act to Establish Coastal Waters and Submerged Lands Regional Planning Commissions  
 
March 16,  2023 
Nicholas Branchina, Director, Fisheries & Aquaculture  Program  
Coastal Enterprises Inc. , Brunswick, Maine  
Nick.Branchina@ceimaine.org  
 
Dear Senator Reny, Representat ive Hepler and Distinguishe d Members of the  Committee : 
 
My name is Nick Branchina,  and I  am the Director of the Fisheries & Aquaculture Program at Coastal 
Enterprises , Inc. (CEI), which is headquartered in Brunswick . I reside in  Kennebunk . On behalf of CEI, I am 
submitting testimony  to express our  organization’s  opposition  to LD 487 “An Act to Establish Coastal 
Waters and Submerged Lands Regional Planning Commissions.”  
 
Coastal Enterprises, Inc.  (CEI) is a private, nonprofit Community Development Corporation (CDC) and 
Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI) based in Brunswick, Maine. CEI was founded in 1977 
to develop job -creating natural resource -based  business  ventures in Maine ’s rural and coastal regions . 
Today we continue to work to build a just, vibrant, and climate -resilient future for people and 
communities in Maine and other rural regions. We do thi s by integrating finance, business expertise and 
policy solutions in ways that make the economy work more equitably . 
 
CEI has a 46-year track record of supporting Maine’s commercial fishing and aquaculture  businesses . We 
do this by providing business services including free business counseling and technical assistance, and by 
making loans and investments in those marine businesses wishing to start or expand . Since the 19 70’s o ur 
total portfolio of loans to this sector has grown to over $18 million and these loans have sustain ed or 
created over 2,200 jobs in Maine.   
 
While CEI supports community self- determination , especially around natural resources , the bill as written 
has several p rovisions  that impact  aquaculture in State coastal waters. Maine’s  Department of Marine 
Resources ( DMR ) has developed a robust regulatory framework for aquaculture in Maine’s shared waters . 
These resources  belong to all Mainers regardless of residence . Given  the DMR ’s demon strated  capacity 
to conduct thorough, transparent,  and fair review processes when considering new areas for aquaculture 
siting , and aquaculture’s  positive  impact  in creat ing jobs and diversify ing incomes for those already fishing 
on our waters, CEI believe s LD 487 is a direct barrier to the  development of responsible aquaculture  in 
our state’s  waters . 
 We support the Maine Aquaculture Association and its concerted efforts  on behalf of the  aquaculture 
industry  to find constructive solutions that address public concerns while allowing Maine aquaculture 
businesses to grow.  CEI respectfully  asks that th is committee please consider the negative effects that this 
bill, as written, will have not only on the  aquaculture indus try, but also upon coastal towns  more broadly 
as well as  on the State’s economy . Specifically , this bill currently : 
 
• allows the establishment of commissions that would usurp and/or duplicate authority that at least three state regulatory agencies already have ; 
 
 
 
• create s a checkerboard of standards, rules, and regulations that vary along the coast, which would 
pit municipalities against each other;  
• create s commissions that may establish rules and regulations which conflict with existing state  and 
federal laws and regulations ; 
• allow s the creation of additional permits and fees that will significantly increase the cost of doing 
business and put Maine sea farmers at a competitive disadvantage ; 
•  gives municipalities mana gement responsibilities over state waters that they do not have the 
resources or expertise to implement ; and,  
• increase s municipalities ’ legal exposure in areas that they have little to no experience or knowledge 
in. 
 
In 2018, CEI ’s Fisheries & Aquaculture Program Staff w as commissioned  to conduct a study on 
communities along the South Coast of Massachusetts engaged in sea farming. Massachusetts has a “home 
rule” approach similar to that in this proposal, which sanction s each municipality to have oversight for 
aquaculture grant leasing and permitting in their waters. Licenses are issued by the Board of Selectmen and are renewed or transferred at the discretion of the Board. The terms of each grant agreement are set by each town. We found that municipal  control of the aquaculture leasing process heavily favor ed 
competing town interests , reinforced local biases,  and strongly  stifle d opportunities for expanded growth 
or new entry.  Many aquaculturists operate on t wo (2) acres or less, regulated to areas deemed “the best 
of the worst” farm  sites .  
 Municipal control in Massachusetts of the inshore permitting process makes aquaculture growth 
vulnerable to the “Not in My Backyard”  detracto rs and local opponents to any development.   Today ’s 
snapshot of aquaculture along in Southeaste rn Massachusetts tends towards “hobbyist”, family -run micro  
entities  with a bare minimu m numbe r of empl oyees for whom aquaculture is merely  a secon dary so urce 
of in come ; most owner -operators have another full- time occupation.  This model will prevent aquaculture  
in Maine  from fulfilling its  economic  potential as a key sector in our Stat e that employs  people who make 
their living work ing o n shared  waters  and as a viable ec onomic diver sification optio n for Maine's  lobster 
fishermen . 
 At CEI, we continue  to invest in a  sector  we believe in.  Aquaculture is a significant  source  for diversification 
of the economic base of Maine’s marine economy . It has co -existed successfully with other marine 
activities for decades . For these and other reasons, it is cent ral to  the state’s official economic 
developmen t strategy . If implemented , LD 487 could create insurmountable  hurdles to an industry that is 
already operating in a  well-regulated  environment.   
 
At this fragile time for many of our natural fisheries resources, t he State of Maine should be supporting 
and preserving the growth of aqua culture  - as opposed to b uilding barriers  to its success.  It is for this 
reason that we oppose this bill . 
 
On behalf of CEI, I t hank you for your consideration of our testimony.  
