To the Maine State Legislature  3/16/23 In support of LD 487  1. Two years ago, American Aquafarms proposed installation of salmon pens in Frenchman Bay just to the West of the Porcupine Islands. These pens would be of industrial scale, and although the company claims otherwise, it has been established that their fish pens would pump contaminated wastewater back into Frenchman Bay. The tides would NOT sufficiently clear this waste out of the Bay and the pollution levels would continue to rise indefinitely. This would threaten the local marine life and even human health.  2. Their activity in the Bay would be in full view of Acadia National Park and all the visitors who enjoy the surrounding communities. The constantly operating diesel generators, and the barges that would daily be transporting feed and fish waste would generate unacceptable air, light and sound pollution. Our lobstermen and women have already affirmed that this project would threaten their local industry. Twenty-two area businesses and conservation groups have publicly recorded their opposition and four communities surrounding the Bay are officially on record to stop it.  3. The American Aquafarm project is hugely beyond the scale of what is healthy for our area and, for that matter, anywhere along the coast of Maine.   Although individuals in our community came together to oppose this project, there was no local commission with the tools or power to stop this project because it concerned coastal waters and submerged lands. We currently can only regulate land use, but waters out in Frenchman Bay are regulated by the Department of Marine Resources. Even though most of the other communities surrounding Frenchman Bay individually passed resolutions in opposition to the Aquafarms proposal, there was no state authorized procedure for these communities to work together to prevent the project.  LD 487 would enable local communities sharing a bay or section of coastal waters to create planning commissions to regulate development of their shared waters. There would be participation by all interested parties at both the state and local levels. Guidelines for the commissions would assure that all aspects affecting the health and public use of the waters would be addressed.  As a resident of Gouldsboro, I urge you to pass LD 487 so that Maine Coastal waters remain healthy, and that development is of appropriate scale.   Richard Fisher, Gouldsboro, Maine 
