 
March 16, 2023  
 
The Honorable Cameron Reny, Chair  
The Honorable Allison Hepler, Chair  
The Honorable members of the Marine Resources Committee  
c/o Legislative Information Office  
100 Statehouse Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Dear Senator Reny, Representative Hepler, and the Honorable Members of the Committee on 
Marine Resources:  
 
I am writing on behalf of Friends of Acadia to testify neither for nor against L.D. 487, An Act to 
Establish Coastal Waters and Submerged Lands Regional Commission s. Friends of Acadia is a 
non-profit organization in Bar Harbor whose mission is to preserve, protect, and promote 
stewardship of the outstanding natural beauty, ecological vitality, and distinctive cultural 
resources of Acadia National Park and the surrounding  communities. We support Acadia through 
fundraising and grants, as well as volunteer work, advocacy, and cooperative programs such as 
youth internships and public transit through the park and surrounding communities. We have 
approximately 5,000 members fro m across the United States and abroad and have contributed 
more than $35.7 million to the park and partner organizations since our organization’s founding 
in 1986.  
 
It may seem unusual for a national park friends organization to provide their thoughts to t he 
Marine Resources Committee, but almost two and a half years ago, Friends of Acadia became 
aware of a significant project on Acadia’s doorstep that generated immense outcry from our 
members and supporters. American Aquafarms had proposed leasing two sixt y-acre sites in 
Frenchman Bay, as close as 2,000 feet from the park, and directly in -line with key vistas from 
the park’s historic carriage roads, trails, and motor road system. Each of the lease sites would 
have had fifteen pens, five 500 -kw diesel genera tors and fuel tanks, continuously running water 
pumps, and effluent discharge volume greater than Manhattan. American Aquafarms had 
proposed massive industry in the center of the Acadian archipelago.  
 
It was not only our organization that was concerned ab out this out -of-scale industrial use of 
Frenchman Bay. Lobstermen, other aquaculturists, recreational boaters, municipalities, local 
businesses, and citizens came out in force in opposition to American Aquafarms. We were united 
in the cause to defeat these  poorly sited , unwelcome salmon farms.  
 
Despite this united opposition, Frenchman Bay remains vulnerable to future proposals like 
American Aquafarms. Washington State just shut down most ocean -based finfish aquaculture, 
and global economic pressures will likely generate more interest in Maine’s waters.  
 
Greater community involvement in decision -making over the waters bordering their communities 
could help prevent future conflicts by identifying areas where different uses are welcomed and 
encouraged. Regio nal planning, as suggested in this bill, is one idea, and there may be other 
 2 ideas, as well. The current aquaculture leasing process requires that the DMR Commissioner 
consider the effects of a proposed lease on ingress or egress of riparian landowners, na vigation, 
other fishing activities, other aquaculture uses, wildlife and marine habitat, and enjoyment of 
public facilities within 1,000 feet. The leasing process also requires consultation with a 
municipal representative and notification of public meeting s/hearings in the newspaper.  
 
However, this does not give the general public who live near, work near, and love a bay the 
opportunity to decide the future of that bay. Local people can provide valuable insights about the 
usefulness and appropriate scale f or activities in their region. Maine citizens do this through 
zoning on land. Controversial proposals are still occasionally brought forward for consideration 
and debate, but setting guidelines and expectations in advance prevents things like industrial -
sized farms from being sited next to national parks.  
 
Perhaps we could have saved a lot of time for the state regulatory agencies and for American 
Aquafarms had it been known in advance that the communities and citizens surrounding 
Frenchman Bay were not su pportive of immense fish farm leases.  
 
Thank you for considering my comments. If you have questions, please do not hesitate to contact 
me at eric@friendsofacadia.org.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Eric Stiles  
President and CEO  
 

