TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 732 
”An Act to prohibit off-trail operation of a snowmobile in an area closed to off-trail 
operation" 
SPONSORED BY: Senator BLACK of Franklin~ 
Cosponsored by Representative LANDRY of Farmington and Representatives: MASON of 
Lisbon, WOOD of Greene. 
DATE OF HEARING: April 24, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. lam Dan Scott, Colonel for Maine Warden Service at the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in support 
of L.D. 732. 
This bill prohibits a person from operating a snowmobile off a snowmobile trail in an area that is 
posted as being closed to off-trail snowmobile operation. lt provides a civil violation with a fine 
not less than $100 and not more than $500 for the first violation. 
This bill addresses the concerns brought forth by many local snowmobile clubs and of Maine's 
private landowners. While most snowmobilers are respectful of landowners and appreciate the 
opportunity to ride on private snowmobile trails across Maine, there are some who operate off- 
trail, in conflict with the wishes of the landowner. This bill aims to address this activity and will 
help assure landowners that if someone does ride off—trail on their property, there are statutes 
in place to hold the riders accountable for their actions. 
DIFW and snowmobile clubs across Maine often receive complaints from landowners who are 
upset with riders who are operating off-trail. In these situations, the snowmobilers may be 
causing damage to golf courses, tree plantations, newly seeded fields, or simply operate where 
they are not wanted. In other situations, the snowmobilers may be operating in a location which 
is not safe for riding and may be placing themselves in danger. 
The increased popularity in off-trail riding and lower tolerance of landowners makes this bill 
very timely, providing relief to landowners and snowmobile clubs as well. Over the last 5 years,
Warden Service has received over 400 calls for service regarding snowmobile trespass and off 
trail riding (2019-93; 2020-79; 2021-128; 2022-69; 2023 as of March 8th: 48). 
This bill is not intended to prevent all off-trail riding, limiting the shed antler enthusiast, hare or 
coyote hunter, winter trapper or even the responsible back country rider, but rather to provide 
a means to address the irresponsible snowmobiler operating in areas where they are not 
wanted. 
We'd like to see the bill amended to permit the clubs’ trail master to be a representative of the 
landowner regarding trail use purposes, therefore the landowners are not required to attend 
court and testify in the case of a trial. 
l would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session. 
Suggested Amended Language 
Sec. 1. 12 MRSA §13106-A, sub-§27 — replace lines 3-5 of the bill language and replace with the 
following highlighted portion, while keeping the penalty sections in lines 6-10. 
Note: suggested language is taken from DACF’s current statutory language within the 
snowmobile trail fund." 
27. Operating snowmobile in posted area. A person may not operate a snowmobile off ofa 
snowmobile trail, identified by the Department of Agriculture, Consen/ation and Forestry, Bureau of 
Parks and Lands as having been funded by the Snowmobile Trail Fund pursuant to section 1893, 
subsection 3, 
in an area that is posted as being closed to off-trail snowmobile operation, without the 
permission of the landowner or the landowner ’s representative. 
For the purpose of this section: 
1. "Posted" means: containing signagg, placed bv the landowner, the landowners 
representative, a local snowmobile club representative, or an employee of DIFW or 
DACF, which is reasonably likely to come to the attention of a snowmobiler, and 
indicates that's Off-trail snowmobiling is prohibited. 
2. A local snowmobile club trail master may serve as the landowner's representative. 
A. A person who violates this subsection commits a civil violation for which a fine of not less 
than $100 and not more than $500 may be adiudged. 
B. A person who violates this subsection after having been adiudicated as having committed 3 or 
more civil violations under this Part within the previous 5-year period commits a Class E crime. 
informational article from Ontario, Canada: https:1’/intrepidsnowmobileazcom/stay-on-trail[
