Testimony of the Maine Snowmobile Association 
In Support of LD 732 
An Act to Prohibit Off-trail Operation of a Snowmobile in an Area Closed to Off-trail Operation 
April 24, 2023 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and members of the committee, my name is James Cote and 
I am here on behalf of the Maine Snowmobile Association in Support of LD 732. 
LD 732 is intended to prohibit a person from operating a snowmobile off a snowmobile trail in an area 
that is posted as being closed to off-trail snowmobile operation. lt provides for a fine of not less than 
$100 and not more than $500 for the first violation of the prohibition and that a violation after 3 or more 
civil violations of the inland ﬁsheries and wildlife laws is a Class E crime. 
The Maine Snowmobile Association acts as a liaison between clubs, landowners and state agencies in an 
effort to promote the sport of snowmobiling now and into the future. The future of snowmobiling in 
Maine depends on our continued respect of private landowners who allow snowmobile trails to be 
located on their property. Granting law enforcement ofﬁcials the authority to penalize any snowmobile 
rider who has clearly abused the privilege of riding on a maintained snowmobile trail by riding off trail in 
an area that is marked as closed to off-trail snowmobile operation is common sense and long overdue. 
We understand that some stakeholders may have questions about what the deﬁnition of a snowmobile 
trail is, and that other details in the language may need to be addressed. In terms ofthe deﬁnition ofa 
snowmobile trail, we would defer to the Maine Warden Service, but would encourage the committee to 
consider adding language such as the following: 
”F0r purposes of this section, snowmobile trail means a marked corridor on public or private land for use 
by snowmobile operators on private or public land and or dedicated private ways open to the public.” 
This legislation is intended to provide a simple and clear expectation to snowmobile riders— that riding 
off trail in areas marked as closed is not acceptab|e- and to provide law enforcement the tools that they 
need to enforce that type of behavior. Currently, it is often left to the landowner to enforce this type of 
behavior, which can frequently (and rightfully) frustrate those landowners who have authorized a 
maintained snowmobile trail on their property. This process can be unnecessarily costly and time 
consuming for landowners. 
LD 732 is intended to be a simple tool that law enforcement can use to take care of problems for 
landowners when someone accesses parts of a property that are marked as closed. We would urge your 
support of this legislation, and would be happy to work with the committee and other stakeholders to 
ensure that the language accurately reﬂects our intentions and the interests of private landowners. 
Thank you for your consideration.
