Board of Directors 
Doug Baston 
President 
Tom Allen 
2nd Vice-President 
Jeff Williams 
Secretary 
Seth Sprague 
Treasurer 
Hannah Carter 
Jim Clair 
Terri Coolong 
Jennifer Dann 
Mark Doty 
Chris Jackson 
John Melrose 
Richard Nass 
Paul Sampson 
Chapter Leaders 
Si Balch 
Larry Beauregard 
Ernest Carie 
Joe Dembeck 
Jim Ferrante 
Randy Lagasse 
Lauren Ouellette 
Merle Ring 
Andy Shultz 
Andrew Smart 
Jeff Williams 
8Mulliken Court a PO Box 836 § Augusta, ME 04332-0836 eTelephone: 2074626-0005 Email: info@mainewoodlandownersorg s Website: wwwmainewoodlandowners org DIG‘)-JV/$l\lEl{S 
COMMUNITY ADVOCACY KNOWLEDGE LEGACY 
Testimony of Karla Black 
Deputy Executive Director 
Maine Woodland Owners 
In Support of 
LD 732 
"An Act to Prohibit Off-trail Operation of a Snowmobile in an Area 
Closed to Off-trail Operation" 
Senator LaF0untain, Representative Landry and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, my name is Karla Black, I am 
the Deputy Executive Director of Maine Woodland Owners speaking today in support 
of LD 732, "An Act to Prohibit Off-trail Operation of a Snowmobile in an Area 
Closed to Off-trail Operation." 
This bill prohibits a person from operating a snowmobile off a snowmobile trail in an 
area that is posted as being closed to off-trail snowmobile operation. It provides fora 
ﬁne of not less than $100 and not more than $500 for the ﬁrst violation ofthe 
prohibition. It also provides that a violation of the statute after 3 or more civil 
violations of the inland ﬁsheries and wildlife laws constitutes a Class E crime. 
Landowners have worked cooperatively for years with snowmobile interests, the result 
is over 14,000 miles of snowmobile trails in the state and the largest trail network east 
of the Mississippi. The majority of these trails are on the property of private 
landowners. In addition to the many miles of snowmobile trails on lands of our 
members, as an organization Maine Woodland Owners has 18 snowmobile trails on 
the nearly 8,000 acres of land we own. 
Generally there have been few problems with snowmobilers but the number of 
complaints seems to be on the increase. Damage to property, particularly to young 
trees, and operating snowmobiles in locations where landowners don’t want them such 
as near homes and on lawns are typical complaints. This bill would give the Maine 
Warden Service the needed ability to address those incidents by creating a new civil 
ﬁne for operating a snowmobile off a snowmobile trail in an area that is posted as 
being closed to off-trail operation. 
There are a few questions raised by the proposed bill that the Committee may want to 
consider. Speciﬁcally, 
A Nonproﬁt Corporation - IRC 501(c)(3)
0 What constitutes a trail‘? 
6 Is there a standard for how trails must be posted‘? 
0 How will a law enforcement ofﬁcer know that the violator has seen a posting‘? 
0 Do you have to prove the violator leﬂ; the trail? Or is operation off trail in a posted 
area enough? 
There may need to be some clariﬁcations to implement the intent behind the bill. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today in support of LD 732. I’d be happy to take any 
questions now or at the work session.
