4-24-2023 
Senator LaFontaine, Representative Landry and members of the Inland Fisheries & Wildlife 
committee. My name is Matthew Stedman, I am the Northern Region Vice President for the Maine 
Snowmobile Association & an active member of the Ashiand Sno-Mobile Club. lam here today 
speaking in support of LD 732 to assist snowmobile clubs, private landowners, and the Maine 
Warden Service with a tool to manage folks snowmobiling off trail in places where the landowner 
does not want them. 
As an association we strive to support our clubs and I believe this bill will improve their landowner 
relationships as there would be a clear distinction for those owners who do not want folks leaving 
the marked trail, and this can be explained during the permission process annually. 
Landowners are the key to our trail system in Maine, without them we would not have the 
interconnected trails we have today. Snowmobile club volunteers meet annually with landowners to 
determine trail route and access that connects the snowmobilers to businesses and communities. 
The language has been worked on with the Maine Snowmobile Association, State of Maine 
Snowmobile Program advisory council, the Maine Warden Service, and other committees for the 
past 5-8 years. Effort was made to ensure the law, if passed, does not burden the landowner yet 
provides clear direction to protect private landowner rights and is easily enforceable. LD 732 will 
provide these groups with a new tool to foster better landowner relations and the correct language 
to allow the Maine Warden Service to enforce it. 
Clubs know which landowner will or will not allow folks off the marked trails, and this bill will give 
them the opportunity to sign the trails accordingly. Once signs are posted, if there is an issue the 
Maine Warden Service has all they need to enforce the law. Now when there are issues with 
snowmobilers where they are not supposed to be, it is difficult to prove that they were not 
supposed to be off trail, and therefore difficult to prosecute. 
This bill will give landowners and club volunteers a way to communicate to the snowmobiling 
community places where they are not welcome and in conjunction give the Maine Warden Service 
the ability to enforce it without burdening the landowner with a visit to the District Court. 
LD 732 will be helpful for clubs and landowners, large and small. Whether you own 1/2 an acre with 
a trail that runs along the back of your lawn but not over your garden, thousands of acres of crop 
land where you want the trail on your field road and no snowmobiling through the middle of your 
field or a forest landowner who allows groomed trail and snowmobiles on unplowed roads but does 
not want folks riding out through their trees. It gives flexibility to allow clubs and landowners to have 
a specific plan for segments of trail they manage and maintain. 
Clubs in Aroostook County and their volunteers are privileged to have thousands of miles of trail 
and this would not be possible without the generosity of landowners. This bill will help to ensure 
that we can maintain a positive relationship with them, looking after their wants and needs while 
still providing a connected trail system for snowmobilers & communities. This connected trail 
system is very important to our State economy, spreading money to businesses throughout the 
state as snowmobilers come here from away and local families get our and enjoy the winter. 
Thank you very much for your time and the opportunity to speak today. 
Respectfully submitted, 
, -~-;::»<" ’? /C I l‘l:*
. r'i-~l--W... 
llllN 
_;' V '2'); /$1’) S" .
\}
