Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony in Support  of LD 732 
 
“An Act t o Prohibit Off-trail Operation of a Snowmobile in an Area 
Closed to Off -trail Operation ” 
 
April 24, 2023 
Patrick Strauch, Executive Director  
 
Good afternoon, Senator L aFountain, Representative Landry and members of the  
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife . I’m Patrick Strauch, the Executive  
Director of the Maine Forest Products Council. The Maine Forest Products Council is an 
organization representing more than 300 member  comp anies  from all facets of t he forest  
products industry. We also have more than 8 million acres of dues paying members.   
I am submitting testimony  today in support of LD 732 , “An Act to Prohibit Off -trail Operation 
of a Snowmobile in an Area Closed to Off -trail Operation .” The Council  would like to thank the 
sponsors for bringing this bill forwar d.  
 
Here in Maine, snowmobile riders enjoy a v ast network of more than 14,000 miles of 
maintained trails throughout the state , thanks to a cooperati ve program between snowmobile 
clubs, municipalities, private landowners and the Bu reau of Parks and Lands. Most of  these 
miles are possible thanks to the generosity  of private landowners who permit access across their 
properties, often times with little to no benefit  to the landowner . This public access supports a  
$606 million industry  each winter.   
 As the committee heard earlier this session from the Department, trail usage has risen drastically 
over the last few years. While the vast majority of trail users are respectful of the private lands 
they use for recreation, there will always be some bad actors that create proble ms for 
landowners, clubs and the State.  LD 732 would provide Game W ardens with an important  tool 
to help hold them  accountable for utilizing the trail system to access areas that are posted as 
being closed to off -trail snowmobile  operation. Operating a snowmobile in a posted area can 
lead to financial losses to landowners  practicing agriculture or forestry on their lands , 
threatening continued access to these properties for all riders.  
 
While reviewing  this bill, the Council would ask the committee to consider the following : 
 
• As drafted, the burden will be on Game Wardens to prove that a snowmobiler gained 
access to a closed area via the snowmobile trail , 
• If the snowmobiler begins off trail, this law would  not apply.  
• Clarification is needed regarding  how a landowner would post restricted areas. The bill 
assumes that riders can leave the designated trail un less posted otherwise.  
Thank you for your consideration. We urge the com mittee to support LD 732 . I would be 
happy to provide answers to any questions you may have for the work session. 
 
 
 
