MAINE AFL-CIO  
A Union of Unions Standing for Maine Workers 
21 Gabriel Drive, Augusta, Maine 04330 
Tel. (207) 622-9          
(207) 622-9675 
Visit our website: www.maineaflcio.org  
 
President 
Cynthia Phinney Vice President 
Pat Carleton Secretary Treasurer 
Doug Born 
 
 Testimony of Maine AFL-CIO Legislative & Political Director, Adam Goode in Support of LD 1337, 
“An Act to Require a Corporation That Files a Tax Return in the State to File a Tax Disclosure 
Statement” 
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation, my name is 
Adam Goode. I’m the Legislative and Political Director of the Maine AFL-CIO. We represent 40,000 working 
people in the state of Maine. We work to improve the lives and working conditions of our members and all 
working people. We testify in support of LD 1337.  
 
LD 1337 gives Maine an opportunity to shine a light on how much big corporations pay, or don’t pay, in state 
taxes. Hardworking Mainers, including union members pay their fair share into the tax system that benefits us 
all by paying for services we all use and need. 
 
We have little information about how much corporations pay in state taxes in Maine, but we do know at the 
national level that corporate tax avoidance is a huge issue costing billions of dollars a year. We also know that 
Maine gives away over a billion dollars in tax breaks to businesses each year. 
 
Mainers deserve to know if their tax dollars are going to line the pockets of wealthy, out-of-state corporations 
who don't pay their fair share in taxes. When wealthy corporations dodge taxes, in hurts Maine's people, 
communities, and small businesses, and leaves everyday Mainers to pick up the tab. 
 
Corporations benefit from the things hard working Mainers pay taxes for, including infrastructure and 
education. We should ensure they pay their fair share into the system they profit from. 
 
We urge the committee to support this bill, because how much corporations pay in taxes impacts all of us, and 
we need greater transparency to know if our tax system is fair and just. 
 
Printed In House with Union Labor

