iiZ.ii§il2§ ‘BT§3@-68» Maine Equaljusticc “"" °*‘"‘°'"‘
. 
_ _ Policy Advocate 
TTY{Voice. (207) 626 7058 (207) 626_7058 X216 
§,a~§;Vfr§fg; ‘§f;'8148 People Policy Solutions adanforth@mejp.org 
Testimony on Behalf of Maine Equal Justice in support of LD 1337: An Act to Require a Corporation 
That Files a Tax Return in the State to File a Tax Disclosure Statement 
April 13, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee. My 
name is Ann Danforth and l use she/her pronouns. I'm a Policy Advocate at Maine Equal Justice, a nonprofit 
legal aid provider working to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today in support of LD 1337. 
LD 1337 will provide needed transparency that can help inform more equitable policy decisions 
Families with low income are still suffering from the economic impacts of the pandemic, with record high 
inflation coupled with a pre-existing and worsening housing crisis. At the same time, data shows that 
corporations reported record high profits during the pandemic} 
While families with low income pay a disproportionate share of their income in taxes, even as they 
struggle to make ends meet, federal data indicates that corporations that do business in Maine are not 
holding up their end of the social bargain by paying into our communities in taxes? This is lost revenue 
that could and should feed back into our state's infrastructure, education system, and economic security 
programs to better support our people and workforce. 
This is revenue that could: 
0 Support affordable housing programs to help address Maine's housing crisis. 
0 Expand refundable tax credits for Mainers with low-income, thereby strengthening Maine's 
families and improving outcomes for children. The Child Tax Credit cut poverty nearly in half in 
our state when it was in effect.
1 
https://www.brookings.edu/research/profits-and-the-pandemic-as-shareholder-wealth —soared-workers —were—left-b 
ehind/ 
2 https://www.mecep.org/blog/lack-of-corporate-tax-transparency-hurts-maine/
0 Invest in our health care system to keep all Mainers healthy and make sure no one goes without 
lifesaving care. 
0 Ensure all Maine families have enough food so that kids aren't going to school hungry. According 
to the most recent data, 139,410 people in Maine are facing hunger and 39,990 of them are 
children? ’ 
As the Maine Center for Economic Policy notes‘ , a first step in changing our state tax policies to better 
meet the needs of Mainers with low income is having the data that shows us what corporations are or 
are not currently paying in taxes to support the public services that make Maine a good place to do 
business. l 
(Ionclusion 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on these bills. I am happy to answer any questions you might 
have. 
3 
https://www.feedingamericaorg/hunger~in-america/maine 
4 
https1//www.mecep.org/biog/lack-of-corporate-tax-transparency-hurts-maine/
