 
 
 
 
 
April 13 , 2023  
 
Senator Nicole Grohoski , Chair  
Representative Joseph Perry , Chair  
Members of the Taxation  Committee  
 
RE: Testimony  in OPPOSITION to LD 1337, An Act to Require a Corporation That Files a Tax Return in 
the State to File a Tax Disclosure Statement  
Dear Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry  and members of the Taxation  Committee : 
My name is Curtis Picard and I am the President and CEO  of the Retail Association of Maine. I am a 
resident of Topsham.  We have more than 350  members statewide and represent retailers of all sizes.  
Maine’s retailers employ more than 80,000 Mainers.  I am here today in opposition to LD 1337 . 
 
LD 1337 would  require  a corporation that files a tax return with the State to file a tax  disclosu re 
statement with the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau  of Revenue Services.  In 
essence, this bill woul d require private tax information to become public information . Not only do we  
think this is not prop er, it would also d ivulge pr opriety sales , and expense  to competitors, and that is 
something  we absol utely cannot support. Additio nally, a bill like this sends a message to the business 
community that Maine is an unfriendly place to do business, and wil l add unneeded cost to doing 
business in Maine . Maine has the 3rd highest tax burden in the country. New Hampshire has the 48th 
highest. How much longer are we going to continue to make the cost of doing business in Maine more 
costly , and less competitive than other states?  
 
Taxpayers  (individual , corporate or otherwise) have a reasona ble expectati on of privacy. Additionally, 
this bill only looks at one aspe ct of taxation – the corporate income tax, and ignores other taxes like 
sales, payroll, and property taxes. No other st ate in the country requires disclosure of private tax 
informati on, and e do not think that LD 1337 would serve any public policy debate. Maine Revenue 
Services already has the ability to audit any tax return . We believe that LD 1337 would require 
significant additional resources for Maine Rev enue Services to try to comply with the c omplexities of the 
bill.  
 
I urge  the committee to quickly vote LD 1337 Ought Not to Pass.  
 
Thank you for the consideration of our comments . 
 
Curtis Picard, CAE  
President and CEO  

