MAINE SOCIETY or 
C CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS 
Testimony in Opposition 
LD 1337, An Act to Require a Corporation that Files a Tax Return in the State to File a Tax 
Disclosure Statement 
April 13, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Honorable Members of the Taxation Committee; 
On behalf of the Maine Society of Certified Public Accountants (MECPA), my name is Elizabeth Frazier 
and I am testifying in opposition to LD 1337, An Act to Require a Corporation that Files a Tax Return in 
the State to File a Tax Disclosure Statement, on the basis of the language that has been presented to the 
public prior to the public hearing - we understand that the sponsor may be proposing amendments or 
changed language, and we will of course consider those changes when we have had the opportunity to 
review them. 
Currently, MECPA opposes the proposed bill because it would effectively eliminate confidentiality 
provisions for Maine businesses. The scope of information that would need to be disclosed would also 
create onerous administrative work for both businesses and Maine Revenue Services. Additionally, we 
believe the proposal unfairly targets corporations as opposed to other forms of business entities. 
We understand the sponsor may wish to align the proposed bill to mirror a Massachusetts tax disclosure 
law. We believe there are several key factors that differentiate the current proposed version of this bill 
from the Massachusetts tax disclosure provisions. 
1. Massachusetts limits disclosure reporting to corporations that are required to file both a report 
with the federal Securities and Exchange Commission and a Massachusetts income tax return. 
LD 1337 requires disclosure by all corporations registered to do business in Maine, whether or 
not they are required to file a return. 
2. Massachusetts law also requires the Secretary of State to anonymize reports, redacting all 
identifying taxpayer information, before they are made public. Conversely, LD 1337 requires the 
creation ofa searchable database making the detailed disclosure reports fully available to the 
public. 
3. Unlike LD 1337, the Massachusetts disclosure form does not require detailed disclosure of 
apportionment factor data; of specific information about cost of goods sold, net operating 
losses, and other deductions; or of affiliate information. 
These are three significant differences between the proposed bill and the Massachusetts requirements, 
which are far narrower, and which are ultimately anonymized before they are made public. 
As a general matter, we do not believe a separate corporate filing, outside of the income tax return, 
should be required. This will add both time and cost to the process of tax filing for both small and large
corporations and tax accountants. lt would also require corporations and their advisors to report 
information beyond the bounds of Maine corporate income tax law. For example, LD 1337 would 
require reporting on business and nonbusiness income—a distinction that does not exist for Maine 
corporate income tax purposes and is not defined anywhere in Maine law. Speaking on behalf of 
accountants, I can say that adding any additional work during tax season would present a timely 
compliance challenge. However, if the Committee is interested in pursuing this policy, we would advise 
that the key differences discussed above be reflected in any similar Maine law. 
The IVIECPA would be happy to provide additional information about this issue and why we feel the 
underlying proposal for a separate tax disclosure for corporations is not necessary or appropriate for 
Maine at this time. 
Thank you for taking the time to consider this important issue, and we look forward to working with the 
committee during the work session. 
Sincerely, 
Elizabeth M. Frazier 
On behalf of the Maine Society of Certified Public Accountants (M ECPA)
