Testimony of Jeff McCabe 
Maine Service Employees Association, SEIU Local 1989 
In Support of LD l337,An Act to Require a Corporation That Files a Tax Return in the State to Filea 
Tax Disclosure Statement, Sponsored by Representative Matlack 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
April 12, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, members of the Committee on Taxation, I’m Jeff McCabe, 
director of politics and legislation for the Maine ServiceEmployees Association, Local 1989 of the 
Service Employees International Union. Maine Service Employees Association represents over 13,000 
workers across the state, including workers in all three branches of Maine State Government. 
With Tax Day on the horizon, corporations have spent yet another year reaping enormous profits in 
Maine without paying the taxes that they owe, while gas and grocery prices continue to soar, childcare 
and four-yearuniversities remain unaffordable for many, scores of roads are unrepaired, and mental 
health programs are struggling under massive caseloads. Working people and families are struggling to 
make ends meet.I 
Meanwhile, 55 proﬁtable corporations paid $0 in federal taxes in 2020 despite collectively earning almost 
$40.5 billion in pre-tax income. Tax revenues are critical to the ability of state and local govemments to 
provide basic services to their residents, including K-1 2 education, childcare and elder care, maintenance 
of roads and bridges, and public and mental health, among others. 
When wealthy corporations don’t pay what they owe in state taxes, the burden of paying for these critical 
public services falls on everyday workin g people. Had they paid the statutory federal corporate tax rate of 
21%, the federal government would have had $8.5 billion more for public investment for things like 
school lunches, Medicaid and Medicare, and childcare programs. 
This did not happen by accident. The wealthy and their political allies have inﬂuenced decisions, seeking 
tax breaks and avoiding paying taxes, leading to more proﬁts than they know what to do with, while we 
suffer from cuts to essential, sometimes life-saving services like education and care. Parents are paying 
the equivalent of a home mortgage for childcare and many college students are graduating with crushing 
student debt. When it comes to choosing between regular working families and big corporations, 
shouldn’t the moral choice be clear? 
I have said this before and my statement is updated as our Great State of Maine struggles to be able to 
provide key services that Maine people count on. There is no longer any place in the State of Maine that 
is not facing staffing shortages in the public sector. While lack of investments in key services and wages 
can cause inconvenience, it also puts the elderly, children and others at risk. We have seen: staffing 
shortages at MaineDOT impacting the ability to keep roads plowed; staffing shortages at the Maine 
Department of Public Safety’s Regional Communications Centers affecting response time and leading to 
retention issues; and ongoing high tumover among human services caseworkers at Maine DHHS. 
In Woodland and in Limestone, municipal ofﬁces have closed for lack of staff. Right now, Maine’s court 
gystem faces such an enormous backlog of cases that it won’t be cleared until 2028 even with the 
proposed hiring of four new judges. Such recruitment and retention problems are widespread among all 
departments of Maine State Govemment, and they must be addressed in order to ensure the delivery of 
quality public services throughout our Great of Maine. 
Working people aren’t strangers to budgets being balanced on our backs. Just look at the tax cuts of 201l 
in this state; the Legislature pulled the rug out from under tens of thousands public sector retirees to fund
1
tax cuts for the wealthiest Mainers. We know full well who’s behind this crisis, and the path forward is 
holding corporations accountable. The 2011 tax cuts that mostly beneﬁted the wealthy exacerbated all of 
these challenges, and the burden for paying for those cuts fell disproportionally on low- to middle-income 
working families, and on our members We are concemed that the current lack of transparency in Maine 
law as it relates to corporate tax loopholes allows corporations to avoid paying their fair share. Because of 
this lack of transparency, corporations use loopholes to hide corporate proﬁts offshore, compromising our 
State’s capacity to uphold its commitments to Maine people and our communities now and in the future. 
According to the Maine Center for Economic Policy, corporations in Maine using the “tax havens” 
loophole avoid paying $52 million a year in state taxes. 
Why we need a State Corporate Tax Transparency Bill: 
0 Over the past several decades state corporate tax revenues have grown far more slowly 
than corporate profits with a significant impact on state revenues needed to invest in our 
communities. 
0 The lack of transparency prevents policymakers and the public from assessing whether 
the existing corporate income tax structure ensures that all corporations doing business 
in the state are paying their fair share. 
0 A State Corporate Tax Transparency law would allow policy makers to determine the 
effectiveness of existing tax policy as well as stimulate any needed reform in the state’s 
corporate income tax system. 
0 The information requested in the State Corporate Tax Transparency Bill is designed 
precisely to provide both policymakers and the public with the information to understand 
and improve their own state corporate tax policies. 
I am happy to answer questions.
2
Member testimonials about lack of investments 
“Please ensure that the State seriously address the known 15% average pay gap across state employees 
with regional peers; please ensure that the State prioritize the safety of their staff and patients; please 
ensure that the State operates the hospitals with equity, opportunity, and fairness. ” 
--MSEA-SEIU Dorothea Dix Chapter President James Bailey, who works as a licensed social worker for 
Dorothea Dix Psychiatric Center in Bangor 
Share on FB. Website. 
“This is nota normal social work job. I have had my life threatened, I’ve been spit at, almost hit bya 
vehicle driven by an angry client, andl am verbally abused and harassed on a regular basis. We have such 
high turnoverin this job because nobody wants to be treated this way and get paid peanuts. It’s time that 
our pay reflects the incredibly challenging work that we do.” 
--MSEA-SEIU Member Sophia Spiller, who works as a Human Services Caseworker for Maine DHHS, 
testifying in support of addressing understaf ﬁng, impossible caseloads and the State Employee Pay Gap 
Share on FB. Website. 
“Our division, (Maine Forest Service) is uncompetitive with the private sector in our hiring process and 
employee retention. For example, just recently we had two great forester position openings located in the 
central and southern Maine area that only revealed one qualiﬁed candidate. Granted the employee market 
is unprecedented at this time but it shows the reluctance of the workforce considering being a public 
servant. ” 
--MSEA-SEIU Member Randy Lagasse, who works as a forester for the Maine Forest Service, in 
testimony in support of ending the State Employee Pay Gap 
Share on FB. Website. 
“We are not able to recruit because the starting pay is too low, we are not able to retain employees 
because the increases are minimal but the work is overwhelming. The Judicial Branch needs to evolve 
and start pay at a higher rate, create opportunities for all employees to grow and evolve rather than stay in 
a stagnant environment. ” 
--MSEA-SEIU Member Rhonda Quellette, who works in the Judicial Branch’s criminal division of York 
County Superior Court, in testimony on the urgent need to address understaffing and better compensate 
Judicial Branch workers. 
Share on FB. Website. 
“In the last 3 years at the Dry Mills State Fish Hatchery in Gray, Maine, we have had signiﬁcant turnover 
and were shorthanded for an extended period of time. The most difficult aspect of this is training 
employees just to have them leave for better pay elsewhere! Retention is at an all-time low and 
recruitment is very difficult at this time.” 
--MSEA-SEIU Member Mike Andrews, who works at the Dry Mills State Fish Hatchery, in testimony in 
support of ending the State Employee Pay Gap 
Share on FB. Website.
3
“The work that my coworkers and I do is so important to so many of our fellow Mainers; we offer 
stability during challenging times, a lifeline out of poverty, and a safety net for those who are down on 
their luck. But we need to be paid fairly for the work we do and we need to invest in making sure we 
retain qualified staff like myself.” 
--MSEA-SEIU Member Darcey Boucher, who works as an eligibility specialist for Maine DHHS, in 
testimony in support of ending the State Employee Pay Gap 
Share on FB. Website. 
“We here at Disability Determination Services deﬁnitely have a hiring and retention problem. Of our 35 
case deciders, we only have 8 that have been here more than 7 years, and the rest have 3 years or less. 
Since I 1/2020, we have lost 27 Examiners and Adjudicators, most of whom were new employees who 
did not stay long.” 
--MSEA-SEIU Member Ronnette Partridge, who works as a disability claims adjudicator for Maine 
DHHS, in testimony in support of ending the State Employee Pay Gap 
Share on FB. Website. 
“During my years of state service, I have seen high to impossible caseloads, lack of resources, lack of 
support from management, and lack of training to support the job. I have seen people leave because they 
have found jobs that have better beneﬁts and/or salary as well as less stress due to more manageable job 
duties.” 
--MSEA-SEIU Member Amy Hill, who works as a human services caseworker for Maine DHHS, in 
testimony calling on the Maine Legislature to end the State Employee Pay Gap 
Share on FB. Website. 
“The State needs to take steps to close the pay gap and ensure that all workers are being compensated 
well for the important work they do. Without an investment in our state workers, we will continue to face 
recruitment and retention problems, and they’1l likely get worse in the future.” 
--MSEA-SEIU Member Cynthia Oakes, a planning and research associate for Maine DHHS, in testimony 
to the Legislature ’s Appropriations and Health and Human Services committees 
Share on FB. Website. 
“Since I assumed this supervisory position in March 2022, I tried to recruit forthe vacant environmental 
engineer position which requires the successful candidate to have a ‘professional engineer ’ license issued 
by the State Board of Licensure for Professional Engineers. None of the applicants was qualified for the 
position; hence, we could not move forward with interviews and fill the position. Unfortunately, this isa 
common occurrence. ” 
--MSEA-SEIU Member Kerem Gungor, who works as a senior environmental engineer for the Maine 
DEP Bureau of Land Resources, in testimony to the Maine Legislature ’s Appropriations Committee and 
Environmental and Natural Resources Committee 
Share on FB. Website. 
“I feel as though I’m not making whatl am worth for the work I do, and it is not a pleasant feeling. ANY 
job thatl can find in the public and/ or private sector starts at more than I currently make, will provide me
4
with full beneﬁts and a paycheck year-round. I don’t want to leave my position, but I’m starting to feel as 
though I have to if I want to still be able to provide for my family.” 
--Anthony Holzhauser, who works as a seasonal conservation aide for the Maine Department of Marine 
Resources, in testimony before the Maine Le gislature ’s Appropriations and Marine Resources committees 
Share on FB. Website. 
“Although today we no longerhave a hiring freeze or pay raise freeze, the issue of inequity in our pay and 
staff retention still persists. It is hard to ﬁnd high-quality candidates when they see the pay they will be 
offered. ” 
--MSEA-SEIU Member Cynthia Barre, who works for the Maine Bureau of Insurance, in testimony 
before the Maine Legislature ’s Appropriations Committee 
Share on FB. Website. 
“These services take a caring, passionate and driven provider. However, employees cannot pour from any 
empty cup. With stafﬁng shortages, many of our CDS staff members are feeling overworked and unable 
to provide the quality of services they wish they could or lack the resources to do so, or are being asked to 
work outside of their originally tasked job.” 
-~'MSEA-SEIU Member Hannah Whitrnore (shown with her daughter), a service coordinator for Child 
Development Services 
Share on FB. Website. 
“Several of my colleagues have left the department to return to jobs either in Maine schools where they 
can earn similar pay with greater time off, or to the private sector for higher pay. I am writing this to you 
to express my sincere concem. . ..” 
--MSEA-SEIU Member Kellie Bailey, a regional education representative for the Maine Department of 
Education 
Share on FB. Website. 
“I am writing this to you to express my sincere concern with how my colleagues are contemplating, at 
alanning rates, the desire to leave state govemment service to return to the private sector because of wage 
disparity. ” 
-- Staci Warren, a supervisor for the Maine Department of Education 
Share on FB. Website. 
“Please consider the immense impact a strong, resourced, and staffed Maine DOE would have on the 
districts, schools, educators, families, and students in this state. I urge legislators to continue to invest in 
our learning systems that begin and end with the health and wellbeing of the Maine Department of 
Education. ” 
--MSEA-SEIU Member Rita Pello, who works as a Title 1 coordinator for the Maine Department of 
Education 
Share on FB. Website.
5
“We are experiencing a signiﬁcant brain drain from the Department (of Education), because at the end of 
the day, the wages do not compare. Colleagues have reluctantly left their dream jobs at the state, for other 
positions that pay 50% more and have a school year schedule. Folks who have years of historical 
knowledge and context for the department — something that is few and far between, and so crucial — are 
realizing it’s not worth it to continue working at these salary levels given their expertise. ” 
--MSEA-SEIU Member Amelia Lyons, who works as a regional educational representative for the Maine 
Department of Education 
Share on FB. Website. 
“Adjuncts are teaching in these positions without healthcare options, paid time off, sick pay, or 
guaranteed employment. The title of adjunct, once used for temporary employees just helping out here 
and there, is now largely the only position available to us. On top of that We work two, three, and in the 
case of one adjunct I spoke with last week, four other jobs to supplement our income. If we want to attract 
instructors to these schools the only way to do that is to offer actual careers, and stop relying so heavily 
on adjuncts. ” 
--MSEA-SEIU Adjunct Faculty Chapter President Katrina Ray-Saulis 
Sh on FB Website 3T3 . . 
“There are regular job postings for rehabilitation counselor, career center consultants, occupational safety 
specialist, and customer service representatives to name a few because qualified individuals are not 
applying due to the low wages. There are numerous employees that have or will be retiring in the next 
few years. These positions need to be ﬁlled with qualiﬁed individuals and that will only happen if wages 
are competitive. ” 
--MSEA-SEIU Eichel-Crinion Chapter President Winifred Malia, a principal economic research analyst 
with the Maine Department of Labor 
Share on FB. Website. 
“I’ve been with MaineDOT for seven years. I work seven days a week in order to pay my mortgage, 
health insurance, childcare and just day-to-day bills — heats, lights and stuff. I have a second job to make 
ends meet.” 
--MSEA-SEIU Member Brian Markey, an assistant technician for MaineDOT 
Share on FB. Website. 
"There’s a real problem with recruiting and retaining MaineDOT workers, and it’s mostly because of the 
State’s low pay. The fact is, the State just can’t get the people to come in or stay at these jobs because of 
the low wages. This problem is getting worse, not better." 
-- MSEA-SEIU Member Dave Boudreau, a transportation worker II for MaineDOT 
Share on FB. Website. 
“It’s past time that the State ends the State Employee Pay Gap. It’s the right thing to do — and it’s also 
necessary for the State to recruit and retain qualified Workers for the kinds of positions the BMV is 
seeking to fill right now. That’s why I respectfully ask that you include funding in the proposed State 
Budget to end the State Employee Pay Gap.”
6
--Ramona Welton, MSEA-SEIU past president, MSEA-SEIU Motor Vehicle Chapter vice president and 
an auditor II for the Maine Bureau of Motor Vehicles (BMV) within the Maine Department of Secretary 
of State» 
Sh n FB Website are O . . 
“Our members look forward to working with all of you to ensure a State budget that funds quality 
services and treats fairly the workers who provide them and the retirees who have ‘dedicated their careers 
to public service in our Great State of Maine. As you craft this budget, please take to heart the Governor ’s 
words from Jan. 10: ‘Our greatest asset....is our people." ’ 
-- MSEA-SEIU President Dean Stafﬁeri, in testimony calling on state legislators to fund ending the State 
Employee Pay Gap 
Share on FB. Website. 
"I feel strongly that an investment in our institution brings a good return on investment for our state.I 
implore you to keep the additional funding for Maine Maritime Academy in the budget." 
-- MSEA-SEIU Director and Maine Maritime Systems Integration Specialist Jake Adams in support of 
additional funding for Maine Maritime Academy 
Share on FB. Website. 
"The current budget surplus presents an opportunity for the current Legislature and governor to make 
some small amends for past actions even though the improvement will not come close to making public 
employees whole." 
-- MSEA-SEIU Retiree Member Rob Peale 
Share on FB. Website. 
"While I certainly appreciate the (supplemental) budget that Governor Mills put forward, containing a 
‘one-time ‘ increase for our retirees, one-time ﬁxes simply are not enough and fail to increase the base on 
which the next COLA can be calculated. This results in our retirees falling further and further behind. I 
am asking that you fund a full cumulative COLA in the biennial budget." 
-- MSEA-SEIU Androscoggin Valley Retirees Chapter President Penny Whitney -Asdourian 
Share on FB. Website. 
"Not only did the LePage administration reduce the COLA cap from 4% to 3% they also added a $20,000 
cap on the amount of pension beneﬁt that would be COLA eligible. Then they froze the COLA for three 
years. This was nothing more than financial terrorism for Maine ’s state worker and teacher retirees. The 
frozen COLAs added three more years of falling further behind financially." 
-- MSEA-SEIU Retiree Director Steve Butterfield 
Share on FB. Website. 
“Right now the State has a budget surplus, so I’m asking you to fund a State budget that ends the State 
Employee Pay Gap_ You should also know it’s the low wages for State workers that is making it hard for 
the State to recruit and retain workers. Funding a State budget that ends the State Employee Pay Gap Will 
go a long way toward making sure the services are there that Maine people count on every day.”
7
-- MSEA-SEIU Member Gary R. Brooks, a building custodian for the Maine Department of Defense, 
Veterans and Emergency Services 
Share on FB. Website. 
“The current pay gap has become so extreme that there will be no hiring college graduates struggling with 
student loans on top of the increased price of living. The phrase ‘do more with less’ will not fill positions 
or allow workers to keep up with demands as people leave for well-deserved retirements." 
-- MSEA-SEIU Member Connor Smith, a procurement analyst II for the Maine Department of 
Administrative and Financial Services 
Share on FB. Website. 
Op-Ed: 
“Throughout all departments of Maine state government, state workers are overworked and underpaid. 
It’s more important than ever that the governor and Legislature work together to fund, complete and 
implement the long-overdue reclassification and compensation study for Maine state government. ” 
--Cynthia Phinney of the Maine AFL-CIO and Eliza Townsend of the Appalachian Mountain Club, in an 
op-ed, Funding for natural resources must be a priority, in the Bangor Daily News 
Share on FB.
8
CORPORATE TAXES 
MAINE 
A quality education has long held the promise of creating a pathway for generations of Americans to pursue their 
dreams. From quality child care in the early years to an enriching K-12 education, to debt-free higher education, invest- 
ment in a high quality and equitable public education system is key to our children's future and the future of our country. 
Maine has increasingly fallen short in meeting this commitment as policymakers have cut education budgets and put our 
children's future at risk. From 2007 -- the year the last recession began -- to 2018, Maine state and local governments cut 
public K-12 spending by 11 percent as a share of total state personal income, and higher ed spending by 23 percent asa 
share of income.‘ This defunding is no accident; rather it is the result of manufactured austerity. Large, highly proﬁtable 
corporations and the wealthy in Maine have rigged the rules: They have demanded tax breaks, avoided paying the taxes 
they owe, and consolidated a tax structure that reinforces and accentuates economic inequality and structural racism. 
We must demand that corporations and the wealthy pay their fair share. We say Tax corporations and the Rich and Fund 
Education and Child Care in Maine! 
Over the past several decades, Maine's economy has grown tremendously while at the same time economic and racial 
inequality have greatly increased. The state's largest corporations and the state's billionaires have amassed hundreds 
of millions and even billions in wealth, while Maine's working class has struggled with lostjobs and lower wages. 
Maine's large corporations and billionaires clearly have the resources to contribute to the public good. 
0 Corporate wealth: Maine is home to two Fortune 1000 companies that together made $1.8 billion in earnings 
over the past 12 months.’ 
Despite their enormous wealth and proﬁts, Maine's low-road corporations and billionaires exploit loopholes in the tax 
code and demand more and more tax breaks. These loopholes and corporate tax breaks allow big corporations and 
the wealthy to avoid paying their fair share. As a result, Maine's tax burden falls disproportionately on our poorest 
residents, many of whom are people of color. 
o Proﬁting without pitching in: 
0 Corporate taxes account for only 5.2% of Maine's total tax revenue. ‘ 
0 Maine's transparency on corporate tax cuts and subsidies ranks among the worst in the country. ‘ 
0 Corporate tax loopholes were estimated to have cost Maine $52 million in 2019.’ . 
o Corporate ”incent1'ves" could cost Maine as much as $96 million in Fiscal Year 2023.” 
0 Maine's wealthiest residents pay little to nothing in income taxes, forcing low income families, and especially 
people of color to shoulder a greater share of the burden to fund the services Mainers need. Maine's sales 
tax and property tax are regressive, putting a larger burden on the working class than the top 1% of income 
earners. 
o The top 1% of income earners pay 8.6% of their family income in state and local taxes, while the poorest 
20% of Mainers pay 8.7%--virtually the same percentage. ” 
1 ME Fact Sheet: Why we need State and local Funding in ME. U.S. Census Bureau, 2007 Census of Governments and 2018 Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances, 
Bureau of Economic Analysis, State Personal Income 
Capital IQ. Fortune 1000 data. 
Pew. How States Raise Their Tax Dollars. 
Good Jabs First. Financial Transparency. Rating the States on Economic Development Transparency. 
In l T atlo dE ic Pol" .A$17 billi lo oi.                
st tule on ax n an conom icy on ophe 
Maine Center for Economic Policy. "Lack of Corporate Transparency Hurts Maine." By Maura Pillsbury. Posted 
7/5/22. institute on Taxation and Economic Policy. Who Pays? State by State data.
s-a
x 
When corporations and the rich don't pay taxes, the result is government cuts in social spending and public services. 
These cuts mean that workers don't get paid what they deserve, children don't receive the education they need, and 
families go hungry. These cuts rob our children of the best possible start in life, they can prevent families from keep- 
ing a roof over their head and food on the table, and they left Maine woefully underprepared for the pandemic. When 
the wealthy and corporations don't pay their fair share, our children and their families pay the price. 
0 Even before the pandemic Maine was cutting essential spending for years: From 2007 -- the year the last reces- 
sion began -- to 2018, Maine state and local governments cut public K-12 spending by 11 percent as a share of 
total state personal income, higher ed spending by 23 percent as a share of income, and housing and community 
development spending by 29 percent as a share of income.” 
0 Ordinary, working Mainers are struggling with unemployment, hunger, and homelessness. Almost 1 in 10 
Mainers have gone hungry, and more than 30,000 parents said their kids went hungry because they couldn't 
afford to feed them.“ 
o These life-threatening crises of hunger and homelessness loom largest over people of color. While 7% of White 
Mainers lack enough to eat, 18% of Mainers of color report going hungry"; and about 1 in 7 Mainers -- have 
fallen behind on their rent, putting them in danger of eviction and homelessness. “ 
0 With little to no public investment, child care costs are increasingly expensive for Maine families. On average, a 
Maine family would need to spend 24% of their income to pay for child care for two children. “ 
0 Maine's spending on education has dropped over the past decade: From 2007 -- the year the last recession 
began -- to 2018, Maine state and local governments cut public K-12 spending by 11 percent as a share of total 
state personal income, higher ed spending by 23 percent as a share of income.” 
o with public disinvestment in higher education, tuition costs have skyrocketed, creating huge ﬁnancial barri- 
ers to an affordable education. From 2008 to 2018, tuition at public four-year colleges in Maine increased by 
$1,283.“ This is an increase of 14.9%.” in the same time period, Maine spent $51 less per student, a drop of 
0.6%.“ 
o Tuition costs at community colleges which represent the most accessible post-secondary option create even 
larger barriers for students and disproportionately impact women and people of color. Tuition makes up be- 
tween 16% and 28% of a student's total community college expenses in Maine?” and 14% of Maine community 
college students are Black, indigenous, Immigrant, or other People of Color (BliPOC), ’° and 57% of Maine com- 
munity college students are women." 
O Taxpayers can end up paying far more on incarcerating people than to educate them. in Maine, it can cost tax~ 
payers as much as $252,000 annually to incarcerate a child, but only $14,000 for public education. ” 
10 ME Fact Sheet: Why we need State and Local Funding in ME. U.S. Census Bureau, 2007 Census of Governments and 2018 Annual Sun/ey of State and Local Government Finances; 
Bureau of Economic Analysis, State Personal Income. U.S. Census Bureau, 2007 Census of Governments and 2018 Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances; Bureau of Economic 
Analysis, State Personal income 
11 ME Fact Sheet: Why we need State and Local Funding in ME. U.S. Census Bureau, 2007 Census of Governments and 2018 Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances; 
Bureau of Economic Analysis, State Personal income. SEIU analysis of U.S. Census Bureau Household Pulse Survey microdata for October 28-December 21, 2020 
12 ME Fact Sheet: Why we need State and Local Funding in ME. U.S. Census Bureau, 2007 Census of Governments and 2018 Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances; 
Bureau of Economic Analysis, State Personal income. SEIU analysis of U.S. Census Bureau Household Pulse Survey microdata for October 28-December 21, 2020 
13 ME Fact Sheet: Why we need State and Local Funding in ME. U.S. Census Bureau, 2007 Census of Governments and 2018 Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances; 
Bureau of Economic Analysis, State Personal Income. SEIU analysis of U.S. Census Bureau Household Pulse Survey mlcrodata for October 28-December 21, 2020 
14 EEC fact sheet - MAINE - Final. SEIU analysis of 2015-2019 ACS mlcrodata. 
15 ME Fact Sheet: Why we need State and tocal Funding in ME. U.S. Census Bureau, 2007 Census of Governments and 2018 Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances; 
Bureau of Economic Analysis, State Personal income. U.S. Census Bureau, 2007 Census of Governments and 2018 Annual Survey of State and Local Government Finances; Bureau of Economic 
Analysis, State Personal Income 
16 Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. "State Higher Education Funding Cuts Have Pushed Costs to Students, worsened inequality." By Michael Mitchell, Michael Leachman and 
Matt Saenz. Posted 10/24/19. 
17 ' 
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. "State Higher Education Funding Cuts Have Pushed Costs to Students, Worsened inequality. ” By Michael Mitchell, Michael Leachman and 
Matt Saenz. Posted 10/24/19. 
18 Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. "State Higher Education Funding Cuts Have Pushed Costs to Students, worsened Inequality." By Michael Mitchell, Michael Leachman and 
Matt Saenz. Posted 10/24/19. 
19 Debt-Free CC Fact Sheet - Maine. SEIU calculations based on data from the U.S. Department of Education, integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS): https:// 
nces.ed.gov/|peds/ 
Z0 Debt-Free CC Fact Sheet — Maine.SElU calculations based on data from the U.S. Department of Education, Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (iPEDS): https://nces. 
ed.gov/ipeds/ 
21 Debt-Free CC Fact Sheet — Maine.SElU calculations based on data from the U.S. Department of Education, Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS): https://nces. 
ed.gov/lpeds/ 
22 No Kids In Prison. Cost To Taxpayers. Maine.
2 
f-M
an-I 
The manufactured austerity created by tax breaks for corporations and the wealthy doesn't just rob our children of the 
best possible start in life. It also robs educational workers-instructional and non-instructional alike-of the quality jobs 
they deserve. When the wealthy and corporations don't pay their fair share, working class Mainers pay the price. 
0 Maine child care workers provide critical services to children and families every day, yet they earn poverty-lev- 
el wages: Median wages for child care workers in Maine are $10.17, and 60% earn less than $15 an hour.” Asa 
result, 34% of child care workers live in or near poverty. “ 
0 Women are the most affected by poverty-level childcare wages: 93% of Maine child care workers are women,” 
compared to 49% women in the Maine workforce as a whole.“ 
0 Maine's K-12 teaching assistants are not being paid what they deserve: The annual median wage for teaching 
assistants in Maine is $36,490. ” 
0 Maine's community college workers who are disproportionately women and people of color are struggling 
with low wages: 18% of Maine community college workers make less than $15 an hour in wages." 
Mainers' tax dollars shouldn't be going to corporate tax breaks and new tax cuts for the wealthy. That money should 
be used to fund education and child care for the Mainer families who need it most. 
o The $52 million that Maine lost to corporate loopholes in 2019” could pay for thousands of Mainers' child care 
or college tuition. 
0 $52 million could pay for child care for 6,271 young children in a single year.” Likewise, $52 million could 
pay for tuition at a four-year university for 4,638 Mainer students in one year.” 
23 EEC fact sheet ~~ MAINE - Final. SEIU analysis of Z015-2019 AC5 microdata. 
24 EEC fact sheet -- MAINE - Final. SEIU analysis of 2015-2019 AC5 microdata. 
25 EEC fact sheet —- MAINE - Final. SEIU analysis of 2015-2019 AC5 mlcrodata. 
26 EEC fact sheet -- MAINE - Final. SEIU analysis of 2015-2019 ACS mlcrodata. 
27 US Bureau of labor Statistics. Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics. Maine, Teachlng Assistants, Except Postsecondary. May 2021. 
28 Debt-Free CC Fact Sheet -- Maine. Unless otherwise noted, all bullets in this section below are SEIU calculations based on U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, May 2020 Occupational 
Employment and Wage Statistics. 
29 Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy. A $17 billion loophole. 
30 Based on analysis of child care costs from: Economic Pollcy Institute. Child care costs In the United States. TEEC fact sheet -- MAINE - Final. SEIU analysis of 20151019 ACS mIcro~ 
data. In comparison with tax revenue losses from corporate breaks from: Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy. A $17 billion loophole. . Calculations in spreadsheet here. 
31 Based on analysis of costs from: Collegetloard. Trends In College Pricing 2022. Data in Excel. In comparison with tax revenue losses from corporate breaks from: Institute on 
Taxation and Economic Policy. A $17 billlon loophole. Calculations in spreadsheet here.
3 
* "" ‘s--"iic
