 
 
122 C Street, N.W., Suite 330 ● Washington, DC 20001 -2109 ● Tel: 202/484 -5222 ● Fax: 202/484 -5229  Leonore F. Heavey 
Tax Counsel  
(202) 484-5 221 
LHeavey@cost.org  
      
April  11, 2023 
 
Chair  Nicole Grohoski  
Chair  Joseph C. Perry , Sr. 
Members of the Joint Committee  on Taxation 
 Via E- mail  
 Re: COST Opposes L.D. 1337 R equiring  Tax Disclosure Statements  
 Dear Chair  Grohoski, Chair Perry , and members of the  Joint Committee  on Taxation:  
 On behalf of the Council On State Taxation (COST), I am writing to oppose L.D. 
1337. This legislation would place an unprecedented and onerous reporting 
requirement on corporations  doing business in M aine. L.D. 1337 would violate 
taxpayers’ privacy rights and longstanding practices of fair tax administration  by 
requiring reporting and disclosure of confidential tax information and making that information publicly searchable.  
 
About COST  
 COST is a nonprofit trade association based in Washington, DC. COST was formed in 1969 as an advisory committee to the Council of State Chambers of Commerce and today has an independent membership of over 500 major corporations engaged in interstate and international business. COST’s objective is to preserve and promote the equitable and nondiscriminatory state and local taxation of multijurisdictional business entities. Many COST members have operations in Main e and would  be 
negatively affected by this  legislation . 
 
COST Supports  Confidentiality of Taxpayer Information 
 The COST Board of Directors has adopted a formal policy statement in opposition to disclosure and publication of confidential taxpayer information
1. The policy position 
states:  
 
Taxpayers have a justifiable expectation of privacy. State departments of revenue audit business taxpayers on a regular basis to ensure that all relevant tax laws are appropriately enforced; releasing specific business tax returns or information from those returns to the public would serve no policy purpose. 
 
 
1 See COST Policy Statement: https://cost.org/globalassets/cost/state -tax-resources -pdf-
pages/costpolicy- positions/c onfidentialityoftaxpayerinformation.pdf.  Officers, 202 2-2023 
 
Michael F. Carchia  
Chair  
Capital One Services, LLC  
 
Mollie L. Miller  
Vice Chair  
Fresenius Medical Care  
North America  
 
Jamie S. Laiewski  
Secretary & Treasurer  
Charter Communications  
 
Robert J. Tuinstra, Jr.  
Immediate Past Chair  
Corteva Agriscience  
 
Arthur J. Parham, Jr.  
Past Chair  
Entergy Services, LLC 
 
Amy Thomas Laub  
Past Chair  
Nationwide Insurance Company  
 
Douglas L. Lindholm   
President  
Council On State Taxation  
 
Directors  
 
Madison J. Barnett  
The Coca -Cola Company  
 
C. Benjamin Bright  
HCA Healthcare , Inc.  
 
Lani J. Canniff  
Ameriprise Financial, Inc.  
 
Sandra K. Cary  
LKQ Corporation  
 
Susan Courson -Smith  
Pfizer Inc . 
 
Karen DiNuzzo -Wright 
Walmart Inc.  
 
Kurt A. Lamp  
Amazon.Com  
 
Jeffrey A. Langer  
The Home Depot  
 
Stephen J. LaRosa  
Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc.  
 
Toni Mincic  
Lumen Technologies  
 
John H. Paraskevas  
Exxon Mobil Corporation  
 
Michael R. Raley  
VF Corporation  
 
Patrick A. Shrake  
Cargill, Incorporated  
 
Kyle Snedaker  
Conagra Brands, Inc.  
 
Beth L. Sosidka  
AT&T Services, Inc.  
 
Archana Warner  
Constellation Energy  
Corporation  
 
Emily T. Whittenburg  
Nike, Inc.  
 
Council On State Taxation (COST)   April  11, 2023  
Letter Opposing  L.D. 1337  Page 2  
 
Disclosu re of a Specific Taxpayer ’s Information  
Serves No  Public Policy Purpose  
 
COST has consistently warned against violating taxpayer confidentiality under the guise of  
transparency. Rather than inform the public policy debate, L .D. 1337 could, t hrough its sole  
focus on the income tax, mislead both legislators and the public into thinking that businesses do 
not pay substantial taxes, when in fact  business pay substantial taxes, especially in areas other 
than the corporate income tax. The  corporate income tax is the most volatile state revenue st ream 
because of business cycles and intended tax code features. If the Legislature is concerned that 
certain classes of taxpayers are inappropriately taxed, it can and should ask the executive branch 
for aggregate information for that class  of taxpayers. Showing that a specific taxpayer did not 
pay corporate income tax for a given year – because of loss carryovers, current year profitability, tax credits, or some other reason – does not  benefit the policy debate. In fact, it will likely harm 
the debate, as the reason for a  taxpayer’s  Maine income tax liability will likely not be apparent or 
understood from the information disclosed. L .D. 1337 would make certain taxpayer information 
public record, would not rais e additional revenue , and woul d merely serve to allow the 
harassment  of indiv idual corpor ations . 
 No other state requires d etailed public disclosure of confi dential ta xpayer information. This bill 
will put  Maine taxpayers at a competitive disadvantage to  the extent they are subjected to 
disclosure rules  not applicable to their out of state competitors. I t should be noted that 
disclosures  such as those required by L .D. 1337 may make trade secrets and other sensitive 
information available for use by taxpayers’ competitors , including competitors  not subject to the 
state’s tax system . 
 
For these reasons, COST respectfully urges this Committee to reject L .D. 1337. 
 Sincerely,  
 
 
Leonore F. Hea vey 
  CC: COST Board of Directors  
Douglas Lindholm, COST President & Executive Director  

