188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741  
   
 
 April 13, 2023  
 
 
Senator Grohoski , Senate Chair  
Representative Perry , House Chair  
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 RE: AGC Maine’s Opposition to LD 1337  “An Act to Require a Corporation that Files a Tax Return in the 
State to File a Tax Disclosure Statement ” 
 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation  my name  is Matthew Marks,  I am a Principal at Cornerstone  Government  Affairs,  and writing  
today  on behalf of my client  The Associated  General  Contractors  of Maine.  AGC  Maine  is a state wide  
commercial construction  trade  association  and a Chapter of AGC  America.  
 
AGC  Maine  is opposed  to LD 1337  as we believe  it will create  confusion,  false  narratives,  exposure  of 
competitive  information,  and lead  to policies  that are under  inaccurate  assumptions.  It will also provide  
a distinct  disadvantage  for firms  based  here,  competing  here,  and could  discourage  investment.   
 
The debate  over  tax disclosure  precedes  the first tax on corporations  in 19091 when  the Federal 
government  authorized  the Corporate  Excise  Tax. The Revenue  Act of 1924  created  public  disclosure  for 
private  and corporate  individual  returns.  The Act provided  the names,  addresses , and tax payments . 
That  was swiftly  changed  in 1926  when  then President  Coolidge  and Treasury  Secretary  Mellon  cited  
cases  of scams,  and compromising  business  secrecy.  However,  the debate  continued  until  the 
ratification  of the 16th  Amendment.  The IRS established  authority  through  delegated  rules  to allow  
certain  inspections  of records  generally  for other  agencies  and officials  in legal  proceedings.  The policy  
shifted  once  again  when  President  Nixon  was accused  of using tax information  against  his polit ical 
opponents.   
 
The public  can easily  misinterpret  the publication  of tax returns , as there is a substantial  difference  
between  tax filings  and financial reporting.  Tax returns  can be lengthy  and complicated,  and the 
summary  of information  that would  be required  under  this law will create  unnecessary  assumptions.  
The state government  has the expertise  and authority  to investigate and prosecute  violations.  When  the 
government  creates  accelerated  depreciation  to encourage  investment in equipment,  it could  appear  on 
the public  information  that the company  is less profitable.  That  could  impact  investors,  confidence , and 
 
1 Public Disclosure of Corporate Tax Return Information: Accounting, Economics, and Legal Perspectives  David Lenter , Joel Slemrod , Douglas Shackelford  
National Tax Journal , Vol. 56, No. 4 (December, 2003), pp. 803 -830 (28 pages)  
 
188 Whitten Road, Augusta ME 04330  www.agcmaine.org   207- 622- 4741 future  business  activity.  In the case  of accelerat ed depreciation,  companies , and our economy  have  
benefited  from  the investment  in new  equipment , especially  during a recession.  Those  investments  
create  opportunities  for suppliers  and lenders.   
 
Additionally,  this would  place  Maine  firms,  and those  conducting business  here  required  to file, exposed  
to their  competitors , especially  those  they  might  compete against  in other  states.  In the construction  
industry  that would  be particularly  challenging  for firms  as the market  here  is smaller,  and during slow  
periods  they  choose  to bid elsewhere.  The opposite  is true  for developers  who  may  weigh  this proposed  
law before  investing  in our state.  Regardless,  it would  be detrimental  for future  laws  to be crafted  based  
on the simple  reading  of tax returns  targeting  specific  business  sectors.  Section  (5) of this bill requires 
“Total business income and nonbusiness income of the corporation apportioned to the State .” Sharing 
this information will inform competitors of any shift or trend to grow or reduce market share within the 
state and could compromise  a company’s str ategic plan .  
 
In section , J states  “In the case  of a publicly  traded  corporation  incorporated  in the United  States  or the 
affiliate  of such  a publicly  traded  corporation,  profits  before  tax reported  on the United  States  Securities  
and Exchange  Commission  Form  10-K or a successor  form  for the corporation,  or the affiliated  group  of 
which  the corporation  is a member,  for the corporate  fiscal year  that contains  the last day of the tax 
year for which  the return  is filed .”  
 
The SEC advised  against  public  corporate  tax disclosures  in the 2002  debate , furthe rmore , they  can 
request  tax returns  in civil investigations  and have  the expertise to compare  against  financial 
statements , unlike  the assumptions  that could  be made  because  of this bill. The belief from  regulators  
was that the public  financial repor ts from  publicly  traded  firms  provided  a stronger  analysis  of the 
corporation ’s financial status . It was also followed  by SEC directi ves to have  exec utives  personally  sign 
and certify  their  financial results  and adoption  of the new  rules  under  the Sarbanes -Oxley  Act of 2002 .    
The Sarbanes -Oxley  Act states  that any corporate  officer who  knowingly  certifies  false  financial 
statements  can go to prison.  The regulations  under  the act directly  address  corporate  responsibility,  
increased  criminal  punishment , and accounting regulations.  Additio nally,  the Act created  the Public  
Company  Accounting Oversight  Board  to oversee public  audit  compan ies and auditing  standards . 
It’s our belief this is not necessary  and violates  the privacy  of corporations  and may  discourage  much -
needed  investment.  We respectfully  ask the Committee to vote  against  LD 1337.   
