 
 
 
1 Marginal Way | FL 2 | Portland, ME 04101 | t. 207.956.7030 | f. 207.805.1679  
www.maineimmigrantrights.org | FB: @MEImmigrantRightsCoalition | T: @MaineRights | IG: @MaineImmigrantRights  Testimony from the Maine Immigrants’ Rights Coalition regarding:  
LD 1337: An Act to Require a Corporation That Files a Tax Return in the State to File a Tax 
Disclosure Statement   
Sponsored By: Representative Ann  Matlack 
Public Hearing: Thursday, April 13, 2023 at 1: 00pm 
 
 
Dear Members of the Committee on  Taxation : 
My name is Tobin Williamson and I am the Advocacy Manager with the Maine Immigrants’ Rights 
Coalition (MIRC), a  statewide network  of almost 100 member organizations  working to enhance the lives 
of Maine’s immigrant communities. MIRC works to advanc e systemic change s in Maine through 
collaborative advocacy to ensure that voices of the state’s large, diverse, and gro wing immigrant 
communities are heard.  
To quote the Maine Center for Economic Policy  (MECEP) , this bill would lead to a "more inclusive 
economy that works for all Mainers — not just those at the top."  Representative Matlack ’s proposed 
legislation w ould increase corporate transparency and close tax loopholes, which will go a long way in 
making sure corporations pay their fair share of taxes . 
There are many unmet needs t hat Mainers – immigrants and non -immigrants alike – are struggling  with. 
There is a housing crisis, public schools need fu nding, a number of transportat ion projects could use a 
boost, and so on. Unfortunately, to quote  MEC EP’s Maura Pillsbury,  “as corporations have paid less in 
taxes, fewer dol lars have flowed into our communities to provide services and supports .” If corpora tions 
paid more of  their fair share, everyday Mainers would stop being dispr oportionately impacted.  
As MIRC is a member of the Mainers for Tax Fairness coali tion, closing t ax loophole s by increasing 
transparency is an idea we wholeheartedly support.  Therefore, we encourage the pass ing of LD 1337: An 
Act to Require a Corporation That Files a Tax Return in the State to  File a Tax Disclosure Statement . 
Thank you for your consideration of this legislati on.  
 
Tobin Williamson  
Lewiston, ME  
MIRC Advocacy Manager  
 
### 
