Written Testimony of
Timothy J Martin
V.P. Cornerstone Insurance Agency
March 27, 2023
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and  honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs.  Thank you for the opportunity to submit my written testimony in support of 
L.D. 1088, An Act to Update the Gambling Laws to Allow Once-annual Casino Nights for Charitable 
Purposes or Registered Political Committees. 
I write in support of L.D. 1088. As a longtime booster club member and board member of several non 
profit organizations I strongly support the bill being presented to allow once annual casino nights for 
Charitable Purposes and Registered Political Committees. As a board member of these non profit 
organizations we are constantly trying to find new ways to fundraise for our organizations. 
Other states allow the opportunity for nonprofits and registered political committees to host casino 
night events. These events allow those organizations to raise a large amount of funding in a single 
fundraising event. These nonprofits often support youth organizations, medical charities, as well as 
political committees. They support an endless list of charities, from Shriners, and make a wish to school 
booster clubs and fraternal organizations that give vast amounts to numerous charities. 
44 states in the United States allow legal casinos and some list restrictions on their gambling. Maine has 
2 legal casinos that operate year round. The opportunity to host once annual casino nights may also 
bring an opportunity for Maine’s legal casinos to host a casino night off their premises for a charitable 
organization. There are also businesses that offer casino night services in other states that would come 
in and run an event for a fee.
A once annual license, and fee would help pay for these costs of generating the legal license for that 
once annual event and possibly raise funds for the department. I see casino nights as a win win for the 
organizations and the states, and allow ample regulation of said events. These events would also be an 
economic boost to large venues, hotels, restaurants, limo services,  etc., that would benefit from a 
group that could potentially draw a large attendance. 
The state of Maine already allows games of chance such as Bingo, and the state itself sells lottery and 
scratch tickets as well as licensed Casinos, so I believe this bill will allow nonprofits and political 
committees to also raise funds for their organizations, while offering a safe, and fun atmosphere for 
those who choose to participate in such events, and not take away from the other legal offerings already 
allowed by the gaming commission. I strongly urge you to vote in favor of L.D. 1088.
Sincerely,
Timothy J Martin

