The Joint Standing Committee of Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Testimony from Agnieszka Carpenter, Executive Director, BioME 
 
In Support of LD 416 
 
LD 416 
An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for Research and Development 
and Commercialization 
 
24 April 2023 
 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs: 
 
My name is Agnieszka Carpenter, I am the Executive Director of the Bioscience Association of 
Maine (BioME) located in Portland, Maine. I am here today to present testimony on behalf of 
BioME in support of LD 416. 
 
Bioscience Association of Maine (BioME) is a trade organization representing over 230 
bioscience companies in Maine. BioME’s mission is to advance economic growth and 
opportunities within the life sciences community in Maine.  
 
Maine's life science industry has made steady progress year over year, as demonstrated by our 
industry report, which highlights over 480 companies and 9,500 employees across biotech, 
human and animal health, R&D, diagnostics, medical equipment & supplies. In addition to this, 
we have experienced strong job growth over the past five years, which has had a significant 
multiplier effect on the state's economy, generating substantial income from those jobs.  
 
Maine’s life science jobs have grown faster than in any other New England state over the past 5 
years. Moreover, life science jobs are high paying: the average salary for a life science employee 
in Maine is $108,000 which is much higher than all other industries. 
Despite all this progress and potential to become a major life sciences hub, Maine lags in R&D 
investments. According to the industry report which we published in 2022, Maine’s higher 
education R&D expenditures are less than one fourth that of the other New England states. 
Furthermore, third-party reports such as the Maine Development Foundation’s Measures of 
Growth and Maine State Chamber of Commerce’s Making Maine Work both highlight the need 
for additional R&D investment in Maine.  
Our trade association frequently receives feedback from our members, particularly those from 
startups and small companies, indicating that the most significant factor for their business 
growth was the award from the Maine Technology Institute. We’ve heard multiple success 
stories of very small startups growing over a short period of time, bringing in new jobs and 
capital to the Maine’s economy thanks, in a great part, to these funds.  
We strongly believe that Maine’s life sciences’ growth is in jeopardy should there be little 
funding available for research and development. Bioscience, among other technology-based 
sectors, is where future Maine jobs are. As much as we applaud Maine’s heritage industries, 
such as tourism, fishing, or pulp and paper, unlike life sciences, these industries create jobs that 
are often seasonal and are not growing nowhere near as fast as life science jobs. This is true not 
only in Maine, but nationally and globally. Biotechnology is reported to be one of the fastest 
growing sectors in the world and this trend will continue. Maine ought to acknowledge the 
significance of fostering both the biotech sector and its community of researchers and 
entrepreneurs.  
To maintain competitiveness, Maine needs an appealing package of incentives tailored towards 
the life science industry.  Such incentives would bolster Maine’s capacity to attract new 
businesses and facilitate the growth and advancement of existing companies in an economic 
environment conducive to progress. When combined with other related initiatives currently 
under review by the state legislature, such as the proposed biomanufacturing tax credit and 
funding for the mobile learning lab, this bill will enhance the story we tell prospective biotech 
companies and professionals who consider Maine as a place to do business.  
Continuing to invest in R&D through the Maine Technology Asset Fund will encourage 
innovation and new ventures, support existing research and development activities, and above 
all, help grow Maine’s economy. This bond will foster public-private partnerships and provide 
crucial funding for Maine institutions in targeted sectors, including life sciences, giving them the 
resources they need to innovate and create high-paying jobs. 
For those reasons, we urge you to support LD 416.  
 
Sincerely, 
Agnieszka Carpenter 
BioME Executive Director 
 
 
 
