April 24, 2023 
LD 416 An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for Research and Development and 
Commercialization 
Brian Bowman, Vice President 
Bowman Constructors, Newport Maine 
Testifying: In Support 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Gattine, members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Committee, 
I am Brian Bowman from St. Albans, Maine, here to testify in support of LD 416, An Act to 
Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for Research and Development and Commercialization. 
My brother and I are Co-owners of Bowman Constructors, a 2"“ generation family-owned 
business located in Newport Maine. This is our 36*“ year in business. We employ a workforce of 
35 to 40 skilled construction workers year round, building projects for the University of Maine, 
Maine State Housing Authority and many municipalities and school districts throughout the 
state. One project we are currently constructing is the new Child Care Facility for Jackson 
Laboratory in Bar Harbor, an innovative solution to the workforce problem, supported in part by 
investments from the state of Maine. 
Infrastructure improvements are not only required but are necessary to boost the States 
competitiveness and economic resilience and help attract and retain young people in |\/Iaine. 
Most important in my opinion is retaining and attracting young people. Just a small recent 
example l would like to share with you. I have a son who is a high school senior. Over a year ago 
we began the conversation about post-secondary possibilities and where he might attend 
college. Being a University of Maine graduate myself I naturally suggested that would bea 
great place to attend and that we should set up a tour. We visited the Advanced Composite 
Development Center on the Orono campus. To say the least he was absolutely amazed at what 
was happening at this facility, in Maine, in our backyard and he could be a part of it. He was 
hooked and he has since been accepted to the University's mechanical engineering program and 
is looking forward to applying for the jobs available at that facility. It was that easy, one more 
engineer, one more young person inspired and not moving away from |\/laine, because of 
investments made in research and development years ago. 
For decades research and development investment has been identified as a critical factor in 
growing the Maine economy and yet, according to the 2022 Measures ofGrowth Report, Maine 
ranks 44"‘ in the country in Research and Development. I would argue that Maine is 44"‘ in the 
country at retaining and attracting young people. We desperately need to change that. 
I urge your support for LD 416, its that easy. 
Thank you for your consideration.
