 
 
April 24th, 2023  
 
 
To Whom It May Concern,  
 
To introduce myself, I am Brian Harris, the Co -Founder and CEO of MedRhythms, a company 
based in Portland, Maine, that is building innovative products at the intersection  of neuroscience, 
technology, and music, with the vision to revolutionize medicine and bring important care to 
people across Maine and around the world.  Today, I am writing in support of LD 416 An Act to 
Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for Research and D evelopment and Commercialization , as 
I believe that this is a critical step toward securing necessary funding that will set the foundation 
for companies like ours to succeed, put Maine on the map as having an innovative culture, and 
most importantly with c ompanies like MedRhythms, help more people get access to the care that 
they need.  
 
While  we have been fortunate to take advantage of funds supplied by the Maine Technology 
Institute for our Research and development (R&D) in the past, so much more can be do ne.  
Looking at the statistics, R&D spending in Maine represents 1.0% of total gross domestic 
product (GDP), compared to 3.0% nationwide. This ranks Maine 44th of the 50 states, so we can 
clearly do better.  Being born and raised in Maine (as is our other Co-Founder), we were excited 
to move MedRhythms back to Maine after starting in Boston, as we were passionate about the 
state, the economy, and wanted to be a part of changing the narrative around the economy of 
Maine.  We wanted to build an iconic global company and believed that we could do it from 
Maine, and we still do.  Th e money from this Bond, would not only enable, but also attract other 
innovative companies to build successful organizations in the state to positively impact  the 
economy  and the peop le of the state of Maine.  
 
Additionally, the recent growth of the Roux Institute has garnered national attention and planted 
the seed for innovation to grow here  form the academic side , and this funding would be the water 
on th is seed to help research, com panies, and innovation grow here.  It is through this lens that I 
whole -heartedly support LD 416.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Brian Harris  
Co-Founder & CEO  
MedRhythms, Inc.  

