Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs,  and distinguished Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs,  
Thank you for the opportunity to share some thoughts in support of  LD 416, An 
Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for Research and Development and 
Commercialization.   
Funding from the Maine Technology Institute (MTI) has been an integral part of 
building a research economy in Maine.  It’s true, not all the funding goes to the 
University of Maine, though we have gotten our fair share. A t last count the 
University had received 94 grants.   
That said, a lot of the grants went to small start -ups founded  by our graduates , like  
Cathy Billings, the founder of Lobster Unlimited1.  At Lobster Unlimited they 
develop new ways to recycle the waste from lobster processing and render it into 
commercially viable products.  
Other MTI grants go to businesses where our graduates work, like Sappi North 
America . SAPPI  received a $1 million g rant from MTI's Forestry Recovery 
Initiative to improve pulp yield in its Somerset Mill  through a new chip treatment 
process.2  
When we educate innovative thinkers at the University of Maine, it’s great to have 
tools to keep them in Maine.  MTI is one of those tools.  
More personally  at the University of Maine Advanced Structures and Composites 
Center (UMaine Composites Center)  we received a $500,000 grant from the Maine 
Technology Institute (MTI) in 2019 to explore how large -scale 3D printing can 
help Maine boatbuilders .  
This grant helped us set three Guinness Book of World Records: world’s largest 
prototype polymer 3D printer, lar gest solid 3D -printed object, and largest 3D -
printed boat.3  And while it was fun to set that record, it’s also important. Being a 
world leader helps put the University of Maine and our work on the global map.  
This kind of attention has already attracted tens of millions in financial interest , 
 
1 https://www.lobsterunlimited.com/  
2 https://www.mainetechnology.org/news/sappi -nort h-america -awarded -1-million -from -the-maine -technology -
institute -as-part -of-maines -forestry -recovery -initiative/   
3 https://umaine.edu/news/blog/2019/10/10/umaine -composites -center -receives -three -guinness -world -records -
related -to-largest -3d-printer/   
brought talented people  to our lab, and helped UMaine become an Carnegie R1 
research university .   
The project itself is also emblematic of the importance of MTI.  The gr ant helped 
us forge significant collaboration with diverse industry leaders and it strengthens a 
legacy Maine industry, boatbuilding.  The project includes  UMaine engineers, 
researchers,  and students .  They work with Maine boat builders , like Back Cove 
Yachts in Rockland, Sabre Yachts in Raymond, Front Street Shipyard in Belfast, 
Hinckley Yachts in Trenton, Hodgdon Yachts in Boothbay,  Lyman -Morse 
Boatbuilding in Rockland,  Kenway Composites in Augusta,  Custom Composite 
Technologies in Bath, and  Compounding S olutions in Lewiston.  
For the past 18 years, the UMaine Composites Center has been developing 
technologies to extrude plastics filled with wood cellulose and nanocellulose 
fibers. These plastics contain up to 50 percent wood fiber by weight . Now, we will 
use these same stronger and stiffer plastics in very large 3D printers to develop 20 - 
to 100 -foot boat molds and other boat parts for Maine boatbuilders. By 3D printing 
plastics with 50 percent wood, we aim to produce boat molds much faster and 
cheaper than  today’s traditional method  lowering costs by as much as 50%.   
Not only does it strengthen boat building, but it  also supports the forest products 
industry.  Our  feedstock materials  include a range of economical wood -filled 
materials for composite tooling  applications. The use of the wood -based fillers 
significantly reduces the cost and increases the stiffness and toughness of the 
material, while reducing the environmental impact and improving recyclability.   
These technologies were developed in our lab at  the University of Maine.  The 
university work s with Maine -based companies to develop a local supply chain for 
its unique, bio -filled materials.   
All of this was jump -started  with an MTI grant.  I hope this  testimony helps 
illustrate how Maine’s investment in R&D can have far reaching impact on 
sustaining Maine’s traditional industries, while adding value to our economy and 
our workforce.  
 
Habib J. Dagher, Ph.D., P.E.  
Executive Director, Advanced Structures & Composites Center  
Professor of Civil Engineering  
BIW Professor of Structural Engineering  

 
