                                                                                                                                    
 
 
 
April 24, 2023  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations & Financial Affairs  
c/o Office of Fiscal & Program Review  
5 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 416, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for Research and Development 
and Commercialization   
 
Dear Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and esteemed members of the Committee : 
 
We are  writing to convey information relat ed to LD 416, “An Act to Authorize a General Fund 
Bond Issue for Research and Development and Commercialization.”  
 
As you know, the bill proposes to allocate $100 million in bond funding “for Maine -based public 
and private institutions ” to stimulate innovation in our state’s seven targeted technology 
sectors.   
 
Maine’s 10 -year Economic Development Strategy calls for the promotion of innovation to 
increase private sector R&D investment and R&D expenditures in higher education, which then 
offer profitable opportunities to feed into Maine’s entrepreneurship and small business 
programs.  
 
The legislation  before you  references the soon -to-be-released Five -Year Innovation Action plan 
that has been developed by the Maine Innovation Eco nomy Advisory Board pursuant to MRSA 
Title 10 §949.  Of the five innovation economy goals outlined in the plan, three of them directly relate 
to the objectives of LD 416:  
 
• Goal 1: Increase R&D to 3% of GDP while Focusing on Activities that Directly Support  Maine 
Industries  
• Goal 2: Strengthen Pathways to Successful Commercialization, and  
• Goal 5: Strengthen Maine’s R&D Framework  by, among other things, developing a clear 
schedule and strategy for biennial R&D bonding and State R&D Appropriations .  
  
The Innovation Action Plan also cites other reports and studies that demonstrate the impact associated 
with R&D investments, including the Maine Department of Labor’s Maine Workforce Outlook: 2018 -
2028 , that notes that “ occupations in science, technology, engi neering, and mathematics pay 
93% more on average than those in other sectors. Moreover, they are growing faster. From 
 
   
 2012 to 2022, Maine science and technology jobs grew 21%, compared to just 3% growth for 
jobs in other sectors. Through 2028, these sector s are expected to grow another 6% while the 
rest of Maine’s job market remains relatively flat, growing just 0.3%.”  
 
Other relevant studies and data include:   
 
• Since 2009, the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, Educate Maine, and the Maine 
Development Found ation have promoted workforce and R&D investments in their Making 
Maine Work  reports. The 2022 edition calls for expanding the size and capabilities of 
Maine’s workforce, increasing R&D, and targeting high value -added industries. It notes, 
“State government can double its investment in R&D annually without running out of viable 
projects.”  
• The Maine Economic Growth Council emphasizes the importance of R&D in its annual 
report, Measures of Growth  (2022). It rec ommends R&D spending as a percentage of 
Maine’s economy increase from its current level of about 1% to the national average of 3% 
by 2030.   In the most recent data year available (2019), Maine’s R&D activity totaled about 
$685 million which equates to roug hly 1% of GDP and places Maine 44th of the 50 states.  
• The Bioscience Association of Maine’s Life Sciences in Maine  report (2022) shows the 
industry’s recent job grow th in Maine has outpaced all other New England states.   
 
All this data points to tremendous economic benefits and returns on investments in research, 
development, and commercialization.  The last R&D bond that was passed by the Legislature 
and approved by  the voters is another good representation of that fact.  In 2017, t hat bond set 
aside $45 million for targeted investments in innovation on projects that would have the 
greatest economic impacts.  The Maine Technology Institute, our state’s unique public -private 
partnership tasked with catalyzing innovation in Maine, admi nistered those funds and made 
awards through a competitive process, utilizing extensive due diligence evaluating the technical 
merit and feasibility of all the projects, with a particular emphasis on economic impact and job 
creation.   
 
There was tremendou s demand for the funding as MTI received 267 proposals through two 
funding rounds with total requests exceeding $425 million for the $45 million in available 
funding.  Ultimately, MTI made 28 consequential awards that generated 1,770 direct new jobs 
and ro ughly twice as many indirect and induced jobs.  The funding leveraged over $ 224 million 
in private sector matching investments and, according to an independent analysis, generate d 
$1.4 billion in economic impact  throughout Maine.  
 
LD 416 contemplates a sim ilar MTI process and competition  with all potential awardees 
needing to match any funding awards with at least one dollar for every dollar awarded . 
 
Clearly , there is a demonstrated and significant demand for research and development investments  
and sustained public and private investments are key to moving the needle .  The bon d fund s 
contained in LD 416 have the potential to drive meaningful economic growth and job creation 
across our great State .      
 
   
  
Thank you for your time and consideration . 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
 Heather Johnson, Commissioner                                                  Brian Whitney, President  
Dept. Of Economic & Community Development                      Maine Technology Institute  
 

