RE: Testimony In favor of LD416 An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for 
Research and Development and Commercialization April 24, 2023 
Erepared/delivered by: Katie Shorey, Director of Engagement, Live + Work in Maine 
(50103 non-proﬁt) 
Dear Legislators: 
My name is Katie Shorey, Director of Engagement for Live and Work in Maine, a 50103 
non-proﬁt which promotes the state of Maine as a career destination. We are dedicated 
to providing information and resources to talented people who want to relocate to, move 
within, or stay in Maine. We are supported by both Maine employers and the state. Our 
efforts include marketing initiatives, in-person events, content creation, and coordination 
all designed to position Maine as a world-class place to live and work so employers and 
communities can retain the families currently living here - and welcome new residents- 
so our economy can continue thriving into the future. 
I am here to voice our support for LD416. Maine is at a critical juncture - especially 
when it comes to attracting (and retaining) the indviduals our employers need. In order 
to stay competitive in the global economy, we also need to attract and grow high impact 
industries. As we've seen over the last two decades, the Maine Technology Institute 
model is sound, and the seven industry sectors are where we should invest. 
lf l were to take off my “work” hat and put on my “personal ” hat, I am a Mainer who grew 
up in a small, 400-person town called Sweden. As a young person l was encouraged to 
leave the state to pursue higher education and a career. l (as well as my parents and 
teachers) didn't know the types ofjob opportunities that existed in my own state - or 
what was possible for my future. But now, with the growth of innovative industries such 
as tech and advanced life science organizations, the possibilities for career growth are 
endless. We're seeing the intersection of technology and innovation in Maine's heritage 
sectors, which opens up new pathways for young Mainers. 
The funds will enable a competitive process for new ideas and products which is one of 
the solutions needed to attract new talent, businesses, and matched investment. The 
timing could not be better to make a major investment as tech-focused organizations 
are growing and working together to expand the innovation economy. We need to take 
bold steps to compete on a global scale.
l strongly encourage you to move forward with authorizing a general fund bond issue for 
research and development and commercialization. It's good for the future of Maine’s 
economy, our workforce and the talent and businesses we need to attract. 
We look forward to working with the Legislature on this and other issues, and would 
welcome the opportunity to provide additional insights or answer any questions as they 
arise. = 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
Katelyn (Katie) Shorey 
Director of Engagement, Live + Work in Maine 
katie@liveandworkinmainecom 
Address: 93 Pleasant St, Brunswick, ME 04011 
____
g LiveandWor1cinMaine.com ~ info@Ziveandwori2inmczine.com
