Lee Umphrey, President & CEO, Eastern Maine Development Corporation 
In Support of LD 416, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for 
Research and Development 
Before the Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
April '24, 2023 
Thank you, Senator Peggy Rotundo and Representative Melanie Sachs and members of the 
Committee on Appropriations. 
My name is Lee Umphrey, President of Eastern Maine Development (EMDC) and I am here 
today on behalf of our organization, region and state to strongly support LD 416 to Authorize a 
General Fund Bond Issue for Research, Development and Commercialization. In particular, I am 
here to emphasis Jackson Lab’s critical role as Maine’s innovation engine driving our economic 
vitality and potential for growth. 
Here in Eastern Maine, we see the economic impact and community engagement of Jackson Lab 
on a daily basis. With 1600 Maine employees, Jackson Lab is continuously seeking to meet 
employee needs, addressing childcare and other issues. The emphasis on workforce housing 
became a reality last summer with the opening of Hemlock Lane apartments adjacent to the Lab 
demonstrating their commitment to their workers. They also invest in their employees and 
community with robust education and learning opportunities and programs. 
As an organization, EMDC has a rich history of cultivating and convening successful 
partnerships that bring traditional and non-traditional, public and private partners together to 
achieve positive change. Jackson Lab has been that kind of partner helping to boost the local 
economy and workforce by hiring people and engaging businesses as vendors. 
We provide economic and workforce development guidance while leveraging resources and 
ﬁnding opportunities for communities, businesses, and people throughout all of Penobscot, 
Piscataquis, Hancock, and Waldo counties. These core services have expanded to include 
workforce development in nine Maine counties and statewide efforts in small business lending, 
PTAC/APEX government contracting, Disadvantages Business Enterprise/DBE assistance and 
comprehensive planning and land use including brownfields assessment, climate resiliency, 
broadband and transportation supporting towns. 
As a member of the Governor ’s Economic Recovery Committee and active participant with 
DECD’s 10-year Economic Development plan that informed our own Comprehensive Economic 
Development Strategy, I can relay that strategic and immediate investment in research and 
development was consistently recognized as being paramount in growing our state’s economic 
success and sustainability. This investment will create more and better paying jobs. For
example, the salaries for jobs at Jackson Lab are higher than the state average. The pandemic 
was both a crisis and opportunity. With an inﬂux of federal funds, Maine held its own by 
investing in communities and businesses wisely. Still, we need to look to the future while 
potential new sectors and businesses are interested in Maine. 
To meet this opportunity, we need a consistent and increased level of R& D investment to keep 
Maine’s innovation economy competitive in global markets. The University of Maine and the 
Maine Technology Institute among others are working daily to create public private partnerships 
and connecting innovation with new ventures. Jackson Lab, here in Maine, is a global leader in 
cancer research that’s making signiﬁcant medical progress while supporting its employees and 
surrounding communities. Supporting LD 416, the Maine R&D Bond makes good sense because 
it sends a message that this is a Maine priority while supporting a premier Maine organization 
that promotes the livelihood of the people of our state.
