Good afternoon Sen. Rotundo, Rep. Sachs and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs. My name is Linda Caprara and I am a resident of 
Winthrop. I am the Vice President of Advocacy for the Maine State Chamber of Commerce and 
I am testifying in strong support of L.D. 416, “An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue 
to Stimulate Investment in Innovation by Maine Businesses Issue for Research and Development 
and Commercialization. ” We thank Sen. Pierce for sponsoring the bill. 
In this high-tech digital age of intense global competition, it is absolutely critical that Maine 
companies have the tools they need to invest in innovation to grow our economy. The strength 
of our economy depends upon it. 
Maine companies compete regionally and globally. To keep up with the demands of the regional 
and global marketplace, companies have to constantly stay ahead of the competition. Investing 
in R&D to improve existing products and services and to discover and develop new products to 
bring to market is essential. Investing in the necessary technology and equipment to upgrade and 
accomplish this is very costly. Investments made in R&D enable our companies to gain and hold 
market share in their respective industries and both preserves and grows jobs in our state. 
The importance of R&D and an innovation economy is outlined in Maine’s 10 Year Strategic 
plan, which identiﬁes key areas of growth throughout the state. The importance of R&D is also 
highlighted in the “Making Maine Work” report which was a collaborative effort between the 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce, Educate Maine and Maine Development Foundation. The 
report provides recommendations for public private investments to improve Maine’s economy 
and quality of life. One of the goals in this report is to champion investments in innovation by 
increasing R&D spending; Maine currently lags behind the country in R&D spending at both the 
private and public sector. The report cites that we could double our current R&D investment 
and not run out of worthy, competitive, projects to fund. As a state we need to dedicate more 
resources to R&D, and we are fortunate to have the Maine Technology Institute, which hasa 
proven track record of successfully stewarding the State’s investments, to administer these 
resources. By capitalizing the Maine Technology Asset Fund and empowering MTI to manage 
the competitive award process, Maine could make great strides in implementing the 10 Year 
Strategic Plan and growing the Maine economy through public — private partnerships and 
ﬁnancial investments. 
There are some very exciting things happening across the State, from disease research 
discoveries at The Jackson Laboratory in Bar Harbor, to the creation of high performance 
insulated panels made from recycled glass bottles at Acadian Composite Materials, in Limestone. 
These are just two of the many organizations that have benefited from competitively awarded MTAF 
funds and the products they make and distribute, benefit Mainers and the Maine economy. 
The focus on innovation to strengthen Maine’s economy and to preserve and expand job 
opportunities camiot be underscored. Let’s not lose sight of the importance of R&D in keeping 
Maine businesses and our workers, globally competitive. We urge you to vote yes on L.D. 416.
