 
 
 
The Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Fiscal Affairs  
Testimony from Michael Pollastri , Ph.D.  
The Roux Institute  at Northeastern University , Portland, Maine  
 
In Support Of  
  
L.D. 416 
An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issuance for Research and Development and 
Commercialization  
  
24 April 2023  
  
Chair Rotundo, Chair Sachs, and distinguished members of the Appropriations and Fiscal Affairs  
Committee, my name is Michael Pollastri . I currently serve as  Senior Vice Provost and Academic L ead at 
The Roux Institute at Northeastern U niversity —a global leader in graduate education, experiential 
learning, and use -inspired researc h.  
 
By way of brief background, I served previously as Interim Dean of Northeastern’s College of Science and 
before that as Chair of the Department of Chemistry. Prior to joining Northeastern, I spent a decade in 
industry working in drug discovery as a research chemist at Pfizer . Thank you for the opportunity to 
provide  testimony this morning in strong support of L.D. 416, An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond 
Issuance for Research and Development and Commercialization.  
 
The Roux Institute was founded in Portland in 2020 for the express purpose of helping to drive the State 
of Maine’s economic growth by attracting, developing, and retaining the high technology industries of 
the future here in the state —including artificial intelligence, computer and information sciences, and the 
life and health sciences, among other eme rging fields.  A core element of our mission is to support 
Maine’s economic development by helping to significantly grow the talent and research base for the  
current, and future,  data -driven economy in Maine.  
 
As was referenced in preceding testimony, Maine lags several states in its investment in research and 
development, currently ranking 44th out of 50 states. Other states ar e hard at work right now  executing 
deliberate strategies to differentiate their economies and increase the ir competitiveness by making 
robust public investments in emerging fields ranging from life sciences to clean energy to advanced 
manufacturing.  
 
To address this disparity and to spur economic development in Maine’s natural resource -based and next 
generati on technology sectors, the state’s economic recovery plan called for a $100 million annual  
investment in commercially promising research and development in Maine. Passage of L.D. 416 would 
make an important down payment on this urgent need.  
 
At Roux, we are already working hard to help realize this vision. Roux has partnered with more than 150 
Maine employers and non -profit organizations since our founding in 2020, creating customized learning 
programs and helping prepare the next generation o f innovators powering the Maine economy. And we 
have invested in rapidly expanding our regional entrepreneurial ecosystem, recruiting over 45 startups 
 
to Maine over the last three years . These companies have attract ed $37 million in invested capital  and 
creat ed 70 new jobs in the state . One example we are particularly proud of is the launch of Tanbark  
Molded Fiber Products, a sustainable packaging startup . The founder , Melissa Lacasse, w as selected for 
our incubator , which is called “The Founder Residency” , allowing her to launch Tanbark . Melissa recently 
set up their first manufacturing site in Saco and we are looking forward to their growth in the years to 
come.  
 
Increased state funding for research and development will help supercharge these efforts, ensuring that 
advancements in technology and research innovation lead to new products made  by companies  right 
here in Maine  – just like we did in helping Tanbark bring their new product to market . We have 
collaborated with Maine -based startups, such as New England Marine Monitoring, not only to  help  
develop the compu ter vision tools for their services, but also to attract funding from the National Fish 
and Wildlife Foundation.   
 
Of critical importance to research enterprises like our s is the  frequently req uired  matching  funds for a 
considerable number  of federal research funding programs .  Proceeds from this proposed research bond 
would provide a source for required state matching funds for consortia of Maine industry and academic 
institutions to compete for the hundreds of millions of d ollars in currently available federal science and 
technology, computing, advanced manufacturing, and economic and workforce development funding.  
 
And while the Roux Institute research team, numbering 27 faculty , postdoctoral researchers, and 
graduate students,  have been successful in securing $9 million in federal and private research grants to 
date, these state funds would open up considerable opportunities for us and our colleagu es and 
partners across the state.  
 
The Roux Institute is acutely focused on the promise of transformative power of technology  to enable and 
grow the economy in Maine. One clear opportunity is centered  around applications of artificial 
intelligence . This opportunity to double down on applications of Artificial Intelligence to Maine business 
sectors looms large. This past January, we produced a report entitled “The State of AI in M aine”, which 
reported  out the findings from 50-plus interviews  of business leaders across  multiple  economic  sectors in 
Maine. It uncovered a wide range of AI applications already in use in healthcare, financial services, natural 
resources, education, and manufacturing . But there are many new directions that this technological 
transformation can take.  
 
This is going to require o ngoing research effort and investment, which undoubtedly will require an 
infusion of research dollars.  Over seven  hundred people attended the event that surrounded the release  
of the State of AI in Maine  report  – showing that  there is wide enthusiasm for developing these 
technologies. Thus, research investments will reach far beyond the Roux Institute a nd deeply into the 
wider research community in the state , and this will require investment far beyond what the corporate 
sector can provide. In conjunction with corporate an d federal dollars, the  state of Maine has an 
opportunity to  support these investments,  
 
The deployment of AI and related technologies  will not only drive growth of companies that exist in Maine, 
but can a lso attract  those who would aspire to move to Maine, where the cutting edge technologies and 
talent pools have developed.  
 
 
We are already working in this space. We are developing artificial intellig ence approaches that can 
improve patient care across healthcare organizations in Maine , by identifying patients who are more at 
risk of disease complications, by enabling patients to receive more effective care at home, and to provide 
ongoing monitoring  that allows healthcare providers a glimpse into a patient’s condition after returning 
home. Importantly , though these technologies that we deve lop together with Maine Health and Northern 
Light Heath will improve trea tment outcomes for Mainers, they also hold the promise to help transform 
healthcare nationwide.  
 
L.D. 416  represents a vital step forward to help  develop Maine’s future economy . That’s why there is such 
a broad cross -section of support across economic sect ors and public and private research institutions. It 
will help  make Maine more competitive . And it will help attract new industry to Maine  that will provide 
high -quality jobs to residents of the state , giving young Mainers access to better economic opportunities 
in the state  and attracting newcomers to help power Maine’s future growth.  
   
Thank you very much for your time and  for your consideration  of this important initiative. I urge you to 
report L.D. 416 favorably  with an “ought to pass ” recommendat ion. 
 
Respectfully Submitted , 
 
 
 
Michael Pollastri , Ph.D.  
Senior Vice Provost and Academic Lead  
The Roux Institute at Northeastern University  
 
 
  
  
 

