\/OX The Jackson 
Laboratory 
Leading the search 
for tcm10rrow ’ s cures 
PUBLIC HEARING TESTIMONY 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 416 
April 24, 2023 
An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for Research and Development 
and Commercialization 
Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Submitted by Michael McKernan, Director, Government and Community Relations, 
The Jackson Laboratory 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and members of the Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs, my name is Mike McKernan. l am Director of Government and Community 
Relations at The Jackson Laboratory and a resident of Bar Harbor. l am pleased to testify in 
support of LD 416, which, if enacted, will advance to Maine voters for approval a strategic, 
scalable, and sustainable investment that will benefit people in every county in the state. 
You will hear during today’s testimony that state investment in research, development, and 
commercialization is strategic. Investment in R&D advances goals established in Maine's 10- 
year Economic Development Plan and it supports strategic technology sectors including 
biotechnology, composites, environmental technology, forest products and agriculture, 
information technology, marine technology and aquaculture, and precision manufacturing. 
Maine has a strategy; it now needs to capitalize it. 
State investment in R&D is smart because the investments are scalable. State investments 
help R&D organizations expand their footprint and enhance their products and services, 
resulting in a significant return on state investment and increased GDP. An R&D bond was last 
approved by Maine voters in 2017, during the LePage administration. Through a competitive 
review process, JAX was awarded $12.5 million to complete the second phase of our state-of- 
the-alt production facility in Ellsworth, helping us scale our Maine-based production and meet 
the increased demand for research mouse models for human disease. The return on the state’s 
investment is ongoing and substantial. Comparing JAX’s economic footprint before and after the 
bond, the investment in JAX enabled: 
o An increase of 83,000 ft’ of production space in Maine with room for an additional 180 
employees; 
0 A 36% increase in annual revenue, today, compared to before the bond investment 
(+$86 million); 
0 A 10% increase in Maine employees, today, compared to before the bond investment 
(+150 people) accompanied by a 29% increase in compensation (+$36 million).
This increase in economic activity is growing local and state tax revenues, and enabling 
increased infrastructure investments in housing, childcare, and workforce transportation. 
Additional downstream benefits include the growth of Maine vendors and suppliers who scale 
their own operations to support R&D customers. 
Finally, support for research, development, and commercialization is sustainable. investments 
in R&D generate revenue from federal research grants and/or revenue derived from the sale of 
products or services. Research institutions like UMaine and JAX sustain R&D by leading the 
state in federal research grants—$19 million in NSF grants to UMaine and $79 million in NIH 
grants to JAX in 2022 alone. These grants are often multi-year and renewable. Similar grants 
made to other research organizations nationwide ensure the sustainability of revenues coming 
into Maine through demand for software or services like those created by Rockstep Solutions or 
hydration gel packs produced by ClearH2O. These revenues enter the Maine economy and 
sustain many other businesses. In 2022, for example, The Jackson Laboratory spent $60 
million with almost 600 Maine-based vendors from 116 towns - including wood pellets from 
Athens, insurance coverage from Bangor, and boiler mechanics from Lincoln. 
As you’ve heard from others, Maine's total investment in R&D has been inconsistent, 
unpredictable, and deficient. This bill is an opportunity to make a well-timed correction to plans 
already on the table. We ask the committee to authorize LD 416. Thank you for your 
consideration of my testimony.'
