Robert Hussey
Waterville
LD 416
The Joint Standing Committee of Appropriations and Financial Affairs
Testimony from Robert Hussey P.E.  Co-Founder of Hussey Medical, LLC
In Support of LD 416
LD 416
An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for Research and Development and 
Commercialization
24 April 2023
Senator Pierce, Representative Millett, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Appropriations and Financial Affairs:
My name is Robert Hussey and I am one of three co-founders of Hussey Medical, 
LLC, formed in 2019 and is located in Waterville, Maine.  I am submitting this 
written testimony in support of LD 416.
I am a Licensed Mechanical Engineer in the State of Maine and spent 38 years as a 
senior level automation and machine design engineer solving complex manufacturing 
and product design issues for international corporations. 
Due to a personal medical emergency, I have an ostomy and discovered an issue 
commonly faced by ostomy patient issue that did not have a solution.  My sons, a 
physician and an electrical engineer, and I formed Hussey Medical, LLC and created 
a device that solved this issue which      resulted in improved quality of life and 
preservation of my personal dignity. I use our patent-pending prototype every day and
have benefited for the past 2 plus years.  
Unfortunately, there is a paucity of available funding required to fully comply with 
FDA regulations, which is preventing us from bringing our device to other ostomy 
patients. FDA compliance would also allow us to satisfy hospital Institutional Review
Board (IRB) requirements that are responsible for ensuring patient safety during 
human trials.  We need to complete these trials prior to bringing the final design to 
market.  
Hussey Medical has experienced that the financial burden of complying with FDA 
regulations is underappreciated by funding organizations, such as MTI. Even with 
Hussey Medical’s relatively simple FDA-regulated class I medical device, estimates 
from consulting firms exceed $250,000 for us to fully comply with the FDA 
regulatory requirements.  
For these reasons, I urge you to support LD416 so that Maine can become a 
competitive, world-class biotech destination. Thank you for the opportunity to submit 
this written testimony.
Sincerely, 
Bob Hussey P.E.
Hussey Medical, LLC
bob@husseymedical.com

