MDI €fI€t.E%?Z!3C?lNG ’§2§ ifﬁiaﬁfﬁ 
Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs and distinguished members of the Joint Select Committee on 
Appropriations and Financial Affairs, 
Good morning. My name is Sadie Kuhn and I am the research coordinator for MDI Bioscience at the 
MDI Biological Laboratory. I am testifying today in support of LD416. 
I grew up in Woodstock, Vermont and in 2018 I moved to Maine to attend Colby College. During my 
time at Colby, I studied biology. I have always had a passion for medicine and as a kid used to perform 
simulations of total knee replacements on my iPod Touch. However, after a couple of years at Colby 
studying biology, I realized that I also had a passion for research. I ended up working in one of the 
microbiology labs on campus and I caught the bug that many of us researchers end up catching, which 
is: there's always another question that needs answering. 
This interest in research led me to MDIBL last summer where I partook in the undergraduate research 
fellowship program, supported by the INBRE. After an amazing summer of learning new skills and 
developing myself as a scientist, Jim Strickland, the director of MDlBL's newest initiative, MDI 
Bioscience, offered me a position in his team. MDI Bioscience aims to utilize non-mammalian 
organisms for developing commercial tools to aid in drug discovery and assessment of environmental 
toxicity. This position gave me the opportunity to combine my passion for medicine and human health 
with my curiosity and desire to be a part of the discovery process. 
The support that LD416 would provide Maine’s R&D sector is critical for young professionals like 
myself. After spending four years at Colby, I planted roots here. I had a misconception that in order to 
do this kind of work, I would need to look towards places like Boston or San Francisco, but places like 
the Roux and MDI Bioscience give recent college graduates like myself an opportunity to work in well- 
paying jobs that are just up the road from the people and places that we have become so connected 
to. 
Passage of LD416 will open up many doors for young people like myself to continue to live and work in 
Maine, and continue to be a part of the amazing communities that many of us cherished during time 
spent at Maine Universities and Colleges. With your support of LD416, we can harness the momentum 
that Maine has been building over the past several years to become one of the nation's leading states 
in biomedical research. 
Thank you for your attention, and I welcome any questions you may have. 
MDI Biological Laboratory I P.O. Box 35 | Salisbury Cove, ME 04672 I TEL: 207-288-3605 | jeri@mdibl.org
