OWNEAST lNsr IT 
(Z U} ,1 ' 
Downeast lnstitute's Testimony 
o,%VE New woe in Support ofA 
'“" Eoucmiou ' ll‘ -' 
Located on the shores of 
Black Duck Cove on 
Great Wass Island 
Address 
39 WiLDFLOWER LANE 
P.O. Box 83 
BEALS, ME 04611-0083 
Phone 
207'497'5769 
Website 
WWW.DOWNEASTlNSTlTUTE.ORC LD 416. An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for Research and 
Development and Commercialization 
April 24, 2023 
Good morning Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and Members ofthe ]oint 
Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. 
My name is Sara Randall, and I am the Associate Director ofthe Downeast institute 
(DEI) located in the Washington County town of Beals. DEI improves the lives of 
coastal and downeast Maine people through marine research, marine science 
education and innovations in wild and cultured shellﬁsh. Part of my wor|< involves 
conducting ﬁeld research across the coast of Maine to ﬁnd ways to enhance and 
sustain one of Maine's most valuable ﬁsheries- the soft-shell clam. 
Downeast institute is an excellent example ofthe good that results from Maine 
Technology institute (MTI) investments. Since 2000, DEi has received almost four 
million dollars in investments from MTI. During this time frame we have grown 
from 5 to seventeen employees, and our annual budget has grown from halfa 
million to about $1,500,000. 
The most signiﬁcant investments include a $1 million grant from MTl’s Maine 
Technology Asset Fund (MTAF) that helped construct our marine education 
center/classroom in 2008, We also received two million dollars from the 2016 
Marine Economy Bond, administered by MTI, which, along with investments from 
private foundations, allowed us to construct a full service marine research 
laboratory and dorm and become the easternmost marine ﬁeld station in the U.S. 
Examples ofthe hands-on Research St Development (R St D) work DEI has done to 
sustain and grow Maine's marine economy and support our coastal communities 
include: 
0 Production ofmillions ofcommercially important shellﬁsh species a year 
(e.g. soft-shell clams, quahogs, Atlantic surfclams, blue mussels, Razor clams, 
American oysters) to enhance wild stocks and also for aquaculture. 
The mission ofthe Downeast institute is to improve the quality oflife for the people ofalowneast and coastal 
Maine through marine research, marine science education, and innovations in wild and cultured ﬁsheries.
0 Eliminated a barrier to increased farmed mussel production in the northeast by developing a consistent and 
affordable method to grow Blue mussels to supplement natural seed settlement. 
0 Developed a visually distinct (gold) hatchery grown mussel to help Maine farmers differentiate their product 
and command a higher market price. 
0 Discovered, through extensive independent ﬁeld research, how climate change is impacting the valuable 
clam ﬁshery through increased predation by the invasive green crab. 
0 Monitoring mudﬂat temperature, clam recruitment, recruit growth and recruit survival at 24 locations across 
the Maine coast. 
0 Undertaking a comprehensive study to determine how many eggs clams ofdifferent sizes produce to provide 
shellﬁsh managers with information necessary to sustain harvests in a warming ocean. 
0 Developing ways to produce Sea scallops in the hatchery to increase sustainability by reducing reliance on 
capturing wild seed and ensuring continued supply. 
0 Creating new cultured ﬁsheries opportunities such as Arctic surfclam and Sea scallops. 
0 Conduct research to sustain shellﬁsh in our state-of-the-art ocean acidiﬁcation laboratory. 
6 Engaging over 500 pre-K to 12"‘ grade students ayear in hands-on marine science and applied math 
education. 
We hope these are clear examples ofthe beneﬁt ofMaine’s continued investment in R &D. Frequent and robust state 
investment in the Maine Technology Asset Fund (MTAF) will encourage innovation and new ventures, support 
existing research and development activities, and above all, will help grow Maine’s economy.
