elow Laboratory for 
g Ocean Sciences 207 3154567 1 bigeloworg | (>0 Bigelow Drive l East Boothbay, Maine 0454/. 
Testimony of Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences in Support of LD 416 
An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue for Research and Development and Commercialization 
April 24, 2023 
To Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Committee on Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs, 
Good morning, I am Valerie Young, chief of staff at Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, and I am 
here on behalf of Bigelow to speak in favor of LD4l6: An Act to Authorize a General Fund Bond Issue 
for Research and Development and Commercialization. We believe that strategic investments in 
research and development is essential for the growth and prosperity of our state. 
Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences is an independent, nonprofit research institute located in East 
Boothbay, Maine. From the Arctic to the Antarctic, our scientists use innovative approaches to study the 
foundation of global ocean health and unlock its potential to improve the future for all life on our planet 
Creative, cutting-edge science is our hallmark. We've reimagined ocean research —fusing the best of 
scientific inquiry and entrepreneurial ingenuity. This bold and nimble approach has transformed 
Bigelow from a scrappy start up into a world-renowned hub of ocean discovery over the last 50 years. 
With a combination of support from federal and private funds, we're empowering diverse researchers 
to collaboratively explore and exceed the traditional boundaries of their fields. 
By authorizing this general fund bond issue, you will allow Maine's research and development sector to 
leverage those federal and private dollars already being allocated to Maine, to bring new discoveries 
and technologies that can help to protect and preserve the ocean and its ecosystems that are so critical 
to sustaining life on our planet. 
Indeed, Bigelow has benefited from similar, past bonds distributed through the I\/laine Technology 
Institute, which we used to help build our state-of-the-art laboratory facilities and to expand our 
research capability. Over the past ten years that I've worked at Bigelow — starting when the building 
was constructed — we've grown from a staff of 70 to 110, with our operating budget growing from $8M 
to $20M. That growth has now brought us to our next expansion phase slated to begin this fall. The 
planned Education and Innovation Wing will provide dedicated teaching labs and classrooms, 
additional laboratories to hire more scientists, and much needed space to continue to grow our
elevv Laboratory for 
g 0C€8n QCEEHCES 287 31542567 l i>igelow.org i 60 Bigelow Drive l East Booihbay, Maine 04544 
footprint as a national repository for microbes and seeds involved in patent filings, an activity that has 
grown from ”$50,000 in annual revenue in 2018 to over a million dollars in 2022. 
Another example of how we have leveraged our past MTI funding is in our Coast-Cow-Consumer Project. 
Suppression of methane emissions (burps) from livestock has the potential to drastically reduce the 
global production of this greenhouse gas, which has over 25 times the warming potential of carbon 
dioxide if released into the atmosphere. This project aims to develop a well-balanced seaweed additive 
for cattle feed that dramatically reduces methane production while providing major benefits to the 
environment, dairy and beef farmers, and the working waterfront. This project started with $25K of seed 
funds and has now brought in $26lVl from a mix of private and federal funding sources. 
Bond funding such as this would be of utmost importance to get creative solutions like these off the 
ground in a variety of research sectors across Maine. The Maine Technology Institute, the Maine 
innovation Economy Advisory Board, and the Department of Economic and Community Development's 
Office of Innovation have worked hard, with important stakeholder input, to craft action plans and 
identify sectors of importance to help maximize where this investment can have the most impact for 
Maine. 
Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences urges the Maine Legislature to support LD416 and to authorize 
a general fund bond issue for research and development and commercialization. This is a critical 
investment in the future of our planet, and it is an investment that will pay dividends for generations of 
Mainers to come. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Valerie Young 
Chief of Staff 
Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
