P O Box 2490 Consumers for Augusta, ME 04338 
9? A"°"='=b'e ‘°'°"“‘;';iitI§33I§ €i'Z3Z2 
~ consumerhealth@ma|necahc org 
www.ma|necahc org 
Advocating the right to quality, aﬁbrdable 
health care for all Malners. 
i 
Statement of Ceilidh Shea 
Consumers for Affordable Health Care 
To the Joint Standing Committee On Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
Speaking in Support of: 
LD 615, An Act to Ensure Access to Newly Born Male Infant Circumcision by Requiring 
MaineCare and Health Insurance Coverage 
March 23, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee On Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services, thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments in 
support of LD 615, “An Act to Ensure Access to Newly Born Male Infant Circumcision by Requiring 
MaineCare and Health Insurance Coverage. ” 
My name is Ceilidh Shea, and I am a policy advocate at Consumers for Affordable Health Care,a 
nonpartisan, nonproﬁt organization that advocates the right to quality, affordable health care for every 
person in Maine. CAHC is a nonpartisan, nonproﬁt organization founded in 1988 and based in Augusta 
whose mission is to advocate the right to quality, affordable health care for every person in Maine. As 
designated by Maine’s Attorney General, CAHC serves as Maine’s Health Insurance Consumer 
Assistance Program (CAP). which operates a toll-free HelpLine. Our HelpLine, ﬁelds approximately 
6,000 calls and emails every year from people across Maine who need help obtaining, keeping, using, or 
ﬁxing problems with private health insurance or with accessing or affording health care services. CAHC 
also serves as the Ombudsman program for Maine’s Medicaid program, MaineCare, and helps people 
apply for and navigate the enrollment process for MaineCare. It is with that background that we provide 
these comments. 
Male infant circumcision is a common preventative health measure. Studies have shown that infant male 
circumcision greatly reduces the risk for heterosexual transmission of HIV, other sexually transmitted 
infections, infant urinary tract infections, penile cancer, and other adverse health outcomes. ‘ The 
American Academy of Pediatrics states that the preventive health beneﬁts for infant males outweighs the 
risks of the procedure and “are sufficient to justify access to this procedure for families choosing it and to 
warrant third-party payment for circumcision of male newborns. ”“ 
In 1999, Florida stopped covering infant male circumcision in their Medicaid program. However, it 
became apparent that this cost-saving effort was ineffective. A University of Florida study found that 
between 2003 and 2008, a period just a few years after Florida stopped coverage, the number of older 
male children who required circumcisions rose sharply, as did state spending on circumcisions. 
Circumcisions in older male children are often due to issues with urinary-tract or penile infections, which 
are less common among their circumcised counterparts. “lWhen performed on, older children, the 
procedure is more painful, has higher risks of complications, and is signiﬁcantly more expensive, can 
compared to when performed on newborns. “ In fact, the University of Florida study found that a few 
years after male newborn circumcisions stopped being covered in 1999, total Medicaid spending on
circumcisions for children up to age 17 more than doubled, from just under $15 million in 2003 to over 
$33 million in 2008.“ 
A study conducted by the University of California, Los Angeles, concluded that “lack of Medicaid 
coverage for infant male circumcision correlated with lower rates of circumcision. Because 
uncircumcised males face greater risk of HIV and other sexually transmitted infections, lack of Medicaid 
coverage for circumcision may translate into future health disparities for children born to low-income 
families covered by Medicaid. ” Ensuring access to coverage for male infant circumcision will allow all 
families, no matter their socioeconomic status, to access this preventative health beneﬁt for their 
newborn, if they so choose. It is for these reasons I urge you to support LD 615. Thank you and I am 
happy to answer any questions.- 
' 
https:[/www.healthaffairsorg/doi/10.1377/hlthaff.2011.0776 
“ httpszﬂpublications.aap.0rg[pediatrics/article/130@/585/30235/Circumcision-Polict 
Statement?aut0Iogincheck=redirected 
'“ 
https:1/blogsscienti ﬁcamerican.com/observations/newborn-circumcision-shown-to-be-a-better-financial-choice- 
in-medical-coverage[ 
“’ https:[[pubIications.aap.org[pediatrics/article/130@/585/30235/Circumcision —Policy; 
Statement?autologincheck=redirected 
"‘ 
https:[/blogsscienti ﬁcamerican.com/observations/newborn-clrcumcision-shown-to-be-a-better —ﬁnancial-choice- 
in-medical-coverage[
