Testimony of Dr. Jamie Fey, MaineHealth
In Support of LD 615, “An Act to Ensure Access to Newly 
Born Male Infant Circumcision by Requiring MaineCare 
and Health Insurance Coverage”
Thursday, March 23, 2023
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial 
Services, I am Dr. Jamie Fey, pediatric hospitalist at Maine Medical 
Center, and I am here to testify in strong support of LD 615, “An Act to 
Ensure Access to Newly Born Male Infant Circumcision by Requiring 
MaineCare and Health Insurance Coverage.” 
MaineHealth is an integrated non-profit health care system that provides a 
continuum of health care services to communities throughout Maine and 
New Hampshire. Every day, our over 22,000 care team members support 
our vision of “Working Together so Our Communities are the Healthiest 
in America” by providing a range of services from primary and specialty 
physician services to a continuum of behavioral health care services, 
community and tertiary hospital care, home health care and a lab. 
As you have heard from the sponsor, the American Academy of Pediatrics 
(AAP) updated its policy statement on newborn male circumcision in 2012 
to say that “…the benefits of circumcision are sufficient to justify access 
to this procedure for families choosing it and to warrant third-party 
payment for circumcision of male newborns.”
Of the newborn male circumcisions performed within a MaineHealth 
hospital, less than 2% were covered by the family’s insurance. And the 
average cost of $450 is not insignificant. Inconsistent insurance coverage 
in Maine has led to inconsistent access to this procedure for families. At 
Maine Medical Center, it has created a tiered system where some families 
are able to pay for the procedure (although not without significant 
financial hardship in some cases) and others who wish to have it 
performed are unable to access it at all due to cost considerations.
LD 615 mandates that insurance carriers cover newborn male 
circumcision should a family choose it. A separate bill will address 
MaineCare coverage. If circumcision is the right choice for a family, the 
cost shouldn’t be a barrier to accessing the procedure and its health 
benefits. 
Specific benefits identified included prevention of urinary tract infections, 
penile cancer, and transmission of some sexually transmitted infections, including HIV. It also 
prevents complications associated with having a foreskin including inflammation and infection 
of the foreskin, phimosis and paraphimosis, which is a urologic emergency and can have 
catastrophic consequences. 
In my practice, I have cared for patients who have suffered with illnesses that could have been 
prevented by circumcision. I regularly care for small infants with urinary tract infection, the 
management of which includes invasive testing, prolonged intravenous antibiotics, and long 
hospitalizations. I have also seen patients with uncomfortable infections or penile injuries related 
to paraphimosis. Ensuring that access to this procedure is equitable would allow these families to 
have a choice to access the benefits of circumcision and in some cases will help them avoid 
preventable suffering and injury. 
For those reasons, I urge you to support the legislation before you today. Thank you and I would 
be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
