northernlighthealth.orgThis institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer.Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 615 An Act to Ensure Access to Newly Born Male Infant Circumcision 
by Requiring MaineCare and Health Insurance Coverage
Testimony in Support 
March 23, 2023
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance 
and Financial Services Committee, my name is Lisa Harvey-McPherson RN.  I am here 
today providing testimony on behalf of Northern Light Health and our member 
organizations speaking in support of this bill.  Northern Light Health member 
organizations include 10 hospitals located in southern, central, eastern and northern 
Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air and ground ambulance, behavioral health, addiction 
treatment, pharmacy, primary and specialty care practices and a state-wide home care 
and hospice program.  Ninety three percent of Maine’s population lives in the Northern 
Light Health service area.  Northern Light Health is also proud to be one of Maine’s 
largest employers with over 12,000 employees statewide.
Northern Light Health provides comprehensive women’s health services including 
obstetrical and gynecological care. Northern Light Health birthing locations include A.R. 
Gould Hospital, Maine Coast Hospital, Eastern Maine Medical Center, Mayo Hospital, 
Inland Hospital and Mercy Hospital.  To assist women and families prepare for 
pregnancy and childbirth we have a Northern Light Women’s Health Patient Guidebook 
available on our website providing comprehensive information on prenatal care, 
delivery and postnatal care.  The guidebook includes general insurance information that 
most insurance plans have global maternity fees, circumcision is not identified as a 
covered service in the global fee.  We advise women to discuss circumcision with their 
provider and we also ask women to identify in the birthing check list if they want the 
baby boy to be circumcised. We also advise women that once they give birth the 
newborn will automatically be eligible for coverage from the insurance provider under 
HIPPA and they need to notify the insurance company within 30 days to enroll the child 
in the family plan.  https://user-zmtjpvy.cld.bz/Pregnancy-and-Birthing-Guide/20/
In 2012, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) updated its policy statement on 
newborn male circumcision to say that “Evaluation of current evidence indicates that 
the health benefits of newborn male circumcision outweigh the risks and that the 
procedure’s benefits justify access to this procedure for families who choose it.”
It went on to say, “Although health benefits are not great enough to recommend 
routine circumcision for all male newborns, the benefits of circumcision are sufficient to 
justify access to this procedure for families choosing it and to warrant third-party 
payment for circumcision of male newborns.” Additionally, the American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists has endorsed this statement. 
Northern Light Health Births per Year 
2020 2021 2022
2816 Babies 2905 Babies 2770 Babies
1382 Male 1499 Male 1409 Male
Average Births Per Year = 2830
Average % Male Per Year = 50.52%
In 2022 parents chose to circumcise 826 male babies born in a Northern Light Health 
birthing location.  We advise new mothers in advance of a circumcision procedure that 
there will be a cost for the procedure in the event that their insurance does not cover 
the procedure in the hospital or in an outpatient setting after discharge.  Northern Light 
Health financial assistance policies determine when the child/family qualifies for charity 
or reduced care.  For those who do not qualify an out-of-pocket payment discount is 
available.  The range of payment with the discount is around $600 dollars.
This bill  requires health insurance coverage for newly born male infant circumcision 
beginning in January of 2024.  We are in full support of this proposal.  
Thank you for the opportunity to speak in support of this bill.  
