  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
March 23 , 202 3 
 
Senator Donna Bailey , Chair  
Representative Anne Perry , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial 
Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 615 – An Act to Ensure Access to Newly Born Male Infant Circumcision by Requiring 
MaineCare and Health Insurance Coverage  
 
Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services : 
 
This letter is to share MaineCare’s concerns about Part B of LD 615, An Act to Ensure Access to 
Newly Born Male Infant Circumcision by Requiring MaineCare and Health Insurance Coverage . 
Part A of this bill requires health insurance coverage for newly born male infant circumcision. Part  
B of this bill requires the MaineCare program to provide reimbursement for the costs of newly 
born male infant cir cumcision . Both sections of the bill are proposed to begin January 1, 2024.  
MaineCare is opposed to Part B of this bill.  
 
Federal Medicaid regulations  dictate services  are only reimbursable if they are me dically 
necessary. Since non -therapeutic circumcisi on is not medically necessary, MaineCare would not 
be able to claim federal match for these services . There is also literature that suggests that non-
therapeutic circumcision may be pose health risks . To remain  in compliance  with federal la w, non-
therapeutic circumcision  would have to be paid for entirely with state dollars. We do not believe 
it would be a wise use of Department time to pursue a state plan amendment that conflicts with 
federal regulations.  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the abov e information as you consider this bill going forward. If you 
have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

