The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings. 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health all Maine people
TO: Joint Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services
FROM: Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health & Government Affairs Associate 
DATE: March 23, 2023
SUPPORT – LD 615, An Act to Ensure Access to Newly Born Male Infant Circumcision by Requiring 
MaineCare and Health Insurance Coverage
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and the distinguished members of the 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee. My name is Mikenzie Dwyer, I 
am the Public Health and Government Affairs Associate for the Maine Medical Association and 
I live in Windham. The MMA appreciates this opportunity to provide the following comments in 
support of LD 651. This bill would require health insurers and MaineCare to provide coverage 
for newly born male infant circumcision. 
Neonatal circumcision protects against urinary tract infections, HIV, HSV-2, syphilis, chancroid, 
thrush, bacterial accumulation, human papillomavirus, penile (and possibly prostate) cancer, 
local inflammation (balanitis), phimosis, paraphimosis, sexual problems with age, and, in 
female partners, human papillomavirus, cervical cancer, HSV-2, chlamydia, and bacterial 
vaginosis. The risks associated with medical circumcision of infants are also extremely low 
(0.3%-0.6%)1 .
According to the American Academy of Pediatrics an evaluation of current evidence indicates 
that the health benefits of newborn male circumcision outweigh the risks and that the 
procedure’s benefits justify access to this procedure for families who choose it. The American 
Academy of Family physicians stated, “the potential health benefits from circumcision justify it 
being a covered medical service by third-party payers, and it should be an available service for 
those who desire it.” The American Medical Association “encourages state Medicaid 
reimbursement of neonatal male circumcision” as well2 .
The MMA believes it is important to ensure families have this choice. Lack of Medicaid 
coverage for neonatal male circumcision is correlated with lower rates of circumcision and 
1 Morris BJ. Why circumcision is a biomedical imperative for the 21(st) century. Bioessays. 2007 
Nov;29(11):1147-58. doi: 10.1002/bies.20654. PMID: 17935209.
2 American Medical Association, Neonatal Male Circumcision https://policysearch.ama-
assn.org/policyfinder/detail/neonatal%20circumcision?uri=%2FAMADoc%2FHOD.xml-0-5039.xml
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings. increased risk of HIV and other sexually transmitted infections meaning a lack of Medicaid 
coverage for circumcision could translate into future health disparities for children born to poor 
families covered by Medicaid. 
Providing coverage for neonatal male circumcision is also cost beneficial. A recent Johns 
Hopkins’ study showed the declining rates of U.S. infant male circumcision will lead to 
dramatically higher rates of sexually transmitted disease and related cancers in men and their 
female partners, which could add up to more than $4.4 billion (an increase of about $14 per 
person in the US) in avoidable costs if circumcision rates drop lower3. States that do not 
provide Medicaid coverage for newly born circumcision have lower rates of circumcision 
overall4 .
Medicaid coverage is a critical piece to ensuring parents have the necessary means to make 
the best healthcare decisions for their children. Loss of this coverage has shown to increase 
overall costs while also increasing risk to the patient. For example, in 2003 Florida 
discontinued coverage for routine neonatal circumcision. The number of circumcisions 
increased by 79%, most of the increase was in non-neonatal circumcisions (>3 years) 
increased. The cost of circumcision for those 3 or older was 7.8 times the amount of neonatal 
circumcision costs5
.
For these reasons, the Maine Medical Association asks the committee to vote ought to pass on 
LD 651. Thank you for your time and consideration of our comments. Please reach out with 
any questions,
Sincerely,
Mikenzie Dwyer
(mdwyer@mainemed.com) 
3 Kacker, Seema, et al. Declining Rates of U.S. Infant Male Circumcision Could Add Billions to Health Care Costs, 
Experts Warn 
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/news/media/releases/declining_rates_of_us_infant_male_circumcision_could_a
dd_billions_to_health_care_costs_experts_warn
4 Mateo Zambrano Navia, Deborah L. Jacobson, Lauren C. Balmert, Ilina Rosoklija, Jane L. Holl, Matthew M. 
Davis, Emilie K. Johnson; State-Level Public Insurance Coverage and Neonatal Circumcision 
Rates. Pediatrics  November 2020; 146 (5): e20201475. 10.1542/peds.2020-1475
5 Susana Soto, Kailee Hernandez, Kaity Colon-Sanchez, Pamela Ellsworth,
Impact of Florida Medicaid guidelines on frequency and cost of delayed circumcision at Nemours Children's 
hospital, Journal of Pediatric Urology, Volume 18, Issue 6, 2022, Pages 834.e1-834.e7, ISSN 1477-5131,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpurol.2022.03.004. 
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1477513122000997)
