WW’ /./,,"—.'.'” ..,,;;~I\'- .. \_ 
/ea-' /-at \ 1-.‘ 
,e 
%%4»__ Ii
e 
MAINE CANNABIS muusrrw ASSOCIATION 
January 30th, 2023 
To: Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Honorable Members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
From: Alex McMahan 
Lewiston, Maine 04240 
Subject: Testimony against LD 48 
Good afternoon Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Honorable Members of the VLA 
Committee, my name is Alex McMahan and l’m testifying on behalf of MCIA. 
l’m here today to speak out against LD 48. 
There is much that concerns me about this bill; particularly the removal of the 0.6 milligram 
language, the deﬁnition of cartoon, and the addition of audit testing to the already mandatory 
testing regime. 
I'll start with advertising: there are plenty of liquor bottles that depict humans, animals, and fruit, 
not to mention countless craft beers that feature all of the above, plus an abundance of 
cartoons. The fact that it is different for cannabis is direct evidence of the persisting stigma; 
something we thought we were progressing away from with the passage of Speaker Talbot 
Ross’ anti. cannabis racism bill last session. As a reminder, Question 1 in 2016 was an act to 
regulate cannabis like alcohol. It is unclear why we are steering away from the stated goal of 
this referendum that was passed by Maine voters. 
The striking of the language “except that the allowable variance may not be less than 0.6 
milligrams" is problematic and frankly insulting. This language was only added last session after 
MCIA worked hard with the legislature to pass a bill making this crucial change. Less than one 
year later, we are fighting the exact fight again, and |’m not entirely sure why this is the case. 
Since it is the case however, l must repeat a point that was provided last session. 
The “not less than 0.6 milligrams" language is specifically to assist operators in offering 
low-dose edibles. 0.6 milligrams is the same size as one grain of sugar. With the 10% allowable
