122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  Neither For Nor Against : 
LD 48: An Act to Clarify Provisions of the Cannabis Legalization Act Regarding Labels, Packaging and 
Testing  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
State House, Room 437 Monday, January 30, 202 3 
 Good afternoon, Senator Hickman, Representative Supica , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs . My name is Rebecca Boulos . I am a resident of South Portland and 
executive director of Maine Public Health Association . 
 MPH A is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent 
more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health 
inequities – but  which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied 
to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities , and we take that 
responsibility seriously.  MPHA is Neither For Nor Against LD 48: “ An Act to Clarify Provisions of the Cannabis Legalization Act 
Regarding Labels, Packagi ng and Testing.” This  bill makes changes to labeling, packaging, and testing of 
cannabis products in the recreational cannabis program.  
 Labeling  
While we are supportive of efforts to minimize the attractiveness and marketing of cannabis products to youth, we have concerns about the vagueness of the definition of “cartoon.” We have concerns that the  revised 
definition will be insufficient to address a major driver of accidental youth ingestion, which are “copycat” 
product s (see below), since not all  these products have cartoons. We have labeling considerations  for the 
committee’s deli berations . 
1. Please m aintain restrictions on allowing fruit or other food imagery on packaging of 
products , and p lease consider p rohibit ing “copycat ” marketing. Cannabis edibles pose 
unique risk to children who may mistake cannabis edibles for food or  candy.  Indeed, t he number 
of poison center calls in Maine related to exposure of cannabis products among those 5 years ol d 
and younger  increased from 2 calls in 2016 to 39 calls in 2022. In other words , in just six 
years, there was a 20- fold increase in poison c enter calls.  
2. Make labels easier to read and understand. The minimum health and safety warning label font size is 6pts (
example).  Increas e health and safety warning label font size to 10pts minimum 
(example ). 
3. Add a  “Not safe for kids” label requirement on all products (currently this is optional). 
4. Provide clearer information about potential drug- nutrient and drug- drug interactions (i.e., THC 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  interactions with other drugs). 
 
Testing  
We believe Maine must continue to be vigilant about the testing and safety of cannabis  and cannabis  products, 
specifically edible cannabis  products. Studies from Washington State show clear and systematic differences 
within results provided by cannabis testing facilities , even when controlling for confounding factors.1 A 2019 
audit  of Oregon’s testing system found that the state’s testing program “cannot ensure that test results are 
reliable and products are safe” and “ [l]imited authority, inadequate staffing, and inefficient processes reduce 
OHA’s  ability to ensure Oregon cannabis  labs consistently operate under accreditation standards and industry 
pressures may affect lab practices and the accuracy of results .” 
 Considering the testing challenges observed in other states, we believe Maine should f ocus its efforts on 
improving consistency and testing  methods before approving an allowable variance rate that is higher than labs ’ 
already established variance rate.  
 Given  these factors,  we have considerations  for the committee’s deli berations : 
1. Support  efforts to promote  accuracy in testing  so that consumers can trust that the drug 
content  on the label is what is actually in the product ; a higher amount of THC per serving than 
what is labeled poses health risks and negative soci al impacts.  
2. Please consider requiring that all laboratory data are public to improve transparency and public safety . 
3. Currently, t here is no requirement for licensees  to update product labeling to be consistent with the 
actual  potency of the product. Instead of increasing the margin of error, sufficient resources should be 
dedicated to improving the accuracy of manufacturing and testing processes that improve the reliability of product contents.  
4. Please consider  conduct ing additional assessments of testing accuracy across products and facilities.  
5. Is there a variance range for CBD  per serving? O r ratio of THC:CBD/serving? Cannabis has become 
much more potent : samples studied from 1995 to 2014 show that while the level of THC increased by 
300%, the amount of CBD decreased by 50%.
2 By establishing an increased allowable variance for THC 
but not CBD (or ratio of THC:CBD)  per serving, the psychoactive properties  – and associated health 
risks – of these products increases.  
6. A 2018 publication found interlab differences in cannabinoid reporting, underscoring the need for, and importance of standardized laboratory methods.
2 We recommend focusing on this area first, be fore 
creating a wider margin of error for product s. 
 Health Effects  
We know cannabis use poses risks to our mental and physical health. People who used cannabis heavily in their 
teens and continued through adulthood showed a significant drop in IQ between the ages of 13 and 38 years – 
an average loss of 8 points for those who met criteria for cannabis dependence.
3 Cannabis  adversely impacts 
adolescent brain development, is a risk factor for cardio- respiratory disease and testicular cancer and is 
associated with both psychiatric illness and negative social outcomes.4,5 In 2020, there were 5,625 cannabis -
related emergency department visits , representing a 21% increase from 2019.6 Rates were disproportionately 
higher for males and for people ages 18 to 25 years old.  Maine’s  Department of Health and Human Services has prepared county- level fact sheets
 about adult and youth 
use of cannabis. In addition, the Maine State Epidemiological Outcomes Workgroup has prepared a fact sheet  
about cannabis use and consequences . 
 Ensuring accuracy in product testing and labeling, and restricting copycat marketing, will help minimize health 
harm s from cannabis. Thank you for consider ing our tes timony . 
 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org   
1 Jikomes  N & Zoorob M. The cannabinoid content of legal cannabis in Washington State varies systematically across testing facilities 
and popular consumer products. Scientific Report.  8: 4519 (2018).  
2 ElSohly M A, et. al. Changes in cannabis potency over  the last two decades (1995- 2014) – Analysis of current data in the United 
States. Biological Psychiatry . 2016; 79(7):613- 619. 
3 Cunningham  A. Teen vaping of marijuana raises concerns about addiction. Science News . October 2018.  
4 Hagler D . Marijuana use: Detrimental to youth . American College of Pediatricians . April 2017.  
5 Wilkinson ST, D’Souza DC. Problems with the medicalizati on of marijuana. JAMA . 2014;311(23):2377- 2378.  
6 Marijuana Use Dashboard . Maine State Epidemiological Outcomes Workgroup.  
 
 
Sample “Copycat ” Cannabis P roducts  
 
 
 
 
     CNN  
 

 
 
 
Per THC Cannabis Letter  by Virginia Attorney General Jason Miyares 

