Chair, Committee on  Housing  *  Education and Cultural Affairs Committee  
Cell:  (207) 415 -8631  * State House  (207)  287-1515  * Fax (207) 287 -1585  * Toll Free  1-800-423-6900  * TTY 711 
Teresa.Pierce@legislature.maine.gov  * legislature.maine.gov/senate   
 
Teresa  S. Pierce  
Senator,  District  25 THE  MAINE  SENATE  
131st Legislature  6 Waites  Landing  Road 
Falmouth,  ME 04105  
 
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 48 , "An Act to Clarify Provisions of the Cannabis 
Legalization Act Regarding Labels, Packaging and Testing ” 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
January 30 , 2023  
 
 
Senator Hickman, Representative  Supica , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs , I am Senator Teresa Pierce, and I represent senate district 
25 which incl udes Falmouth, Cumberland,  North Yarmouth , part of Yarmouth,  Gray  and Long 
Island . I am pleased to present  LD 48, " An Act to Clarify Provisions of the Cannabis Legalization 
Act Regarding Labels, Packaging and Test ing”. This is a bill brought to me by the Department of 
Administrative and Financial Services , and I’m happy to sponsor it h ere today.  
 
 
The bill seeks to  amend the Cannabis Legalization Act in a few important ways that will further 
strengthen safety standards for Maine cannabis growers and implement additional safeguards to 
ensure that  minors are not enticed to use these products.   
 
 
First, it repeals the prohibition against a label or pack aging  that depicts a human, animal or fruit and 
replaces it with a prohibition on the use of cartoons on a product label.  “Cartoon”, as defined in this 
bill, will cover any drawn or exaggerated depictions of people, animals or fruit.   
 
 
There has been a fair amount of confusion about how to interpret the human, animal, and fruit 
prohibition – specifically around body parts of humans and animals, paw prints, outlines vs. full 
illustrations , and the like.  In addition,  we have a number of edible  cannabis products that are fruit -
flavored and  licensees  have wanted to use realistic depictions of the fruit on the product label.  By 
defining and prohibiting the use of “cartoon s” we will be able to better protect children and by 
allowing licensees to h ave realistic depictions options it will give stronger guidance  to the industry . 
This is a more objective and focused standard to achieve the same ends.  
 
 
Second, l ast session when the legislature was considering LD 1846 (PL 2021, ch. 558),  OCP  
recommended th at the 0.6 mg to 5 mg language in question be stricken as it conflicted with the across 
the board 10% potency variance authorized by that bil l, but the language remained and has proven 
confusing to licensees and more limiting than OCP believes the committe e intended to be when it 
authorized an allowable variance of 10%.  This bill strikes that confusing language.  
 
 

 Third, the remaining testing provisions are aimed at clarifying in law what tests are intended to be 
conducted on which cannabis items while elim inating redundant testing that does not improve public 
health and safety.  
 
 
I have briefly highlighted the components of this bill and will be happy to answer any questions. That 
being said, this bill is technical in nature, and the committee might be bett er served by addressing 
questions to the department.  
 
 
Sincerely , 
 
Teresa S. Pierce  
State Senator, District 25  
Serving the people of Falmouth, Cumberland, North 
Yarmouth, Yarmouth (majority), Gray, and Long Island  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
