HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002
(207) 287-1440
TTY: (207) 287-4469
         Chad R. Perkins
                         POB 251
            Dover-Foxcroft, ME 04426
   Residence: (207) 279-0927
         Fax: (207) 305-4907
        Chad.Perkins@legislature.maine.gov
                                                                                                                                  
21 Mar 23
MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT: LD 940, An Act to Allow Pharmacists to Provide Services Through Telehealth and 
Vending Machines at Federally Qualified Health Centers
Committee Chair Senator Bailey, Committee Chair Representative Perry and distinguished members of
the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services ,
  Thank you for allowing me to bring forth testimony for LD 940,  An Act to Allow Pharmacists to 
Provide Services Through Telehealth and Vending Machines at Federally Qualified Health Centers .
   A Federally Qualified Health Center (FQHC) is a non-profit organization that operates under charter 
from the Health Resources and Services Administration. An FQHC qualifies for funding under Section 
330 of the Public Health Service Act, qualifies for enhanced reimbursement from Medicare and 
Medicaid, delivers comprehensive healthcare services to rural, under-served areas and offers a sliding 
fee scale. Services most often include preventive health services, dental services, mental health and 
substance abuse services, but can include transportation services necessary for adequate patient care 
and specialty care to include occupational therapy, chiropractic care, massage therapy, optometry, 
pharmacy services and others.  FQHCs must have an ongoing quality assurance program and are 
governed by a board of directors.
   As the Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors for a large FQHC operating multiple clinics in the 
State of Maine, I have seen the positive impact on rural healthcare in providing pharmacy services. By 
offering these services, we have allowed our patients access to the 340B program, allowing them huge 
savings in prescription drug costs as well as offering access in rural areas, including rural pharmacy 
delivery.
House District 31
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville Township, &
Southeast Piscataquis
LD   940
Page 2
   Passage of this bill would allow the same benefits to smaller FQHC clinics that do not 
have the space, staff or resources to operate their own, in-house pharmacies. 
   
   I encourage the committee to consider this legislation and support it with a vote of 
‘Ought To Pass’. I thank you for your time.
Respectfully,
Rep. Chad R. Perkins
District 31
ATT:
CF:
Committee Chair Senator Bailey
Committee Chair Representative Perry
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  Committee Members
House District 31
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis

