State of Maine 
131st Legislature 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Testimony of Charles F. Dingman on behalf of the Maine Primary Care Association 
Supporting 
LD 940, “An Act to Allow Pharmacists to Provide Services Through Telehealth and Vending 
Machines at Federally Qualiﬁed Health Centers” 
Sponsored by Representative Perry 
March 21, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, I am Charlie Dingman, a lawyer with the ﬁrm of Kozak& 
Gayer, and I am submitting this brief testimony today on behalf of the Maine Primary Care Association 
(MPCA). 
I refer you to the testimony of Hannah Hudson, MPCA’s Policy and Communications Manager, 
for the substance of MPCA’s support for Representative Perry’s initiative to improve access to 
pharmacy services at community health centers in rural Maine. My purpose in adding my own testimony 
is to note for the Committee the present status of a collaborative effort to reﬁne the bill in its current 
form to avoid duplicating what is already provided in Maine pharmacy statutes and rules, while ﬁlling 
any gaps that may impede innovative solutions to the problem of inadequate access to pharmacy 
services. 
MPCA is grateful to Deputy Commissioner Joan Cohen of the Department of Professional and 
Financial Regulation and to the staff and counsel for the Board of Pharmacy, who met with MPCA 
representatives last week to discuss What is possible under current law and what changes might be 
appropriate to address any remaining obstacles to delivering as much access to pharmacy services as 
possible at community health centers. As a result of that meeting, the CHCs that initially worked with 
Representative Perry on the ideas reﬂected in this bill are giving careful thought to what may or may not 
be needed in terms of legislative changes. Based on that analysis, we expect to consult further with the 
Department and Board staff and with Representative Perry, and we are optimistic that a consensus will 
emerge from these conversations. 
In any event, I will plan to be available at your work session on this bill to report on those efforts 
and to offer any technical comments or assistance that you may ﬁnd helpful. 
Thank you for your time and attention to this important health care access issue. I would be 
pleased to respond to questions via the contact information provided below or at your work session. 
Charles F. Dingman, Esq. 
cdingman@koza¥<gager. com 
Mobile: (207)~240-9146 
Kozak & Gayer, P.A. 
157 Capitol Street, Ste.1 
Augusta, ME 04330
