EDUCATE 
MAINE 
$6 The Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Testimony from Kaitlin Young, Policy and Program Manager, Educate Maine 
In Support Of 
L.D. 1608: ”An Act to Address Teacher Shortages Through Financial Assistance 
and Career Advancement Opportunities" 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: My name is Kaitlin Young, 
Policy and Program Manager of Educate Maine. I represent a business-led 
organization, with two—thirds of our board of directors coming from the business 
sector. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of L.D. #1608. Educate Maine's 
mission is to ensure that Maine people are prepared to succeed in education and 
career and that all Maine people reach their highest educational potential. Asa 
member of the MaineSpark coalition, we measure this by attainment - the share of 
adult workers with a postsecondary credential of value in demand by Maine 
employers. Maine's goal is to reach 60% by 2025. We strongly believe thata 
well-prepared, diverse, and stable educator workforce is essential in achieving our 
mission and ensuring that all Maine learners have access to exceptional educators 
who can equip them with the skills, knowledge, and credentials necessary to 
succeed in postsecondary education and the workforce. 
The problem of teacher shortage is multifaceted, and addressing it requires a 
comprehensive approach. LD 1608 is a critical step in addressing this crisis in Maine 
by providing multiple strategies outlined in the Teach Maine Plan to strengthen and 
support the educator workforce across the teacher pipeline. The bill aims to 
incentivize recruitment efforts through financial assistance and explore career 
advancement opportunities for teachers to attract and retain more individuals in the 
profession. 
482 Congress Street, Suite 303, Portland, ME 04101 ~ 207-347-8638 ' info@educatemaine.org
One of the key provisions in the bill is the emphasis on teacher residencies. Teacher 
residency models provide a hands-on, immersive experience for teacher candidates 
in real classrooms, allowing them to gain a comprehensive and realistic view of the 
teaching profession. They also provide candidates with a supportive community of 
experienced educators offering mentorship, feedback, and guidance throughout the 
program. In addition to supporting preparation, these experiences connect teacher 
candidates to the students, schools, and communities they hope to serve in the 
future. 
While teacher residencies are a relatively new concept in education, they have 
quickly gained popularity due to their potential to prepare and retain educators and 
promote positive student outcomes. In a recent study by the National Center for 
Teacher Residencies, 89% of teacher residency graduates stayed in the teaching 
field, and 96% of partner residency-hosting principals reported that the residency 
program positively impacted student learning and achievement. The Maine Teacher 
Residency Program has also shown promising results since its pilot program's start. 
Investing in teacher residencies is beneficial for teacher candidates and their 
students, as well as the education system as a whole. Retaining highly qualified 
teachers improves the quality of education in schools and ensures that all students 
have access to a high-quality education. It also reduces the costs associated with 
teacher turnover, such as recruiting and training new teachers, which can strain 
already-tight budgets. 
As a business-led non-profit organization, it is crucial to invest in education. 
investing in teachers is investing in the future of the state's workforce. LD 1608 
recognizes the importance of this investment and provides the necessary support to 
ensure that students have access to well-prepared and effective teachers. 
I encourage you to support LD # 1608 and help ensure Maine attracts and retains a 
diverse, talented, and stable educator workforce. Thank you for your time, the 
opportunity to testify, and for considering this in your deliberations. 
Kaitlin Young
