 DATE:  April 20, 2023 
 TO:  Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs 
 FROM:  Dr. Lauren Stark, Policy Engagement Fellow for the Scholars Strategy Network, 
 Assistant Professor of Education at the University of Maine at Augusta, Advisory Board Member 
 for the Maine Teacher Residency 
 Email & phone number 
 RE:  LD 1608 An Act to Address Teacher Shortages  Through Financial Assistance 
 and Career Advancement Opportunities 
 Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
 Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs: 
 I am writing to you today in support of LD 1608. 
 My name is Lauren Stark, and I am a policy engagement fellow for the Scholars Strategy 
 Network, an assistant professor of education at the University of Maine at Augusta, and an 
 advisory board member for the Maine Teacher Residency. My perspectives do not necessarily 
 represent those of my institutional affiliations. 
 As a teacher educator and field placement director at the University of Maine at Augusta, I have 
 worked with my colleagues to support teacher candidates as they work full-time in schools. This 
 has included negotiating individualized Memorandums of Understanding and Alternative 
 Placement Plans for the over 50% of our teacher candidates who are working in schools. The 
 Maine Teacher Residency program has substantially supported these efforts, providing tuition 
 remission for teacher candidates and significant stipends and training for mentor teachers. 
 The Maine Teacher Residency Program follows best practices within national research on teacher 
 residencies. We know from this research that residencies provide financial support for students, 
 support their professional development, increase recruitment and retention, improve teacher 
 preparation and teacher quality, and increase academic support for PK-12 students (Guha, Hyler, 
 & Darling Hammond, 2016). While it will be important to measure concrete successes of this 
 program within the state, I have seen the program support each of these goals in my work with 
 MTR teacher residents and mentor teachers. 
 This program addresses some of the significant financial barriers that teacher candidates face on 
 their pathway toward certification. It addresses educational technician and teacher shortages by 
 supporting well-prepared educators to fill open positions as they complete their certification. 
 Likewise, it facilitates “grow your own” models by enabling educational technicians to continue 
 working in schools as they complete their certification. It also supports experienced educators by 
 offering a more substantial stipend than is possible through approved teacher education 
 programs, building community among experienced educators and deepening their practice as 
 mentors. My hope is that this will support teacher retention and create pathways for career 
 advancement for excellent educators without requiring them to leave the classroom. 
 I welcome the opportunity to speak with legislators about LD 1608 and urge members of the Joint 
 Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs to support this act. 
