. . EIIII13 ltl L U.\'l\~‘i.l{S l TY 0 1-‘ 
. . 
College of Education and ~ 
57(>65I1|bIcs I lall 
Human Development I , V. 
\/I A I N E Orono, Maine ()44(+)-576!» 
(M Tel: 207-SRI-2438 
Fax: ?_07—58I-2423 
WWW.llmHll1C.L ‘tlLl 
Testimony from the University of Maine 
Presented by Penny Bishop, Dean of the College of Education and Human Development, 
In Support of LD 1608, An Act to Address Teacher Shortages Through Financial Assistance and 
Career Advancement Opportunities - April 20, 2023 
Senator Rafferty. Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Education & Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Penny Bishop and I am Dean of the College of Education and Human Development at the 
University of Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to be here with you today. On behalf of Maine‘s R1 
flagship and the University of Maine System (UMS), I am speaking in strong support of LD 1608, An Act 
to Address Teacher Shortages Through Financial Assistance and Career Advancement Opportunities. 
As this Committee well knows, Maine is experiencing a significant shortage of qualified teachers, as is 
the rest of our nation. We face particular challenges in Maine, however. Our large percentage of rural, 
remote, or isolated communities makes it difficult to recruit and retain teachers. Our starting salary is the 
lowest in the northeast. And the windfall elimination act further discourages many educators from 
choosing Maine as their home. 
All of this matters, because research is clear that the classroom teacher is the primary in-school factor 
influencing student achievement. Making the Maine Teacher Residency Program permanent, as LD 1608 
proposes, therefore links directly to improving student outcomes in Maine schools. 
We are fortunate that Senators Collins and King secured Congressionally Directed Spending to scale 
statewide the Maine Teacher Residency Program. We can already see the tangible effects of the 
program in boosting the educator pipeline, with more than 100 new teachers having been placed by the 
end of the 2023-24 school year 
While the University of Southern Maine administers this program, I want to emphasize this is a statewide 
collaboration, that residents are enrolled in high-quality educator preparation programs across the UMS— 
including UMaine — and even at private institutions like the University of New England, and that these 
residents are filling positions across the state, including rural districts close to and well north of UMaine. 
With that as context, I‘d like to identify three ways that I believe making this successful residency program 
permanent, as LD 1608 proposes, would help strengthen Maine's educator workforce: by increasing 
affordability, the quality of preparation, and the likelihood of retention in the profession. 
Affordability 
First, LD 1608 would encourage students to choose teaching as a profession by making the pathway 
more affordable. MEPR|’s recent research highlights the importance of affordability to Maine’s 
undergraduate students, who identified the current salary levels of teachers as a “major detractor" to 
going into teaching. This residency directly reduces the financial burdens of educator preparation, while 
simultaneously allowing teacher candidates more time to focus on learning the art and science of 
teaching, and completing their programs with confidence in their skills. 
The importance of affordability was also identified in a recent Maine SEEDS survey conducted in 
December, 2022. This collaboration between the Maine Department of Education and the University of
Maine System asked approximately 1,500 educational technicians across the state to identify the 
supports that were most likely to help them pursue teaching certification. Financial support for tuition and 
fees, a paid internship, and courses that fit into their work schedule were all identified as important and all 
of these would be addressed by making the Maine Teacher Residency Program permanent. 
Strong Preparation 
Second, LD 1608 would help ensure that the teachers who do enter the profession are well prepared. A 
well-supen/ised and supported student teaching experience is an important component of high-quality 
teacher preparation. Unfortunately, across Maine's educator preparation programs including those within 
UMS, we too often lose prospective teachers before they complete their student teaching internships 
because they cannot afford to take time away from the part-time jobs held by so many of our students, 
many of whom are first-generation and/or Pell-eligible. Unlike in engineering, medicine, business, or other 
industries, the required work learning experiences in education, like internships or student teaching, are 
typically unpaid. Instead of completing their programs, these students choose to what we commonly refer 
to) as “capstone out.” They finish their degree program without the accompanying internship, and enter 
the educator workforce less prepared, less resilient and less likely to remain in the profession, as well as 
with lower skills and credentials that impact their own social and economic mobility. 
Retention 
Third, LD 1608 would help to increase retention of teachers in our schools. While residency programs 
attract people to the teaching profession by making it more affordable, they retain more new teachers as 
well, because they provide support, a sense of community, and reduced isolation. National research on 
teacher residencies has illustrated that people who complete teacher residency programs remain in the 
same district longer than their counterparts. For example, 85 percent of residency graduates associated 
with the National Center for Teacher Residencies teach for at least three years in the school district 
where they were prepared, compared to just 50 percent of teachers in other high-needs schools. 
However, it is not only new teachers who are positively affected by the residency program. The mentor 
teachers in the Maine Teacher Residency Program participate in a research-based program designed 
by faculty at the University of Maine. These mentors consistently report that the program is helpful to 
their own professional development and classrooms. The time spent honing their development as 
mentors benefits the particular resident they are supporting, and also their broader school communities, 
where they work alongside other novice educators. This also reflects national research illustrating that 
hosting a resident in a classroom may be positively associated with increased teacher effectiveness 
and improved student academic outcomes. Developing teacher leaders in this way helps to builda 
more robust career ladder, which is key to retaining some of our most skilled educators in the state. 
In closing, this is a new era of teacher preparation. We must find the critical intersection between 
getting more teachers into Maine schools and ensuring those teachers are in fact effective at promoting 
student learning and wellbeing. lt is also an exciting time, and we are committed to adapting our models 
to meet the evolving needs of Maine communities. A large part of the success of this residency model 
is due to its collaborative nature, working closely both within the University of Maine System and 
externally with our school district partners. 
I encourage you to support LD 1608 and thank you for your continuous support of the University of 
Maine System and of our high-quality educator preparation programs.
