1 Written Testimony by William Norbert 
Governmental Affairs and Communications Manager 
Neither For Nor Against L.D. 1608 
An Act to Address Teacher Shortages Through Financial Assistance  
and Career Advancement Opportunities 
April 20, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Distinguished Members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Bill Norbert. I am the Governmental Affairs and Communications 
Manager at the Finance Authority of Maine (FAME). I live in Brunswick and am 
submitting this written testimony Neither For Nor Against L.D. 1608, An Act to Address 
Teacher Shortages Through Financial Assistance and Career Advancement 
Opportunities. 
This bill proposes three things: 
1.  It provides ongoing funds of $1 million beginning in fiscal year 2024-25 to the 
Department of Education, General Purpose Aid for Local Schools program to 
support the Maine Teacher Residency Program at the University of Southern 
Maine and authorizes the Commissioner of Education to expend and disburse 
funds for that purpose;  
2.  It provides that the maximum loan per academic year under the 
Educators for Maine Program be $8,000 for undergraduate students and 
students pursuing postbaccalaureate certification ; and 
3.  It requires the Maine Education Policy Research Institute to study the 
development of career ladders for educators. 
I write concerning Section 1 of the bill only, the portion concerning the Educators 
for Maine Program, which is administered by FAME. 
The Educators for Maine Program offers merit-based forgivable loans for Maine 
students pursuing initial certification as a teacher, including speech pathology or a career 
in child development. Award amounts are based on available funding and are subject to 
change annually, but not less than $3,000 for undergraduate students and not less than 

2 $2,000 for graduate students. The governing statute allows us flexibility to award higher 
amounts based on available funding. For academic year 22-23, available funds allowed us 
to increase awards to $5,000/year for undergraduates and $4,000/year for graduate 
students. Loans are forgiven if the recipient is an educator or speech pathologist in an 
eligible elementary or secondary school or a quality childcare program in the state of 
Maine. Loan recipients who are Jobs for Maine’s Graduates specialists may also be 
eligible for forgiveness in this program. 
Our concern with the bill as drafted is that it caps the maximum award amounts 
for both undergraduate and graduate students. Although available funding may not in the 
future allow us to award up to that proposed cap of $8,000, if it ever does, we would like 
to have the flexibility as we do now to maximize awards. Our preference would be, in the 
absence of any new funding, to keep the current statute as is and we will continue to set 
award levels based on available funds. 
I have spoken with the sponsor of the bill, Senator Pierce. My understanding is 
that she wishes to remove the section concerning the Educators for Maine Program from 
the bill as it does not reflect her intent. We support that move and hope you will be able 
to accommodate her wishes. 
Thank you for your consideration of my comments.  
