TESTIMONY OF 
JOHN SAGASER, TAX POLICY COUNSEL 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: Wednesday, April 26, 2023, 9:30AM 
L.D. 1212 — “Resolve, to Study the Economic Effects of Instituting a Seasonal 
Sales Tax” 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good morning, my name is John Sagaser, Tax Policy Counsel in the 
Ofﬁce of Tax Policy at Maine Revenue Services. I am here today at the request of 
the Administration to testify Against L.D. 1212, “Resolve, to Study the Economic 
Effects of Instituting a Seasonal Sales Tax.” 
The study would include: (1) revenue estimates based on various 
hypothetical and unspeciﬁed versions of a seasonal sales tax; (2) analysis of the 
potential economic effects of a seasonal sales tax; and (3) analysis of other states’ 
seasonal sales tax regimes, including those of South Dakota and Alaska. The study 
must solicit input from various named stakeholder groups, many of which relate to 
the recreation and tourism industries. 
Although not speciﬁed, the references in the bill to “variations in tax 
bases” and to tourism-dependent businesses indicates that the bill is directed to 
studying the revenue and economic impact of expanding the sales tax base to 
amusement and recreational services. Another sales tax base study — even with the 
added element here of seasonal imposition of sales tax upon these services — is 
simply not needed. Numerous tax reform bills over the last ﬁfteen years have 
proposed expanding the sales tax base to these services, receiving public hearing 
and work session analysis. Furthermore, recent Resolves over the last several
1
years requiring the Office of Tax Policy to study certain issues have required 
signiﬁcant resources out of proportion to the attention to or response by the 
Legislature. It is in everyone ’s interest to bring into balance the resource needed 
for undertaking such study reports and the degree of legislative interest in 
following up on the reported ﬁndings and recommendations 
If the Committee decides to move forward with the study, the bill should 
direct either the Ofﬁce of Tax Policy or the Department of Administrative and 
Financial Services to issue the report instead of MRS, as any recommendations in 
the report would reﬂect the views of the Governor, not the bureau of revenue 
services in its administrative capacity. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
