 
 
 
 
1 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
Ought to Pass – LD 766 
 
An Act Regarding the Residence of Incarcerated Persons for Voting Purposes  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
 
March  13, 2023  
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs, good morning. My name is Michael Kebede, and I am Policy 
Counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization co mmitted to 
advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On 
behalf of our members, I urge you to support  LD 766. 
 
If enacted, LD 766 would give people who have been incarcerated for six months of longer the 
option to register to vote in the municipality where they are incarcerated . Under current law, an 
incarcerated person’s voting address is  any address where they have established a fixed and 
principal home to which they intend to return .  
 
The current system  gives little incentive to would -be state legislators , and to candidates for 
municipal  office , to consider the conditions of incarcerated people. Indeed, candidates for 
municipal government and the state legislature today have an electoral incentive to enter prisons  
only to talk to jail and prison staff, since corrections workers might live and vot e in the districts 
where they work. The population of any jail or prison likely includes people from various parts 
of the state , whose candidates are unlikely to travel to a jail or prison to pick up a handful of 
votes. In practice, then, the current  syste m makes the incarcerated voter doubly invisible: to the 
legislator who represents them at their permanent address in a far -flung district, and to the 
legislator who represents the jail’s or prison’s district.  
 
This bill would give scores of candida tes for public office in Maine a strong incentive to talk to, 
learn about, and meet incarcerated people. If this bill passed , candidates for legislative office 
might schedule a jail or prison visit to help them craft their campaign  platforms and pick their  
policy  priorities. Even candidates for mayor and town council might need to campaign in jails 
and prisons, making  those officials more aware of jail and prison conditions . 
 
Maine is a national leader in voting rights. This bill would strengthen that right by expanding the 
voting power of a significant number of incarcerated people.1 We urge you to vote ought to pass . 
 
1 Men incarcerated in Maine in 2021 spent an average of about two years in prison, and women spent an average of 
1.43 years. 2021 Year End MDOC Adult Data Report, Maine Department of Corrections, Feb. 10, 2022, available at 
https://www.maine.gov/corrections/sites/maine.gov.corrections/files/inline -
files/2021%20Year%20End%20Adult%20Data%20Report.pdf  
