L 
P -'5 W Department of the Secretary of State 
\l
I 
t§e'::*~~J,=l1 
""’*i7»""“"i 
Shenna Bellows 
Secretary of State Bureau 0 Corporations, Elections and Commissions 
Julie L. Flynn 
Deputy Secretary of State 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows, Secretary of State 
March I3, 2023 
Testifying Neither for Nor Against 
L.D. 766, “An Act Regarding the Residence of Incarcerated Persons for Voting Purposes" _ 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, my name is Shenna Bellows and I am the Secretary of State and the chief elections 
ofﬁcer. I am speaking today in neither for nor against L.D. 776. 
To start, I would like to reiterate our commitment to ensuring all eligible Maine voters have the right to 
vote and that voter registration has a low-barrier threshold and process. We are proud that Maine is one 
of only two states in the nation where every citizen who is a resident of the State of Maine hasa 
constitutional right to vote. Additionally, we support the principle that voters have a voice in local, 
state, and federal issues through their elected officials. 
Last year, we partnered with the NAACP to visit Maine Department of Corrections facilities at 
Warren, Charleston and Windham to register residents and provide absentee ballot applications. Our 
staff was proud to be able to provide this service — to register voters and facilitate absentee voting at 
our state’s correctional facilities. Unfortunately, we were unable to register a few of the residents 
because they had been in the facility a long enough time that they could not remember their last 
address. Allowing those who are incarcerated to register in the place where their facility is located 
could ensure that those who otherwise have no address or cannot recall their last address can still 
exercise their right to vote. 
Furthermore, the bill would create ties, for people who are incarcerated with the communities and 
areas where they reside as these persons would have the ability to get involved in politics at all levels 
and call upon their elected representatives. 
However, this bill raises several issues this committee will need to grapple with — for instance, its 
impact on the redistricting process, the potential creation for voting blocks, and whether the intent of 
this bill conﬂicts with criminal justice advocates ’ calling for re-entry of those who are incarcerated 
back to the communities from which they came. For all of these reasons, I testify neither for nor 
against this bill. This concludes my testimony. Thank you and I would be happy to answer any 
questions that the committee may have.- 
101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0101 
www.Maine.gov/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
