Q .' i- _i 
‘ ' 
v. ,. Jq 
_* 
, ..-‘* M. .1- 
Stacey K. Guerin 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 4 Augusta, Maine 04333 ‘ ' 
THE MAINE SENATE 
13 lst Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Stacey K. Guerin 
In Opposition to L.D. 766, “An Act Regarding the Residence of 
Incarcerated Persons for Voting Purposes ” 
March 13, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs: I am State Senator Stacey Guerin and I represent 
Senate District 4, which includes almost all of Piscataquis County and parts of Penobscot 
County. Thank you for allowing me the opportunity to testify in opposition to L.D. 766, “An Act 
Regarding the Residence of Incarcerated Persons for Voting Purposes. ” 
In addition to Long Creek Youth Development, which houses people up to 21 years of age, 
Maine has ﬁve adult correctional facilities. These facilities are located in some of Maine’s more 
rural communities: Charleston, Warren, and Windham. 
The bill before you would allow for an incarcerated person, who has been committed to one of 
these facilities for at least six months prior to an election, to claim residency and vote in the 
municipality of the facility. I have a few serious concerns with this as it could greatly impact 
these municipalities. 
If passed, this would create added work for the staff in our local town ofﬁces. At a time when 
they are already busy prepping for Election Day, they may ﬁnd themselves incredibly 
overwhelmed if a ﬂood of new voter registrations come in and need to be processed. 
Based on information I received last week, the number of individuals currently cormnitted at 
Mountain View Correctional Facility, located in my district, is the equivalent to nearly a quarter 
of Charleston ’s population. In my opinion, the votes of these individuals who have never beena 
contributing member or taxpayer in that community could greatly sway election results, 
municipal policies and local budgets. Speciﬁcally, school budgets that are based on the number 
of residents in a municipality. According to the Town of Charleston, which you will hear from 
today, if all the individuals at Mountain View claimed residency in Charleston their local school 
budget would increase from approximately $650,000 to over $1,000,000. Needless to say, the 
taxpayers of Charleston, Warren, and Windham would be signiﬁcantly burdened as a result. 
Finally, let’s not forget that individuals in a correctional facility may already vote by Absentee 
Ballot in the town where they resided prior to being committed. 
For the reasons I have provided, please oppose L.D. 766, “An Act Regarding the Residence of 
Incarcerated Persons for Voting Purposes. ” Thank you.
