 
 
 
Testimony of Benjamin Hawkins , Director of Public Affairs  
Maine Health Care Association  
 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Health & H uman Services  
 
March 27, 2023 at 10:00 am 
 
Neither for Nor Against LD 781, An Act to Protect Nursing Home Residents by Requiring 
Nursing Homes to Provide Silent Bed Alarms for Residents with Dementia  
 
Good morning  Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Health and  Human Services. My name is Ben Hawkins , and I serve as the  Director 
of Public Affairs  for the Maine Health Care Association . We represent approximately 200 
nursing homes , assisted living , and residential care facilities (also known as Private Non -Medical 
Institutions or PNMIs) across the state. Our mission is to empower members to ensure the 
integrity, quality, and sustainability of long term care in Maine.   
 
I am here to testify neither for nor against LD 781, An Act to Protect Nursing Home Residents by Requiring Nursing Homes to Provide Silent Bed Alarms for Residents with Dementia. This bill,  as 
drafted , requires nursing facilities to  provide  silent bed alarms that directly signal nursing home 
staff to residents who have dementia and cannot use a call button if they fall out of a bed or 
chair.   
 
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services provides guidance to ensure “position change 
alarms” are used with thoughtful consideration to the patient, their family members, and the 
caretakers:   
 
While position change alarms may be implemented to monitor a resident’s movements, 
for some residents, the use of position change alarms that are audible to the resident(s) may have the unintended consequence of inhibiting freedom of movement. For example,  
 
 
2 
 a resident may be afraid to move to avoid setting off the alarm and creating noise that is 
a nuisance to the resident(s) and staff, or is embarrassing to the resident. For this resident, a position change alarm may have the potential effect of a physical restraint.  
 Examples of negative potential or actual outcomes which may result from the use of 
position change alarms as a physical restraint, include:  
• Loss of dignity;  
• Decreased mobility;  
• Bowel and bladder incontinence;  
• Sleep disturbances due to the sound of the alarm or because the resident is afraid to 
move in bed thereby setting off the alarm; and 
• Confusion, fear, agitation, anxiety, or irritation in response to the sound of the alarm as 
residents may mistake the alarm as a warning or as something they need to get away from.
1 
 
While this bill specifies silent  alarms, which would mitigate some potential drawbacks of 
position change alarms, we urge the committee and DHHS to consider the implications of the 
potentially broad requirement  as proposed.  We are  concerned that LD 781 might remove 
caretakers’ ability to use their judgment when caring for their residents.  Facilities can already 
use silent alarms as needed on a case -by-case basis, so we are unsure if this bill is necessary.   
 
Additionally, t he bill’s language of “shall provide” within the first sentence  is unclear regarding 
the exact obligation nursing homes will have. For example, can  facilities use such devices only 
when the caretaker and patient think it best?  What is the  consideration of the patient’s and  
family members’ consent?  
 
 
1 State Operations Manual Appendix PP - Guidance to Surveyors for Long Term Care Facilities . 
https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Provider -Enrollment -and-
Certification/GuidanceforLawsAndRegulations/Downloads/Appendix -PP-State- Operations -
Manual.pdf.  Accessed on March 22, 2023.   
 
 
3 
 As always, residents have a right to privacy and dignity. To that end, p atients should feel 
comfortable moving  within the safety of the facility , and we want to ensure that the 
requirement of s uch alarms does not interfere with that freedom.  Therefore, if  passed, we 
recommend it include a provision that the patient and their family members be informed about 
the use of the device and can  remove such devices  as desired .  
 
We believe the use of suc h alarms, when done in consideration of what is best for the patient, 
can help  improve care. We just want to ensure that this bill and the following rule -making 
process fully consider  the patient’s  rights and caretakers' ability to provide nuanced care.  
 Lastly, t he drafted bill does not include any specific language on an appropriation of funding to 
support the purchase of these devices. Basic  device s can cost $50 to $200 each . Additionally, 
installation, maintenance, and staff training would add to the cost. Even if only roughly  a 
quarter of Maine’s nursing home beds were required to have this technology, it would cost 
$225,000 to meet this bill’s requirements.
2 
 Thank you fo r the opportunity to provide comments today.   
 
2 $150 per device  multiplied by 1,500 beds equals $225,000.  
