 1  
Charles Skold 
59 State Street, Apt. 67  
Portland, ME 04101 
 Phone: (207) 329-3838 
Charles.Skold@legislature.maine.gov HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
 
 
May 19, 2023  
 
 
Testimony of Rep. Charles Skold presenting  
LD 1901 - An Act to Improve Affordability and Opportunity for Maine Renters and 
Landlords 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
 
Senator Pierce Representative Gere, and esteemed members of the Joint Select Committee on 
Housing, I am Charles Skold, representing part of Portland in House District 119. I am honored 
to be here to present LD 1901, An Act to Improve Affordability and Opportunity for Maine 
Renters and Landlords 
 
I know this committee has been hard at work this session identifying the overwhelming demand 
for housing in this state and exploring solutions to help meet that demand. You already know 
there are over 25,000 Mainers on affordable housing waitlists statewide. There are many renters 
on this list who would love to find a unit of affordable housing in their town so they can stay in 
or rejoin their community. At the same time, there are many property-owners in every town of 
this state, who would love to provide and rent out that unit of affordable housing, if only they 
had some extra funds and support to do so.  
 
This bill helps both renters and landlords by creating a program within Maine Housing to help 
small property-owners bring to market one to four new units of rental housing, by providing no-
interest loans of $50,000 for each unit of new construction or renovation, in exchange for 
agreeing to rent the units at an affordable level for at least 25 years. 
 
Maine Housing is doing fantastic work of supporting affordable housing through programs such 
as LIHTC and Rural Affordable Rental Housing Program. However, this bill would help us fill a 
gap that most existing programs don’t address: the one-to-four unit gap. Most programs support 
housing developments of somewhere between five and fifty units. They do not currently support 
individual small property landlords trying to build or renovate between one to four units.  
 
This bill would help a property owner anywhere in the state to build an Accessory Dwelling Unit 
(ADU), or subdivide their large house into two rental units, or purchase an empty three-decker 
apartment building and do the renovations needed to bring two of those units up to code and rent 

 2 them out. These owners are not necessarily trying to become big developers. They may just have 
some property and need some extra capital to do the construction needed to make one, two, 
three, or four units available in their communities. This is a great opportunity for the State of 
Maine to partner with local property owners everywhere in helping to meet the tremendous 
demand for affordable housing options. 
 
Lastly, I will point out that the Housing Committee and the Legislature passed LD 2003 in the 
last session. Programs like the one this bill proposes could help Mainers implement that law and 
be part of the affordable housing solution in their communities.  
 
Thank you and I’m happy to answer any questions you may have. 
 
Rep. Charles A. Skold 
District 119 
 
