 19 Community Drive ∙ Augusta, Maine 04330 ∙ (207) 622-7501 ∙ Fax: (207) 623-3590  
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS®    
 Testimony in Support of LD 1901 (“An Act to Improve Affordability and Opportunity for Maine Renters and Landlords”) J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  May 19, 2023  Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations. We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.   The Maine Association of REALTORS® supports LD 1901. The bill would provide no-interest loans to support the development of affordable housing. It would encourage initiatives that serve to increase the availability and affordability of housing through the private sector, which is the best way to respond to the individual and collective housing needs in Maine. Moreover, LD 1901 is a complement to the landmark legislation sponsored by former Speaker Fecteau last session (Public Law Chapter 672, “An Act To Implement the Recommendations of the Commission To Increase Housing Opportunities in Maine by Studying Zoning and Land Use Restrictions”).   The Maine State Housing Authority is the entrusted steward of the HOME Fund and maximizes its leverage in conjunction with other funding sources. We believe that the HOME fund should be used to help increase housing supply, and this bill would encourage housing development toward additional permanent solutions to address Maine’s housing needs.    For these reasons, we support LD 1901 and respectfully urge you to vote Ought to Pass. Thank you for your time and consideration.     
