. 7\_ HOUSE QF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION ii‘ 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Bruce White TTYI MAINE RELAY 711 
I Silvermount Street 
Wateiville, ME 04901 
Phone: (207) 660-8722 
Bruce.White@le2islat1u"e.1naine.,<zov 
Testimony of Rep. Bruce White introducing 
LD 528, An Act to Improve Road Safety for Waste and Recycling Collection Employees ' 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and fellow members of the Transportation 
Committee, my name is Bruce White, and I have the honor of representing district 65, which is 
part of the City of Waterville. 
Thank you for the opportunity to introduce LD 528, “An Act to Improve Road Safety for Waste 
and Recycling Collection Employees. ” This is a small statutory change, but I believe it will have 
a signiﬁcant impact on safety for sanitation employees, just as it has in other states. 
According to the National Bureau of Labor Statistics, waste and recycling collection is the 
seventh most dangerous job in America. On average, every Week in the United States, a waste or 
recycling collection worker dies on the job, often as a result of distracted driving. With this 
legislation, we have a chance to improve the safety for these workers, who perform essential 
work in nearly every town in Maine. 
The change proposed in LD 528 is often referred to as “Slow Down to Get Around.” This is part 
of a national effort to enactlegislation that provides additional protection for solid waste workers 
when they are out on the job. This bill — or a similar form of it - has been enacted in thirty states. 
Being struck by a motorist is a leading cause of death for waste and recycling collection 
employees; with proper awareness, it’s completely preventable. This bill will help to achieve 
that. 
The bill proposes to add business vehicles used to transport refuse, garbage, compost, recycling 
or trash to the term “public service vehicle” as deﬁned in Title 29-A. Any person attempting to 
pass a “public service vehicle” must do so at least one lane over, and if that’s not possible then at 
a “careful and prudent speed.” This same proscription applies to someone attempting to pass an 
“authorized emergency vehicle. ” 
The current list of “public service vehicles ” is limited to vehicles used to remove disabled 
vehicles or debris from a roadway, such as Wreckers, and vehicles used to construct, maintain, 
inspect or repair utility infrastructure. I believe there may be one or two other categories. I can 
appreciate the concern that We do not want to make this category of protected vehicles so big that 
District 65: Waterville (part)
the protection that they receive becomes meaningless. I would agree that giving “public service 
vehicle” status to the pizza delivery truck would be taking things too far. 
However, the situation for sanitation workers is very different. The service they provide is an 
essential public service — the removal of trash, recycling and compost from our homes and off 
our streets. it is one of the most important municipal responsibilities. 
My understanding is that the State Police will be testifying neither for nor against this legislation. 
I would be happy to work with Lt. Scott and his staff, along with the trash, compost and 
recycling haulers who brought this bill to my attention, to work on any needed amendments that 
will maintain the selectivity of the status of “public service vehicle” and “authorized emergency 
vehicle, ” While at the same time improving protection for the men and women in Maine who 
perform the Work collecting and disposing of our trash. 
The bill also clariﬁes that vehicles used for the purpose of collecting recycling and compost may 
also be equipped with an auxiliary light that emits a ﬂashing amber light, just as refuse, garbage 
and trash trucks are. Going forward, it may make sense from a drafting perspective to use the 
term “sanitation ” or “waste hauling” vehicle exclusively, and then include the various types of 
sanitation vehicles under that deﬁnition. 
Thank you for your consideration of this legislation. I am proud that this bill has solid bipartisan 
support, and the support of so many recycling and waste hauling staff, who had been scheduled 
to have Waste Hauler Safety Day in the Hall of Flags yesterday. I’d be happy to answer any 
questions, although there will be people following me who may be able to answer your questions 
more speciﬁcally. 
District 65: Wateiville (part)
