 
64 Blueberry Road Portland, Maine 04102  
Testimony of Matt Grondin, Director of Communications & Public Affairs,  
ecomaine  
before the Committee  on Transportation  in Support of  LD 528,  
An Act to Improve Road Safety for Waste and Recycling Collection Employees  
March 1 4, 202 3 
 
Senator Chipman , Representative Williams , and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Transportation , thank you for the opportunity to testify on this 
legislation. My name is Matt Grondin , and I represent ecomaine as  the Director of 
Communications and Public Affairs . We are a quasi -municipal organization in 
Portland with more than 70 member communities in Maine. We own and operate  
Maine’s largest recycling plant, a food waste recovery program, a waste -to-
energy facility,  and a landfill.   
I am a relative newcomer to the recycling and solid wa ste industry, having spent 
much of my career in non-profits and public media.  When I first started at 
ecomaine nearly five years ago, I was utterly shocked to learn how dangerous a 
profession the collection of solid waste , recycling, and compost can be , ranking 
as hig h or higher than many industries thought of as extremely hazardous.  
Indeed, despite progress in the industry, waste collection has remained on the 
top ten list of most dangerous jobs in the countr y, with more than a fatality per 
week in the U.S.   LD 528 is a welcome step toward c hanging that in Maine.  
While ecomaine does not employ a fleet of trucks to collect waste from our cities ’ 
curbs or our towns ’ transfer stations, our business model of sorting and 
processing waste dep ends on the safety and well -being of those who do .  There 
are far too many risks faced by collection crews on our r oads , from other traffic, 
distracted driving, inc leme nt weather, and more.  The Slow Down to Get Around  
campaign increases public awareness and more explicit mindfulness in residents 
of safety around waste colle ction  and provides strategies for these essential 
workers to go home safely at the end of their day.  
The injuries an d fatalities that occur on collection routes are often very 
preventable – by affording these crews the same protections and strategies that 
are rightly extended to Maine ’s other essential workforce , LD 528 can create a 
safer work environment for our colleagues who keep our recycling and  trash 
moving and our neighborhoods clean and safe.  Thank you for considering your 
support for this important legislation.  

