 
 
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF LD 528  
 
Transportation Committee  
 
Testimony of Shelby Wright, Eastern Region Manager of Engagement  
Casella  
 
March 1 5, 2023  
 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, my name is Shelby Wright, and I am the Eastern Region 
Manager of Engagement for Casella.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak in support o f LD 528 “An Act to Improve Road Safety 
for Waste and Recycling Collection Employees.” We are proud to be part of such a strong and 
committed coalition to improve safety for sanitation workers in Maine.  
 
Being struck by a motorist is a leading cause of death for waste and recycling collection 
employees, and with proper awareness, is completely preventable. According to the National 
Bureau of Labor Statistics, waste and recycling collection is the seventh m ost dangerous job 
in America. On average, every week in the U.S., a waste or recycling collection worker dies in 
service to public health often as the result of distracted driving.  LD 528 is what is commonly 
referred to as the “Slow Down to Get Around” la w and which would require drivers in the 
State of Maine slow down when passing refuse trucks. At least thirty states and one province 
have enacted some fashion of this law aimed at protecting solid waste workers while out on 
the job. Now, it is Maine’s tur n.    
 
Casella operates curbside collection services throughout Maine, employing dozens of drivers  
and waste handlers, and operating a fleet of well over a hundred collection vehicles in both 
urban and rural areas of the state.   The safety of our workers is our top concern.  To that end, 
we provide robust and thorough safety and training programs, which helps to ensure that our 
employees have the tools and the training necessary to perform their jobs in a manner that 
protects their safety, as well as that of their co -workers, and the public.  These men and 
women deserve to know that the state of Maine is just as committed to making sure that they, 
as well as Maine’s entire fleet of solid waste and recycling collection workers, go home safe 
at the end of the  day.   “An Act to Improve Road Safety for Waste and Recycling Collection 
Employees” is a simple and practical proposal that requires drivers slow down when passing 
refuse trucks and would help to protect the lives of collection workers while serving the 
public.   
 
For these reasons, I urge you to vote ought to pass on LD 528.    
 
Thank you.  I welcome the opportunity to answer any questions.  
 
Shelby Wright  
Eastern Region Manager of Engagement, Casella  
