.0“ 
. HoUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
‘Q 2 STATE HOUSE STATIoN 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002
‘ S 
(207) 287-1400 
Ed Cmke“ TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
128 Bramblewood Drive 
Portland, ME 04103 
Residence: (207) 797-8371 
Ed.Crockett@legislaturemaine.gov 
April 25, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Ed Crockett supporting 
LD 1356, “An Act to Improve the Local Referendum Process by Increasing 
the Percentage of the Population Required to Submit a Local Referendum 
Question. ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and esteemed colleagues of the State and Local Government 
Committee. I’m Representative Ed Crockett from District 112 serving part of Portland and part of 
Falmouth. I visit you today in support of LD 1 3 5 6 An Act to Improve the Local Referendum Process by 
Increasing the Percentage of the Population Required to Submit a Local Referendum Question. 
l’ve been a resident of Portland for all but ﬁve years of my life. l’ll be 62 years old this summer. Last 
November we experienced something never seen before, and hopefully won’t happen again. Voters in 
Portland went to the polls, having to give themselves some extra time, due to 13 referendum questions 
being on the ballot. Thankfully, due to critical local, state and national races being contested we hada 
70%+ voter turnout. 
Eight of the questions were somewhat anticipated since they came from the Charter Commission that 
was elected the year before to consider major changes within the city. Six of these were approved, all 
as expected handily, but the two most sweeping proposals (an executive mayor and school board 
budget authority) were soundly defeated. 
The other ﬁve referendum questions came from voter-initiated ballot referendum campaigns with 
policy proposals driven by special interest groups. Only one of those passed. With over 70% voter 
turnout, the voice of all the voters was heard. Nobody could cry foul. 
So, here’s the crazy thing. The charter commission vote in the summer of 2021 drew less than 15% of 
voters and created a very unbalanced commission driven by the same special interest groups that only 
had to gather about 1,500 signatures in a community of nearly 65,000 to get on the ballot. That is nota 
high bar. In fact, it wasa lay-up. 
Portland was lucky. Imagine if these questions had appeared during an off-cycle year when voter 
tumout is always down. If that had been the case every one of those referendum questions would have 
likely passed. 
District 1 l2: Poitland (Part), Falmouth (Part)
Unfortunately, the system as stands can be gamed. Raising the threshold on signatures is a way to 
strengthen our democracy and bring integrity back into the process. I think Rep. Graham’s proposal to 
raise the bar is a must. I haven’t done the math but worry if l5% is enough. I’m thinking 25% 
enhances the likelihood that the proposal has more than special interest advocacy. 
In closing, I encourage you to pass LD 135 6. Thank you and I would be more than happy to answer 
your questions. 
District ll2: Portland (Part), Falniouth(Pa1t)
