L LEAGUE 0F WOMEN VOTERSi 
iféii i\,fi;l‘i_i hi ii 
TO: The Honorable Tim Nangle 
The Honorable Holly Stover, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
DATE: April 25, 2023 
RE: LD 1356, An Act to improve the Local Referendum Process by Increasing the Percentage 
of the Population Required to Submit a Local Referendum Question 
Good afternoon Senator Nangle and Representative Stover, 
My name is Lane Sturtevant. I'm a resident of Warren. I am here today representing the League of 
Women Voters of Maine. The League is testifying in opposition to LD 1356, An Act to Improve the Local 
Referendum Process by Increasing the Percentage of the Population Required to Submit a Local 
Referendum Question. 
The League of Women Voters of Maine is a nonpartisan political organization that has been working for 
over 100 years to encourage informed and active participation in government, to increase understanding 
of major public policy issues, and to inﬂuence public policy through education and advocacy. We never 
support or oppose any political party or candidate. 
The League of Women Voters of Maine believes that citizen-initiated referenda are an important form of 
direct democracy, one that allows community members to utilize their collective power in the event of 
an unresponsive or obstructionist representative government. The people are the ultimate authority ina 
democracy, after all. 
lt is vital that the local referendum process remain accessible to ordinary citizens in all communities. The 
State Legislature itself endorsed the importance of the local citizen-initiated referendum process when it 
preempted municipalities from prohibiting local initiatives in Title 30-A, §2504. 
The League of Women Voters of Maine is concerned that increasing the number of signatures required 
for citizen initiatives in non—charter municipalities would make this invaluable tool of direct democracy 
less accessible to ordinary citizens. Municipalities with charters can choose to increase their signature 
requirements through a charter amendment, as Portlandl is indeed considering. That is their home rule 
prerogative, and there is a democratic process for such charter amendments. 
Municipalities without charters, on the other hand, rely on the threshold in Title 30-A, §2528, sub-§5. 
Non-charter municipalities are by and large much more rural than municipalities with charters in Maine; 
this rural character can impose a higher logistical burden on the process of citizen initiatives, as these 
1 
"Council to consider changes to Portland referendum process, ” Portland Press Herald, March 27, 2023. 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
info@1wvme.0rg 207.622.0256 wwW.lwvme.org
LWVME to VLA April 25, 2023 
LD 1356 
communities tend to have less public infrastructure, fewer public or community spaces, and often less 
extensive civic networks. 
This bill feels like a reaction to a recent spate of contentious citizen~initiated local referenda in certain 
municipalities. However, this bill does not actually address the issue in those municipalities, which have 
charters and can therefore set their own local referendum signature requirements. We have to ask: are 
residents of non—charter municipalities themselves requesting a higher signature requirement? 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee. 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
inf0@1wvme.org 207.622.0256 Www.lwvme.0rg
