7*‘ 
it HOSPITALITY 
MAINE 
Testimony of Nate Cloutier 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
April 25, 2023 
In Support of LD 1356, “An Act to Improve the Local Referendum Process by Increasing the Percentage 
of the Population Required to Submit a Local Referendum Question” 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and distinguished members of the Committee on State and Local 
Government: My name is Nate Cloutier, and l am here today on behalf of HospitalityMaine representing 
more than 1,200 restaurant and lodging operators of all sizes across the state. HospitalityMaine supports 
LD 1356, “An Act to Improve the Local Referendum Process by Increasing the Percentage of the 
Population Required to Submit a Local Referendum Question. ” 
Increasing the percentage of the population required to submit a local referendum question would have 
several beneﬁts to the state’s democratic process. The Sponsor’s amendment proposes to change the 
current threshold of 10% to 15% of the number of voters in a municipality in the last gubernatorial election. 
There is arguably little difﬂculty in getting questions on the municipal ballot, and we need look no further 
than Portland ’s November 2022 general election to support that claim. Portland had 13 questions in total,5 
of which were voter-initiated ballot referendum campaigns on issues ranging from housing, short-term 
rentals, minimum wage, and cruise ships. What do these issues have in common? They were organized 
and drafted by a single group as part of a single campaign. lt’s the prerogative of any person or group (in- 
state and out) to gather signatures to get an issue on the ballot, however the current requirements have 
too easily allowed lone groups to push their agendas which include potentially substantial changes to 
policy. 
l am picking on Portland a bit, but it is important to remember that as an economic epicenter, our largest 
city is a service center to the Greater Portland area, which includes about 40% of all Mainers. ln 
comparison, about 5% of Mainers live in Portland. increasing the percentage is not meant to be a barrier or 
an impediment to the democratic process—quite the opposite. lt would: 
O Reduce the potential for abuse by the referendum process: With a higher percentage threshold, it 
would be more difficult for special interest groups to push through their own agendas, which is 
particularly critical if that agenda is not widely supported by residents. 
- Encourage more thoughtful and deliberate policymaking: initiatives that require more support from 
the ballot are more likely to be well-crafted and thoroughly researched. For example, a political 
group in Portland gathered signatures last year to have a question on the ballot that limited cruise 
ships visiting Portland. This evidently received no input from the public because the people this 
initiative was supposed to beneﬁt, actually opposed it. The ballots had already been printed and
the question could not be retracted, so the organizers ultimately broadcasted opposition to their 
own initiative. Thankfully, that question failed, however it underscores the importance of a well- 
researched and reasoned question. 
Referendums are intended to be a tool for the public to invoke when there is inaction in the state 
Legislature, and they should be less reserved for pursuing political agendas of a vocal minority. National 
pundits often say Maine is a cheap date because of our referenda process. There are many potential 
changes the Committee may consider, though raising the threshold for the number of signatures required 
to get on the municipal ballot is one way to increase the integrity of our democratic process, making it 
more accountable, focused, and engaging for citizens. 
Thank you, and I would be happy to answer any questions.
