May 10, 2023  
 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee of State and Local Government  
Re: Additional information regarding LD 1356 , An Act to Improve the Local Referendum Process by 
increasing the Percentage of the Population Required to Submit a Local Referendum Question  
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and member s of the State and Local Government Committee.  My 
name is Paul Wh itmarsh.  I am the current Chair of the North Yarmouth Planning Board. I was unable to 
attend the hearing on this bill, but I have now read the testimony. I feel it is necessary  to correct 
information that the sponsor of the bill , Representative Anne Graham, is using to justify the change.    
For transparency sake, I must also disclose that I participated in creating and gathering signatures for 
the referendum to which Rep . Graham refer s. And I would also note the Rep . Graham was a vocal 
opponent of both the petition and the resulting referendum.  
In her testimony, Rep . Graham fails to provide the needed background that led to t he referendum.  A 
number of residents  had approached both the North Yarmouth Planning Board and Select Board on 
numerous occasions to have different issues debated and presented at the annual town meeting.  These  
were rebuffed by both boards and the concerns about the Land Use O rdinance were never addressed.  
Thankfully, Maine adopted in the state  constitution the right of citizens to use the petition for just these 
situations.  It was only after the other avenues of redress were ignored that it was  decided to  pursue the 
referendum process.  
In her testimony, Rep.  Graham makes a claim that typical North Yarmouth voter turnout is greater than 
75% , and therefor e the referendum turnout was low by this standard .  This is patently false .  From the 
gubernatorial election in 2018 (November  6, 2018) through the following gubernatorial election in 2022 
(November 8, 2022), only once (November 3, 2020) did North Yarmouth have greater than 75% voter 
turnout and only 3 times did we have greater than 50% voter turnout.  During this time period, we  held 
12 elections .  The average turnout was 42.75%.  Making a closer comparison to elections for local issues 
(i.e. municipal officers, MSAD 51 budget, etc…) the average turnout is 26.4%.  The referendum in March 
2022 had the hi ghest voter turnout in the time period from November 2018 through November 2022 
than any of the other 6 election s that dealt with only local issues.  In that same time period, the number 
of required signatures  to get to referendum in North Yarmouth  has increased  13.5% from 244 to 277 . 
For some further perspective only 109 voters attended our last town meeting, fewer than half the 
number required for the referendum process.  And to add to that, the warrant article was to make a 
change to the Land Use Ordinance that w as passed by a mere 63 people!  
From these official voting record s, it is clear that this was not just some fringe group or “vocal minority ” 
looking to push an agenda , but  a widespread desire by the residents of North Yarmouth to implement 
this change .  As a result of this referendum ’s success, i t seems that Rep. Graham through LD 1356 is 
trying  to make it even harder for the voices of the residents to be heard when their concerns are being 
ignored by the elected and appointed officials.  
I ask you not make this process even more di fficult.  
Sincerely,  
 
Paul Whitmarsh  
110 Wild Turkey Ln  
North Yarmouth, ME 04097  
