,. 
HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
i AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
William Bridgeo TTYI l\/LAINWE RELAY 711 
100 Fairview Avenue 
Augusta, ME 04330 
William.Bridge0@legislature.maine.gov 
April 25, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Bill Bridgeo in support of 
LD 1356, An Act to Improve the Local Referendum Process by 
Increasing the Percentage of the Population Required to Submita 
Local Referendum Question 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Good afternoon Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and members of the Committee on State 
and Local Government. My name is Bill Bridgeo and I represent House District #60, the east 
side of Augusta. I am here today to testify in support of LD 1356, An Act to Improve the Local 
Referendum Process by Increasing the Percentage of the Population Required to Submita 
Local Referendum Question. 
I suspect that Representative Graham was surprised when I quite enthusiastically agreed to 
cosponsor her bill. That enthusiasm stems from my observation over the years of the abuse of the 
initiative and referendum process. 
In my years as the city manager of Calais in the early 1980s, and then in my early years as city 
manager of Augusta in the late 1990s, those communities had to contend with a small but 
determined group of people who were seemingly committed to blocking just about everything 
the elected ofﬁcials tried to do. They routinely stalled the apparatus of local govermnent and cost 
the communities ’ unnecessary legal, administrative and lost opportunity costs by taking 
advantage of the low thresholds in the municipal charters at that time to force policy decisions to 
referendum. 
They usually failed, but it was a frustrating and counter-productive way to conduct the- people's 
business. 
In the early 2000s, through a charter revision process, the voters of Augusta tightened up the 
city's referendum and initiative process by requiring a minimum of 20% of those having voted in 
the last gubernatorial election to Sign any petition challenging actions approved by the city 
council in order for a referendum to be required. 
The mayors and councilors of Augusta have a long history of respecting the wishes of their 
constituents and there are still occasional referendum questions put to the voters on key issues, 
District 60: Pait of Augusta
but the day-to-day business of city government proceeds much more smoothly and far less 
contentiously. 
At all levels, We Americans value our representative forms of government. We look to our 
elected officials to do the hard work of studying pressing policy issues in depth and making 
informed decisions accordingly. The Reform Movement of the early 1900s advanced the 
instruments of initiative and referendum and they have an important place in our modern system 
of government but they can be, and often are, misused. LD 1356, if passed, will help prevent 
such misuse. 
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
District 60: Part of Augusta
