Ethan Croce
Portland
LD 1358
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and members of the Committee on Housing.  My 
name is Ethan Croce and I am submitting testimony in support of LD 1358, An Act to
Clarify Density Requirements for Affordable Housing Developments.  Professionally,
I am employed by the Town of Falmouth as its Community Development Director.  In
this role, I have been assisting with the preparation of amendments to the Town’s 
ordinances in order to implement the provisions of the affordable housing law “LD 
2003” approved during the last legislative session and codified at §§4364, 4364-A, 
and 4364-B.  
Unfortunately, an apparent drafting error in the definition of “affordable housing 
development” in §4364(1) of the statute has created a loophole that, if left 
uncorrected, will allow developers to take advantage of LD 2003’s affordable housing
density bonus without having to provide the level of affordable housing contemplated 
by the drafters of the law.   
LD 2003 defines “affordable housing development” as “a development in which a 
household whose income does not exceed 80% (for rental housing) or 120% (for 
owned housing) of the median income for the area as defined by the United States 
Department of Housing and Urban Development under the United States Housing Act
of 1937, Public Law 75-412, 50 Stat. 888, Section 8, as amended, can afford a 
majority of the units that the developer designates as affordable without spending 
more than 30% of the household's monthly income on housing costs”.  Based on a 
reading of the current definition of “affordable housing development”, a developer of 
a housing project has the ability to designate as “affordable” as many, or as little, of 
the development’s dwelling units as the developer wishes while still being able to take
advantage of LD 2003’s density bonus in §4364(2) for the entire development.  So, a 
developer could choose to designate only one housing unit in a development as 
“affordable” and still take advantage of LD 2003’s density bonus of 2 ½ times the 
base density for the entire project.  It seems highly unlikely that this was the intent of 
the drafters of the law.
LD 1358 will serve to close this loophole and uphold the intent of LD 2003’s 
affordable housing provision by making clear that a majority of the units in the 
development must be designated as “affordable” in order for a developer to take 
advantage of the law’s density bonus.  
This testimony reflects my own opinion and does not necessarily reflect the view of 
the Town of Falmouth.  
