 
C:\USERS \JFRANC \DESKTOP \WESTBROOK - FRANCESCHI - LD1358  04 -11-23 PUBLIC HEARING. DOCX       Page 1 of 2 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE:  April 10, 2023  
 
Senator  Teresa Pierce 
Representative Traci Gere 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Housing - Room 216  
 
RE: LD 1358 -  An Act to Clarify Density Requirements for Affordable Housing Developments  
 
Senator  Pierce, Representative Gere  and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Housing : 
 
My name is Jennie P oulin  Franceschi . I am the Director of Planning and Code Enforcement for the City of 
Westbrook, and I would like to provide testimony regarding LD1358 An Act to Clarify Density Requirements for 
Affordable Housing Developments  with the recommendation of OUGHT TO PASS  with a request for an included 
amendment .   
 
This bill is extremely important to clarify LD2003 as currently the  definition  language does not provide any 
minimum number of affordable units in an “affordable housing development” which is an enormous loophole  to 
use the 2.5 density multiplier .  This loophole allows a  mostly market rate project to utilize the multiplier where a  
developer would only have to place a few affordable units to be “designated”.   So  for example  - a lot that can 
bear 10 units  in a community, could now  be allowed to go to 25 units, and if the developer says they can only 
designate 2 units as being affordable , as that is what the project financially bear, they actua lly only have to 
provide a majority of the units that developer designate s as being affordable  so only 1 affordable unit might be 
built in a 25 unit complex.   This loophole allows for LD 2003 to function as  a means to subvert local ordinance  
and comprehensive plan growth patterns.  T he amendment tries to reduce the loophole by requiring a majority of 
the units  “in the development” to be affordable , which we feel was the intent of the Legislature’s support of LD 
2003 all along when this statute was  being drafted.   
 
Additionally,  we would ask for your consideration on an amendment to LD 1358 in the same vein as the 
proposed amendment to clarify the reduced parking requirements to be specific to the affordable units as the 
current standard of 2/3rd of a space per unit is insufficient  for work -force or market rate housing outside of a dense 
urban environment  and is irresponsible to mandate that community cannot ensure that projects are providing the 
necessary parking spaces to create a successful proj ect in order to avoid cars being parked along adjacent public 
roads when a site is under parked , which may not be a safe/functional situation to handle that overflow .  
 
Below is the full bill document for ease of review , inclusive of the original LD 1358 proposal , with our  
amendment proposal in yellow highlight , which is in next subsection #2  of this same statute section : 
 
Sec. 1.  30- A MRSA §4364, sub- §1, as enacted by PL 2021, c. 672, §4, is amended to read:  
 
1. Definition.  For the purposes of this section, "affordable housing development" means:  
A.  For rental housing, a development in which a household whose income does not exceed 80% of the 
median income for the area as defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban 
Development under the United States Housing Act of 1937, Public Law 75- 412, 50 Stat. 888, Section 8, as 
amended, can afford a majority of the units that the developer designates as affordable in the 
development  without spending more than 30% of the household's monthly income on housing costs; and  
 
C:\USERS \JFRANC \DESKTOP \WESTBROOK - FRANCESCHI - LD1358  04 -11-23 PUBLIC HEARING.DOCX             
 Page 2 of 2  
 B.  For owned housing, a development in which a household whose income does not exceed 120% of the 
median income for the area as defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban 
Development under the United States Housing Act of 1937, Public Law 75- 412, 50 Stat. 888, Section 8, as 
amended, can afford a majority of the units that the develope r designates as affordable  in the 
development  without spending more than 30% of the household's monthly income on housing costs.  
 
2. Density Requirements. A municipality shall allow an affordable housing development where multifamily 
dwellings are allowed to have a dwelling unit density of at least 2 ½ times the base density that is 
otherwise allowed in that location and for the units d esignated as affordable  may not require more than 2 
off-street parking spaces for every 3 of those affordable  units in the development .  
 
 
We thank you for your time and consideration of our comments.  
 
Respectfully Submitted,  
 
 
Jennie Poulin . Franceschi , P.E.       Rebecca Spitella  
Director of Planning and Code Enforcement     Senior  Planner  
