MA|NE N\UN|C|pA|_ 1-aoo-452-a7ae(m state) 
(T) Z07~6Z3-81428 
ASSOCIATION SiNCE1§3<5 (F)20,_6,h_0m 
60 Community Drive I Augusto, ME 04330-9486 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1358 — An Act to Clarzﬂ Density Requirements for Affordable Housing Developments 
April ll, 2023 
Sen. Pierce, Rep. Gere, and distinguished members of the Housing Committee, my name is 
Rebecca Graham, and I am providing testimony neither for nor against LD 1358 on behalf of Maine 
Municipal Association which represents the interests of municipal government before the state and 
federal government. The positions of the Association are formed at the direction of our 70-member 
Legislative Policy Committee, (LPC) who are elected by the selectboards and council of the 
municipalities in each of the 35 Senate districts in Maine. As a result, the positions represent a wide view 
of communities with varying resources, rural and urban, and those with ample local resources as well as 
those with none. 
As this bill highlights, there are many language related issues as a result of LD 2003 and this is 
one important one. When communities are sold affordable housing developments, they expect those 
developments to be widely affordable and not have a developer decide only a speciﬁc set of the 
development is affordable and then only be required to meet a majority threshold of those designated 
units to meet the 30% household income threshold as the current law states. LD 1358 corrects the 
language and requires the affordable housing project to have most of the entire development designated as 
attainable at the 30% household income level. 
That said, this bill and the need for that clarity in the statute are clear examples of why LD 665 is 
necessary. There are a number of identiﬁed conﬂicting language issues in the resulting -law change from 
LD 2003. Officials hope the committee will look at the totality of those issues to amend the law and make 
not only the results envisioned by the law change achievable, but also defendable for those trying to 
implement such developments. 
Without the delay requested by LD 665, this is also a change that may impact ordinance 
development and is again unachievable by the deadline. None-the-less it is an important change that needs 
to happen in concert with the delay.
