 
 STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY  
MAINE EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES  
152 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA , MAINE  04333  
  
 
JANET T. MILLS 
GOVERNOR  
 MICHAEL SAUSCHUCK  
COMMISSIONER  
  J. SAM HURLEY  
DIRECTOR  
 
● Excellence  ● Support  ● Collaboration  ● Integrity  ● 
 
PHONE:  (207) 626 -3860   
TTY:  (207) 287 -3659   
FAX:  (207) 287 -6251  
 
With offices located at the Central Maine Commerce Center, 45 Commerce Drive, Suite 1, Augusta, ME  04330  
 
Testimony of J. Sam Hurley, MPH, EMPS, NRP  
Director , Maine Bureau of Emergency Medical Services (Maine EMS)  
Department of Public Safety  
Neither For N or Against  of LD 1701  
“Resolve, to Reestablish and Continue the Work of the Blue Ribbon Commission to Study 
Emergency Medical Services in the State”  
Presented by House Speaker Representative Talbot Ross of Portland 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND PUBLIC 
SAFETY  
Public Hearing: Tuesday, May 4, 2023 
 
Senator Be ebe Center , Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety:  
 
My name is Sam Hurley , and I am the Directo r of Maine Emergency Medical Services, Maine 
EMS, within the Department of Public Safety. I am testifying  on behalf of Maine Department of 
Public Safety and Maine EMS  neither for nor against LD  1701, “ Resolve, to Reestablish and 
Continue the Work of the Blue Ribbon Commission to Study Emergency Medical Services in the 
State .” 
 
Maine EMS appreciated the opportunity to participate in the Blue Ribbon Commission that was 
established under the 130th Legislature charged with studying emergency medical services in 
Maine. Many of the recommendations that originated from that Committee have appeared before 
the 131st Legislature this session and are potentially moving closer to becoming law in Maine.  
 
Page 2 of 2  
 That said,  as this Committee and other Committees of the Legisla ture have heard this session and 
others, the EMS system in Maine continues to face significant woes. This iteration of the Blue 
Ribbon Commission will be fortunate insofar that it will also have access to the strategic plan 
that has been developed by the B oard of Emergency Medical Services. It offers an opportunity 
for the subject matter experts, the Board, to share insight into statutory changes that will be beneficial at addressing  some of the underlying issues facing EMS in the State of Maine.  
 Specifically, we are optimistic that this Blue Ribbon Commission will focus on  the following 
domains, in alignment with the Maine EMS Board’s strategic vision for the future :  
• Public and governmental understanding and valuing of EMS ; 
• Data- driven informatio n about the EMS system;  
• EMS system evolution, including, structure within the government, regional coordination 
and support, interfacility transports, communications and emergency medical dispatch, 
and emergency management and disaster preparedness;  
• EMS f inance, including, understanding the true cost of EMS, reimbursement alignment, 
and local agency sustainability;  
• EMS workforce, including, data -driven workforce planning, education and training, 
leadership development and support, and mental fitness and w ellbeing; and  
• EMS clinical care, including, medical direction, systems of care, expanded role of EMS, 
and evaluation and quality improvement. 
 
Maine EMS is eager to work collaboratively with members of the legislature, the EMS 
community, and stakeholders a t developing a reliable and sustainable system of emergency 
medical services that meets the needs of Mainers no matter where they live within our state.   
I am more than happy to answer any questions that you may have , but please feel free to reach 
out to me  anytime if there is any additional information that  we can offer you and/or the 
Committee . Thank you.  
