 
 
 
Testimony in Support of  
 
LD 1515, An Act to Fund Delivery of Emergency Medical Services  
and 
LD 1701, Resolve, to Reestablish and Continue the Work of the Blue Ribbon Commission  
to Study Emergency Medical Services in the State  
 
Kimberly Cook, Esq.  
May 4 , 2023  
 
 
Community Health Options is  a nonprofit CO -OP health insurance company  based in Lewiston .  
We exist for the benefit of our members  and our mission which is to provide affordable, high-
quality  benefits that promote health and wellbeing. We offer health insurance  to individuals  and 
small and large employers as well as health plan administration to self-insured organizations 
through our Pioneer ASO . 
 
We are here today to express our strong support for LD 1515 and LD 1701 as together these bills  
would  provide a critical and immediate infusion of  funding to the state’s emergency medical 
services system  and ensure that the important work of the Blue Ribbo n Commission continues to 
examine and make recommendations on the structure, support and delivery of emergency 
medical  services  informed by a broad and expert stakeholder group .   
 
Emergency medical services are both a part of our public emergency response system  and part of 
our health care system.  Community Health Options has followed the work of the Blue Ribbon 
Commission and our Chief Operating Officer has been a member of a se parate stakeholder group 
that was first convened  at the direction of the 129th Legislature1 to review public and private 
reimbursement rates for ambulance services .2 3  Based on the recommendations of that 
stakeholder group we have supported legislation before  the H ealth Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services  Committee and the Health and Human Services C ommittee regarding private 
health insurance reimbursement and M aineCare reimbursement reforms in 20214 and again this 
year that propose  solutions to sustainable funding for emergency medical services.  
 
1 LD 2105, Public Law 2019, Chapter 668   
2  Final Report of the Maine EMS LD  2105 Subcommittee, February 1, 2021  available at  
https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/6562   
3 2020 Report of the Stakeholder Group Regarding LD 1258’s EMS Financial Health Committee  available at  
https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/9667   
4 LD 1258, Public Law 202, Chap ter 241  which  enacted some of the recommendations of the LD 2105 
Subcommittee and reestablished  the stakeholder group requiring the group  to review issues related to financial 
health and costs of ambulance service provid ers and the delivery of services by ambulance service providers in this 
State . 
 
 
 
 
We commend the work of the Blue Ribbon Commission and the  separate Stakeholder Group on 
financial health of ambulance services  for all of their good work examin ing the issues facing our 
EMS system and  for proposing a  range of thoughtful solutions over the last few years , including  
the two bills before you today.  We urge the committee to support LD 1515 and LD 1701 to help 
to fund and continue examining these  lifesaving  services.  
 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our comments.  
