STATE OF MAINE 
é § i HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
SPEAKERS OFFICE 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
VET (207) 287-1300 
RACHEL TALBOT ROSS 
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE 
Thursday, May 4th, 2023 
Testimony of Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross presenting 
LD 1701, Resolve, to Reestablish and Continue the Work of the Blue 
Ribbon Commission to Study Emergency Medical Services in the State 
Before the Joint Select Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and esteemed members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, I am Rachel 
Talbot Ross. I represent House District ll8 which is the Portland peninsula. I also 
have the distinct honor of serving as the Maine Speaker of the House. I am here 
today to present LD 1701, Resolve, to Reestablish and Continue the Work of 
the Blue Ribbon Commission to Study Emergency Medical Services in the 
State. 
This resolve reestablishes the Blue Ribbon Commission to Study Emergency 
Medical Services in the State that was previously established by the 130th 
Legislature in 2022. This 17-member Commission is charged with examining and 
making recommendations on the structure, support and delivery of emergency 
medical services in the State. This bill reestablishes the Commission and allows it 
to continue and complete its important work. The Commission is directed to 
submit its report to this Committee no later than December 6, 2023. The report will 
detail the commission ’s ﬁndings and recommendations, including any proposed 
legislation. 
I would like to present a little history to explain why this resolve is needed. 
In the 130th Legislature, I submitted LD 1988, An Act To Establish That the 
Provision of Emergency Medical Services by an Ambulance Service Is an 
Essential Service and To Establish the Blue Ribbon Commission To Study 
Emergency Medical Services in the State. I did so because I recognized that 
Maine’s emergency medical service providers had faced unprecedented strain over 
the two years before I submitted LD 1988. Like all our health care and emergency 
response systems, COVID-19 had placed a greater burden on EMS than ever 
before. 
District 118: Portland neighborhoods of Parkside, Bayside, East Bayside, Oakdale and 
the University of Southern Maine Campus
The EMS system had been increasingly strained for years even before the 
pandemic. Lagging reimbursement rates, recruitment and retention challenges, 
training, an aging and rural population, and other issues have made it more and 
more difﬁcult for EMS providers to offer the services each and every one of our 
communities depend on. 
LD 1988 recognized how fundamentally important EMS is to our state. EMS 
is an important part of public safety, yes, but also an integral part of our health care 
delivery system. It also recognized the high level of frustration that EMS workers 
were experiencing and their concern that the services they were providing and the 
system as structured were not sustainable. This Committee moved that bill forward 
and it was enacted into law at Public Law 2021, chapter 749. 
The Blue Ribbon Commission was established and consisted of 17 members 
as directed Public Law 2021, ch.749 as follows: 
~ Two members of the Senate; 
- Two members who are employed or volunteer in the ﬁeld of emergency 
medical services, including one member who represents a community of 
10,000 residents or more and one member who represents a community of 
fewer than 10,000 residents; 
~ One member who represents a statewide association of emergency medical 
services providers; 
~ One member who represents a private, for-proﬁt ambulance service; 
~ One member who represents a statewide association of municipalities; 
~ Four members of the House of Representatives; 
' One member who represents a tribal emergency medical service; 
~ One member who represents a volunteer emergency medical service; 
- One member who represents a county government; 
' One member who represents a statewide association of hospitals;
' The Commissioner of Health and Human Services or the commissioner's 
designee; and 
~ The Director of Maine Emergency Medical Services within the Department 
of Public Safety or the director ’s designee 
The Commission was charged to examine and make recommendations on 
the structure, support and delivery of emergency medical services in the State; and 
maintain communication and coordinate with Maine Emergency Medical Services 
as deﬁned in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 32, section 83, subsection 16-A so 
that Maine Emergency Medical Services is informed of the work of the 
commission and the commission is informed of the strategic plamiing work of 
Maine Emergency Medical Services. The commission was charged with looking at 
all aspects of emergency medical services, including but not limited to workforce 
development, training, compensation, retention, costs, reimbursement rates, 
organization, and local and state support. The Commission met six times and 
issued its report in December 2022. The report contained ﬁndings and 
recommendation and can be accessed at https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/9404. 
I want to thank the members of this Committee and the members of the Blue 
Ribbon Commission for their dedication and hard work. The Commission 
ultimately made eight separate recommendations and legislation has been 
introduced to implement all of them, including emergency ongoing ﬁinding to 
ensure that EMS remains operational (LD 526), long-term investment to cover 
EMS funding gaps (LD 1515), providing EMS staff access to the Maine State 
Retirement System (LD 882), fully funding the popular Length of Service Award 
Program (LD 588), exploring EMS career pathways to encourage qualiﬁed persons 
to join the EMS system (LD 224), and facilitating the growth of paramedicine (LD 
883). For the purposes of the resolve before you, I want to focus on its ﬁnal 
recommendation. 
Recommendation D-1: During the 131st Legislature, the Legislature 
should reestablish the Blue Ribbon Commission To Study Emergency 
Medical Services in the State. 
This recommendation was made because a majority of Commission 
members did not feel that the Commission completed its work and recognized that 
there are still outstanding issues that need to be addressed to ensure the short- term 
and long-term sustainability of EMS in Maine. This can best be accomplished by 
continuing to bring together legislators, experts, and EMS providers to collaborate
and advise the Legislature on the best paths forward. This need is particularly acute 
as the Maine EMS strategic planning process concludes and makes its 
recommendations to Maine EMS, the EMS Board, the Department of Public 
Safety, and ultimately the Legislature. 
Therefore, I am here today asking you to honor the Commission ’s hard Work 
and advance its recommendation to reestablish it. The reestablished Commission 
Would still have l7 members selected in an identical fashion as the prior 
Commission though it is possible that individual members would change. 
The reestablished Commission would examine and make recommendations 
on the structure, support and delivery of emergency medical services in the State. 
The Commission would maintain communication and coordinate with Maine 
Emergency Medical Services so that Maine Emergency Medical Services is 
informed of the work of the Commission while the Commission would be 
informed of the strategic planning work of Maine Emergency Medical Services. 
The Commission is authorized to look at all aspects of emergency medical 
services, including but not limited to Workforce development, training, 
compensation, retention, costs, reimbursement rates, organization and local and 
state support. The Commission is authorized to hold a maximum of 6 meetings. 
The cormnission is directed to submit its report to this Committee no later than 
December 6, 2023. That report should detail its ﬁndings and recommendations, 
including any proposed legislation for this Committee to consider. 
I thank you for your time and attention this afternoon and ask that you act 
favorably on LD 1701. I am happy to answer any questions you might have.
