 
 
Testimony of Sarah Calder, MaineHealth 
In Support of LD 1515 and LD 1701 
Thursday, May 4, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety, I am Sarah Calder, Senior Government Affairs Director at 
MaineHealth, and I am here to support both LD 1515 and LD 1701. 
MaineHealth is an integrated non-profit health care system that provides a 
continuum of health care services to communities throughout Maine and 
New Hampshire. Every day, our over 22,000 care team members support 
our vision of “Working Together so Our Communities are the Healthiest 
in America” by providing a range of services from primary and specialty 
physician services to a continuum of behavioral health care services, 
community and tertiary hospital care, home health care and a lab.  
MaineHealth also operates three ambulance services across our service 
area, including PACE Paramedic Service in Norway, NorthStar 
Ambulance Service in Farmington, and the Barbara Bush Children’s 
Hospital neonatal transport system. Since 2019, calls to both PACE and 
NorthStar have increased by upwards of 33%. At the same time, the losses 
sustained by both services have also dramatically increased. PACE’s 
operating margin in Fiscal Year 2022 was -25%. NorthStar’s was over -
9% and is on track to be almost -15% this year, and because of these 
losses the reliance on town subsidies has increased by over 25% since 
2018. This is simply not sustainable for MaineHealth or the local towns.  
As you have heard today, we are not alone. In addition to delays 
responding to emergency calls, the strained system is also failing to 
adequately accommodate inter-facility transports (transporting patients 
from the hospital to another hospital or from the hospital to a long-term 
care facility). And these delays in transports are resulting in patients 
staying longer in the hospital than they need to, which contributes to back-
ups in our Emergency Departments and hospital beds.  
The inability to transfer patients in MaineHealth hospitals has become so 
severe, we have been forced to stand up our own inter-facility transport 
system by pulling NorthStar staff and rigs to provide inter-facility and 
medical transports for our patients. Just in November and December,  
 
NorthStar made 278 transports from Maine Medical Center, Mid-Coast-Parkview Health, Pen 
Bay Medical Center, and Waldo County General Hospital. To be clear, we first contacted local 
EMS to request these transports, but they were unable to accommodate the request.  
We also believe that reforms are needed to build a sustainable EMS system, and it is for that 
reason we support continuing the work of the Blue Ribbon Commission and would welcome the 
opportunity to participate.  
The past three years have thrown unimaginable hurdles at our hospitals and our care team 
members – a pandemic, a behavioral health, long-term care, and workforce crisis, and a failing 
EMS system. In the face of each of those challenges, we have done our best to respond with 
innovative solutions – many of which have come with significant investments – but we can’t 
continue to shoulder the burden of a failing system alone. We need your support. Please vote 
Ought to Pass on LD 1515 and LD 1701. 
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.  
