Maine County Commissioners Association 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
LD 1 701, Resolve, to Reestablish and Continue the Work of the Blue Ribbon Commission to Study 
Emergency Medical Services in the State 
May 4, 2023 
Chair Beebe-Center, Chair Salisbury, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to sewing as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy- 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee in suggort of LD 1701. 
About MCCA. Brieﬂy, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efﬁcient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all 16 of Maine’s counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county. 
What does LD 1701 do? LD 1701 reestablishes the Blue Ribbon Commission to Study Emergency Medical 
Services in the State, which was previously established by the 130th Legislature in 2022. This 17-member 
Commission is charged with examining and making recommendations on the structure, support, and delivery of 
emergency medical services in the State. In addition, the Commission is directed to submit a report detailing its 
ﬁndings and recommendations, including any proposed legislation, to the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety by December 6, 2023. 
Discussion. Emergency medical sen/ices organizations and EMS persormel provide critical services to 
communities and work to ensure the health and safety of all people across our State. As this Committee is aware, 
EMS organizations currently lack necessary funding and also face signiﬁcant stafﬁng shortages, especially in 
rural counties and communities. 
In February, the Blue Ribbon Commission to Study Emergency Medical Services in the State released its initial 
Report, as directed by the 130th Legislature, and it recommended that the State appropriate $70 million per year 
in State funding for EMS organizations in order to avoid provider closures. While the Commission made several 
recommendations in its initial Report, more needs to be done with regard to examining the structure, support, 
and delivery of emergency medical services throughout the State. To the extent that LD 1701 would continue to 
examine these issues and make further recommendations on ways to address them, we write in support. 
Conclusion. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
Respectfully submitted, 
%,‘,7/IZ~.Z/ 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee
Comments of MCCA re LD 1701 
May 4, 2023 
Page2 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel
