 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of Hilary Schneider, Maine Director of Government Relations  
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network and  
Allyson Perron Drag, Government Relations Director  
American Heart Association , and Lance Boucher,  
Assistant Vice President, State Public Policy, Eastern Division  
American Lung Association  
 
LD 1722 , Resolve, to Establish the Blue Ribbon Commission to Design a Plan for Sustained Investment 
in Preventing Disease and Improving the Health of Maine Communities  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Health and Human Services Committee thank you for 
allowing us to provide testimony. The American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network (ACS CAN) is the 
nonprofit, nonpartisan advocacy affiliate of the American Cancer Society, which advocates for evidence -
based public policies to reduce the cancer burden for everyone. As the nation’s leadin g advocate for 
legislative solutions that are helping to defeat cancer, ACS CAN ensures that cancer patients, survivors, 
and their families have a voice in public policy matters at all levels of government  The American Heart 
Association is the nation’s old est and largest voluntary organization dedicated to fighting heart disease 
and stroke, whose mission is to be a relentless force for a world of longer, healthier lives. The American 
Lung Association is the leading organization working to save lives by impr oving lung health and 
preventing lung disease, through research, education and advocacy. Our organizations continue to work 
to ensure that we are able to provide residents of Maine prevention and treatment for tobacco  use and 
we believe that LD 1722 would look to design a plan to ensure the sustainability of adequate funding for 
the tobacco  control  program.   
 
In Maine, nearly 1 in 6 adults smoke cigarettes, the highest rate in the Northeast  and the 16th highest 
rate in the  nation.i More than one in 20 Maine high school students smoke cigarettes, with a high of 
nearly 1 in 10 in Washington County.ii In recent years, overall youth tobacco use in Maine has 
skyrocketed, largely driven by the youth e -cigarette use epidemic. One in 3 Maine high school students 
and 1 in 10 middle school students have used e -cigarettes.iii Nearly 20 percent of high school students 
are current users of e -cigarettes.iv, While this rate has decreased since 2019, it is still well above the 
2017 rate of  15% .v  The United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US CDC) recommends 
that Maine spend $15.9 million per year to fund its state tobacco prevention and treatment program.vi 
In FY 22, Maine brought in over $180 million in tobacco -related revenue (made up of roughly $ 49 million 
from the tobacco master settlement agreement and over $ 135 million in tobacco tax revenue).vii 
Funding the state tobacco prevention and treatment program at the US CDC recommended level is less 
than 10% of Maine’s annual amount of tobacco -related revenue and less than one -third of what the 
tobacco industry is estimated to spend annually in marketin g their products in Maine.viii The US CDC 
evidence -based recommendations for a comprehensive tobacco control program provides states with 
the needed framework to educate people on the dangers of tobacco use as well as connect people who 
are already addicted to tobacco to resources to help them quit. Comprehensive tobacco control 

programs establish smoke -free policies and social norms, promote tobacco cessation and support those 
trying to quit, prevent initiation of tobacco use among prospective new users incl uding youth and 
reduce tobacco -related health disparities among disparate populations.ix  When appropriately funded in 
accordance with CDC recommendations, comprehensive tobacco control programs are able to reduce 
tobacco use.x Research shows that the mor e states spend on comprehensive tobacco control programs, 
the greater the reductions in smoking. The longer states invest in such programs, the greater and 
quicker the impact.  
 
Tobacco control programs play a crucial role in the prevention of many chronic conditions such as heart 
disease, cancer and respiratory illness. Comprehensive tobacco prevention and cessation programs 
prevent kids from starting to use tobacco products , help kids and adults who use tobacco products to 
quit, educate the public, the med ia and policymakers about policies that reduce tobacco use, address 
disparities, and serve as a counter to the ever -present tobacco industry.   
 
Healthy kids are ready to learn, workers are more productive, seniors can stay in their homes, and 
employers sp end less on insurance coverage. Good health makes Maine a place where businesses want 
to be, where young people want to stay, and where communities can grow and thrive.  Public health 
problems are seldom -solved,  and health and economic benefits are rarely m easurable within a 2 -year 
state budget cycle. This structural limitation, coupled with lack of access to long -range (ROI) data, 
creates  an artificially narrow lens through which Maine lawmakers often consider policy proposals. The 
result is an ongoing loss  of opportunities to prioritize and invest in evidence -informed primary and 
secondary prevention and other public health initiatives. Maine receives funds from multiple legal 
settlements with manufacturers as well as excise taxes on products that impact pu blic health and well -
being. Yet, the Maine Legislature often lacks the system and structure necessary to maximize benefit 
through long -range data projections, coordinated planning, and sustained investment in preventing 
disease and improving the health of Maine communities. To improve Maine’s resilience and 
preparedness, Maine lawmakers need a more comprehensive, nimble, and forward -thinking system for 
considering investments in health and productivity.  
 
The Fund for a Healthy Maine (FHM) budget is  project ed to  face a $25 million structural deficit in the 
next biennium . As a result, the programs it funds will not be able to funded at the baseline level of 
funding and tough decisions will have to be made.  The tobacco settlement is Maine’s primary source of 
funding for tobacco prevention and public health. But significantl y lower , but anticipated,  payment 
projections have made the current FHM budget for both public health and medical care impossible to 
retain after the next biennium. Without legislative action, FHM -funded  programs will be pitted against 
each other for limit ed resources. It’s time to rethink how we address geographic and demographic 
health disparities and make the best use of Maine’s legal settlements and excise taxes. LD 1722 
establishes a Blue Ribbon Commission to recommend new models for funding prevention  and public 
health  that allow for sustained investments and consideration of benefits (ROI) outside the 2 -year 
budget cycle. The Commission’s charge would include recommending solutions to the looming structural 
deficit in the Fund for a Healthy Maine. If the pandemic taught us anything , we must keep our 
communities healthy and safe —which means building strong public health infrastructure including 
comprehensive tobacco control measures.  To achieve our mission to be a relentless force for longer, 
healthier lives, to eliminate cardiovascular disease and cancer we must continue our critical work to 
stabilize key funding for tobacco prevention and treatment  efforts for more Mainers.  Thank you for the 
opportunity to provide this testimony We look forward to wor king with you in the Maine Legislature to 
ensure there are we allocating adequate funding for the state’s tobacco prevention and treatment 
program.  As such, we urge you to vote ought to pass for LD 1722 . 
 
Sincerely  
Hilary Schneider, MPP       Allyson Perron Drag   
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network   American Heart Association/ Stroke Association  
Government Relations Director      Government Relations Director  
 
Lance Boucher  
American Lung Association  
Assistant Vice President, State Public Policy, Eastern Division  
 
 
i US C DC 2021 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) data available online  
ii Maine CDC, 2021 Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey (MIYHS), https://w ww.maine.gov/miyhs/2021 -results .  
iii Ibid.  
iv Ibid.  
v Maine CDC, 2017 Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey (MIYHS), https://data.mainepublichealth.gov/miyhs/  
vi U.S. Center for Disease Control, “Best Practices for Comprehensive Tobacco Control Programs – 2014”. 
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/stateandcommunity/best_practices/index.htm   
vii Report of the Maine State Revenue Forecasting Committee, May 2023 , FHM: https://www.legislature.maine.gov/doc/10054  General Fund 
Revenue :  https://www.legislature.maine.gov/doc/10057 . Note, the cigarette and other tobacco product tax re venue includes excise tax from 
cannabis sales as that is how it is reported. The number in the text backs out an estimated cannabis excise tax revenue of ro ughly $13.5 million 
based on the estimated cannabis excise tax revenue for FY 23 included in the rep ort. 
viii Estimated annual tobacco company marketing expenditures in Maine: Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids, The Toll of Tobacco in Maine , 
updated May 2, 2023 , https://www.tobaccofreekids.org/problem/toll -us/maine  
ix CDC, 2014.  
x CDC, 2014.  
