Edward Miller
Hallowell
LD 1722
Testimony of Ed Miller in Support of LD 1722, a Resolve to Establish the Blue 
Ribbon Commission to Design a Plan for Sustained Investment in Preventing Disease 
and Improving the Health of Maine Communities
Good morning Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint 
Select Committee on Health and Human Services.  My name is Ed Miller.  I am a 
resident of Hallowell and a retired public health professional who spent nearly 30 
years as the CEO of the American Lung Association in Maine after more than a 
decade at the Maine CDC. I have been involved in tobacco policy in this state since 
1977 and involved with the Fund for a Healthy Maine since its creation more than two
decades ago.
I am writing today as a private citizen in support of LD 1722.
Maine’s track record in using the Master Tobacco Settlement funds to improve health 
and health care is one of the best in the nation.  Even before we received the first 
dollar, the Legislature created a well thought out bipartisan plan for the most effective
ways to use these funds. While support for tobacco use prevention and providing help 
to smokers who wanted to quit was at the core of the plan, the resources available 
allowed Maine to also address other significant health issues. Among the many 
accomplishments from this investment, Maine was able to achieve a 60% reduction in
our youth smoking rate. This transformed the state from having one of the worst rates 
to having one of the best.
But as you will hear in detail by the testimony of others today, the Settlement dollars 
will be steeply declining and difficult choices will need to be made.  I urge you to 
support LD 1722 as a proactive step to plan for the decline in Settlement funds at the 
same time Maine faces significant and expanding public health challenges. This is a 
unique opportunity to harness the creative power of the proposed Commission 
members and others and once again design a solution that will last for decades.
Thank you.

