 
Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine | Kalie Hess | kalie@mainecohn.org | www.mainecohn.org 
 1 Testimony of Kalie Hess, Associate Director 
Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine 
LD 1722: Resolve, to Establish the Blue Ribbon Commission to Design a Plan for Sustained Investment in 
Preventing Disease and Improving the Health of Maine Communities 
Before the Committee on Health and Human Services 
Public Hearing: Tuesday April 8, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services Committee, my name 
is Kalie Hess and I am the Associate Director of the Children’s Oral Health Network of Maine 
(COHN/Network). Our Network includes providers of dental care and leaders in communities and educational 
institutions who work collaboratively to ensure that all children in Maine can grow up free from preventable 
dental disease. I am here on behalf of our Network to testify in support of LD 1722. 
 
COHN is invested in ensuring that the State of Maine has sufficient resources and capacity to provide oral health 
leadership to address the oral health challenges facing the state, including bringing oral health services to 
children in school settings. Currently, the Maine CDC operates the School Oral Health Program (SOHP) in about 
1/3 of Maine schools. The program provides screenings, fluoride varnish, and sometimes sealants to children 
who need them. These are essential services to help protect oral health for kids, particularly when so many 
children are unable to access care in a traditional dental office.   
 
Until this year, when the supplemental budget for FY2023 added the first installment of the funding needed to 
expand the program, a small allocation of funding from the Fund for a Healthy Maine has been the only source 
of ongoing funding for the state’s School Oral Health Program – around $250,000 per year typically. These 
resources are insufficient to address the oral health needs of all Maine children, but this program is an incredibly 
important foundation of school-based oral health services and it would be devastating to lose the limited 
funding that exists, especially since the fiscal note estimating the amount needed for the full expansion of the 
program to all public schools was built on an assumption that this FHM allocation would continue to be there. 
Oral health and access to dental care comes up over and over again in community and state needs assessment, 
but then falls off the priority list just behind other pressing needs. Without identifying a long-term plan to 
sustain investment in core public health services, it would not be surprising to see oral health – despite being 
the most common chronic disease among Maine children – fall to the wayside, as it has in the past.  
 
We are concerned about the instability of state public health funding and the inevitable decisions that will have 
to be made about which programs to cut or eliminate entirely from the current allocation structure without a 
long-term plan for the Fund for a Healthy Maine.  A reduction in the Fund for a Healthy Maine allocation would 
jeopardize Maine’s current ability to maintain the School Oral Health Program at all and could affect recent 
hard-won gains to rebuild oral health staffing capacity at the Maine CDC. Finally, these funds are important to  
Maine’s ability to apply for federal oral health funding in the future as they can be used to meet matching fund 
requirements for federal oral health grant opportunities. These same worries extend to every program that 
counts on the Fund for core essential services that help keep Mainers healthy.   
 
Public health solutions take time and prevention efforts need stability and strategic investment in order to 
produce desired results. Creating a Blue Ribbon Commission to facilitate planning around the use of the Fund for 
a Healthy Maine is the best option we have today to ensure that the tobacco settlement funding can continue to 
improve the lives of Maine people for years to come. 
