 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126 Sewall Street  
Augusta, Maine 04330 -6822 
TTY/Voice: (207) 626 -7058 
www. maineequaljustice.org    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kathy Kilrain del Rio  
Advocacy & Programs Director  
kkilraindelrio @mejp.org  
 
  
MEJ Testimony in Support of  LD 1722 , Resolve, to Establish the Blue Ribbon Commission to  
Design a Plan for Sustained Investment in Preventing Disease and Improving the Health of 
Maine Communities  
 
May 8 , 2023  
 
Good morning , Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee . My name is Kathy Kilrain del Rio, I use she/her pronouns, and I’m 
the Advocacy and Programs Director for Maine Equal Justice, a nonprofit legal aid provider 
working to increase economic secu rity, opportunity, and equity for people in Maine. I am 
speaking today in support of LD 1722 . 
 
A robust health care system that will ensure all Mainers with low incomes can lead healthy lives 
requires an investment in both public health prevention programs and comprehensive MaineCare 
services. For that reason, Maine Equal Justice has long been a par tner with members of the public 
health community in supporting the Fund for a Healthy Maine.  
We recognize and support the need to  address the changing funding streams for the Fund for a 
Healthy Maine while also maintaining adequate funding for  other needs that are currently partly 
funded through the Fund for a Healthy Maine, including MaineCare, Drugs for the Elderly , and Head  
Start.  We believe the creation of a Blue Ribbon Commission will be an effective way to desig n a plan 
that supports sustainable funding for public health needs while also addressing  the challenges 
raised in previous eff orts to respond to  the looming shortfall in the Fund fo r a Health y Maine. The 
diverse perspectives of t he members of the Comm ission as descri bed in this bill can bring essential 
expertise and creat ivity to the process. The duties outlin ed for the Commiss ion thoughtfully  include 
many of the questions and concerns that have been raised in this  commi ttee during discussion s of 
the future of the Fund for a Healthy Maine in recent legislative sessio ns.  
Together we can  find w orkable , sustainable  solutions  and we believe the Blue Ri bbon Commission 
envisioned by LD 1722 is the best way to accomplish that goal. For these reasons and the others 
you’ve heard today, we urge you to support LD 1722. Tha nk you and I am happy  to answer any 
questions.  
