Testimony of Lani Graham, MD, MPH 
Freeport, Maine 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 1722 
Resolve, to Establish the Blue-ribbon Commission to Design a Plan for 
Sustained Investment in Preventing Disease and Improving the Health of 
Maine Communities 
Sponsored by Senator Margaret Rotundo 
Before the Health and Human Services Committee: May 8, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Committee. 
My name is Lani Graham. I am a retired family practice physician and former Chief Public 
Health Officer for Maine. Currently, I serve on the Public Health Committee for the Maine 
Medical Association (MMA) and live in Freeport. I am here in support of LD 1722. 
I have been involved in public health in Maine for more than 30 years, but over the yearsI 
have been discouraged by the difficulty in maintaining consistent funding for public health, 
and particularly for the great epidemic of tobacco addiction. In 2020, the leading killer in 
Maine was not Covid, but cancer, followed by heart disease, both strongly linked to tobacco 
use. 
We all celebrated when at last the tobacco companies were held accountable for knowingly 
addicting thousands of Maine people to this dangerous product, and through multi-state 
litigation, Maine became one of the beneficiaries of the Tobacco Settlement dollars. At the 
time, the Maine legislature sensibly set up a special receptacle, the Fund for Healthy Maine. 
It was a great idea and worked well. In fact, the Fund for\Healthy Maine made most of our 
best advances in tobacco prevention and control possible and Maine a leader in tobacco 
control. 
Yet, careful analysis now shows that those dollars can no longer sustain the needs of 
tobacco prevention and control to say nothing of the greater needs of public health. If after 
the Covid pandemic, and during the substance use pandemic, we are not prepared to 
develop a plan for continuous investment in public health, I wonder if we ever will. The 
people of Maine deserve a strong public health system that stands on a firm, well-funded 
foundation. Now is the time for the development of such a plan, which this bill envisions. 
Now is the time to act to create a professional plan that will fully fund public health work in 
Maine, align with the work of the Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention, and 
move Maine people toward a healthier future. 
Thank you for your attention, I will be pleased to answer any questions you may 
have.
