LD 1722 — Resolve, to Establish the Blue Ribbon Commission to Design a Plan for Sustained 
Investment in Preventing Disease and Improving the Health of Maine Communities 
Testimony of Linda Sanborn, MD 
May 8, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Balclacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee. My name is Linda Sanborn and I live in Gorham. I served 10 years in the Maine 
Legislature representing the people of Gorham, Buxton, and Scarborough. I also practiced medicine for 
over 25 years as a family physician. I'm pleased to be joining you today to testify in strong support of 
LD 1722, which will establish a Blue Ribbon Commission to recommend a model that allows for 
sustained and data-driven investment in the health of Maine kids and communities. 
I want to express my gratitude to Senator Rotundo for bringing this important bill forward, and to 
Senator Bennett, Representative Ducharme, and Representative Cyrway for continuing to demonstrate 
that when it comes to the health of our kids, we can and must set politics aside to give them the best 
chance to learn, grow, and thrive. 
As some of you may know, my service in the Legislature included four years on this esteemed 
committee and six years on the Appropriations Committee. I am proud of what we accomplished 
together, especially during the most difﬁcult moments, but it was also impossible to avoid a feeling of 
deep frustration, knowing that there were problems left unaddressed, long-range cost/benefit data left 
out of decision making, and special funds like the tobacco settlement being diverted or supplanted 
outside their intended purpose. Public health initiatives always seemed to be the first to be cut or the 
last in which investments were made. 
Now, in this increasingly complex, post-pandemic environment for kids, for parents, for employers, and 
for workers, our legislature should have every tool available to assure good decision making and 
maximize the value of our investments in programs and infrastructure designed to improve the health 
and wellbeing of our children, families, and community. 
LD 1722 may not be an actual tool, but it is a flashlight. 
The Blue Ribbon Commission established by LD 1722 will light a path toward better situational 
analyses, better priority-setting, more efficient use of limited resources, and ultimately a better, more 
strategic government response to public health challenges. 
In recent years, I have become more and more passionate about primary care being, in the words of 
Atul Gawande, "the backbone of a functional and effective health system" . The long-term health of our 
communities depends on funding both medical care and public health. The two work together 
synergistically. But if we continue to ignore the structural deficit in the Fund for a Healthy Maine,we
will be choosing to fund medical care OR public health. This is a false choice that we must actively 
reject. Supporting LD 1722 will generate important information and options, including how to ensure 
the tobacco settlement is used as it was intended ~ preventing youth tobacco use and improving public 
health. 
l remind you of a 40 year study done in Franklin County and published in JAMA in 2015, that concluded 
that "sustained, community-wide programs targeting cardiovascular risk factors and behavior changes 
(including tobacco cessation) to improve population health were associated with reductions in 
hospitalization and mortality rates, compared to the rest of the state" . This was a perfect real-life and 
local example of the old adage, "An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure." 
Good health changes everything for families and businesses. Healthy kids are ready to learn, workers 
are more productive, older adults can stay in their homes, and employers will see relief from the high 
costs of health insurance. 
One of the very last bills I supported and actively sought to pass ~ before COVID brought an abrupt end 
to my final term in the Legislature - was Republican Representative Denny Keschl’s bill to restructure 
Maine's tobacco settlement into a trust, modeled after the very successful Efficiency Maine Trust. 
While a trust offers just one example of how this legislature can purposely create and provide strict 
requirements for an entity to receive and allocate funds outside the state's 2-year budget cycle, LD 
1722 is not that bill. Rather, LD 1722 calls for an examination of all possible options for solving the 
structural challenges that are outlined in the Commission's duties. lt is a worthy next step. 
l hope you will recognize the opportunity for non-partisan problem solving that LD 1722 provides. It 
will certainly light a path toward better health for our kids and communities. 
Thank you and I am happy to answer any questions.
