Testimony by Lisa Miller in Support of L.D. 1722 
Resolve, to Establish the Blue Ribbon Commission to Design a Plan for Sustained Investment in 
Preventing Disease and Improving the Health of Maine Communities 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Monday, May 8, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services Committee- 
my name is Lisa Miller from Somerville. I am a retired philanthropy oﬁicial and a fonner legislator who 
served in the l22“d to 124"‘ legislatures, serving on the Health and Human Services and Appropriations 
and Financial Services Committees. 
Having served on those committees, I have had ﬁrst-hand experience in the challenges of ensuring our 
tobacco settlement funds are used appropriately and to their best purpose within the Fund for a Healthy 
Maine. 
But it’s not just the tobacco settlement, other monies ﬂow into the Fund from other settlements and from 
excise taxes imposed on products that impact our health, like alcohol and marijuana. How can We 
maximize the impact of these special sources of revenue and ensure their use is aligned with their 
intended purpose? 
Like you, I have experienced the frustration of a two-year budget cycle, when we all know that Maine’s 
most difficult challenges require commitment of more than two years and sometimes a decade — before 
we can expect a return on our investment. Our state budgeting system should allow us to thoughtfully 
consider the longer-range implications of what we might do, and not do. This bill allows you to kick down 
the door of two-year thinking and create a pathway for long-term planning and intentional direction of 
resources to our most pressing health needs._ 
Now let me put on my philanthropy hat for just a moment. For 20 years, I was the Co-Director of the 
Bingham Program, a small charitable endowment that focuses its investments on improving health and 
health care in Maine. There were many times when we had to step in where government funding fell 
short—despite evidence of need and impact—because of budget limitations, or a lack of local data, or the 
need to build community capacity, or even the shifting of the political winds.' 
Being small, our support seldom approached what was needed. Instead of funding stop-gap measures, 
philanthropy could be a real partner with state government if our legislative system made serious efforts 
to identify problems, prioritize effective interventions, and gamer public and private resources to create 
the best chance of success. I particularly like Duty 6. in Section 5 of the bill looking at blending or 
pooling funding because public-private partnerships are we get stuff done in our communities. 
You’ll hear more about the persistent ﬂaws in the Fund for a Healthy Maine, now made more urgent by 
the structural gap in the Fund for Healthy Maine account, which will make current funding levels for both 
public health and medical care impossible to maintain in future biennia. 
LD l722 offers a thoughtful path forward that may just result in something terriﬁc — something that 
makes the job of this committee and Appropriations easier, something that creates stability for both state 
agencies and communities, and something that ﬁnally resolves the Fund for a Healthy Maine deficit.
