 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health all Maine people 
 
TO:   Joint Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
FROM: Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health & Government Affairs Associate  
 
DATE:  May 8, 2023 
 
SUPPORT – LD 1722, Resolve, to Establish the Blue-Ribbon Commission to Design a Plan for Sustained 
Investment in Preventing Disease and Improving the Health of Maine Communities 
 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and the members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee. My name is Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health, and Government Affairs Associate with 
the Maine Medical Association. We are pleased to be here before you today to offer comments in support 
of LD 1722 with a friendly amendment. This bill would establish a Blue-Ribbon Commission to design a 
plan for sustained investment in preventing disease and improving the health of all Maine communities.  
 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine’s largest professional association representing over 
4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings. 
 
Public health policies and disease prevention investments increase the health outcomes of 
Maine residents and reduce economic costs overall. Healthcare is largely re-active, meaning 
many individuals do not seek healthcare until they are sick. Costs associated with waiting to 
obtain healthcare until you are sick are often considerably higher than if preventative measures 
were used prior to symptom progressing. Healthcare is expensive for many and thus people do 
not use it unless it is completely necessary – putting these individuals and the healthcare system 
at large in a position to spend more.  
 
Appropriate investments into public health are essential for improving the overall health and well-
being of individuals and communities; it can be an effective measure at reducing health costs 
and improving health outcomes through disease control and prevention, promotion of healthy 
behaviors, and the creation of healthy environments.  
 
A study published in The Lancet in 2018 found that investing in global public health could yield 
a return on investment of up to 20 to 1. The study showed that every dollar spent on public health 
interventions such as vaccination, smoking cessation, and disease prevention programs could 
yield up to $20 in economic and social benefits, such as increased productivity and reduced 
healthcare costs. 
 
Investments into public health are also imperative to addressing health disparities. A Health Affairs study 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 in 2017 found that a community-based program to reduce childhood obesity in low-income 
neighborhoods in Philadelphia yielded significant improvements in health outcomes and reduced health 
disparities. 
 
An important key to improving Maine’s public health is appropriately investing in our communities and 
programs, ensuring data-driven utilization of public health funds. LD 1722 establishes the Blue-Ribbon 
Commission to bring experts together and recommend models for funding prevention and public health 
that allow for sustained investments and consideration of benefits into Maine’s future.  
 
The Maine Medical Association supports investing in our public health to promote the well-being of our 
residents and communities. For these reasons we ask the committee to please vote Ought to Pass on LD 
1722.  
 
We thank the committee for your time and attention to these matters. We welcome any questions.  
 
Sincerely, 
Mikenzie Dwyer 
(mdwyer@mainemed.com )  
