 
Richard A. Bennett                                                                                                        3 State House Station  
Senator, District 18                                                                                                  Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Fax: (207) 287-1527 *  TTY (207) 287-1583  *  Message Service 1-800-423-6900  *  Web Site: legislature.maine.gov/senate 
 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
In Support of LD 1722 
“Resolve, to Establish the Blue Ribbon Commission to Design a Plan for Sustained 
Investment in Preventing Disease and Improving the Health of Maine Communities” 
May 8, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services: I am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and I have the honor of serving 14 communities 
in Western Maine in the State Senate. I am pleased to cosponsor LD 1722, “Resolve, to Establish 
the Blue Ribbon Commission to Design a Plan for Sustained Investment in Preventing Disease 
and Improving the Health of Maine Communities”. Today I ask you to support this bipartisan 
effort and better Maine’s understanding of how it might best structure public health funding in 
the decades ahead.  
 
Maine faces significant challenges in the sustained, long-term funding of public health 
programming. Over the course of my legislative service, I have observed countless instances in 
which Maine’s two-year budget cycle compresses the Legislature’s outlook. With respect to 
public health, biennial funding cycles mean we seldom look forward more than a few years to 
ensure the continuity of revenue streams that ultimately prevent disease and improve the 
wellbeing of our communities. And as appropriators we have little opportunity in the context of a 
biennial budget writing process to formally consider the return on investment that may be 
inherent to a public health program.  
 
That failure to consider ROI is particularly problematic for public health funding, a policy sphere 
whose planning is otherwise data-driven and focused on long-term outcomes. It means the total 
impact of Maine’s investments to address health challenges ranging from the opioid crisis to 
cardiovascular disease or youth tobacco use are never fully understood. This is an imperfect way 
of operating, and we should look around the nation to consider how other states are trying to 
maximize efficiency and involve long-term ROI projections when funding public health. 
 
This Resolve asks us to convene a Commission once the Legislature has adjourned that will 
bring together lawmakers and experts who are familiar with Maine’s public health funding 
structure and able to evaluate alternatives. This 15-member panel represents a depoliticized, 
unhurried forum for thoughtful consideration of funding models that could potentially modernize 
Maine’s system of public health appropriations. They may then make recommendations 
including legislation that could be integral to addressing looming threats before us. 
 
I am proud to have served in leadership during the 119th Legislature when we created the Fund 
for a Healthy Maine. I’m one of only a few of us here who were part of doing so. The Fund has 
served us well and longer than most states’ efforts to protect this special revenue stream. But as 
our collective memory of what we did, and more importantly, why we did it continues to fade, 
the risk to the Fund and its legacy for our children and grandchildren is also heightened.  
We created the Fund for a Healthy Maine to give Maine kids a healthy start and every 
opportunity to learn, grown and become productive members of their communities. As members 
of the 131st Legislature, it’s now our responsibility to make sure the Tobacco Settlement, all of 
our current and future legal settlements, and excise taxes related to public health are in the best 
possible position to be used efficiently and effectively for our kids and communities. Let’s tackle 
this together and make these special funds work for the next 25 years.  
 
I’m honored to be working with all of you on an issue of such significance to our state. In 
conclusion, I ask for your support of LD 1722 and the Blue Ribbon Commission it would 
convene later this summer. I have found that bringing together focused stakeholders to seriously 
discuss a crisis results in resolution. This will be an important step in ensuring the Legislature is 
equipped with the best information and tools needed to address public health funding questions 
in the years ahead. I would be pleased to answer any questions the Committee may have. Thank 
you. 
 
