1 
  
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 17 22 
Resolve, to Establish the Blue Ribbon Commission to Design a Plan  
for Sustained Investment in Preventing Disease and Improving the  
Health of Maine Communities  
 
May 5, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Distinguished Members of the Joint Committee on Health and 
Human Services,  
 
On behalf of our local coalition serving the Maine Highlands, a very rural region of Maine composed of all of 
Piscataquis County and several towns in Somer set and Penobscot Counties, please know that we at Helping 
Hands with Heart (HHH) sincerely appreciate your dedication to the people of Maine as demonstrated through 
your service.  
 
We write this letter in support of L.D. 17 22 designed to create a Blue Ribb on Commission to address the 
significant issues related to health and well -being our all of our residents throughout Maine, most especially in 
our underserved rural communities. My name is Sue Mackey Andrews and I serve as the volunteer facilitator for 
this coalition, which recently celebrated our 25th year in public health and community service advocacy  for our 
30 towns and 3 Unorganized Territories.  
 
We strongly support L.D. 17 22 which would provide a robust and diverse commission of experts to work to 
understand the diverse needs of our local regions beyond the county delineations, and to create 
recommendations which will help to ensure that funds directed towards some of our most pressing public 
health issues are protected and can ensure not only the fu nds essential to address our diverse priorities, but also 
to provide the amount of time to realistically develop and implement appropriate responses.  
 
I have personally participated in a variety of meetings for over five years, representing our region, wh ich have 
focused on the human and economic impact of eroding and inconsistent public health services in our region.  
 
On behalf of our region, I am also a member of the Maine Public Health Association and was the lead facilitator 
of our Covid  Respond Team (CRT ) which met weekly during the pandemic . HHH hosts the Maine Highlands 
Integrated Response Network (MHIRN) which continues and expands the work of the CRT and now meets bi -
weekly to address the increased human and social needs which existed prior to and  have escalated since the 
pandemic. This team is composed  of law enforcement, healthcare, emergency response and community service 
agencies work  together to identify needs, coordinate responses,  and address the large gaps in needs in our 
region.  
 
The healt h and well -being metrics of our region have been the poorest in Maine for years, even before the 
pandemic. This can be attributed to a number of realities not the least of which is our aging population (27+%), 
high percentage of persons under 65 on disabil ity (20%), largely due to the “hard body work” that the majority 
of these workers experienced at the many mills that used to dot our region. The majority of those mills have 
since closed (2006 -2009), even furthering the deep poverty in this region which is  too often multi -generational.  
 

2 
 Testimony L.D. 17 22 
May 5, 2023  
Page Two  
 
HHH has intentionally moved into the role of lead facilitator  or “hub”  for a variety of initiatives (see attached), 
which are data driven and address some of our most pressing needs. We have assumed this role because we are 
“partnered” with Penobscot County to compose Public Health District Six . However, the differences betw een 
most of Penobscot County and Piscataquis are significant. We partner with Penobscot frequently  and 
appreciate , together, that addressing our needs requires a locally driven, responsive approach .  
 
We also have a large rural area which still qualifies as a federally designated “Frontier County” (one of 813 in the 
US), with fewer than 6 people per square mile. This geography means that service delivery is very difficult given 
the distances, as well as  lack of public transportation which means that “moving people to services” is 
challenging.  While many households have vehicles, these are often in poor shape, unregistered or uninspected, 
or lack a licensed and/or insured driver.  
 
We have no state servic es housed within this region . DHHS OFI visits one day a month to assist residents. 
Everything else happens either on line or in Bangor or Skowhegan. Consequently, while tools like Zoom and 
Tele -Health have added opportunity for service delivery, Internet a ccess is limited in this region where 56% of 
residents have access to the Internet, and are further plagued with limited data plans and digital literacy.  The 
travel time to Bangor, in food weather, ranges from 45 minutes to 2 hours across this region one-way. Access to 
LYNX hosted by PENQUIS often depends on volunteer drivers and it can take a whole day for someone to get 
into Bangor, wait for their appointment and then wait for LYNX to return them home. This affects employment, 
and also, for example, state  mandated visitation for families involved in the child welfare system.  
 
The impact of the consequences of the many social determinants of health that are caused or exacerbated by 
poverty are significant. We join the rest of Maine in an overall lack of av ailable, affordable, safe,  and healthy 
housing. The number of unhoused persons has risen significantly with few if any options for these people. Right 
now,  we are working with our partners to find housing for three individual woman, all 65+, who are unhous ed 
and sleeping in cars, as one example.   
 
Our local healthcare system is plagued with workforce shortages, resulting in long delays for appointments or 
essential treatments. The impact of increasing mental health issues for children, youth and young adul ts is very 
serious and too often results in persons who are “boarded” in our local hospital Emergency Department due to 
the general lack of placements or options. These placements can last months before an option is found.  The 
lack of mental health servic es is profound here  and reverberates across every sector in our region, including 
area businesses and law enforcement.  
 
Our schools struggle with these mental health issues as well, workforce shortages which often find building 
principals teaching classes  and office staff monitoring study halls. Mental health and anxiety are reported by our 
children as their most significant challenges, by more than 50%, and is validated across several different data 
sources (local student surveys, MIYHS, the Shared CHNA, etc.).  
 
The inconsistency of public health funding to address these needs is very problematic  as is the reality that too 
often, the priorities of these funds don’t “match” our needs and priorities, or the ways in which services must be 
delivered in a rura l region vs. one more urban.   
 
Because we have small communities and caring residents, we often have creative opportunities to resolve some 
of these issues but lack the resources  and time sufficient  to do so. The majority of services are derived from 
Bango r where needs are great also, as i s the shortage of qualified workers.   
 
3 
 Testimony L.D. 1722  
May 5, 2023  
Page Two  
 
Additionally, t he methods and approaches used in a more urban region too often don’t work for our rural 
population.  Most residents have been here for years and now, regardless of their status, have built communities 
that they belong to and won’t leave. This is their home, even without a roof.  
 
If we learned anything from the pandemic, we learned that it is crucial that our public health system is able to be 
nimble when situations change. A one size fits all approach to problem solving is grossly inadequate. We 
encourage you to pass L.D. 1722  to create the opportunity to protect, preserve and utilize the available 
resources to address these ongoing public health issues in forward -thinking, data driven and meaningful ways 
for our residents, schools, businesses , and for our economy.  
 
Thank you.  
 
Sue Mackey Andrews  
 
152 East Main Street /The Commons  
Dover -Foxcroft, Maine 04426  
 
207-408-8040  
sdmandrews@gmail.com   
 
cc:  
Senator Margaret Rotundo  
Representative Drew Gattine  
Senator Joseph Baldacci  
Senator Rick Bennett  
Representative Kristen Cloutier  
Representative Scott Cyrway  
Representative  John  Ducharme  
Representative  Melanie  Sachs  
Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross  
Representative Maureen Terry  
 
  

4 
  
152 East Main Street  
Dover -Foxcroft, Maine  04426  
sdmandrews@gmail.com   
207-408-8040  
Brief Summary: Helping Hands/The Commons at Central Hall Initiatives  
: Our three partnership with The Heart of Ma ine United Way to provide welcome boxes 
to all expectant and new parents in the region 4 times a year for the first couple of years of life. 
These are intended to provide high quality developmentally  appropriate yours for the child, 
parent information and resources for the family. Bangor Savings Bank has donated a $25 gift card 
for each box intended to support parents in whatever they need.  Funding for BUNDLE was initially 
obtained through Maine Community Foundation and continues with United Way support and  
considerable cross -sector collaboration.  
  The MHWCC  is a 3 year partnership with The 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston (Boston FED) to address the roots and causes of poverty in our 
region, and to create deep systems change to address this.  We are one of six such WCCs in Maine. 
This is an annual $65,000 award over three years; we are entering into our second year. MHWCC 
is hosting Donna Beegle, Ed.D., an expert in poverty with a life of lived experience.  
Maine Highlands Integrated Response  Network  (MHIRN):  our partnership with 
Piscataquis County Emergency Services, to establish a crisis response system specifically for our 
region for all residents. This is something we identified as a result of several very serious issues 
that were not hand led in a timely manner, largely because we lack "in county" resources for rapid 
response.  The MHIRN grew out of our three year “Covid Response Team” efforts, meeting weekly, 
to address needs and coordinate efforts across multiple entities during the Pandem ic. This effort 
has one year funding from the Farris Foundation for $48,000.  
HHH Emergency Relief Support Areas:  with funding from United Way, Penquis and 
community donations, we help residents address immediate needs (food, fuel, transportation, 

5 
 etc.) an d link them to ongoing supports and services.   We currently have several homeless, older 
persons and families in the region  largely due to the housing crisis . Among other areas of need we 
have addressed situationally, as indicated:  
• Car repairs  
• Mental and b ehavioral supports  
• Emergency housing  
• Meal/Food delivery  
• Laundry assistance especially for the homebound  
• Social network supports especially for the older residents  
Recovery Wellness Initiative (RWI):  In its 3rd year and recently awarded the state 
contract to establish a recovery center in our region, and also offering virtual and in -person 
Recovery  Cafes, community education, etc.  We are waiting for this funding which is $50,000 for 
Year One.  
Rural T ransportation Initiative:  Our nearly 8 year partnership with Eastern Maine 
Development  Corp to identify transportation needs and work to resolve them in the region.  Our 
survey is now out in the communities with flyers delivered to local towns by students i n the 
Positive Action Teams. The $700,000 state and federal funding includes the purchase of some 
electric small passenger vehicles which will, initially, be used to move people from home/work.  
Children’s Unmet Needs Fund:  Our earlier 'reason for being,' we support the needs of children 
that are unmet by existing resources.  
US DOE Youth Mentoring Initiative: A Congressionally Directed Award for 2023  will establish youth 
mentoring services for all area schools which are defined by them and guided by youth a dvisors.  
This funding totals $426,000.  We have applied for a 2nd CDS in the amount of $1,181,000 to 
continue and expand this work to include school faculty support and community education   about 
youth aspirations, resilience, and needs.   
Youth Services Wor kgroup/WCC Youth Workgroup/You MATTER!  A multi -year effort to coordinate 
non-profit agency youth services in the region and to expand services . One of the recent initiatives 
in planning is a student -led documentary that our CTE is leading on.  
Restoration o f in-county state services:  There are no state service offices physically in this region. 
We have conceptualized a model of one "state services" location with itinerant state agencies 
visiting on a routine schedule (DOL, DHHS, Public Health, DMV, etc.) rec ognizing we don't have the 
population base to justify a single office for any one agency.   
HHH and partners would, in response to this proposed design, ensure that advertising, 
transportation and other forms of assistance needed by residents  
to access any  of these services would be provided.  
 

