 
 
PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ feedingmaine.org 
May 17th, 2023 
Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine testimony to the Committee on Health and Human Services in support of 
LD 151 – An Act Regarding Child Welfare   
To Chairperson Meyer, Chairperson Baldacci, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services  
My name is Rebekah Lane and I am the Community Organizer for Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine. I am 
here today to express our support, and ask for your support, of LD 151 – An Act Regarding Child Welfare   
The mission of Good Shepherd Food Bank is to eliminate hunger in Maine by improving access to nutritious 
food for people in need, building strong community partnerships, and mobilizing the public in the fight to end 
hunger. Good Shepherd Food Bank works in partnership with nearly 600 organizations to help distribute food 
to community members in need. Our network of partner agencies includes food pantries, meal sites, senior 
centers, school programs, and healthcare facilities. In our work centering equity, we are increasingly working 
with communities of color to address food security in a culturally responsive way.  
We believe there is a solution to the problem of hunger in Maine. Working in partnership with the state 
legislature we can and will help reduce the impact of hunger in our state and make Maine a stronger, better 
place to work and live.  
As many, if not all, parents in our state can attest to, we are facing more and more challenges when it comes 
to ensuring that children and parents have access to necessary supports to survive, let alone thrive, and 
children in our state are the ones paying the cost. Just like the Maine Economic Development Strategy, 
focusing on a plan to address child welfare will give a roadmap to follow, as well as show children, parents, 
and families that Maine is invested in our children.  
We ask that you vote in support of LD 151.  
Sincerely, 
Rebekah Lane 
Community Organizer 
rlane@gsfb.org   
