Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
May 17, 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1 51 – An Act Regarding Child Welfare  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services : 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide information and our opposition to LD 151, An Act 
Regarding Child Welfare . The sponsor has proposed that this concept draft be amended to  “create 
a task force/commission to develop a strategic plan for the efficient operation of the Office of 
Child and Family Services.”  We are unclear how this is substantively different from LD 1754 , 
Resolve, to Establish the Commission to Study the Delivery of Services to Children and Families . 
 
As we expressed in our position on LD 1754, t he Department  of Health and Human Services has 
worked diligently over the last several years to e liminate barriers and silos and enable 
collaboration and efficiency between  individual  offices like the Office of Child and Family 
Services (OCFS) and across the Department .  
 
Collaboration is key to ensuring the well -being, safety, and prosperity of Maine families. 
The connections between OCFS’ work and that of other Offices are numerous. Some 
specific examples include:  
 
• OCFS’ work with MaineCare to ensure children and fam ilies access to behavioral 
health services through rate studies, efforts to expand evidence -based services, and 
the addition of new services to the MaineCare Benefits Manual  
• OCFS’ work with MaineCare on the SUD 1115 Waiver, expanding services for 
MaineCare  enrolled parents with SUD who are at -risk of or already involved with 
child welfare  
• OCFS’ work with MaineCare, OBH, and the MaineCDC on the MaineMOM 
project, seeking to improve care for pregnant and postpartum people with opioid 
use disorder  
• Coordination with OBH on ensuring that the Federal Mental Health Block Grant is 
used to improve mental health services for both children and adults  
• Coordination with OADS as youth with significant behavioral health needs 
transition to adulthood  
This list does not begi n to demonstrate the many ways that the work of OCFS is 
interconnected with that of other DHHS Offices. OCFS’ current positioning and structure  
allows for a better coordinated approach to serving children and families as the 
Commissioner’s Office ensures c ohesive and coordinated programs and initiatives to meet 
the needs of Mainers, including children and families.  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going 
forward. If you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Dr. Todd A. Landry   
Director  
Office of Child and Family Service s 

