                                                                     
Maine Mental Health Counselors Association 
 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Finance Services  
Cross Building, Room 220  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
Attn: Edna Cayford  
 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and esteemed members of the Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Finance Services,  
 
I am writing to you today to testify and implore your judicious support of LD 1304: A Resolve, to 
Establish the Task Force to Study Barriers to Achieving Behavioral Health Integration and Parity. 
 
I am Bethany Noel Leavitt, and I represent the Maine Mental Health Counselors Association, 
currently serving as the Legislative Chair on the Board of Directors. MEMHCA remains the only 
professional organization in Maine working exclusively on behalf of clinical mental health 
counselors, and all those we aim to serve. We represent nearly 2000 Clinical Mental Health 
Counselors in Maine, each holding the licensure titled: “Licensed Clinical Professional 
Counselor” (LCPC). An LCPC holds a Master’s or Doctoral Degree and is licensed to be able to 
assess, diagnose, and treat mental health concerns. 
 
MEMHCA is in unison with other large organizations representing behavioral health care 
professions such as NASW (National Assoc. of Social Workers, Maine Branch) and MePA (Maine 
Psychological Association) in recognizing the alarming need for a more integrated and 
streamlined behavioral healthcare system. During the current national mental health epidemic, 
waitlists for mental health service are reaching staggering numbers. Yet, there are many 
unnecessary barriers that prevent eligible individuals from becoming fully licensed to offer 
services, and those who are licensed face unnecessary barriers to offering services more widely. 
This results in a tremendous barrier for those seeking treatment to find prompt and 
appropriately qualified services. This leads to increased emergency (psychiatric and medical) 
expenses for the State of Maine, and many other public health consequences as mental health 
needs go unmet.  
 
The proposed task force would allow for the implementation of a more integrated behavioral 
health system, hence better quality and accessibility of service for patients, and a more efficient 
and just system of training, licensure, and reimbursement that will keep practitioners working 
in the State of Maine. The proposed task force would also serve to: 

 
• Identify and reduce barriers that are faced by those seeking to become clinicians and 
those who are seeking treatment, such as burdensome bureaucracy (inefficient and 
unduly complicated credentialing, licensing, billing procedures). This includes addressing 
unreasonable and severe barriers imposed by insurers upon both providers and 
patients. 
• Reducing the fragmentation and disparity between professions regarding 
reimbursement policies and billing codes, as well as fragmentation between information 
sharing systems 
• Reduce stigma and improve overall behavioral/mental health and medical outcomes. 
• Reduce costs, and improve quality and access to integrative behavioral and medical 
care. 
 
We are hoping to engage in what must become a strong, united collaboration to create a better 
quality of life for the populations we aim to serve, and the behavioral/mental health workforce 
in Maine and across the Nation.  
 
Thank you kindly for your time and consideration. 
 
In service, unity, and gratitude, 
 
Bethany Noel Leavitt 
Clinical Mental Health Counseling, M.S. 
Board of Directors, Legislative Chair - MEMHCA 
leavittb@husson.edu 
207-991-2628 
 
 
 
 
