4/6/2023  
 
Senator Donna Bailey   
Representative Anne Perry   
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services   
State House   
Augusta ME 04332   
  
Re:  LD 1304 Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study Barriers to Achieving  
Behavioral Health Integration and Parity  
 
Dear Representative Perry and Senator Bailey, and Representatives Brennan, Dhalac, and Madigan:   
 
I am writing to describe my  strong support for LD 1304.  I am a licensed psychologist  of over 15 years, the last eight 
of which have been in Maine.  I have worked in the Primary Care Behavioral Health model and trained family 
medicine residents since 2010.  Many of our graduates have gone on to live and work in Maine as primary care 
provider s in rural settings.   
 
Prior to the pandemic, private practices and comm unity mental health centers m aintained long waitlists and the 
pandemic has exacerbated this problem.  Anecdotally, one agency  in Augusta indicates their wait list is 
approximately one year, which severely limits the availability of care for those in need of initial encounters, crisis 
services, psychiatric diagnosis and treatment, and specialty mental health care .  Unfortunately,  this problem is not 
limited to one agency or practice and, nationally and locally, the challenge  of diagnosis and treatment of mental 
illness is met by primary care, rather than psychiatry.  One of the features of integrated primary care behavioral 
health  is that behavioral providers care exclusively for the patients of the primary care clinic in which they practice, 
and my practice is no exception. The clinical value of this model is manifold, and includes coordination of 
behavioral health care, including  service delivery, within the primary care setting to which most patients turn when 
community mental health fails to meet their need.  
 
As a clinical educator, I train both physicians and doctoral psychology students to work together in an 
interdisciplinary  setting for the good of Maine’s patient community.  However, the sustainability of this model is 
hamstrung by loss in revenue due to differences and deficiencies in reimbursement for aligned and 
complementary services.  This often results in multiple co -pays for the patient and billing “surprises,” and often 
forces the clinic to write off services due to the patient’s inability to pay.  From rules preventing reimbu rsement for 
two different encounters  per day, to providers in the community moving to a “cash -only” model of care out of 
exasperation related to billing, I have seen how our laws  limit critical access to those pursuing mental health care 
in Maine.  We are try ing to meet the needs of our comm unity  while al so trying to keep the lights on;  something 
has to change.   
 
In closing, I urge Representative Perry, Senator Bailey and the esteemed members of t he committee to support LD 
1304 .  The last three years have been remarkably hard and Mainers are  hurting; this bill wi ll go a long way in 
search of solutions.  Regardless of this bill’s  outcome  during the current session, these issues exist, they can be 
devastating to families and communities in Maine, and they are not going away.    
 
I regret that I  was not able to present my testimony in person, but should this committee or its members require 
further information or perspective from a content expert, I encourage you to reach out and I would be happy to 
assist.   
 
Corey D. Smith, PsyD.  
Augusta, ME  
402-689-1588  
Corey.smith@mainegeneral.org   
