 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
MDr. Kim Tousignant
Psychologist
Psychotherapy  Assessment
Consultation     Seminars
Advocacy
Mandated Treatment
Preschool & Children
Adolescents & Adults
Author
MAILING ADDRESS: 
PO Box 1694
Bucksport,  ME  04416
PRIMARY OFFICE
151 Main St., Suite 2
Bucksport,  ME 04416
(207) 944-8881
SATELLITE OFFICE
157 Park St., Suite 22
Bangor, ME 04401
(207) 944-8881
FAX:(207) 469-1932
dockimt@gmail.com
drkimtousignant1/24/23
Senator Donna Bailey 
Representative Anne Perry 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
State House 
Augusta ME 04332 
 
Re:  LD 1304 Resolve (H.P. 829), to Establish the Task Force to Study 
Barriers to AchievingBehavioral Health Integration and Parity
Dear Representative Perry and Senator Bailey, and Representatives 
Brennan, Dhalac, and Madigan: 
As a licensed psychologist in Maine, I am writing in support of this critical 
emergency legislation to establish a task force to study service barriers to 
behavioral health treatment. At a time when there is a serious shortage of 
mental health providers across the state, on the heels of a national 
pandemic, we have an unprecedented shortage of BH services for every 
sector of the population, from school children to the elderly.
I am the only psychologist in Independent Practice in the town of 
Bucksport, Maine. At least 75% of my client load is clients with MaineCare 
&/or Medicare. I want to share with you some of the challenges I 
encounter regularly, at this time, in trying to provide services to the 
mentally ill of my community 
I.MAINECARE: (I am still owed over $3500 from Jan 2023 & Feb 
2023)
 March 3rd I sent an initial request to my MaineCare liaison: Pamela 
Grotton  for guidance and help on how to correct billing procedures that 
changed significantly from January 1st 2023
Some of the responses I received included: 
A)From the back-up liaison (3/6) I received:
a)Depending on how you chose to bill with the new modifiers 
and rates it will depend on when those are paid. [my 
statement to this: I don’t get to choose how to bill, I am 
required to abide all their rules!]
b) IF you have claims that are paying $0 please send us 
some examples so we can triage the issue. [She 
emphasized the word IF. Why would I waste time trying to 
fix this if it were not true? And many other psychologists 
have faced the same issue. I am sure I am not the first to 
request clarification.
c)Right now we are seeking clarification on if the modifiers 
need to be added to the 1/1-2/19 Pas.[ I have yet (4/9/23) 
To hear from anyone about this.]
B)I didn’t hear from the from the designated liaison until March 
23 (20 days lost in trying to gain payment for services I 
already provided) at 3:51 pm. At 4:23 after providing the 
information she requested she replied:
a)There can be many reasons that claims deny or pay at $0 and with out 
claim #s that have denied or paid at $0 I am unable to assist you on how to 
fix those.

 
 
 
 y Response: 
Of course I know there are many reasons to deny. I am 
SOLEY asking you about this MaineCare snafu that is 
costing me thousands of dollars and that has not been 
clearly explained to anyone. I do not believe I asked 
you for any other information. Your comment of "inability to 
help" is not reasonable.  
b) She then requested every specific claim # that says PAID but the rate 
is wrong, and many say Paid at $0. 
1) She should have access to this information as she is the 
Mainecare billing  
liaison.  
2)  This amounted to 42 (forty two) unpaid claims from 1/1/23-
2/20/23. The labor on my part to clarify through Mainecare 
everything unpaid via the long claim number (i.e. 
23060W031121);  in addition to my billing process, my 
reconciliation process, trying to understand the new system when 
no real specific guidelines were given, has taken at least 3 full 
days (24 hours) on my part. 
3) As of Today 4/9/23 I am still owed over $3500 from Mainecare 
for Services I  
provided to clients 1/1/23-2/20/23. 
4) as a sole provider I can NOT shoulder this kind of debt and 
keep my doors  
open, as I have $1150 in office rent monthly.  Landlords won’t wait 
months to be  
paid.  
II MEDICARE: ( I have never been paid for at least 5 clients who switched over and 
got Advantage programs and it took months before I figured out what was happening. ) 
There were so many problems getting payment for sessions I had to teach clients about 
the different types of Medicare programs. Because their representative told them it is 
EXACTLY like Medicare (each client said exactly the same thing) clients didn’t think they 
had to advise me that they switched to an Advantage Plan. The following  comes from 
the document I created.   
I am 1st providing the most important statement : HERE IS A RECENT EXAMPLE:  
I have been a Medicare provider since 2013, and a MaineCare provider 
since 2004. And an Anthem provider since 2004.  
BUT…Anthem Advantage and Anthem Advantage Duo say I am NOT a 
provider for them. 
[I spent almost 3 hours and 11 calls trying to figure out why they 
don’t have me as a provider.  I was on hold multiple times and hung 
up on (we all know how these go).  They finally gave me a provider 
liaison person’s name and number. The number was disconnected, 
therefore I am not going to be able to fix this to get on the panel.] 
 
Other salient points from my document educating clients: 
 
 YOU need to be VERY CAREFUL in learning about these programs. 
HOW ADVANTAGE PLANS WORK: 
If you buy these plans they take your federal Medicare coverage away from you. 
You can no longer use your Medicare card or number.  
 Then they develop their own private plans (through companies like Humana, 
Aetna, Blue Cross/Blue Shield-Anthem, etc.).  You now use the Agency’s card.  
 
 
 
 A different  MEDICARE ADVANTAGE  program has some kind of DUO qualifier.  
HOW ADVANTAGE DUO PLANS WORK: 
If you buy these plans they take your federal Medicare coverage away from you 
AND your state Medicaid coverage (MaineCare) away from you.   You can no 
longer use your Medicare card or number. You can no longer use your 
MaineCare card or number.  
The Insurance Agencies develop their own private plans (through companies like 
Humana, Aetna, Blue Cross/Blue Shield-Anthem, etc.).  You now use the 
Agency’s card.  
LOTS OF PROBLEMS with ADVANTAGE and/or ADVANTAGE DUO plans.  
Over the last 2 years I have had a number of clients get these plans.  My clients 
have struggled to  understand what they cover, or what the requirements for 
coverage are.   Also clients seem to be told by the agent that it is “exactly like 
Medicare” or “nothing changes from Medicare”.   
You need to fully understand the Advantage plans are NOT exactly like 
Medicare. (for example Medicare requires no pre-authorization, but some of 
these plans do; Medicare copay may be $25, but Advantage plans might be $50 
or $75. Low income clients can not afford that!) 
The demands of having to apply for inclusion on the panels of Medicare Advantage and DUO 
programs, in addition to the brands regular insurance are too great of a burden. Therefore, I can 
NOT service these clients.  
  
III.   MAINE’S CRISIS SERVICES [while not specifically insurance related, these are ways the 
mental health system in Maine is failing those in crisis, with emotional pain and mental illness] 
1)  I recently called Crisis Services to pre plan the special treatment needs of my client, 
whom I expected to utilize Crisis more than usual. This was standard practice from 
2000 till about 2019. The person I spoke with had no clue what I was talking about. 
Turns out, with no notice to this psychologist (and likely many more), Crisis Services 
is no longer a place that clients can call and talk out their issues for 5-10 min. Their 
new mandate, inferred from the information I was provided,  is a 2 minute maximum 
time call providing a hook-up to a Crisis Provider, and mostly the client is required to 
go to ER before Crisis can talk to anyone.  
2) In the recent past I also had to talk to the Mental Health Liaison at the Bangor Police 
Dept.   The 1st time I called I left a message and NEVER received a call back on a 
time sensitive issue, i.e. my schizophrenic brother in his 50’s, who needs support, 
was beaten up severely (broken hip, leg, etc) by police instead of getting the mental 
health assistance he needed. I personally know that previous to the beatingt he 
Police Dept was aware of his mental health struggles. When a few weeks later I 
called back she answered, and stated, “ oh, I don’t check my email.”  Really??? How 
can a business run like this? Especially during time critical contacts. 
3) I have a client that had at least 8 suicide attempts in a 4 yr period. She had another 
attempt and I had to call emergency services, and she was admitted to Acadia 
Hospital. Her 6 month hospital experience was terribly traumatizing instead of 
helpful. The client spent her entire childhood in a horrendously abusive family, and 
therefore has a dissociative disorder.  I complained to the Vice President (Brent 
Scobie), yet the poor treatment continued. Her team was constantly threatening to 
send her to a homeless shelter.  For example staff at Acadia said,  “if you dissociate 
again (which providers  don’t understand, vilified and refused to learn about) you will 
be kicked out of the hospital”  Another time the head psychiatrist explained their 
position, “We have a 0 tolerance of self-harm here, so If she self-harms, she will be 
kicked out of the hospital” to the streets.   
 Prior to this case I was unaware the State of Maine has a Complex Case Unit 
(CCU).  I am immensely grateful the CCU accepted her case, because without them 
 
 
 
 I shudder to think what would have become of her. Acadia disrupted a referral to 
Dorthea Dix where this client had previously been safe before. We found a group 
home in So. Portland and the client wanted to go! But Acadia’s psychiatric care was 
so toxic that they took her aside privately, at least 2 times, and strongly pushed for 
her to NOT go to the group home. She has been at the fantastic group home since 
6/2022 and is making very good progress, as they wanted to learn how to help the 
client, and staff are all utilizing the strategies. She did end up in hospital again. The 
experience was so much more supportive of her needs. She was able to return to the 
group home less than 3 weeks later and made progress for safety while there.  
4) The BHP system in Maine (and many other states) is very broken. 1st, only children 
with MaineCare are eligible for these services. BHP wait lists are extensive. BHP 
supports are provided to the most disabled children of our state. YET…..the 
providers of these services often have the least education  (only HS) and are paid 
the very least of any mental health provider.  Honestly it should be the opposite. The 
most severely disturbed children in Maine should be serviced by the most advanced 
Mental Health providers because we have the knowledge to provide healing that may 
prevent future significant problems in adulthood, thereby saving the state the 
extremely expensive expenditures required to support a client over their entire life -
time (consider homelessness, prison/jails, mental health services, housing services, 
food stamps, MaineCare etc.).  
 
  
The unifying theme here is that Maine’s services to those people with Mental Illness, 
(often complicated by low-income insurances or no insurance) are the most vulnerable people in 
our state. And they are not able to access the services they deserve in a kind and just society. 
In my professional and personal opinion these examples make the State of Maine much more 
dangerous for clients with mental health problems and all Maine residents in general. Consider 
please these examples of  REDUCED lack of supports for the mentally ill here, instead of ideally 
developing MORE supports to help prevent things like Mass Shootings.  
 
I am asking for your support to develop this task force to identify the barriers that private and 
public 
insurance providers place on BH treatment services. Only by understanding these roadblocks in 
our 
insurance system can we improve access, encourage integration with primary care, and 
streamline our 
state’s ability to provide BH treatment to people of all ages. 
 
Also, I would like to be considered as a member on that task force.  
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Kim Tousignant, Psy.D. 
Psychologist, Maine License #PS1257 
NPI 1992870976 
 

