April 10, 2023 
 
Senator Donna Bailey  
Representative Anne Perry  
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
State House  
Augusta ME 04332  
  
Re:  LD 1304 Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study Barriers to Achieving 
Behavioral Health Integration and Parity 
 
Dear Representative Perry and Senator Bailey, and Representatives Brennan, Dhalac, and 
Madigan:  
 
Psychology Specialists of Maine, LLC, is the largest and the only private outpatient behavioral 
health group practice in Maine that exclusively employs doctoral level (Ph.D./Psy.D.) clinical 
psychologists and trains postdoctoral fellows. Our group consists of 34 psychologists and we are 
and expanding to include psychiatry (MD/DO) to accommodate the mental health needs of 
Maine residents.  
 
We are in support of this critical emergency legislation to establish a task force to study service 
barriers to behavioral health treatment in Maine. At a time when there is a serious shortage of 
mental health providers across the state, on the heels of a national pandemic, we have an 
unprecedented shortage of BH services for every sector of the population, from school children 
to the elderly.  
 
As founder and CEO of Psychology Specialists of Maine, I have engaged in national and local 
conversations about insurance roadblocks to behavioral health treatment. In my discussions 
with senior provide network representatives, it is clear they possess limited knowledge about 
the scientific research demonstrating efficacy of psychotherapy as well as the cost-savings 
provided by increasing BH access to address mental health issues and prevent more costly 
mental health and medical problems. Payors focus on financial benefits and overall cost, not on 
the mental health and wellbeing of their subscribers. However, they are responsive to data and 
would benefit from education and communicating with leaders in the BH field. We also see 
consistently high deductibles for out of network services which prevent some individuals from 
receiving the specialized care they need. Finally, many providers have left insurance panels due 
to poor service and nonpayment, with little recourse for their independent practices. Despite 
the obstacles, we recently had a positive experience with several payors who agreed to 
substantial increases in reimbursement for psychiatric services as a way to support our mission 
to build an insurance based psychiatric group in Maine. Moreover, one insurance company set 
up meetings between our group and two large medical practices in Maine as a way to 
encourage collaboration and increase access to mental health treatment. It is clear that payors 
are in a critical position to support and connect leaders in behavioral health to make 
meaningful changes to increase access to care. 
  
We are asking for your support to develop this task force to identify additional barriers that 
private and public insurance providers place on BH treatment services. Only by understanding 
these roadblocks in our insurance system can we improve access, encourage integration with 
primary care, and streamline our state’s ability to provide BH treatment to people of all ages.  
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Julie Quimby, Ph.D. 
Founder/ CEO, Psychology Specialists of Maine 
drquimby@psychologyspecialistsme.com  
207-607-4022 
 
 
 
 
