 
 
Committee on  Health Coverage, Insurance, and Finance  Services  
Cross Building, Room 220  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME  04333  
Attn: Edna Cayford  
 
Dear  Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and esteemed members of the Committee on  Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Finance  Services,  
 
I am here to testify today for the National Association of Social Workers Maine Chapter (NASW ME) in 
support of LD 1304: A R esolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study Barriers to Achieving Behavioral 
Health Integration and Parity.  NASW Maine represents the 7,000 licensed social workers in Maine, 
many of whom are behavioral health clinicians and case managers in Primary Care practices.  My 30+ 
years as a teacher of family medicine and behavioral health p roviders, an integrated behavioral health 
provider in a primary care practice , and a researcher informs my testimony.   
 
Between January 2016 and January 2017 , I was lead investigator on  a study to identify key drivers, 
restrainers , and solutions for an Optimal Integrated Behavioral Health in Primary Care (IBHPC) 
Workforce  in the six New England states . Participants included local, state and federal administrators; 
policy makers; payers; licensing board members; health care system administrators; trainers; 
educators and patients. 120 focus group participants i dentified drivers, restrainers and solutions  
related to infrastructu re, training, finances, quality and perce ptions .  Solution  strategie s included :  
• reducing bureaucracy (eg., credentialing, licensing, undo oversight)  
• reducing fragmentation (eg., establishing and financing a state convener/coordinating body)  
• streamlining r eimbursement policies to "level the playing field" among and between providers 
(eg., health and behavior codes across behavioral health disciplines, ensuring payment parity 
between medical and behavioral health providers)  
• streamlining behavioral health inf ormation sharing within and between primary care and IBHPC  
offices  and community BH systems   
• enhancing training of all health care team members to change processes and expectations  
• keeping patients and family at the center of care (eg., including them in planning efforts)  
 
The evidence  (Tice, 2016) , standards  (Joint Principles, 2014) , best practices  (Gerrity, 2016)  and state -
level solutions in other parts of the country (Block, 2018 , Tyler, 2017 ) exist to support a high -quality 
well-trained workforce th at improves access to behavioral health care, decreases stigma, and improves 
behavioral health and medical outcomes. IBHPC basically gets patients the right care, at the right time, 
by the right professional.   
 
NASW ME urges you to vote yes and support th is resolve and Task Force.  
 
 
 Sincerely,  
 
Julie M. Schirmer, LCSW, ACSW  
President, Board of Directors  
NASW Maine Chapter  
 
 
 
References:  
Block, R. Behavioral Health Integration and Workforce Development. Milbank Memorial Fund. May, 
2018.  Retrived from Milbank -Memorial -Fund -issue -brief -BHI-workforce -development -FINAL.pdf  
 
Gerrity, M, Evolving Models of Behavioral Health Integration: Evidence Update 2010 -2015. Milbank 
Memorial Fund. 2016. https://www.milbank.org/wp -content/uploads/201 6/05/Evolving -Models -of-
BHI.pdf  
 
The Working Party Group on Integrated Behavioral Healthcare: Baird, M., Blount, A., Brungardt, S., 
Dickinson, P., Dietrich, A., Epperly, T., Green, L., Henley, D., Kessler, R., Korsen, N. , McDaniel, S., Biller, 
B., Pugno, P., Roberts, R., Schirmer, J., Seymour, D., deGruy, F. The development of joint principles: 
integrating behavioral health care into the patient -centered medical home.  Ann Fam Med. 2014:183 -
85. doi: 10.1370/afm.1639.  http://www.annfammed.org/content/12/2/183.1.full  
      
Tice, J.A., Ollendorf, D.A., Reed, S.J., Shore, K.K., Weissberg, J., & Pearson, S.D. (2015). Integrating 
behavioral health into primary care: a technology assessment final report.  Institute for Clinical and 
Economic Review. Retrieved from  
https://icer -review.org/wp -content/uploads/2016/02/BHI_Final_Report_060215.pdf  
 
Tyler, E.T., Hulkower , R.L., Kaminski, J.W. Behavioral Health Integration in Pediatric Primary Care: 
Considerations and Opportunities for Policymakers, Planners, and Providers. Milbank Memorial Fund. 
March, 2017. https://www.milbank.org/wp -content/uploads/2017/03/MMF_BHI_REPORT_FINAL.pdf  
 
 
