 
 
 
Testimony Neither For nor Against  
 
LD 1 304, Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study Barriers to Achieving  
Behavioral Health Integration and Parity  
 
Kimberly Cook, Esq.  
April 1 7, 2023  
 
 
As Maine’s only nonprofit CO -OP health insurance company, we exist for the benefit of our Members 
and our mission which is to provide affordable, high quality benefits that promote health and wellbeing.  
Community Health Options has always worked to remove  barriers to  behavioral health care  for our 
Members and are fully committed to the letter and spirit of state and federal mental health parity 
requirements .  As evidence of this commitment,  until the Clear Choice  standards  became law, our plans 
offered the first three behavioral health visits each year  on a first dollar coverage basis (i.e., no cost 
sharing) to our members.  We recognize the critical importance of behavioral health care and are 
committed to being a partner in ensuring access to our Members and all Maine people.  
 
We listened carefully to the testimony of behavioral health providers and health systems to understand the 
concerns behind  this bill and its  focus on private health insurance barriers experienced by providers.  We 
noted their concerns regarding  cost sharing for behavioral health care, reimbursement rates  and prior 
authorization and credentialling processes as recurrent themes.   We also noted, as you repeatedly heard at 
the public hearing, one of the biggest challenges to access to behavioral health care in Maine, is the lack 
of providers across provider types from professional counsellors to psychiatrists to inpatient facilities .   
 
We believe it is critical that the full range of barriers be addressed if we are to truly seek integration of 
behavioral health and achieve mental health parity.  We strongly urge the committee to:  
 
1. broaden the scope of this bill to ensure the taskforce examines  all of the  major  barriers  faced 
by Maine people in accessing behavioral health care including :  
a. workforce shortages,  
b. inpatient facilities /beds  shortages ,  
c. public payor reimbursement rates  and administrative burdens , and  
d. barriers stemming from private insurance carriers .  
 
2. review two new laws  that the HCIFS committee endorsed just last year  that addressed cost 
sharing parity and credentialling concerns  and request the B ureau of Insurance brief the 
committee regarding these new laws and all of the work they and carriers have done to  
implement  these new laws.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Suggested Amendments  
 
The bill currently focuses narrowly on barriers experienced by providers from private health insurance 
administrative requirements and reimbursements.  As the committee is aware, the state regulated 
insurance market provides health coverage to less than 30 % of Maine people.  We don’t believe the 
barriers to access to behavioral health care can be solved by such a narrow focus.  
 
We recommend amending Section 5 . Duties  of the bill to include evaluating and making 
recommendations to address the following : 
 
1. barriers presented by a lack of the various types of licensed behavioral health providers needed to 
adequately serve our population and set a goal for the approximate number of providers needed in 
various regions of our state.  
2. barriers presented by the lack o f inpatient capacity for mental health and substance use treatment.  
3. barriers presented  by the lack of behavioral health providers willing to accept MaineCare rates . 
4. barriers presented by the lack of behavioral health providers willing to be part of health  insurance  
network s. 
5. the sufficiency of reimbursement rates by public and private payors to providers and inpatient 
facilities  
6. barriers presented by administrative req uirements such as credentialling, prior authorization, and 
MaineCare program requirements.  
 
We recommend amending Section 2. Task force membership  so that  the taskforce includes 
representatives from all of the stakeholders involved including consumers, providers, and payors.  From 
the payor communities, we believe it is important to include:  
 
1. A representative from the Office of Maine Care  
2. A representative f rom a carrier who offers insurance in the individual, small group and large 
group markets ; and  
3. A representative from a purchaser/self -insured organization  
 
 
New Laws  
 
LD 1822:  Cost sharing parity between primary and behavioral health care  
Last year , the HCIFS  Committee considered  and unanimously e ndorsed  LD 1822, An Act To Improve 
Access to Behavioral Health Services by Limiting Cost Sharing by Insurers  sponsored by Representative 
Victoria Morales .  This bill became law  last year  (PL 2021 c. 683 ), with certain provisions only taking 
effect as plans renew in 2023.    We urge the committee to review th is new law and consult with the 
Bureau of Insurance regarding their implementation through market conduct exams  and mental health 
parity reporting  by carriers .   
 
To validate carrier compliance  with mental health parity laws , the Bureau of Insurance , in the fall of 
2022 , required carriers to submit a comparative analysis including  written responses along with associated 
data as evidence for mental health and substance use disorder benefits as compared to how carriers design 
and apply medical and surgical bene fits.  
 
 
 
The reports from each carrier provide detailed data and responses so that any potential barriers or 
discrepan cies between behavioral health  benefits as compared to medical and surgical benefits  will be 
detected . If discrepancies are noted, it is e xpected , pursuant to 24-A MRS A Section  4320 -T, that the 
Bureau of Insurance would take enforcement action.  
 
LD 1196:  Credentialling  
Also  last year , the HCIFS committee tightened the timelines regarding credentialling  in L.D. 1196 , An 
Act Regarding Reporting on Spending for Behavioral Health Care Services and To Clarify Requirements 
for Credentialing by Health Insurance Carriers  sponsored by Representative Sam Zager.  This bill also 
became law last year  (PL 2021 c. 603) and address ed concerns that credentialling decisions were taking 
too long, especially during  the COVID pandemic .  During consideration of this bill, it was noted that 
Chapter 850 of the  Bureau of Insurance regulation s requires carriers to independently verify certain  
information  such as license status, hospital privileges, etc  which was not required in other states and was 
adding to the length of  time to credential providers .  Hence,  the Committee  included in LD 1196  
unallocated language  direct ing the Bureau of Insurance to : 
 
review the requirements in Bureau of Insurance rule Chapter 850, Health Plan 
Accountability, related to the verification of information on credentialing applications from 
health care practitioners and determine whether amendments must be made to the rule’s 
requirements in order to improve the ability of carriers to make a credentialing decision 
within the 60 -day period in accordance with the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 24 -A, 
section 4303, subsection 2, paragraph D without an impact on quality standards or 
accreditation standards.  
 
 
Our Behavioral  Health Practices  
 
Reimbursements:   Health Options values the importance of equal access to behavioral  health treatment 
of Mainers. This includes equitable reimbursement for behavioral health  providers in keeping with  other 
providers .  
Our Network:   We maintain  a robust Behavioral Health  provider  network  and do not limit  the number of 
providers in  our network . Given the shortage of behavioral  health specialists  in Maine, if  a member 
cannot identify an in -network provider or facility, we work to facilitate  the member ’s access to care with 
an out of network provider . 
Cost -sharing:   Health Options complies with the standard c o-payments  as determined by the Bureau of 
Insurance  Clear Choice design standards and in compliance with  cost sharing parity required by  LD 1822.  
As noted above, prior to these requirements in law, Community Health Options went above and beyond 
state and federal requirements to provide the first three behavioral health visits each year with no cost to 
our members.  
No prior authorization for office visits:   Health Options do es not impose limits on the number of visits 
or prio r authorizations  for behavioral health office visits.  
 
 
We appreciate the Committee’s consideration of our comments .   
