northernlighthealth.org
This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
 
 
Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 1304 Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study Barriers to Achieving  
Behavioral Health Integration and Parity 
 
Testimony in Support 
April 11, 2023  
 
Senator Bailey , Representative  and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services Committee, my name Lisa Harvey-McPherson RN.  I am providing 
testimony on behalf of Northern Light Health and our member organizations speaking in 
support of  this bill.  Northern Light Health member organizations include 10 hospitals 
located in southern, central, eastern and northern Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air and 
ground ambulance, behavioral health, addiction treatment, pharmacy, primary and 
specialty care practices and a state-wide home care and hospice program.  Ninety three 
percent of Maine’s population lives in the Northern Light Health service area.  Northern 
Light Health is also proud to be one of Maine’s largest employers with more than 10,000 
employees statewide. 
 
Maine’s health care system is working to recover from the impact of the COVID-19 
pandemic.  Behavioral health service providers are particularly challenged to meet the 
significant increase in demand for behavioral health services.  Telehealth has 
significantly improved access but long waits for services do exist.  Behavioral health 
workforce shortages impact the full scope of Maine’s population – children to older 
adults.   
 
Now is the time for a legislative task force to be formed  to study barriers imposed by 
insurers and experienced by providers of behavioral health services.  Every barrier we 
can remove from the system will increase our capacity to care for the people of Maine.   
 
As you consider this legislation we do have one change that we strongly encourage the 
committee to add to the bill.  Section 2 – Task Force Membership identifies specific 
provider types for membership.  We recommend that the bill be amended to add an 
independent psychiatric hospital representative to the task force. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our support for this important legislation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
