"' 
Officers" 
Dave McCluskey, President 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1“ Vice-President 
Day One 
Bob Descoteaux, 2-" Vice- 
President 
laineGenera| Behavioral Heali 
Kara Hay, Secretary 
Penquis CAP Inc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
roostook Mental Health Centt 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 
"' 
Board Members "' 
Adcare Educational Institute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, Inc. 
idroscoggin Home & Healthca 
Assistance Plus 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co~occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties 
ommunity Caring Collaborativ 
ommunity Health & Counselir 
COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine 
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
Milestone Recovery 
NFI North, Inc. 
Northern Light/Acadia 
>ortland Recovery Community 
Center 
Pathways of Maine 
Rumford Group Homes 
Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities 
Sweetser 
'iCounty Mental Health Servici 
Wellspring, Inc. 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Services Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
Testimony in Support of LD 1304 
" 
Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study Barriers to 
Achieving Behavioral Health Integration and Parity" 
Sponsored by Representative Perry 
April 11, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services. My name is 
Malory Shaughnessy, I am a resident of Westbrook and the Executive Director of 
the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. 
With over 35 members, the Alliance is the statewide association for Maine's 
licensed safety net community based mental health and substance use treatment 
agencies. Our member agencies employ nearly 6,000 Maine people, _who in 2022 
provided treatment and services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and 
children. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of policies and practices 
that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care 
system. 
I am here on behalf of the Alliance to speak strongly in support of this legislation, 
LD 1304, Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study Barriers to Achieving’ 
Behavioral Health Integration and Parity. This legislation would establish a task 
force to study the barriers imposed by insurers (both public and private payors) to 
the delivery of mental health services that impact both patients and treatment 
providers. The task force would also study how these insurance barriers affect the 
integration of primary and behavioral healthcare. 
According to the Federal 2008 Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act, and 
the Affordable Care Act, most health plans are required to provide physical and 
mental health benefits equally, yet insurers are still not covering mental 
healthcare in the same manner because of additional criteria of how patients may 
qualify to receive coverage for services, as well as added levels of authorizations 
involved in mental healthcare versus primary healthcare. 
The goal of this legislation would be to reduce costs and broaden access to 
behavioral health services and integrated care. This is extremely timely as we 
continue to see increased demand for these services post pandemic. 
According to a recent Kaiser Family Foundation and CNN survey, concerns about 
mental health and substance use remain elevated three years after the onset of 
the COVID-19 pandemic, with 90% of U.S. adults believing that the country is' 
facing a mental health crisis. The pandemic has affected the public's mental 
health and well-being in a variety of ways, including through isolation and 
loneliness, job loss and financial instability, and illness and grief. 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 "' 
Phone 207.621.8118 "‘ Fax 207.621.8362 "' 
theAllianceMaine.org
Additionally, drug overdose deaths have sharply increased — largely due to fentanyl - and aftera 
brief period of decline, suicide deaths are once again on the rise. As the end of the declaration of the 
public health emergency nears — on May 11, 2023 — many people continue to grapple with worsened 
mental health and well-being and many face barriers to care. 
In Maine, and at the Alliance, we have seen several agencies close down services they once offered, 
and reduce access to others because of workforce shortages, and staff loss due to burnout. Some of 
the burnout is fallout from the pandemic, but another reason that is often sited for staff burnout is 
the growing administrative burden of paperwork and reporting that edges out the time to actually 
perform the therapeutic services clinicians are there to provide. When one has to spend more time 
filing paperwork than providing care, it can take a toll. 
ln Maine, we have the MaineCare carve-out, the additional review and authorization process 
conducted by KEPRO that is only required for behavioral health services. The extra authorization 
steps place an undue burden on agencies providing care in Maine's safety net for mental health and 
substance use services. The commercial insurance carve-outs for behavioral health billing and 
credentialing also place an undue burden on providers and create barriers to integrated care. 
Many behavioral health providers in Maine refuse to accept MaineCare in part due to this added 
administrative burden, leaving our community-based agencies as the main providers of care asa 
safety net for those struggling with mental health and substance use challenges. 
The task force created by this legislation will study these barriers imposed by insurers and 
experienced by providers; and develop a plan to address and remove barriers to improve access to 
behavioral health treatment and parity. 
l would be happy to answer any questions you have for me and to bring any other information you 
need for the work session on this bill. 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 "' 
Phone 207.621.8118 "‘ Fax 207.621.8362 "' 
theAllianceMaine.org
