School of Social Work 
MAINE'S LAND GRANT AND SEA GRANT UNIVERSITY 
A Member of the University of Maine System 
 
 
 
Testimony in Support of 
 
LD 1304: Resolve to Establish the Task Force to Study Barriers to Achieving Behavioral 
Health Integration and Parity 
 
Sandra Butler, PhD and Jeff Hecker, PhD 
April 11, 2024 
 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, 
 
We are Jeff Hecker, Professor of Psychology and Sandy Butler, Professor of Social Work, Co-
Directors of the Rural Integrated Behavioral Health in Primary Care (RIBHPC) program at the 
University of Maine.  We both live in Orono. We provide this testimony in support of LD 1304, 
which we believe is an important step towards addressing the crisis in behavioral health care 
facing our State. 
 
We received funding the for the RIBHPC from the Health Resources and Services 
Administration (HRSA) of the US Department of Health and Human services nearly two years 
ago.  The purpose of the project is to train clinical psychology doctoral students and master’s 
level social work students to function effectively in integrated health teams in the rural regions of 
our State.  This is a four-year project, and we expect to graduate 87 students, over that time, who 
will be well prepared to meet the mental health needs of our communities. 
 
It is no secret that Maine is very challenged by the dearth of mental health clinicians; this is 
particularly true in rural areas where individuals face long wait times for services due to the 
shortage of workers.  The lack of treatment can have devastating consequences for individuals, 
their families, and the communities where they live.  Our students graduate well prepared to 
work with other health professionals to holistically provide behavioral health care to some of the 
Maine’s most vulnerable populations.  We should work to eliminate any obstacles that exist 
preventing those services from being provided.  The Task Force developed through LD 1304 will 
gather critical information regarding barriers related to insurance policies and provide 
recommendations on how to remove those barriers for individuals seeking behavioral health 
care. 
 
Most of our students are committed to staying in Maine and working in their rural communities.  
We should make it as easy as possible for them to be able to help Mainers experiencing 
emotional and mental distress. 
 
We hope you will support LD 1304 so crucial data on barriers can be gathered and analyzed and 
a path forward determined.  The findings of this task force and the actions taken on their 
recommendations have the potential to ameliorate the health and wellbeing of the many 
individuals struggling to get the mental health services they need. 
 5770 Social Work Building
Orono, ME 04469-5770
Tel. 207-581-2389  Fax 207 581-2396
http://www.ume.maine.edu/soclwork/
