 
Testimony of Sarah Calder, MaineHealth 
In Support of LD 1304, “Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study 
Barriers to Achieving Behavioral Health Integration and Parity” 
Tuesday, April 11, 2023 
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, I am Sarah Calder, Senior 
Government Affairs Director at MaineHealth, and I am here to testify in support of LD 1304, 
“Resolve, to Establish the Task Force to Study Barriers to Achieving Behavioral Health 
Integration and Parity.” 
As part of our vision of “Working Together so Our Communities are the Healthiest in America,” 
MaineHealth provides a range of behavioral health services throughout our footprint. These 
range from community based outpatient therapy, medication management, substance use 
treatment and care management to inpatient treatment in four community hospitals and Spring 
Harbor Hospital. We have also integrated more than 75 behavioral health clinicians in over 70 
primary care and specialty medical care practices across the MaineHealth system, and were able 
to serve over 15,000 people last year using this integrated care model. 
As you may know, the pandemic exacerbated a pre-existing crisis in Maine’s behavioral health 
system, often referred to as “the shadow pandemic.” We are experiencing the effects of this crisis 
acutely in our Emergency Departments, though they are in no way equipped to meet the needs of 
children and adolescents with behavioral health needs. Just last year alone, 435 children and 
adolescents languished in MaineHealth Emergency Departments for an average of 5.5 days 
awaiting appropriate services. 
It is an unfortunate reality that MaineCare is the largest payor of behavioral health services, and 
because the reimbursement rates have been chronically low, many community-based services 
maintain long wait lists or are simply non-existent. Without the lower level of care available in 
the community, people with behavioral health needs, particularly children, languish in our 
Emergency Departments for days and weeks, or are “stuck” in our in-patient hospitals, like 
Spring Harbor, because the next appropriate lower level of care (for example, residential 
services) is not available.  
And when services are covered by commercial insurance, there are often significant barriers 
imposed that limit or delay access to care, like credentialing delays, prior authorization burdens, 
and higher co-pays. For these reasons, we strongly support the intent of the legislation before 
you today. At a time when the need has never been greater, we need to work collaboratively to 
remove administrative barriers and increase access to care.  
Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.  
 
