:' 
. . . . L, V 
wﬁ, 
g g _ ,_ 2] Gabriel Drzve, Augusta, Mame 04330 ,
_ 
.. (207) 622-9675
> 
K Visit 0zn'webs1'te: www.mainea ﬂcio.org -1 - ' 
MAINE AFL CIO .- 
A Union of Unions Standing for Mame Workers 
.»*\ 
President Vice President Secretary Treasurer 
Cynthia PI1 inney Pat Carleton Doug Born 
Testimony of Maine AFL-CIO Legislative & Political Director, Adam Goode, in Opposition to L.D. 1272, " An 
Act to Index Unemployment Beneﬁts to the Unemployment Rate” 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor &: Housing, my name 
is Adam Goode. I’m the Legislative and Political Director of the Maine AFL-CIO. We represent 40,000 working 
people in the state of Maine. We work to improve the lives and working conditions of our members and all working 
people. We testify in opposition to LD 1272. 
This bill renames the Employment Security Law the Reemployment Assistance Program and cuts the current maximum 
number of weeks of unemployment insurance from 26 to just 12 weeks if the state average unemployment rate is 5.5% 
or below. The bill would allow for a maximum of 20 weeks of beneﬁts, which would only be received if Maine’s 
average unemployment rate is over 9%. This would result in a 6 to l4 week cut in the number of weeks an unemployed 
worker can receive unemployment beneﬁts. 
It is important to have a basic understanding of who is most impacted by a cut to the number of weeks an unemployed 
workers can receive unemployment insurance. To qualify for unemployment insurance, a Worker must have lost their 
job through no fault of their own, must “be able to Work, available to work, and actively seeking work” , and have 
earned a certain amount of money prior to becoming unemployed. Unemployment does not cover people who leavea 
job voluntarily. Passing this bill would make life harder for working people who have played by the rules and lost their 
job through no fault of their own. 
While beneﬁts are ﬁrnded by taxes employers pay to our federal and state government, the funding is generally 
regarding as falling on workers based on the theory that the dollars employer pay in taxes would otherwise go to 
workers’ paychecks. Efforts to make it harder to access these funds, which typically only replace about half ofa 
worker’s previous wages, essentially prevent people from receiving wealth they have created that was set aside for their 
potential unemployment scenario.1 ’6 
You have already heard our testimony this session on Maine’s abysmal recipiency rate. Currently only one out of every 
four unemployed Workers received unemployment insurance in Maine? Cutting 14 weeks of beneﬁts would make that 
number worse. These bills would make Maine an outlier, as only 6 states vary weeks of unemployment based on 
unemployment rates.3 Just 7 states provide less than 26 weeks of unemploymentf ‘ 
‘Chad Stone and William Chen, “Introduction to Unemployment Insurance, ” Center On Budget and Policy Priorities, July 30, 2014, 
https://www.cbpp.org/research/introduction-to-unemployment-insurance 
2United States Department of Labor; Unemployment Insurance Chartbook; Recipiency Rate by State, 
https1//www.maine.gov!labor/cwri/ui.html 
3https://oui.doleta.gov/ ‘unemploy/pdf/uilawcompar/2020/monetary.pdf (see table 3- l2) 
4“Policy Basics: How Many Weeks of Unemployment Compensation Are Available? ” Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, April 27, 2021, 
https://www.cbpp.org/research/economy/how-many-weeks-of-unemployment-compensation-are-available 
5Josh Mitchell, “Who Are the Long-Term Unemployed, ” Urban Institute, July 2013, 
https://www.urban.org/sites/default/ti les./publication/2391 1/'4 I 2885-Who-Are-rhe-Long-Term-Unemployed-.PDF 
“Kevin J. Murphy, “The impact of unemployment insurance taxes on wages,” Labour Economics 14 (3) (2007): 457-484, available at 
hrtps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abslpii/S0927537106000078.
Tying access to unemployment insurance to the rate of unemployment unfairly harms unemployed workers because it 
ignores that experience with job loss doesn’t vary solely based on the rate. Other factors play a big role in how longa 
person remains unemployed, including education levels, race, disability, and others.5 To only use the overall 
unemployment rate for all people ignores the special circumstances of large numbers of people who may be 
unemployed for longer periods. 
Working people who have suffered job loss will not magically ﬁnd work just because they lose beneﬁts at 12 weeks, 
regardless of the unemployment rate. An unemployed person already must meet requirements regarding their 
availability and ability to work and be actively seeking work. Should the committee go forward with this bill, they will 
effectively ignore all of the other factors impacting someone’s ability to ﬁnd work outside of the unemployment rate. 
Black workers make up 22.6 percent of the long-term unemployed and 15.0 percent of newly unemployed workers. 
Single parents represent 13.3 percent of the long-term unemployed but only 7.6 percent of the employed. These are two 
of the many factors the committee would be ignoring if you went forward with this bill and narrowly tied duration of 
beneﬁts to the unemployment rate. 
We urge you to vote against LD 1272.
