M a i n e c e n r Street: 1 West“o4/Eig5ﬁt: rtPE| ll:l€52(4€lE§€ 
I I L S3 
-I Economic Policy 2“.::§.,?:.: 
Testimony in opposition to LD 1272, “An Act to Index Unemployment Benefits to the 
Unemployment Rate" 
Arthur Phillips, Analyst, Maine Center for Economic Policy 
April 6, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of thejoint Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing, my name is Arthur Phillips, and I am an analyst at the Maine Center for 
Economic Policy. I am here to testify in opposition to LD 1272, "An Act to index 
Unemployment Benefits to the Unemployment Rate." 
This bill would rename our unemployment insurance program the Reemployment 
Assistance Program and significantly cut the resources workers can count on if they lose 
theirjob, including at times of high unemployment. 
Currently, workers can access up to 26 weeks of unemployment insurance. Under this 
proposal, if our state were to experience widespread, long-term unemployment the likes of 
which we saw during the Great Recession, workers would be eligible for at least six fewer 
weeks of benefits than they currently are. if unemployment in Maine were double its 
current rate, under this proposal workers would be eligible for less than half their current 
benefits. 
it is important to highlight that economic research shows more expansive unemployment 
benefits have minimal impact on labor force participation but significant impacts on 
aggregate demand and economic activity. ‘ We recently saw a natural experiment on this 
subject, when roughly half of US states allowed enhanced federal unemployment benefits 
to expire while other states maintained them. in the states that terminated enhanced 
unemployment, there was little to no impact on employment. One study found that ending 
enhanced pandemic benefits was associated with slightly increased employment, very 
small gains in income from work, and significant cuts to personal spending and 
consumption in local economies. “ 
Unemployment insurance helps sustain local economies, including those which are 
experiencing higher than average rates ofjoblessness. This is particularly important whena 
city or region's larger employers downsize or close altogether. While the current statewide 
unemployment rate is a historically low 2.8 percent, it is a full 3 percentage points higher in 
Washington County (5.8 percent). Aroostook, Hancock, Piscataquis, and Somerset counties 
also have elevated unemployment rates.“‘ This bill would harm all unemployed workers, 
Board of Directors 
Barbara Burt, Chair Sandra Butler Stacy Mitchell 
Lucy Van Hook, Vice-Chair l\/laulian Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchins Lee Webb 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica Maurer
but it would disproportionately harm those who live in rural areas and likely have negative 
spillover effects in those communities. 
The overarching problem our state must solve is how to keep the workers we have while 
attracting new workers to come to Maine. We can do this by raising wages and investing in 
supports that enable more people to enter and stay connected to the workforce. Cutting 
critical supports for workers when they lose theirjobs through no fault of their own would 
harm current workers, undermine their readiness to get back on the job when the 
economy recovers, and take us in the opposite direction we want to go. 
For these reasons, we ask you to vote against LD 1272. 
“Unemployment insurance Generosity and Aggregate Employment," Christopher Boone, Arindrajit Dube, Lucas 
Goodman, Ethan Kaplan, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol 13, No 2, May 2021, available at 
https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/pol.20160613 
" "Early Withdrawal of Pandemic Unemployment Insurance: Effects on Employment and Earnings," AEA Papers and 
Proceedings, Vol 112, May 2022, available at https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/pandp.20221009 
“l Unemployment and Labor Force, Maine Department of Labor, Center for Workforce Research and Information, 
https://wwvv.maine.gov/labor/cwri/laus.html
