_ STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR 
EJQQ‘ 54 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, l\/lAll\ll<l 04333-0054
5 
states?» 
JANET T. MILLS LAURA A. FORTMAN 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Laura Boyett, Bureau of Unemployment Compensation 
Maine Department of Labor 
In Opposition to LD 1272, An Act to Index Unemployment Benefits 
to the Unemployment Rate 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Public Hearing, April 6, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. I am Laura Boyett, Director of the Bureau of Unemployment 
Compensation at the Maine Department of Labor. I am here to testify in opposition to LD 1272, ”An 
Act to Index Unemployment Benefits to the Unemployment Rate." 
The bill uses the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate as issued by the U.S. Department of Labor for 
the 3-month period ending September 30"‘ each year. This rate is typically issued between October 20 
to 27*“ so we assumed it would go into effect for new initial claims established on or after November 
1st each year to ensure that we have received this information. However, the seasonally adjusted rate 
is a rolling 12-month (4 quarter) period and is designed to temper or smooth out the volatility of 
unadjusted rates that can occur month to month. 
If this proposal had been in effect between 2002 — 2022, a period that included a mild economic 
downturn in 2001 (March through November), the Great Recession (December 2007 —June 2009), and 
the Pandemic Emergency beginning in February 2020, the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate 
would have been 5.5% or less in 14 of the 21 years, limiting the number of available benefit weeks to 
12. Of further concern, even though the Great Recession was considered a deep recession, the 
seasonally adjusted unemployment rate did not reflect the economic reality experienced in Maine until 
the fall of 2009, when it jumped from 5.5% to 8.5%. Similarly, while the level of unemployment that 
hit Maine starting in March 2020 was the highest ever experienced, the seasonally adjusted 
unemployment rate would not have increased the number of unemployment benefit weeks available 
until November. Individuals who established claims prior to November 1, 2020, would have only been 
eligible for the 12 weeks. Additionally, even though Extended Benefits (EB) had already gone into 
effect, these individuals could only have received 6 weeks of EB as a person can only collect 50% of 
what they receive in regular unemployment benefits under the extended program. Under current law, 
a person would have been able to collect up to 13 weeks of Extended Benefits. In addition to reducing 
access to critically needed benefits to individuals during periods of often severe periods of 
unemployment, the potential delay that occurs by indexing available unemployment benefits to the 
seasonally adjusted unemployment rate may not align with actual economic conditions statewide, and 
l’l’lON[i: (207) 623-7900 TTY users <:Illl\l;1ili£ “iiQl'I\,* 721 FAX: (207) Z87»5Z9Z 
'1‘*e.\1aineD<>pai ‘Er1’\}t>[i>( ‘Ig§(%)£i €S€)({Ll1L() ‘7;')i)z{!!i£ neipioymeniand programs. 
‘auxiliary aids and sun s IIL at iilxble 1,2 n reques t snclitiiuais w it dl\1")lli{ e<,
significantly undermines the ability of the Unemployment Insurance Program to function as an 
economic stabilizer for business and communities as it was designed to do. 
An additional concern is that while the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate is a statewide figure, 
the actual unemployment rate can vary significantly from county to county. To illustrate, county rates 
are not seasonally adjusted. Maine's unadjusted unemployment rate for February 2023 was 3.1% but 
county rates for the same month ranged for a low of 2.2% in Cumberland County to a high of 5.8% in 
Washington County. If the number of available benefit weeks were tied to a seasonally adjusted 
unemployment rate for the state, available weeks might be limited at 12 weeks because the State rate 
is 5.5% or lower, yet one or more counties may be experiencing unemployment at a rate higher than 
5.5% and would be impacted harder than other counties by this proposal. A comparison of counties 
using estimated seasonally adjusted county unemployment rates between 2009 — 2022; identified 11 
Counties that would have lost weeks of benefit availability using the statewide seasonally adjusted 
unemployment rate proposal in LD 1272. The 11 Counties include: Androscoggin, Aroostook, Franklin, 
Hancock, Lincoln, Oxford, Penobscot, Piscataquis, Somerset, Waldo, and Washington. This proposal 
appears to adversely impact rural counties, where the time it takes an individual living there to find 
another job that is a good fit, is generally longer. 
The proposal as written also eliminates dependency allowance as a supplemental benefit received by 
the individual filing a claim. The maximum benefit amount (MBA) an individual could receive and their 
weekly benefit amount (WBA), are calculated from their base period earnings. Dependency allowance 
is a supplemental allowance determined separately. However, under this proposal, dependency 
allowance becomes part ofthe calculation of the potential maximum benefit a person might receive. 
For instance, if the seasonally adjusted rate is 5.5%, the maximum amount of benefits a person could 
receive including dependency allowance, cannot exceed 12 times their established weekly benefit 
amount under LD 1272. An individual who qualifies for dependency allowance may receive an 
increased weekly benefit early in their claim series but will reach their maximum benefit limit sooner 
than a claimant who does not have dependents as the number of weeks of potential benefits available 
is reduced. 
The Maine Unemployment lnsurance Program currently pays up to 26 weeks of unemployment 
benefits. lt is not a uniform 26 weeks across all individuals filing claims, benefits are indexed to an 
individual's base period earnings. If collecting a full weekly benefit each week a claim is filed, the 
number of weeks a person might receive benefits ranges between 15 and 26 weeks in a benefit year. 
This is the most common approach among states. In New England, only one state indexes benefit 
week availability to unemployment rates — Massachusetts. However, their method is quite different 
from the current proposal, Massachusetts sets the maximum benefit availability at 26 times the weekly 
benefit amount during periods of low to moderate unemployment and increases it to 30 weeks during 
high unemployment periods. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have 
now or at a future work session. 
PB-2
