TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST L.D. 296 
“Act to Ensure Municipalities Receive a Higher Percentage of All-terrain Vehicle 
Registration Fees to Cover Increased Expenses" 
Presented by Representative NEWMAN of Belgrade. Cosponsored by Representatives: 
PARRY of Arundel, THORNE of Carmel. 
DATE OF HEARING: April Z4, Z023 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Tim Peabody, Deputy Commissioner of the Department 
of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, neither for nor against 
L.D. 296. 
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208. This bill would ensure municipalities 
receive a higher percentage of income from all~terrain vehicle registration fees to cover 
increased expenses. 
The department spoke to the bill sponsor and our understanding is that the Town of Belgrade 
asked the sponsor to bring this forward due to concerns over the process time to register ATVs 
and the increased hourly wages being paid to clerks. They recognized that there had been an 
increase in the registration fee for ATVs but did not see an increase in their agent portion. They 
feel the process time is no longer worth the agent fee of $2 for a new registration and a $1 for 
renewals. We provided the Belgrade Town Clerk information/background on the 2020 AW Task 
Force Report that requested to have a registration increase to support the maintenance of the 
trails and did not address the agent fee portion of the registration or any change in the existing 
split of the registration fee. 
lFW has discussed this bill with staff at DACF and we all agree that attempting to modify the ATV 
registration fee now when it just increased significantly in 2021 would not be supported. 
However, we do feel that a discussion is warranted in reference to a possible agent fee increase 
because the current fees have not been increased in 20 + years 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
