 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 576 (NFNA)   
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 576, An Act to Facilitate Communication Between Pro Se Defendants and Assistant 
District Attorneys  
 
DA: March 8, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission respectfully submit the following  testimony 
neither for nor against LD 576.   
 
 CLAC recognizes that the prohibition ag ainst speaking with unr epresented defendants has 
resulted in confusion and contributed to slowing the resolution  of lower -level cases that might 
otherwise be resolved, in some  cases by diversion or dismi ssal, absent the prohi bition.    It has had 
the unintended cons equence of limiting information  to defendant s in some cir cumstances, as 
prosecutors indicate that they are prohibited from responding to even routine inquiries made by 
defendants to their offices prior to arraignment.   Although there appears to be no evidence of 
prosecutors coercing  defendants to obtai n convictions, some CLAC members are con cerned that 
defendants are not fully aware  of collateral consequences  of ev en minor convictions , for example, 
that specific c rimes  can be used to enhance subsequent charges or may result in license s uspensions .   
Accordingly, while some CLAC members support wholesale rep eal of section 815, others would  
rather limit  the applicability of the prohibition and further strea mline the process , and thus welcome 
the opportunity  to discuss  modifications  of the proposal.   
 
 As a technical point, CLAC notes that the bill title refers only to “Assistant District 
Attorneys. ”   The curre nt law, and thus the repeal of it  as well , appl y to all  Maine prosecutors , 
including those within  the Office of Attorney General  and elected District Attorn eys.     
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R. S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court a dministration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect  to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
