’ 
. 
STATE OF MAINEp 
KATHRYN SLATTERYi 
"' 
j- 
_A 
R. CHRISTOPHERALMY 
DISTRICTI ' 
Drsrmcrv 
JACQUELINE SARTORIS ,3_ 
_ NATASHA IRVING 
DISTRICTII . 
p .1 DISTRICTVI
I 
. 
it 
NEIL MCLEAN ,1 ,- 
- ROBERT GRANGER 
Drsrarcr III _ -< 
. D1srR1cTVII » 
MAEGHAN MALONEY , , I Tom) R. COLLINS' 
. D]s1'R1(;'1'IV » ' 
Drsmrcr VIII 
' S 
I ' “M Y 
AARON FREY 
MAINE PROSECUTORS ASSOCIATION omcr or me A'r'r0RNEY cmm 
AND OFFICE orrrm ATTORNEY GENERAL 
An Act to Facilitate Communication Between Pro Se Defendants and Assistant District Attomeys 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Public Hearing Date: March 8, 2023» 
Testimony in Support of LD 576 _i
_ 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members ‘of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary. My name is Shira Burns and I represent the Maine Prosecutors Association and Ofﬁce of 
the Attorney General to testify in support of LD 576. 
The Maine Prosecutors Association ’s priority this session has been threefold to address the criminal 
caseload; l) reclassify criminal offenses to civil violations and oppose the establishment of new 
criminal offenses that do not affect public safety or victim safety, 2) procuring more resources for 
all parties in the criminal justice system and 3) advocating and suggesting ways within our existing 
system to be more efficient, victim centered, while adhering to all of a defendant ’s constitutional 
rights. That is the only way we are going to be able to move our criminal justice system forward. 
This bill falls within the third prong of advocating for more efﬁciency in our existing criminal 
justice system while adhering to all of a defendant ’s constitutional rights. Different parties in the 
criminal justice system, that are on the ground doing the work, agree that 15 M.R.S. § 815 is 
contributing to the criminal backlog. The previous process that Was in place, which included a 
colloquy with a judge that the defendant was advised of his or her rights, had an opportunity to 
speak to an attomey if they wanted, and was ready to make plea of guilty or not guilty. 
The current law actually takes away opportunities from defendants to resolve their cases ina 
manner satisfactory to them. When a summons is issued for a misdemeanor crime, a defendant has 
to wait 90 days, but usually more, until their arraignment date. Many of these people are entering 
the criminal justice system for the ﬁrst time ever. If the person does not have the ability to hire an 
attorney, the law as enacted, has taken away every single ability for that person to resolve their case 
before arraignment. Prosecutors across the State routinely tum away calls, emails, and in person 
contact with defendants who are looking to speak to a prosecutor to resolve their case before 
arraignment.' 
_' 
The current law passed with good intention based on the 6*“ Amendment report. However, the 
collateral consequences have outweighed the possible good from the prohibition of early contact 
with a prosecutor. The Judicial Branch oversees the procedure of the court and the Maine_ 
Prosecutors Association has full faith in our system partner that they will set a procedure that 
adheres to all of a defendant ’s constitutional right before taking any plea. 
For these reasons, the Maine Prosecutors Association and Ofﬁce of the Attorney General is in 
support of LD 576.
