William Anderson
Thorndike
LD 576
Submission of Written Testimony
 Before the Committee on Judiciary,
Maine State Legislature,
 Concerning LD 576/S.P. 244:
“An Act To Facilitate Communication Between Pro Se Defendants 
and Assistant District Attorneys”
March 8, 2023 Public Hearing
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, Distinguished Members of the Committee on  
Judiciary,
My name is William Anderson.  I am a resident of Thorndike, Maine.  
In my testimony, I am addressing LD 576/S.P. 244, which has the effect of repealing 
15 M.R.S. § 815, a statute that prevents a prosecutor from communicating with a 
person charged with a crime unless the person has been properly arraigned and has 
waived the right to counsel. Before retiring three months ago, I had pursued a 43-year 
career as an Assistant District Attorney, homicide prosecutor, District Attorney, 
District Court Judge, and, finally, Superior Court Justice. 
I have participated professionally in the conduct of tens of thousands of criminal 
arraignments in Maine.
          Although the enactment of 15 M.R.S. § 815 was well intentioned, the Sixth 
Amendment rights of the accused were enforced in the courts of this State before its 
enactment and the statute’s negative effects may outweigh its purported value in 
protecting the rights of the accused. 
The Sixth Amendment in Maine
          First, I would like to comment on the right to counsel secured by the Sixth 
Amendment. Criminal defendants have the right to hire an attorney and to be 
represented by that attorney in all criminal proceedings. For those unable to afford an 
attorney, no person can be sentenced to jail or probation unless provided a 
court-appointed lawyer or unless that defendant properly waives the right to counsel. 
Although a jail sentence is an authorized sentence for all misdemeanors, an 
overwhelming majority of people being arraigned are facing fines only. In order to 
implement these constitutional principles, a procedure has developed in Maine in 
which the prosecutor designates on the criminal complaint whether the State would be
seeking jail or probation if the defendant were convicted. If an indigent defendant is 
facing jail or probation, the judge will appoint an attorney. If the indigent defendant is
facing a fine only, the judge will not appoint an attorney. Obviously, if the prosecutor 
does not designate jail or probation, but the judge believes such a sentence is possible,
the judge will appoint an attorney.
Arraignment
           At arraignment, all people being arraigned view a recording that describes the 
arraignment procedures and the rights of the accused. Additionally, discovery is 
provided to the defendant and one or more “lawyers for the day” are present to 
consult with anyone who wants to speak with the attorney. Those attorneys focus on 
defendants who may be facing jail or probation and are stretched too thin to speak 
with all defendants. The judge clarifies whether those facing felony charges or 
misdemeanors for which the State may be seeking a jail sentence or probation will be 
hiring an attorney or is asking for a court-appointed attorney. Prior to the 
court-appointed attorney crisis, requests for court-appointed lawyers were processed 
promptly. Sometimes, defendants facing jail or probation don’t want a court 
appointed lawyer and wish to plead guilty at arraignment. I know of no defendant 
who has pled guilty or no contest to a charge at arraignment and received a sentence 
of jail or probation without first consulting with an attorney for the day or without 
waiving counsel. Although those not facing jail or probation can confer with the 
attorney for the day at arraignment, if the case is not resolved at that time the 
defendant will have to hire an attorney or go without, because one will not be 
appointed. 
          Although prosecutorial practices may have varied from place to place, prior to 
the enactment of 15 M.R.S. § 815, many prosecutors formerly sent offer letters to 
defendants describing the State’s sentencing recommendation if the defendant were to
plead guilty. Where I presided, this included offers of dismissal if the defendant 
completed a one-day diversion session or received a reinstated driver’s license. At 
arraignment, many defendants wanted to talk with a prosecutor to discuss disposition. 
These practices ended with the enactment of 15 M.R.S. § 815.
Issues With Present Statute
            Everyone wants to ensure that the rights of the accused are respected, but I 
would point out that there are existing judicial mechanisms in the form of dismissal, 
suppression, or sanctions that are employed to ensure that a defendant’s Sixth 
Amendment rights are not violated. Remember, anyone facing jail or probation who 
cannot afford an attorney will have the services of an attorney for the day or of a court
appointed attorney who will be negotiating with the prosecutor.
            For those not facing jail or probation, banning contact between a prosecutor 
and an accused prevents the sending of offer letters prior to arraignment in which 
dismissal is offered if a program is attended or license reinstated. If a fine is offered, a
conscientious defendant who has learned on-line that the misdemeanor charged can 
result in a 6-month jail sentence would certainly be relieved to find out the prosecutor 
only wants a $100 fine. For those who do not receive a sentencing recommendation in
the mail, preventing the prosecutor from informing the defendant of the offer at 
arraignment also causes problems, preventing the defendant from becoming fully 
informed about a likely disposition. At best, judges now ask for the offer during the 
arraignment, usually without an attorney present. Concerning possible diversion 
dismissals, I formerly told defendants that if they contacted the prosecutor and the 
prosecutor agreed there was compliance, the defendant did not have to appear in court
again.. This can no longer be done, necessitating further appearances by defendants to
confirm compliance.
          Finally, I wish to address two provisions of the statute that that were evidently 
designed to make it more user friendly. First, an accused can speak directly to a 
prosecutor if the accused waives the right to counsel. Because defendants facing jail 
or probation are steered to an attorney for the day for negotiation purposes, this 
provision comes into play in fine-only cases. Many judges, including me, do not 
inform defendants of this provision because it is inherently coercive: the defendant is 
required to waive the precious right to counsel in order, according to the beliefs of 
some, to exercise a First Amendment right. It is a bit ironic that an indigent defendant 
who is not facing jail or probation must waive the right to counsel in order to speak 
with a prosecutor when, in reality, the indigent defendant does not have a right to 
counsel because a request for a court appointed lawyer would be denied. Second, the 
provision that a prosecutor can contact a defendant to discuss dismissal upon 
completion of a pre-charge diversion program does not accomplish its goal. A person 
is charged with a crime when given the Uniform Summons and Complaint, before a 
prosecutor is involved in the case. I am not aware of the existence of any pre-charge 
diversion programs. At the very least, this provision should be expanded to include 
any discussion in which a dismissal is offered upon the defendant’s completion of 
specified requirements.
Thank you for giving me this opportunity to submit my written testimony and I hope you find it 
useful in your consideration of this bill.  I regret that I am paddling my canoe on the spring-fed
waters of Florida which prevents me from appearing by video or in person.  
          
William Anderson
Thorndike, Maine
March 2023
