Laura Supica
34 Highland Avenue
Bangor, ME 04401
(207) 717-5702
Laura.Supica@legislature.maine.govHOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002
(207) 287-1400
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711
District 22 Bangor (part)January 30, 2023
Representative Laura Supica Introducing
LD 141, An Act to Simplify the Sale of Food Requirement for Certain Licenses for the Sale of 
Liquor to Be Consumed on the Licensed Premises
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs
Sen. Hickman and esteemed members of the Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, I am 
Representative Laura Supica and I am honored to represent part of Bangor here in the Maine 
Legislature.  Today, I present to you LD 141, An Act to Simplify the Sale of Food 
Requirement for Certain Licenses for the Sale of Liquor to Be Consumed on the Licensed 
Premises.
This bill will address two pieces of the law relating to liquor licenses that have outlived their 
useful life and need to be updated. The first change this bill makes is to eliminate the 
requirement that certain establishments like disc golf courses, indoor ice skating centers, Class A 
lounges and taverns, among others, must include the sale of food to obtain those licenses. It 
would additionally align the sale of food requirement for auxiliary licenses with those of the 
primary licensed premises. 
The sale of food requirement does not meaningfully impact operations at these establishments 
nor hold them to a safer standard and is easily sidestepped by way of keeping items like ramen 
noodles or hot pockets in the store room, but available for purchase. The ease of this workaround 
negates the intent of the requirement and leaves businesses feeling like they have to jump 
through meaningless hoops to obtain a license. 
The second change the bill makes also addresses an outdated provision in the law. It would 
change the gross annual income requirements from the sale of food for Class A restaurants, Class 
A restaurant/lounges and year-round and part-time qualified catering services from an amount 
based on a municipality’s population to 10% of the licenses’ gross annual income. The current 
municipality population-based approach leaves room for too much variation between similar 
business types. 
It is for these reasons that I ask you to support LD 141. Thank you for your consideration and I 
would be happy to answer any questions you may have, although I understand that others coming 
after me will have more information. 
 
