PO BOX 263 •254 ALEXANDER REED RD 
 RICHMOND, ME  04357
PHONE: 207-737-4092 • FAX: 207-737-7150
 E-MAIL: MRWA@MAINERWA.ORG
WEBSITE: WWW.MAINERWA.ORG
To:  Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on State 
and Local Government
From:   Bradley Sawyer, Deputy Director 
Date:  March 2, 2023
Re: Testimony in Support of L.D. 422, An Act to Eliminate the Requirement That Municipalities 
Provide Public Notice in Newspapers
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on State 
and Local Government thank you for allowing the Maine Rural Water Association the opportunity to 
provide testimony on L.D. 422, An Act to Eliminate the Requirement That Municipalities Provide 
Public Notice in Newspapers.
The Maine Rural Water Association is a member-driven non-profit organization based in 
Richmond that specializes in training, technical assistance, and advocacy on behalf of our almost 300 
members. The majority of our membership is made up of water and wastewater utilities from around the 
state and are committed to ensuring clean and safe drinking water and a healthy environment through the 
proper treatment of wastewater. 
Consumer-owned water and wastewater utilities are tied to each other in a plethora of ways 
while remaining subject to different rules from separate state agencies. Wastewater utilities are overseen 
by the Department of Environmental Protection while water utilities are responsible to the Drinking 
Water Program, part of the Center for Disease Control, Department of Health and Human Services, and 
the Public Utilities Commission. The Public Utilities Commission has already taken some steps to 
remove some newspaper posting requirements for water utilities and supporting this legislation would 
level that playing field for municipally run wastewater utilities.  
We would also respectfully suggest that the language should be amended to specifically note that 
this change apply to quasi-municipal entities as well. It seems unfair to ask consumer owned utilities to 
play by a different set of rules just because their governing board is comprised of trustees instead of 
councilors or selectpersons. We believe that as the world, including Maine, continues to move forward 
with the digital revolution that this bill presents an opportunity for municipalities to save money and 
have a larger and quicker reach to their constituents. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony. If you have any questions, please do not 
hesitate to contact me at Bradley.Sawyer@MaineRWA.org of 207-737-9014. 
