ﬂaming ﬁznttnI 
S1111 J 01111131 l{l.lNNEBl.lCIOIJBN:L 
Sen. Nangle, Rep. Stover, members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local 
Government, my name is Jody Jalbert, and l am the Publisher of the Sun Journal and six weekly 
newspapers in western Maine, the Vice President of Sales for the Kennebec Journal and 
Morning Sentinel and a board member for the Maine Press Association. 
I am here today to speak in opposition to LD 422, An Act to Eliminate the Requirement That 
Municipalities Provide Public Notice in Newspapers 
******* 
Public notices are required for open and transparent government. The duty to post public 
notices in an open manner falls on local government officials. This system requires a 
counterbalance to ensure notices are posted correctly and with ample time. Newspapers have 
been the traditional source for public notice since their inception because newspapers provide 
accessibility to the public, independence from government and the ability to provide 
verification and archiving. 
LD 422 as proposed assumes every Mainer has reliable internet service as well as the skills 
needed to navigate the web, but many Mainers do not. Significant numbers of people in rural 
areas still lack internet access and those who are older than 65, have lower incomes or lack high 
school diplomas are also cut off from the internet in far higher numbers than the average. 
Our newspapers know firsthand the challenges people in small towns and rural Maine face with 
internet access and lack of skills necessary to follow along in the digital world. In March of 2020 
our newspapers started to publish our Monday editions only in epaper format on our websites. 
When the announcement of the change was made public, we quickly heard from the many 
people across our readership areas who are without proper internet access, computer
equipment or the ability needed to read our newspapers online. The number of folks who 
shared their concerns and challenges was staggering but it solidified the role we hold in our 
communities and the responsibility we bear to ensure our readers are delivered the 
information necessary to make informed decisions for their families and communities. lt was 
made clear, small rural communities still very much rely on their local newspaper for news and 
information. Our newspapers run public notices on the days we publish print editions, Tuesday 
through Sunday, to ensure all our readers have access to the vital information needed to make 
informed decisions. Also, every public notice that runs in our newspapers are also easily 
accessible on our websites as well as mainenotices.com 
An initiative to publish legal notices online as a single option for access across a multitude of 
municipal websites creates an unnecessary burden and deprives many Mainers of public access 
to government. Public notices provide transparency about how a municipality is spending 
taxpayer dollars and ensure credibility, credibility that will be greatly reduced if the municipality 
is posting information about its activities on its own government website. Having an 
independent, non-governmental monitor as part of the public notice process protects peoples’ 
interests and newspapers serve that role. 
If municipalities are allowed to post their public notices only on their government websites, 
transparency will be lost and if public notices are removed from newspapers, people will know 
a whole lot less about what's happening in their local government. And for that LD 422 should 
not earn your support. Thank you for your time.
