Your Community,  Your News, Your Hometown Paper  
   
   
Locally Owned, Printed and Published in Lincoln County – Since 1875  
 
LCNme.com • P.O. Box 3 6; Damariscotta, ME 04543 • (207)563 -3171 • info@lcnme.com  
 February 28, 2023  
 
Testimony on L .D. 422 “An Act to Eliminate the Requirement That Municipalities 
Provide Public Notice in Newspapers ” 
 
Dear Chair s Nangle and Stover , and distinguished members of the State and Local 
Government Committee , 
 
Please accept this written testimony  as it was not possible to attend this 
afternoon ’s public hearing.  
Public notices are essential for g overnment transparency. They are the critical 
first step for those interested in know ing what is happening in their community.  
I would encourage th e committee members to vote ought not to pass  on this 
legislation . 
The responsibility to post public notices in an open and transparent way falls on 
local government officials. There should be a system of checks and balances to 
ensure notices  are posted with adequate time and done correctly. This is currently 
accomplished through publishing in newspapers.  This proposed bill would remove 
that requirement without offering an alternative.  
Across much of the state, i ndividual i nvolvement in local government has been 
decreasing . With fewer people getting involved in local governments , the electorate 
has fewer  choice s. By removing the requirement  that public notices run in 
newspapers, this trend will likely continue.  
When we are inter viewing candidates for reporter positions at our paper who 
are not familiar with how municipalities conduct business in Maine, we explain that 
the town meeting is one of the truest forms of democracy that exists. Many are 
surprised when we explain how the governing bod y, consisting of the townspeople , 
holds an open discussion and decides the fate of each article as an assembly. This 
does not exist in other parts of the country, and we sho uld all take steps to protect 
this local form of government.  
According to the UN ’s website, several items were declared essential elements 
of democracy  including  the holding of periodic free and fair elections by universal 
suffrage and by secret ballot as the expression of the will of the people ; the 
separation of powers ; transparency and accountability in public administration ; and 
free, independent and pluralistic media .  
Your Community,  Your News, Your Hometown Paper  
   
   
Locally Owned, Printed and Published in Lincoln County – Since 1875  
 
LCNme.com • P.O. Box 3 6; Damariscotta, ME 04543 • (207)563 -3171 • info@lcnme.com  
Public notices express  when elections will be held and provide a level of 
transparency into the public administration. A free and independent media will 
ensure notices are made accurately and timely to help ensure separation of powers 
exist. L .D. 422, as written, would erode some  of these basic tenants of democracy 
and may lead to less trust in local government.  
Through the Maine Press Association, our newspaper has been a steadfast 
proponent of ensuring public notices for the town s that we serve are placed on our 
website as well as mainenotices.com. This is in addition to printing them in a 
section of our weekly paper. This exposu re is far greater than any of the municipal 
governments would garner through their own websites.  
We all lose when public notices become less accessible. Failing to publish these 
notices in newspapers will result in  less attention, less oversight, and less 
involvement from the citizens.  
Please note nothing  in this testimony has  addressed the impact to community 
newspapers at a time when approximately 25% of the newspapers in the United 
States have closed in the last 17 yea rs.  
I urge you to vote against this bill to support a more transparent process for 
local governments, and protect the current public notice law.  
 
 
Sincerely,       
 
John Robert s, Fifth  Generation Publisher  of The Lincoln County News  
