Sen. Nangle, Rep. Stover, members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and 
Local Government, my name is Lorna Dee Nichols, and I am the Town Manager of 
Belgrade and Chair of the Board of Selectmen for the Town of New Sharon.
I am submitting written testimony today to speak in support of LD 422, An Act to 
Eliminate the Requirement That Municipalities Provide Public Notice in Newspapers.
* * * * * * * *
Towns routinely post notices for residents in areas where those same residents frequent 
in the towns in which they live. In addition, websites and social media are incredible 
tools used to reach a vast number of people in a very short amount of time – and in the 
case of social media – at no cost to the town.
As a former newspaper employee, I empathize with the fact this will take away some of 
the revenue used to keep these businesses running – however, the cost is very high 
and can amount to several thousand dollars in a budget year. In fact, we recently ran an 
in-column notice for three days in only one newspaper at a cost of almost $600.00!
Understanding that rural Maine still has work to do with broadband access – there are 
more people with mobile devices than ever which gives them access to the web, too. 
Utilizing other means of communication to reach residents – where they live – and 
where they frequent the world wide web is far more effective without increasing costs to 
taxpayers.
We recently advertised a foreclosure property via the newspaper, our website and 
Facebook. I can tell you that our office received nearly one hundred phone calls – all 
stemming from the information provided via our website and social media – not the 
published notice in the newspaper. I tell you this to prove the point that we are able to 
reach infinitely more people in a variety of ways other than expending tax dollars in a 
print publication that now seems archaic. 
I would appreciate your support in passing LD 422.
Lorna Dee Nichols, Town Manager
Town of Belgrade, Maine
townmanager@townofbelgrade.com
Lorna Dee Nichols, Chair
Board of Selectmen
Town of New Sharon, Maine
newsharonbos@gmail.com
