Maine Broadband Coalition 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 422 
March 2, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on State and Local Government: my name is Myles Smith, I am a resident of 
Portland, and the Executive Director of the Maine Broad band Coalition. I am here today to testify 
in opposition to LD 422." 
For several years, the Maine Broadband Coalition has been advocating for ubiquitous broadband 
availability, affordability, and adoption in Maine. In fact, we’re simply not there yet and this 
legislation, if passed, will have a huge impact on citizens throughout the state. 
Regarding broadband availability, 18% of locations in Maine are unserved with adequate 
broadband, according to data from the FCC and found on the Maine Connectivity Authority 
website. This means many thousands of Mainers do not even have the option to pay for internet 
service that would be sufficient to engage in public and civic life. 
Even for those of us who have adequate service availability, adoption and affordability are also 
concerns. Between 13 and 15% of Mainers are in danger of not being able to afford broadband, 
according to the FCC's deﬁnitions. Over 66,000 Mainers are enrolled in the federal Affordable 
Connectivity Program (ACP), but funding for it is on track to expire next year, which risks putting 
thousands of these folks offline. Additionally, as Maine is one of the oldest states in the country, 
there is a large population of ‘non-digital natives‘ who struggle to navigate the internet, and have 
never used it as a way to keep track of local affairs. Several federal, philanthropic, and state-funded 
programs are helping to bridge this digital divide, but it's still a long way to go before everyone 
has the skills they need to find and engage with information the ways that many of us have been 
doing through their local newspapers. 
We also see this digital divide play out in our local governments. Last week, reviewing state 
records, l found 176 Maine municipalities do not even have a town website, and some do not even 
have an email address. These are places that need more support before they are able to engage 
with their constituents only over the internet. We encourage the state to find ways to support 
local governments, especially in rural areas, to help them catch up. 
U ntil such time that everyone in the State has adequate broadband connectivity, and 
municipalities and counties are able to maintain adequate websites, and everyone knows how to 
navigate and engage with the internet, removing the requirement to print municipal public 
notices in newspapers is taking away the right to know for tens of thousands of Maine citizens. 
On behalf of the Maine Broadband Coalition and all the Mainers who cannot access reliable 
broadband for whatever reason, l ask that you vote ‘ought not to pass‘ on LD 422.Democracy 
depends on it. 
Thankyou. 
Myles Smith 
Executive Director I Maine Broadband Coalition 
207-200-1795 I lTQ}1_[ _QS@iﬁ8i,H€b{Q3QM@5 ﬁC1§,_QQ_a,,iliilQFi,OfQ
