Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association
In Support For
LD 422- An Act to Eliminate the Requirement That Municipalities Provide Public Notice in Newspapers
March 2, 2023
Sen. Nangle, Rep. Stover, and distinguished members of the State and Local Government 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I am submitting testimony in support for LD 422, An Act 
to Eliminate the Requirement That Municipalities Provide Public Notice in Newspapers, on behalf of the 
Maine Municipal Association, which represents the interests of municipal government before the 
Legislature. The positions of the Association are established by our 70-member Legislative Policy 
Committee (LPC), who are elected by the councils and selectboards of municipalities in each of Maine’s 
35 Senate districts.
Municipalities have become a singular funding mechanism that supports the ever-shrinking 
newspaper industry at a time when local newspapers have all but vanished. This has the net effect of 
creating a monopoly for public notice publication in larger regional newspapers costing taxpayers 
significant amounts of money for the publication of a local notice in a distant regional paper their 
residents are unlikely to consult. Many of those larger regional papers have ceased to print paper editions 
on a daily basis and rarely cover town meeting matters unless it is controversial or close to paper 
headquarters. 
The pandemic highlighted the ways in which our residents receive information best, and the use 
of Zoom-like platforms broadened public participation in local government. While many communities 
will feel strongly they reach most of their residents through the few remaining local newspapers, the 
option to find alternate ways to provide public notice would be welcomed in communities that lack those 
relevant local newspapers and must rely on major news outlets in cities far from their community centers. 
Most town residents have become accustomed to going directly to the town website to find out 
when meetings, and special hearings will take place. Not all town websites are created equal. Officials 
feel that flexibility to provide notice on the town website and meet the obligation of notice requirement 
removes the growing costs for ineffective newspaper advertisement and frees that expenditure for a town 
to find effective direct ways to reach residents with no internet access such as direct mailing.
