V 
. 15 University Drive 
Augusta, Maine 04330 
‘S 
Maine Water Utilities Association 207'623‘9511 
Organized 1925 
March 1, 2023 
Honorable Tim Nangle, Senate Chair 
Honorable Holly Stover, House Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: LD 422, An Act to Eliminate the Requirement That Municipalities Provide Public Notice in 
Newspapers 
Dear Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and members of the State and Local Government Committee: 
The Maine Water Utilities Association appreciates the opportunity to provide information to the Committee 
in gualified support of LD 422. 
About MWUA. The Maine Water Utilities Association is a nonprofit association based in Augusta that 
provides support for water works professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for safe drinking 
water through educational and technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, state, and national 
level. The Association was formed in 1925 and counts approximately 109 water utilities in Maine as 
members. 
About the bill. Under this bill, a municipality in Maine would be permitted to provide public notice, as 
required by statute in certain instances, on its publicly accessible website instead of in a newspaper. 
Permitting this alternative way of providing notice recognizes that members of the public are more likely to 
directly access a municipality's website for information about a public meeting rather than the newspaper. 
Municipalities will save time and money if allowed to use their website for public notices rather than placing 
the notice in the newspaper.' 
in its current form, LD 422 would provide municipalities with this alternative way to provide notice. However, 
it does not provide that same alternative to quasi-municipal entities such as water or wastewater utilities. 
Like municipalities, quasi-municipal entities are subject to public notice requirements under statute. For this 
reason, if the Legislature does decide to move forward with this bill. our Association would ask that it be 
amended to include quasi-municipal entities. 
Conclusion. Based on the foregoing, we write in qualified support of the bill, and urge the Committee to 
amend the language of LD 422 to include quasi-municipal entities. 
Sincerely, 
Roger Crouse 
Chair, MWUA Legislative & Regulatory Committee 
General Manager, Kennebec Water District 
cc: Bruce Berger, Executive Director 
James l. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counsel
