Maine County Commissioners Association 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
LD 422, An Act to Eliminate the Requirement Th at Municipalities Provide Public Notice in 
Newspapers 
March 2, 2023 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local 
Government, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to sewing as a member of the board of commissioners 
for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy committee of the Maine 
County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony to the Committee in 
qualified suggort of LD 422, with one recommended amendment discussed below. 
About MCCA. Brieﬂy, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efﬁcient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all of Maine’s l6 counties, and is govemed by a board 
with representation from each participating county. 
Discussion. Current law requires municipalities to provide public notice in a newspaper in certain instances. LD 
422 would provide municipalities with an alternative way to provide such public notice by permitting 
municipalities to provide the required notice on its publicly accessible website instead of in a newspaper. This 
change not only will save the taxpayers money, but it also acknowledges that the public gets their information 
through different channels than they did in the past — including through websites. 
As drafted, this bill would provide municipalities, but not counties, an alternative way to provide public notice 
as required by statute. Counties, like municipalities, are subject to such public notice requirements under current 
law. 
If the Legislature does decide to move forward with this bill, We would ask that it be amended to include 
counties as well. 
Conclusion. We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
Respectfully submitted, 
%/,<Z,Z1.Z, 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
cc: James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel
