/-/g M a i n e C e n te r for . W..P2i*';2iI%§.?;i3; 
- - Augusta ME 04332 
1 Economic Pol icy , 3, ”” ..iii.?‘il 
Testimony in support of LD 398, An Act to Make Agricultural Workers and Other 
Related Workers Employees Under the Wage and Hour Laws, LD 525, An Act to 
Protect Farm Workers by Allowing Them to Organize for the Purposes of Collective 
Bargaining, and LD 1483, An Act to Protect the Rights of Agricultural Workers. 
Arthur Phillips, Maine Center for Economic Policy 
April 18, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Committee 
on Labor and Housing, my name is Arthur Phillips, and I am an analyst at the Maine Center 
for Economic Policy. I am here to testify in support of these three bills which would extend 
basic labor rights to farm workers and help make our agricultural system more resilient. 
Our state recognizes workers’ rights to fair wages and to bargain collectively, but farm 
workers have long been excluded from these basic economic freedoms. Workers in Maine's 
agriculture industry — which employs a disproportionately large share of Black, Latino, 
Indigenous, and Asian American Mainers — have been subject to exemptions from basic 
labor laws that leave them more likely to live in poverty and that make racial inequities 
worse. 
While these exemptions have been enshrined in federal law for nearly 90 years, more than 
a dozen states have taken it upon themselves to right this injustice. Our state has the 
opportunity and moral responsibility to do that too, by ensuring farmworkers have the 
right to a minimum wage, overtime, and the freedom collectively bargain with their 
employers. 
Currently, farmworkers are much more likely to live in poverty than other Mainers: about 
one-quarter of Maine farmhands live in poverty, making them roughly 4.5 times as likely to 
live below the poverty line as other Maine workers. ‘ Nationally, farmworkers ’ wages are 
roughly 60 percent of what all other nonsupervisory workers are paid. 
The USDA’s last Census of Agriculture found that Maine had 2,230 farms with hired labor, 
paying a total of $134 million in wages. Overall, farms employing at least five workers 
accounted for 77.3 percent of farmworkers." 335 farms hired 10 or more workers, 
employing nearly 60 percent of all farmworkers in the state. And as of 2021, Maine had 140 
farms with sales of more than $1 million, with an average acreage of 2,071 .‘" So, while we 
know that many of Maine's farm establishments are small, most farmworkers are 
employed by larger enterprises that can manage to offer the most basic labor rights to 
which nearly all other employers are held accountable. 
Board of Directors 
Barbara Burt, Chair Sandra Butler Stacy Mitchell 
Lucy Van Hook, Vice-Chair Maulian Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus Hutchim Lee Webb 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica |\/laurel
Overall spending on farm labor in Maine was approximately unchanged from 2012 to 2017, 
the period between the two latest versions of the USDA's Census of Agriculture. The share 
of total farm expenses that wage labor accounted for rose from about 19% to 23%, as 
other expenditures, such as feed, livestock, interest payments and fuel, remained stable or 
declined." (Rising costs and tight labor markets have presumably caused increased labor 
spending since then.) 
Among farmworkers who are full-time US residents, data suggests that more than 70 
percent usually work 40 hours or less. Around one-in-four workers work more than 40 
hours but no more than 60 hours per week.” Extending overtime protections to 
farmworkers would entail increased costs to agricultural employers; however, we believe 
they would be manageable. Studies from Massachusetts and New York found that 
extending overtime to farmworkers would increase production costs by between 2 and9 
percent, and that those costs could be managed through a combination of productivity 
improvements and increased prices.“ 
The right to collectively bargain is a first amendment right and a basic economic freedom. 
In response to federal exemptions, to date, more than a dozen states have extended 
collective bargaining rights to farm workers."" Collective bargaining is associated with better 
working conditions, greater economic stability and predictability, and less racial and gender 
discrimination. It should be noted that workers do not only organize in response to bad 
employers but do so to establish a standard in which they have a voice in shaping the 
conditions of their work. Unions are also associated with less turnover and greater 
productivity, and union contracts provide mutually beneficial systems for resolving 
disputes. Unionized workers share with their employers an interest in stability and long- 
term growth. 
It should also be noted that, due to the many limitations of labor law, it is extremely hard 
for workers to successfully organize a union and reach a collective bargaining agreement 
with their employers. Workers organize on an employer-by-employer basis, and doing so 
takes significant time and effort. If LD 525 were passed into law, farmworkers would finally 
have a fundamental labor right, but their successful exercise of that right would be limited 
and gradual. 
Without the rights under consideration, farmworkers are vulnerable to exploitation and are 
less likely to receive fair compensation for their labor. Data shows that violations of labor 
law are common in the limited areas where federal labor protections do apply, such as 
laws governing the treatment of migrant workers and the payment of the federal minimum 
wage. Nationally, 70 percent of US Department of Labor investigations at farms reveal 
violations of labor law. It seems even more likely that employees are being mistreated in 
areas where there are no legal consequences at all, such as those addressed by this bill."‘“ 
Farming is incredibly hard work, and the challenges of rising input prices and the outsized 
power of wholesale buyers make small farmers’ margins particularly tight. However, these
facts do not mean farmworkers should be deprived of basic rights that we take for granted 
for all other forms of work. Ensuring workers have the right to collectively bargain and 
overtime pay is long overdue and will help Maine's agricultural industry thrive in the years 
ahead. We urge you to support the bills under discussion today. 
' 
MECEP analysis of US Census Bureau, American Community Survey, public use microdata, 2015-2019 five-year 
average using the Integrated Public Use Microdata System (IPUMS). Farmhands were defined as non-supervisory 
workers in agriculture. This population was compared with all private-sector workers in Maine. 
" 
US Census of Agriculture, 2017, Table 7. Hired Farm Labor - Workers and Payroll, 
https://www.nass.usda.gov/Publications/AgCensus/2017/FuIl_Report/Volume_1,_Chapter_2_County_Level/Main 
e/st23_2_00O7_0007.pdf 
'“ 
United States Department of Agriculture, Farms and Land in Farms 2021, February 2022, available at 
https://www.nass.usda.gov/Publications/Todays_Reports/reports/fnlo0222.pdf 
"’ 
US Census of Agriculture, 2017, Profile of Maine's Agriculture, 
https://www.nass.usda.gov/Publications/AgCensus/2017/Full_Report/Volume_1,_Chapter_2_County_Level/Main 
e/merefmap.pdf 
" 
MECEP analysis of 2015-2019, ACS 5-year sample, using IPUMS. 
"‘ 
Fiscal Policy Institute, May 2019, "Farm Workers’ Overtime Pay ls Affordable and Long Overdue, ” 
https2//fiscalpolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/O5/Support-the-Farm-Worker-Fair-Labor-Practices-Act.pdf; : 
Jeannette Wicks-Lim, "Estimates of the Potential Costs and Benefits of Extending Overtime Pay Eligibility to All 
Farmworkers in Massachusetts," Political Economy Research Institute, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, June 
2020, https://peri.umass.edu/publication/item/1300-estimates-of-the-potentiaI-costs-and-benefits-of-extending- 
overtime-pay-eligibiIity-to-aIl-farmworkers-in-massachusetts 
"“ According to the National Agricultural Law Center, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Kansas, Kentucky, 
Louisiana, Massachusetts, Nebraska, New Jersey, New York, Oregon, Washington, and Wisconsin all allow farm 
workers to collectively bargain. https://nationaIaglawcenter.org/collective-bargaining-rights-for-farmworkers/ 
"'“ 
Daniel Costa, Philip Martin, and Zachariah Rutledge, "Federal labor standards enforcement in agriculture," 
Economic Policy Institute, December 2022, https://www.epi.org/publication/federal-labor-standards- 
enforcement-in-agriculture-data-reveaI-the-biggest-violators-and-raise-new-questions-about-how-to-improve- 
and-target-efforts-to-protect-farmworkers/
