WILD BLUEBERRY COMMISSION OF 
MAINE 
Senator Tipping 
Representative Roeder 
Members ofthe Committee on Labor and Housing 
RE: Testimony Neither For Nor Against to LD 1483, An Act To Make Agricultural Workers and Other 
Related Workers Employees Under the Wage and Hour Laws 
My name is Eric Venturini, and I am the Executive Director ofthe Wild Blueberry Commission of Maine 
(WBC). 
Maine's wild blueberry industry employees 2-3000 people during peak harvest season. Agriculture in 
Maine is inherently and unalterable seasonal, and too few Maine residents are interested in seasonal 
work to fill the workforce demands of Maine's seasonal economy. Many of those that work during the 
harvest season—whether in the fields, processing, or packing—are seasonal workers, often from foreign 
countries. Many, if not all, foreign and migrant agricultural workers are housed at producers ’ expense 
either on or off-site. 
The title ofthis bill is to protect the rights of agricultural workers. On behalf of Maine's wild blueberry 
industry, I support that objective. Agricultural workers should be respected and treated well for the 
incredibly demanding work they perform to help feed America. Several layers of agricultural worker 
protection laws exist today to guide employers and to hold bad actors accountable. I have summarized 
them below for the convenience ofthe Committee. 
Agriculture's Regulatory Context 
Migrant and Seasonal Workers Protection Act (MSPA)‘ 
0 Protects workers performing seasonal or temporary agricultural work or whose work requires 
them to be absent overnight from their place of residence 
1 The Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (29 U.S.C. 1801). US Department of Labor. 
https:[/www.dol.gov[§_gencies/whd/laws-and-regulations/laws/msg 
‘ii .n‘,
Covers all agricultural workers on a farm if any single worker is covered 
Applies to all farm labor contractors and anyone transporting agricultural workers 
Housing must be certified by State or local health authority that it meets health and safety 
standards 
US Dept. of Labor has unfettered access to inspect housing and vehicles 
Includes various wage, recordkeeping, health and safety, and discrimination protections 
H2-A Agricultural Worker Visa Program eligibility and compliance requirements ’ 
Covers workers brought to work in agriculture in the U.S. through the H2-A Visa Program 
Employers may only use program if employment of foreign workers will not have an adverse 
effect on wages and working conditions of similarly employed U.S. workers 
Pay must be equivalent to the adverse effect wage rate (AEWR), which this year is $16.95 per 
hour 
Guarantees employment of at least 75% ofthe workdays in the contract period 
Housing that meets stringent safety standards must be provided at no cost to employees 
Employees must receive 3 meals a day at no cost, or be provided with free and convenient 
cooking and kitchen facilities 
Transportation from housing to work site, and into and out of the country, must be provided at 
no cost to employee 
Employer must keep detailed records 
Employers cannot discharge without just cause — any person who has filed a complaint, 
consulted with an attorney, or an employee of legal assistance program, testified, or in any 
manner, exercised or asserted on behalf of himself/herself or others any rights or protections 
afforded. 
There can be no strike or lockout during a labor dispute at the worksite 
Employers cannot hold or confiscate workers’ passports or other immigration documents 
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)3 
Holds employers accountable to the Federal minimum wage 
Holds employers accountable to Federal child labor laws 
Includes various recordkeeping requirements 
Sets US Dept. of Labor litigation procedures 
Prohibits employer retaliation or discrimination against employees that have filed complaints or 
provided information. 
Z 
US Department of Labor, Wage and Hour Division. 2010. Fact Sheet #26: Section H-2A of the Immigration and 
Nationality Act. https:[/www.dol.gov@gencies/whd/fact-sheets/26-H2A 
3 US Department of Labor, Wage and Hour Division. 2016. Handy Reference Guide to the Fair Labor Standards Act 
https [/www.dol.gov@gencies/whd/compliance-assistance/handy-reference-guide-f|sa#11
" MAINEf
V 
5784 York Complex Suite 52 ' 
Orono, ME 04469-5784 - 
207-581-1475 ' 
wbcm@maine.edu 
www.wiIdblueberrycommissionofmaine.orq
Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA)" 
0 Includes regulations that apply to worker accommodations including at least 50 ftz per 
occupant, a minimum 7-foot ceiling, at least 3 feet between beds, and many other specifications 
0 Requires signage to point out hazards 
v Includes safety specifications for tractors, including roll over protection 
0 Includes stringent rules on the availability of sanitation facilities, drinking water, and 
handwashing. For example, water must be dispensed in single-use drinking cups or by fountains. 
Maine State Laws_ 
0 Employers must provide workers’ compensation to certain classifications of agricultural 
employees or workers (MRS Title 39-A §101 and 39-A §401(1)(B) and (C)) 
0 Agricultural workers must be protected from safety and health hazards and working conditions 
must be reasonably free of such hazards (26 MRS §580-581) 
0 Subject to Maine's Employment Practices (Title 26, Chapter 7, Subchapters 1 — 12) 
These myriad laws are frustrating, often duplicative, burdensome and costly to agricultural employers, 
especially small operators without their own HR department or other staff, simply because there are so 
many different rules under so many different regulatory frameworks. 
Suggestions for LD 1483 
Definition of "Key service provider" (§647 (1) (C)) 
It is important that health professionals and other essential service providers are allowed access to 
agricultural employees. The wild blueberry industry is deeply appreciative ofthe great work that, for 
example, the Maine Mobile Health Program does to provide Maine's migrant workforce with access to 
health care. Their services, for example, were critical in bringing COVID-19 rapid testing and vaccinations 
to agricultural workers over the last few years. 
However, by including in this definition the catchall phrase of ”any other service provider to which an 
agricultural employee may need access" is too broad. This provision will allow any person who defines 
themselves as an "agricultural service provider," with free access to the private property ofthe 
employer at any time to seek out employees who are on break. Consider the example of a solicitor 
entering worker housing and disturbing both employees and the employer. This bill would provide 
employers with no recourse to prevent solicitors from trespassing on private property. 
Flexibility in Section 3 
Clearly, we do not support employers who may try to use threats, physical force, or violence to prevent 
a worker from entering housing. As I stated earlier in my testimony, bad actors should be held 
accountable for such actions. 
“ US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Safety and Health Topics, Agricultural 
Operations. https:[/www.osha.gov@gricultural-operations/standards 
WILD” 
'.‘.‘.'?.' .‘.'.P' 
MAINEV
' 
S784 York ComplexSuite S2 - 
Orono, ME 044695784 - 
207-581-1475 - 
wbcm@maine.edu 
www.wiIdblueberrvcommissionofmaine.orq
There is also a federal requirement (OSHA, 26 MRS §580-581) and a basic workplace expectation that 
employers protect workers from safety and health hazards in the workplace. Unfortunately, there may 
be times when housing needs to be repaired in order to maintain it in good order. There are also, 
unfortunately, on occasion bad actors on the employee side that for reasons of safety may need to be 
prevented from entering worker housing. Consider cases of alcohol abuse, domestic violence, and other, 
similar situations. 
I ask this committee to consider adding flexibility to account for situations where employers may need 
to bar access to housing in order to maintain a safe and healthy workplace. 
Thank you for your time. I would be happy to answer any questions that you may have. 
xll LD 
urine? 
5784 York Complex Suite 52 - 
Orono, ME 04469-5784 - 207581-1475 - 
wbcm@maine.edu 
www.wiIdblueberrvcommissionofmaineorq
