Farmworker Bill Testimony 4/18/23 
Juana Rodriguez Vazquez 
Executive Director, Mano en Mano 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor & Housing 
Committee, my name is Juana Rodriguez Vazquez and I work as the Executive Director of 
Mano en Mano- an organization that works alongside immigrant and migrant 
farmworker communities so that they can thrive in Maine. We testify in support of LD 
525, LD 398 and LD 1483. 
I come from a migrant family. My mother, father; sisters and brother have worked in 
farm work since before I was born, and I spent a large part of my childhood traveling 
across the United States following the harvest, and putting food on the tables of families 
across the country. 
Throughout my life I have witnessed and experienced the many challenges that 
farmworkers face. These challenges are firstly found in the physicality of the work and 
include: grueling hours, exposure to toxic pesticides, laboring under the hot sun and 
winter ice, and working to lift heavy loads as quickly as possible so that you do not fall 
behind. 
Additionally I have witnessed the structural challenges associated with farmwork, and 
understand them on a personal and professional level. At Mano en Mano we support 
seasonal migrant farm workers and their families over the blueberry, potato, broccoli, 
apple and wreath seasons. Each year we see thousands of workers and their families 
arrive in Maine and experience terrible inhumane treatment including: wage theft, 
unsafe working environments, poor housing, and sexual harassment and abuse. 
Farmworkers are the backbone of the pine, blueberry and seafood harvests- the iconic 
products of Maine. They are an essential part of what makes our economy strong, and 
communities vibrant- yet they are not afforded basic rights. This is a problem for obvious 
reasons; it is a matter of survival. It is also significant, too, for our state as a whole, 
because it prevents us from realizing our shared prosperity and humanity. 
Passing these bills to support farmworks represents a step in the right direction to 
recognize farm workers’ humanity and dignity. Receiving overtime, and having the right 
to organize are all abilities we grant workers throughout our country, yet deny 
farmworkers due to systemic racism and historical marginalization.
Farmworker Bill Testimony 4/18/23 
Juana Rodriguez Vazquez 
Executive Director, Mano en Mano 
Now is the time for change! Now is the time to recognize the humanity and dignity of farm works in Maine, and redistribute the power and resources denied to farm workers in 
our state. 
lspeak for myselﬁ my family, and thousands of farmworkers in Downeast Maine whenI 
testify in support of these bills. They hold the power to create opportunity and restore 
justice for our farmworker community in Maine, and our society as a whole.
