Meredith Bruskin
Swanville
LD 1483
Dear Members of the Labor and Housing Committee,
I am writing to support the efforts being made by 3 current bills before you, to finally 
give farmworkers in the State of Maine the same rights as other workers: LD 398 to 
phase in overtime and wage laws over the next three years; LD 525 to give 
farmworkers the right to organize so that they have a chance to experience safe 
working conditions, humane housing, and the ability to be paid a fair wage; and 
finally LD 1483 An Act to Protect the Rights of Agricultural workers. As a Nurse 
Practitioner, I have cared for farmworkers who have gone to work sick, afraid they 
would lose their job itf they did not. With Covid, we know how dangerous ( and 
expensive) this choice can be.
We are all aware that the "status quo" means farmworkers are not even afforded the 
guarantee of a minimum wage, and certainly not a livable wage, for essential work for
our State and the economy; that they are sometimes required to work 6-7 d a week, 
often with a day off every 2 weeks, and the work is a 365 day a year job; many 
farmworkers find themselves working for employers who " house" them--with rents 
charged-- in subsistence conditions and if they are sick or injured,there is no 
guarantee of pay for time off. These conditions have existed since people were legally
enslaved in this country and then continued in the intersest of keeping a work force 
with no rights ie " cheap and dependent " labor, from Jim Crow time on--we must 
right this wrong. It is your great opportunity and I believe your duty, to begin 
correcting this unequal and discriminatory practice. These are people just like you and
I , who deserve to be treated with dignity, who are struggling to feed and house their 
families, who are the backbone of our economy, indeed our lives. They feed us. Given
inflation,  Farm wages have actually DECREASED since 2012.  If paid a living wage 
with overtime for extra hours worked, farmworkers would be happy to come to 
Maine, and the cost for this is estimated to be only 9 % inctrease  in farm income. 
Seventeen others states have already enacted similar laws--let Maine join them! 
Thank you for your attention to this very important issue. 
