‘E: STATE OF MAINE 
ii-Q? 
_ -N DEPARTMENT or LABOR "‘ ,,_}~' 4¢§.i 54 STATE HOUSE STATION l§*:¥‘!‘~3A-‘ ~
. 
~ AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0054 ll 
Janet T‘ Mms Laura A. Fortman 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Michael Roland, 
Bureau of Labor Standards, Maine Department of Labor 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 398, An Act To Make Agricultural Workers and Other Workers Employees under the 
Wage and Hour Laws, 
and LD 1483, An Act to Protect the Rights of Agricultural Workers 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing Public Hearing, Wednesday, 
April 18, 2023 
Good morning Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Labor and Housing. I am Michael Roland, Director of the Bureau of Labor Standards for the Maine 
Department of Labor (Department). I am here today to speak on behalf of the Department neither for 
nor against LD 398, ”An Act To Make Agricultural Workers and Other Workers Employees under the 
Wage and Hour Laws." 
The proposed legislation would extend certain wage and hour protections to certain currently exempt 
workers by removing language from the statute exempting them from coverage. Agricultural workers 
and those in related occupations would be included in limits on mandatory overtime, required to 
receive Maine's minimum wage, and eligible for overtime pay when they work in excess ofa 
diminishing number of hours. Full overtime protections, equal to those for workers in other 
occupations and industries, would become effective in 2026. 
We estimate that approximately 35,000 employees who work for approximately 2,260 employers in 
Maine would be added to minimum wage and overtime protections with passage of this bill. Under the 
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) as amended in 1966, most of those workers are currently required to 
receive the federal minimum wage of $7.25 per hour, but are still exempt from federal overtime 
protections. California extended full phased-in coverage of state minimum wage and overtime 
protections to farmworkers in 2016. Since then a handful of other states have extended full overtime 
protections and a few have extended partial or modified overtime coverage to agricultural workers. 
We are encouraged that the sponsor appears willing to engage in a discussion with the administration 
and others on the subject in an attempt to find a solution that would be reasonably agreeable to all. 
We look forward to being a part of that conversation. 
Finally, since the proposed legislation would significantly increase the number of workers eligible for 
wage and hour protections, the Department would need to increase its staff. Based on the numbers of 
PHONE:[Z07)6Z3-7900 TTY users callMainL> Relay 711 FAX:(207) 287-5292 
lhe Maine Dep riment of Labor piovidcs Lqual opporiunili iii empl<i\mLrii and programs ‘ 
AllX|l|iil ‘\ aids and services arc Z|\B|l8l"lE upon iequesi to iridi\iduals viith disabilities
workers and employers affected and the nature of the industry, we project that two additional 
Inspector would be required to enforce minimum wage and overtime protections in agriculture. 
Similarly for LD 1483, while we are still contemplating the effect of this bill and have some concern 
about interpreting the phrase "reasonable access," we do believe that implementation would require 
additional resources for the Bureau. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have now 
or at a future work session. 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to sewing Maine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit and train a talented 
workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals when jobs are lost, aiding people with 
disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people on the job and providing research and analysis of employment 
data to support job growth.
