 
      
 
MICHAEL ROBITAILLE, CHIEF OF DEPARTMENT                            BILL GODDARD, DEPUTY CHIEF 
          
 
 
 
LD 1280        An Act to Invest in Maines Fire Service Training Facilities 
 
  
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety. My name is Michael Robitaille, and I am the Fire Chief for the 
Town of Yarmouth.  I have served in the Fire Service since 1983 as both volunteer and career firefighter 
and Paramedic.  I am also a Fire Instructor Level II and have worked as a State Fire Instructor for the 
Maine Fire Service Institute since June 1995.   
 
I write this letter in support of LD 1280 as this is a small investment in Maine fire service.  Unlike our 
partners in law enforcement the fire service does not have constant funding for a state training facility.    
Mane is a state where a volunteer firefighter may have to travel for hours for a four-hour training.  This 
travel is at their own expense, and they are now taken away from the community they protect.   
 
The funding for these facilities will be used to build certified and engineered facilities to accomplish the 
mandated training required to be a firefighter.  In July of 2019 the Town of Yarmouth was awarded one 
of the first facilities to be funded by the State of Maine.  In 2022 departments in the region have 
completed 20,590 hours of firefighting training.  This training included two Portland Fire recruit 
schools, two Southern Maine Community College programs, a regional Firefighter 2 program and many 
local department trainings.  There were 376 live fire evolutions conducted in our facility.  I am pleased 
to report that not a single injury occurred to any person during these evolutions.  Also, during this same 
time period we were able to host a Nationally approved Live Fire Ignitor program at the facility.   
 
When Yarmouth was awarded this grant funding for the construction of the facility it was obvious that 
there was not enough funding to build the facility we needed.  The Town of Yarmouth supplemented 
this funding by nearly $100,000 as the council and community realized the benefits for our staff.  I 
understand that there is only so much funding to go around and would encourage you to consider 
increasing the funding in the future.  The amount requested is the same as in previous years and the cost 
of building and the cost of materials has steadily increased since the first round of awards.  
 
I strongly urge your support in passing LD 1280 to fund the fire service training facilities   Thank you 
 
Respectfully Submitted, 
 
Michael S. Robitaille, CFO III 
Yarmouth Fire Rescue 
Town of Yarmouth, 
Maine
Incorporated 1849
YARMOUTH FIRE RESCUE
178 NORTH ROAD (PO BOX 964)
YARMOUTH, MAINE 04096
