TESTIMONY OF RICHARD MCCARTHY 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
OFFICE OF STATE FIRE MARSHAL 
(Neither for Nor Against) L.D. 1280 
”An Act to Invest in Maine's Fire Service Training FaciIities" 
Presented by: Senator Curry 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
AND PUBLIC SAFETY 
Hearing Date: Thursday, April 27th, 2023, at 1:00 PM in Room 436, State House 
Good afternoon, Senator Beebe—Center, Representative 
Salisbury, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety. 
My name is Richard McCarthy, and I am the State Fire 
Marshal, I am here today representing the Department of 
Public Safety and the Office of State Fire Marshal to testify 
neither for nor against this bill. 
As in any profession training is a critical part of preparation 
for the next challenge. This is incredibly important in all fields, 
but especially important when it comes to public safety 
positions. As an EMT or paramedic you practice to improve 
your skills to provide life-saving care to your patients. Asa 
police officer you practice scenarios over and over to prepare 
for many different situations. And as a Fire Fighter you practice
all the situations that may arise at any time. The difference 
between these three very important jobs is where the training 
occurs. Police officers can attend the Maine Criminal Justice 
Academy, go to ranges to hone their skills. EMT's and 
Paramedics can perform much of their training in a classroom 
or lab. Fire Fighters need buildings to perform much of their 
training, which can be difficult. I remember when someone 
would donate an old building to the Fire Department, we would 
use the building over and over to practice. These donations did 
not happen on a regular basis, so it made it hard to keep all 
members trained adequately. 
This is where this Bill comes into play, this bill would 
provide funding to build and repair fire training facilities across 
the State to allow departments a place to train safely. This 
training is critical to keeping those dedicated members trained 
to a minimum level. There is a shortage of fire fighters and 
there is a constant challenge to increase numbers of active 
members of departments. These training facilities will help 
departments train and hopefully retain members for years to 
come. We understand that this is not part of the Governors 
current budget, and the difficulties that this creates. But we 
support whole heartedly the investment in fire training facilities 
for fire fighters. 
Thank you for your time today and I would be happy to 
answer any questions you may have at this time or during the 
work session.
