 
  
 
 
 
LD 1280, An Act to Invest in Maine’s Fire Service Training Facilities 
 
April 27, 2023 
 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee in support of LD 1280. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all of Maine’s 16 counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion.  LD 1280 provides General Fund allocations in the amount of $1 million each for fiscal years 2023-
2024 and 2024-2025 to fund fire service training facilities across the State. We support this allocation. Maine 
fire departments serve citizens in each county across the State, including fire departments within the 
unorganized territories governed by Maine’s counties. Investing in fire service training facilities will ensure that 
Maine firefighters receive the best possible training and are well prepared for their service throughout the State.  
 
In addition, the challenges of providing Fire and EMS Departments are only growing, as professional 
requirements and certifications are promulgated and equipment becomes more sophisticated.  Departments 
struggle to hire, train, and keep qualified staff and equipment. While the nature of service calls is changing and 
becoming more complex, the Chiefs are becoming more concerned about the wellbeing and mental health of 
their staff. We hear it directly from emergency responders and community leaders: training is absolutely critical.  
 
Turning to the cost of training, towns and cities are looking for ways they may collaborate with each other and 
their County in order to economically share these burdens and improve the response outcomes for their 
citizenry. LD 1280 is important because the allocation from the State’s general fund also keeps the more of the 
costs training do not end up with local property taxpayers, which is beneficial. For these reasons, we urge the 
Committee and the Legislature to support LD 1280. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel 
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
