Senator Michael Tipping, Representative Roeder and distinguished members of the Committee on Labor and Housing,  
 
Based on questions and feedback from the Labor Committee  at the Public Hearing on LD 1794 below are Sappi’s  responses:  
 
1. Safety at the pulp and paper mills in Maine is a concern  
• See the attached safety performance statistics from the American Forest and Paper Association. Relevant data is on pages 5,  
6,and 11 Note the excellent safety performance of Sappi, which has two mills in Maine.  
 
2. Employees have their vacations cancelled due to demand to fill vacancies  
• The following language was added to Sappi’s most recent contract(2021) – “No employee shall be required to report to work 
on vacation”  
 
3. Employees should not work 24 hour shifts  
• During  the 2021 contract negotiations, Sappi offered the following language to our USW bargaining unit:  “ During the 
negotiation of the 2021 labor agreement, the parties agreed to work together to reduce the number of 24 hour shifts, and that  
as of January 1, 2 023 no employee shall work more than 18 consecutive hours”. This language was rejected by the union.  
 
• If the supporters of LD 1794 were truly concerned about safety in connection with long shifts, they would be lobbying for a b ill 
that prohibits  long shif ts.   They aren’t doing that because they want the ability to volunteer for overtime at an overtime pay 
rate, including on long shifts. They want long shifts, but only on their terms, regardless of the potentially devastating 
operational consequences for t he mills.  
 
4. If these issues should be covered during the collective bargaining process, why haven’t manufacturers addressed 
this issue during collective bargaining?  
 
• See points 2 and 3 above.   Sappi addressed the vacation issue during collective bargaining and attempted to address the long 
shift issue, but the unions did not agree.  
 
5. Pulp and Paper Companies should hire more people to cover vacancies  
• Starting about four years ago, Sappi started staffing such that it employees 40 incremental employe es beyond its regular 
staffing for the purpose of covering call -ins and vacancies.  
 
6. Facilities should provide employees with 7 days notice before mandatory overtime or changes in work schedules  
• “Mandatory” overtime generally happens when an employee calls  hours before their shift begins to say they  are not coming in 
to work. The vast majority of these absences are “same day”. The current bill language requires the schedule to be firmed up 7 
days ahead. We cannot predict 7 days in advance of an employee cal ling off work.   This portion of the bill isn’t just 
disadvantageous to the industry – it is unworkable.  
 
7. Facilities need to train more people  
• We are training more than we ever have before. Qualifying employees for many of our jobs require rigorous technical training 
which can take up to 6 months, and most employees are only qualified for a handful of our dozens of job classifications. 
Identifyin g qualified  employees to cover absences can be challenging.   Contrary to what some have suggested, we can’t just 
pull in members off the cleaning crew to cover call in absences.  
 
8. Concern about mandatory overtime are far broader than just the pulp and paper  industry.  
• The pulp and paper industry is a capital intensive low margin business that competes internationally.   Adding unworkable 
operational barriers will significantly increase the competitive disadvantage that Maine based mills in the industry already  face. 
Why is this legislation focused on just one segment of the many 24/7 operations in Maine, including other manufacturers and 
hospitals?  
 
Recommendation  
Conduct a comprehensive study of 24 shifts in Maine for both manufacturing and other 24/7 operatio ns, including hospitals, to better 
understand the nature of the issue and to propose alternatives. Employers are also searching for solutions that address the i ssue and 
still allow them to operate their facilities safely and cost effectively.  
 
We look forw ard to working together at the work session scheduled Wednesday morning.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Donna Cassese  
Sappi Government Affairs  
 
