Good afternoon, 
My name is Justin Shaw. I am the President of local 9, United Steel 
workers at the Sappi Somerset facility in Skowhegan Maine. We have 
approximately 480 members at this facility, consisting of Wood Yard 
operations, Pulping Operations, Boiler Operators, Paper Machine 
Operators, Shipping and Receiving departments, Wastewater 
Treatment, Quality Control Labs, and Maintenance crews. We have2 
hog boilers and a recovery boiler, as well as 3 paper machines. I have 
worked there for 15 years, and off and on before that as a contractor 
for about 11 years. I am a pipeﬁtter/welder by trade. 
I am here today to express my support for LD #1794, An Act to 
Enhance the Predictability of Mandated Overtime for the Pulp and 
Paper Manufacturing Facility Employees. 
For almost 10 years our Union has expressed to Sappi the need for 
recruitment, hiring and training at our facility, The steady downsizing 
and reduction of crews was a safety concern as well as a threat to the 
business as our workforce neared retirement age. We had a high 
percentage of individuals n their 60's and early 70s forced to work 12- 
hour shifts for weeks/months on end as we did not have the staffing 
or qualiﬁed individuals to cover vacations, medical vacancies, life 
events, or a mate calling out because they had been stuck/drafted for 
60 something days] nights. Over the last few years, we have taken 
advantage of the State language, granting us a day off if we are forced 
to work 84 hours a week over a two-week period.
More recently we had an issue with forced 24-hour shifts. For us we 
can be forced to work a 24-hour shift if they cannot ﬁnd coverage. 
Some facilities do 18-hour shifts, which was proposed to us and 
declined. An 18-hour shift for myself is not viable. I live 70 minutes 
away from the mill. With travel, eating, and cleaning, I have about3 
hours of head on the pillow, less in the winter, before doing it all over 
again. lt's not only a hazard to me but every person I meet on my 70- 
minute drive. I've had many drives home that I can't recall over half 
the ride. We have had many individuals in the ditch or wreck vehicles 
trying to keep up with the demands. If we work a 24, we get a full 12 
hours off before being required to return. 
Throughout COVID we struggled with 24's as people were sick, tested 
positive, had contact with someone who tested positive or just used it 
to get time off because they were forced for weeks on end. We Had 
one individual who worked 30 plus 24-hour shifts in 2022.. I can't say 
how many were forced as we were not tracking them last year. We 
recently started tracking voluntary and forced 24-hour shifts. Since the 
start of 2023 we have had 16 voluntary 24-hour shifts and 17 forced. 
It's easy to forget, if you do not work shift work, we do not have 
weekends, typically. Gur holidays and family events are scheduled 
around the needs of the business. Most do not talk about the mental 
and physical toll working multiple nights or hours takes on us and our 
families. A little respect and empathy would go a long way. 
Now the solution for us. We recently started increasing our staffing 
levels. Filling in the workforce at the bottom allowed us to step up and 
train through the lines of progression. With adequate staffing levels
we have been able to do proper cleaning and housekeeping chores. It 
allows for proper training time without interruption. Operators can 
get rest and focus on the task at hand, without fear of interrupted 
training schedules or possible drafts. It's not perfect yet but going in 
the right direction. 
Our labor force needs to be set up for success, not failure. . 
Overworked employees can be a hazard to the company as well as 
everyone around them. The success of the business is dependent ona 
well-trained workforce, a well-rested and mentally focused, safe 
workforce. Seems like common sense but here we are proposing 
language to protect our people. 
Thank you for your time and consideration on this very critical issue.
