N/kiln l\/lalneS'treet 
Solutions Government Relations l Public Affairs 
Affiliated with Verrill Dana. Ll_P 
PETER GORE 45 MEMORIAL CIRCLE, SUITE 202 
SENIOR GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS CONSULTANT AUGUSTA, MAINE 04332-5307 
ggoregaimainestreetsolutions.com 207-622-7432 0 FAX 207-622-3117 
Testimony of 
V Peter M. Gore 
Government Affairs Consultant 
Maine Street Solutions 
On behalf of the 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
in opposition to 
L.D. 1794, An Act to Enhance the Predictability of Mandated Overtime for Pulp and Paper 
Manufacturing Facility Employees 
May 18, 2023 
Sen. Tipping, Rep. Roeder and members ofthe Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, 
my name is Peter Gore, and l am a Government Affairs Consultant with Maine Street Solutions, and I am 
here on behalf of my client, the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide business association 
representing both large and small businesses speaking to you today in opposition to L.D. 1794, An Act to 
Enhance the Predictability of Mandated Overtime for Pulp and paper Manufacturing Facility Employees. 
As drafted, LD 1794 would limit mandatory overtime to no more than 2 hours per day at a ”pulp 
or paper manufacturing facility" facility with more than 50 employees, the exception being an 
emergency that threatened danger to property or life. Not included in this exception is the regular 
maintenance of equipment, or the impact of employees taking a variety of legitimate time off. In 
addition, notice would be required 7 days in advance to an employee that their work schedule would be 
changed, and mandatory OT be required. Lastly, an employee could voluntarily work over this limit. 
The last time the legislature took up the issue of mandatory overtime, was in 1999. Prior to 
then, there were no limits on mandatory overtime, and the issue was hotly debated. Our state had 
come off the winter ice storm of 1998, when significant overtime was required to restore, and get our 
state power grid up and running safely for our citizens. After significant debate in this committee 
between business representatives, the King Administration and labor interests, it was decided to limit 
any mandatory overtime to no more than 80 hours in a two-week period. This remains the current law 
today. 
Then, as is the case today, there are times when running a 24/7 operations, such as a pulp and 
paper manufacturing plant, that mandatory overtime will be inevitable. Furthermore, the workers at 
these operations know when hired that this will be the expectation. For this work and sacrifice, they are 
in turn well paid by Maine standards — upwards of 6 figures in average hourly pay in 2022. 
Passage of LD 1794 would leave mills little choice — complete shutdowns or over staffing. In the 
case of complete shutdowns, while I am by no means an expert in the pulp and paper industry, in 
conversations I have had with those who are, they indicate that idling a paper making machine costs
2 
upwards of$100,000 every 12-hour shift. Overstaffing results un unnecessary cost overruns in a very 
competitive industrial environment, and results in sending unneeded worker home. 
The reality is, this is an issue that should be negotiated and decided at the bargaining table. lt is 
not an issue for the state to dictate through statute. While we are sympathetic to the individual who's 
live may be disrupted due to mandatory overtime requirements, we believe when one is in place, the 
CBA should dictate how this issue is resolved. 
LD 1794 imposes unworkable limitations on the operations of a select group ofemployers. It 
will result in either shutdown of pulp and paper operations at mills in this state, or excessive and 
unnecessary costs - provided that the mill even has the necessary workers to overstaff. The paper 
industry used to be one of the most significant employers in our state. During my time representing 
employers through the chamber, they have shrunk dramatically, in numbers, and in the quality jobs they 
once offered in areas that desperately needed those jobs. Paper making has become highly competitive 
on a global basis. Mills in Maine complete for opportunities in other states and other countries with 
significantly lower costs. LD 1794 not only will impose higher costs, but operational barriers that our 
competitors lack. This legislature in the past, along with this Governor, have fought to retain one of our 
heritage industries. Enactment of LD 1794 may well lead to additional shuttered mills. It is for these 
reasons we are opposed to LD 1794 and urge this committee to give the bill and ought not to pass 
report. Thank you.
