‘ads? nikltgf) 
W1 <\‘;?:»;__?_;;_f;; 
if 
in 
»T rT.~‘%I-:1 '*‘ 
i . 
Troy D. Jackson THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
President of the Senate 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony in Support of LD 17 94 
An Act to Enhance the Predictability of Mandated Overtime for Pulp or Paper 
Manufacturing Facility Employees 
Presented to the Ioint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Thursday May 18, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing, my name is Troy Jackson. I serve as President of the Maine 
Senate and proudly represent Aroostook County in the Legislature. Please accept this written 
testimony in support of l_D 1794, An Act to Enhance the Predictability of Mandated Overtime for 
Pulp or Paper Manufacturing Facility Employees. 
This bill is designed to ensure the safety and equity of workers in pulp or paper manufacturing 
facilities. The proposal would prohibit facilities with 50 or more employees from requiring 
workers to work mandatory overtime without at least seven days’ notice. The bill defines 
mandatory overtime as more than two hours of forced overtime per day. 
Workers at these facilities already work incredibly long days. In practice, shifts can be up to 18 
hours long, followed by a six-hour break, and then a 12-hour shift the following day. The 
schedule is already grueling enough without mandatory overtime. However, there have been 
occasions when workers, without prior notice, have been forced to stay past their 18-hour shift 
due to staff shortages or a colleague calling out sick. it's downright dangerous. 
These individuals work with heavy and dangerous equipment — machinery that should not be 
operated by someone who is overtired or exhausted. This is clearly unsafe, and it puts both 
workers and the company at risk. Capping mandatory overtime at two hours and requiring prior 
notice will allow workers to plan accordingly. 
The notice requirement will not only allow workers to plan accordingly so they can operate 
machinery safely, it will ensure they can plan in regards to family obligations, pre-approved 
vacations and other holidays. Too many workers have missed out on graduations or birthdays 
and lost money that had already been expended for family outings after being forced at the last 
ml"U§i?izi:4}1MYi9Jii?&*)/Ql?lii'?390T*hlé ‘é?ir(9l§*)9§@l§-$ ﬁ9i<5*tPa§'li§li<?9 §9ii5*96§Q"r5iiFi1é'§Fll><i§z8!i§'J4Mi( ﬁ<* m 711 
Senator:/acksoril@gn1ail.c0m * Web Sire." legislature.maine.g0v/senate
employees can plan their lives around their work schedules while ensuring the work can still get 
done. 
Finally, this bill accounts for management concerns by providing an exception for emergency 
situations — when there is an immediate danger to life or property. It also allows for voluntary 
overtime. Some pulp or paper facilities boast more than 600 employees. With more training 
opportunities, there are likely a number of workers willing to take on more hours when needed. 
What this bill seeks to prevent is forced mandatory overtime or the unfair treatment of workers 
who refuse to stay past their scheduled shift. 
Statutory limits on mandatory overtime are not new. They have been part of labor and industry 
standards for decades. There are exceptions for a small number of workers during state 
emergencies, but it does not make sense to include those who work in pulp and paper 
manufacturing in this group. 
For these reasons, and the reasons those in the field will share, I ask you to join me in 
supporting LD 1794. Thank you for your time and consideration.
