 
 
 
82 Bridge Avenue  
Madawaska,  ME 04576  
Tel    207-728-3321  
Fax   207 -728-8701  
twinriverspaper.com  
  
 
Testimony  in Opposition to LD 1794  "An Act to Enhance the Predictability  of Mandated  
Overtime  for Pulp or Paper  Manufacturing Facility  Employees"   
 
May 24, 2023  
 
Senator  Tipping,  Representative Roeder,  and distinguished members  of the Labor  and Housing  
Committee:  
 
I am writing  to respectfully  share our opposition to LD 1794,  An Act to Enhance  the 
Predictability  of Mandated  Overtime  for Pulp or Paper  Manufacturing Facility  Employees . We 
believe this legislation  would  be catastrophic  for our long-standi ng paper  operation in 
Madawaska and our dedicated  workfo rce, and extremely  detrimental to our ability  to sustain  a 
viable  business .  
 
LD 1794 will place Maine paper  makers at a serious  competitive  disadvantage  as we vie for 
business  in a difficult market  against  out-of-state mills  and overseas  supplier s. If passed  in its 
current  form,  LD 1794 will inevitably  result  in the loss of jobs across  Maine papermaking 
operations  and the demise  of an already  challenged  industry identified  by the State  as vital to 
Maine’s  10-year Economic  Plan.  
 
The Twin  Rivers  Madawaska paper  mill directly  provides  450+  high-paying jobs that form  the 
economic  underpinning  of the community.  As the President  and Chief  Financial  Officer  of Twin  
Rivers  Paper,  I can personally  attest  that the safety  of our team  members  is the company’s  highest  
priority.  Our colleagues  who work  at the mill are the reason  for our positive  impact  within  the 
paper  industry and our communities,  and we are committed  to investing in their wellbeing  and 
development.  
 Like most  paper  and industrial  manufacturers,  the scale  and complexity of Twin  Rivers’  
manufacturing operation requires  that we operate our equipment  24 hours  a day, 7 days a week.  
Except  for carefully  planned periodic  outages  to conduct  preventative  maintenance or capital  
improvements,  continuous  production is essential.  When  a shutdown occurs,  it takes  tremendous  
time and energy  to restart  the machines.  Put simply,  it is not feasible – or safe – to stop and start 
paper  machines  based  on crew  members’  last-minute  absences.  It is essential  that we call on our 
employees  to participate  in overtime  when  absences  from  their team  members  occur  – as this is 
necessary  to keep the machines  running.  
 Although Twin  Rivers  Paper,  like other  employers  in Maine and across  the country,  navigates  the 
challenge of filling  job openings  with qualified  candidates,  we are not understaffed  at our 
Madawaska mill. We are consistently able to fully staff each operating shift.  The need  for an 
employe e to work  an extended  shift occurs  when  the crew  member scheduled  to replace that 
person  on the next shift calls out sick or takes  leave  without  sufficient  notice – an 
occurrence that has been  on the rise in recent  years.  Despite  the challenging economic  
environment,  we have added  to our hourly  operations  headcount  and spares  pool over the past 
year.  We also have an agreement  in place to expand the size of the spares  pool in the coming 
months.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
The extended  shift procedure,  also referred  to as inversion or mandatory  overtime,  at the Twin  
Rivers  Madawaska mill has been governed by language  in its Collective  Bargaining  Agreement  
(CBA)  and that language  was retained  in the new CBA  that went  into effect  on May 1, 2023.   
The contract  has been widely  lauded  by Union  membership  as the best CBA  they have obtained .  
On behalf  of Twin  Rivers  Paper  and its more  than 1,300 employees  across  North  America,  I 
respectfully  contend that for a unionized workforce,  matters  such as those  put forth  in LD 1794 
are best governed by agreements  made across  the bargaining table,  informed  by the facts and 
circumstances  unique  to the business  and priorities  of the Union leaders  and the members  they 
represent,  and not through  the legislative  process.   
 The limitations  LD 1794 would  place on our operation  and workforce  would inevitably  require  
layoffs  and shutdowns , an outcome  certainly  not in the best interest  of members  of the workforce  
or surrounding communities  and not aligned  with the intent of this bill. 
 We recognize and appreciate the sponsor  Senator  Troy  Jackson’s  commitment to supporting  and 
growing Maine’s  papermaking  industry.  We are grateful  for Senator  Jackson’s  efforts  to help 
Twin  Rivers  Paper  modernize  and improve  our operations  and processes,  which  is also critical  to 
the long- term viability  and safe operation of our flagship Madawaska mill. 
 
We appreciate this Committee’s  time and thoughtful  consideration  of our comments  and the 
critical  issues that impact  our papermaking work force  and operation.   
 Sincerely,   
 
Tyler  Rajeski   
 
President  and Chief  Financial  Officer  
Twin  Rivers  Paper  Company  
 
 
