 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA members 
include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, amusements, and cultural 
and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kittery to Calais, and 
annually produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933). 
 
 
 
 
 
Alison  Sucy,  Chief Operating Officer and Director  of Government  Affairs   
on Behalf  of the Maine  Tourism  Association  
 
In Opposition  To 
 
LD 1177, An Act Assess  a Slip Fee on Megayachts  Registered  in Overseas  Tax Havens   
 
April 25, 2023 
 
Senator  Chipman, Representative  Williams, and Members  of the Joint  Standing  Committee  on 
Transportation: 
 
My name  is Alison  Sucy  and I am the Chief  Operating  Officer  and Director  of Government  Affairs  
for the Maine  Tourism  Association.  The Maine  Tourism  Association  is a non-profit  association  and 
the state’s  largest  tourism  organization.  For over 100 years,  MTA  has been  promoting  Maine  and 
supporting  members  in every  type of tourism  business  such  as lodging,  restaurants,  campgrounds,  
retail,  outdoor  recreation,  guides,  amusements,  and historical  and cultural  attractions.  I present  this 
testimony  in opposition  to LD 1177.  
 
Although it may seem like taxing wealthy out-of-state yacht owners is a good idea, the reality is that this 
proposal will hurt Maine workers and small business owners. Our opposition is not about giving a break 
to the wealthy; it is about the harm that will come to our hardworking Maine citizens and our working 
waterfronts. It will be Maine workers and our small business owners who suffer should Maine lose these 
yacht dockings. 
 
The yachts that dock in Maine provide great benefits to a wide variety of services that they utilize such as 
local fisheries, farmers markets, grocery stores, breweries and wineries, restaurants, transportation, retail, 
contractors and mechanics, and fuel. In addition, these travelers visit other parts of our state, staying our 
hotels and taking part in any number of our tourism offerings like outdoor recreation, tours, and museums 
and theaters. 
 
A strong  tourism  industry  equals  a strong  Maine  economy.  Tourism  is a tremendous  contributor  to 
the Maine  economy  as evidence  by this 2022  data from  the Maine  Office  of Tourism:  
 
• Tourism  supported  151,000  Maine  jobs 
• Every  102 visitors  support  a new job in Maine  
• Direct  tourism  expenditures  totaled  $8.6 billion  
• Without  tourism,  Maine  households  would  have  had to pay an additional  $2,172  in state  and 
local  taxes   
 
We believe  this proposal  will do more  harm  than good  for our local  businesses  and the tourism  
economy.  Thank  you for your  consideration  of our testimony.  

