Maine Rail Transit Coalition: “. . .  to elevate rail transportation to its proper balance in transportation investments, planning and decision -making.”  
               4/19/2023  
               1 | P a g e    
* Please consider the environment before printing this message . 
 
To:   Maine Legislature Transportation Committee  
From:   Maine Rail Transit Coalition  
Tony Donovan, Director  
Date:    April 19, 2023  
Re: In Support of LD 1 177 An Act to Assess a Slip Fee on Megayachts Registered in 
Overseas Tax Havens  
Senator  Chipman, Representative Williams and Members of the Transportation Committee  
My name is Tony Donovan, I am a Portland resident and founding Member of the Maine Rail 
Transit Coalition (MRTC). The Maine Rail Transit Coalition (MRTC) lobbies for f ederal, state 
and local policies that promote equitable funding of transit services for all. MRTC’s vision is a 
comprehensive transit design connecting passenger rail service with local transit systems to 
promote economic and environmental sustainability.    
 
The MRTC is here in to speak in support of LD 1 177 An Act to Assess a Slip Fee on 
Megayachts Registered in Overseas Tax Havens   
 
To quote a recent article in the New York Times; The Superyachts of Billionaires Are Starting 
to Look a Lot Like Theft  (April 10, 2023 )  
“Owning  or operating a superyacht is probably the most harmful thing an individual can do to the 
climate. If we’re serious about avoiding climate chaos, we need to tax, or at the very least shame, 
these resource -hoarding behemoths out of existence. In fact,  taking on the carbon aristocracy, and 
their most emissions -intensive modes of travel and leisure, may be the best chance we have to 
improve our collective climate morale and increase our appetite for personal sacrifice, from 
individual behavior changes to  sweeping policy mandates .” 
Implementing  a fee for a  mega yacht  registered in an overseas tax haven using a marina  slip in a 
Maine  municipality, could potentially generate significant  reven ues for important social programs 
such as emergency rental services and homeless ness diversion.  Allocating a portion of the funds 
to the Department of Marine Resources  and the Department of Transportation for public transit 
programs is also a positive step towards promoting  sustainable transportation options and reducing  
carbon emissions .  
Recognizing that addressing climate  change will require  a comprehensive approach that involves 
a range of solutions from individual  behavior to sweeping policy mandates, the luxury  yacht 
industry  may be a small piece  of the puzzle .  However, the rich are here in Maine, using our 
harbors, while evading public financial accounting  in the overseas tax havens they register 
ownership in.  
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 200925FB-0482-48A6-A18E-8E8CBE97EFC4

Maine Rail Transit Coalition: “. . .  to elevate rail transportation to its proper balance in transportation investments, planning and decision -making.”  
               4/19/2023  
               2 | P a g e    
* Please consider the environment before printing this message . 
 
While  residents of Portland, the city I call home, deal with lack of affordable housing, 
homelessness and a housing  immigrants and other new Americans, we have a waterfront view 
blocked by luxury  yachts , owned by transnational corporations, avoiding accountability . 
Maine lawmakers should support LD 1177 as a means of addressing global inq= equities  that 
impact our environmental  quality and way of life .  
Vote Yes on LD 1177  
 
I’d be happy to answer any questions.  
-- 
Anthony J. Donovan,  Director  
Maine Rail Transit Coalition  
84 Middle St.   Portland, Me. 04101  
(207) 329 -6732 Mobile  
Mailto:  MElikesRail@Gmail.com  
  
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 200925FB-0482-48A6-A18E-8E8CBE97EFC4

