 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association   
 
In Support of  
LD 1153 , An Act to Allow Municipalities to Tax Personal Solar Energy Equipment Under 5 
Megawatts  
 
April 5, 2023  
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee . My 
name is Kate Dufour, and  I am offering testimony in support of LD 1153 on behalf of the 70 
municipal leaders who were elected by their peers to serve on the Association’s Legislative 
Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal interest.   
Municipal officials strongly support  passage of LD 1 153 as it seeks to claw back the 
generous property tax exemption erroneously extended to large scale solar energy development s.   
 
When the laws governing the development of the solar industry in Maine were being 
debated  during th e pre -pandemic  era, the intent was to extend t he tax exemption only to the 
property attached to residences and not that owned by commercial entities.  By extending the 
exemption  broadly , not only did the act limit the amount of property taxes generated locally  but 
in cases where the property already exis ted, the act shifted additional burdens onto the remaining 
property taxpayers, since  only a portion of the lost property tax  revenu es are reimbursed by the 
state.   This outcome is particularly biting, as these communities were at the forefront of 
supporting this  emerging industry and were punished as a result.   
 
Additionally, the practice of exempting new developments from taxation places 
additional pressures on state coffers making those revenues unavailable to invest in other  
worthwhile programs .  It is an unsustainable approach for subsidizing  an industry  that might not  
have  need ed such a generous incentive , as illustrated  by the proliferation of solar farms  in Maine .  
 
That said, LD 1153 would benefit from further amendment, as the bill is too broadly 
applied.  Municipal leaders believe that solar equipment attached to  residential properties should 
continue to be exempt from  taxation .   
 
Thank you for considering the mun icipal perspective on this bill.  If you have questions 
about the Association’s position, please do not hesitate to contact me at 1 -800-452-8786 or 
kdufour@memun.org .    

