  
 
 
 
1380 Monroe Street NW, #721     info@communitysolaraccess.org 
Washington, DC 20010      www.communitysolaraccess.org 
720-334-8045 
 
 
April 5, 2023 
 
Senator Nicole Grohoski , Chair 
Representative Joe Perry, Chair 
Committee on Taxation 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Re: Testimony in Opposition to LD 1153 
 
To Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and Members of the Committee on Taxation: 
 
Please consider this written testimony in opposition to LD 1153. The Coalition for Community 
Solar Access (CCSA) is a national Coalition of businesses and non-profits working to expand 
customer choice and access to solar for all American households and businesses through 
community solar. Our mission is to empower every American energy consumer with the option 
to choose local, clean, and affordable community solar. We work with customers, utilities, local 
stakeholders, and policymakers to develop and implement policies and best practices that 
ensure community solar programs provide a win, win, win for all, starting with the customer. 
 
CCSA is opposed to this legislation as filed. The community solar industry is committed to 
contributing its fair share of tax revenue to its local host communities. The industry has 
proactively approached the state in efforts to establish a statewide, uniform taxation policy that 
would provide meaningful revenues to local communities while ensuring predictability in project 
costs for solar developers. CCSA and its members remain committed to such efforts to find an 
alternative solution to either full taxation or exemption. By removing the personal property tax 
exemption for solar without any such alternative, LD 1153 would create significant uncertainty 
for projects, as assessment approaches and mill rates vary across municipalities. This 
legislation as filed also creates ambiguity for existing projects that have already secured 
financing and made commitments to subscribers for bill savings based upon the exemption in 
place. This added complexity and variability creates additional time, effort, and costs on the part 
of both project developers and local assessors and tax offices.  
 
We look forward to continuing work with the Governor’s Energy Office, Maine Revenue 
Services, this committee, and other stakeholders to identify and implement feasible solar 
taxation policy. Doing so will be necessary to fulfill the promise in the name of community solar, 
to bring tangible benefits to Maine municipalities. We urge you to vote ought not to pass as 
stakeholders continue this work. 
 
  
 
 
 
1380 Monroe Street NW, #721     info@communitysolaraccess.org 
Washington, DC 20010      www.communitysolaraccess.org 
720-334-8045 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration. Please do not hesitate to reach out with any 
questions. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Kate Daniel 
Northeast Regional Director 
Coalition for Community Solar Access  

