EmergesATi@~--95uei~E 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1153 
An Act to Allow Municipalities to Tax Personal 
Solar Energy Equipment Under 5 Megawatts 
Steven Weems, Board Member, Solar Energy Association of Maine» 
President, Dirigo Community Solar GroupA 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
April 5, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and other members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation: my name is Steve Weems, a Board Member ofthe Solar Energy 
Association of Maine; also President of Dirigo Community Solar Group, a nonprofit 
association of 14 small, member-owned community solar farms. We are in respectful 
opposition to LD 1153, which would eliminate an important incentive for small-scale 
solar energy development. This tax exemption is an especially desirable, limited 
renewable energy incentive for small projects because it is funded through the State 
General Fund, not electricity rates. We know the sponsor as a strong supporter of clean 
energy, yet conclude in this case that LD 1153 is both unwarranted and unnecessary, on 
both policy and‘ 
practical grounds. ’ 
it is important to be precise about the gpplica bility ofthe existing solar personal 
property tax exemption that would be eliminated by this bill. The current tax exemption 
is limited to equipment where gﬂ the energy is used onthe site where the property is 
located, or the customers receive a utility bill credit for the energjpgenerated on their 
utility accounts. This provision limits the application of the existing tax exemption to net 
energy billing (NEB) projects with designated retail customers, up to 5 megawatts (MW) 
in capacity. The existing tax exemption helps a specific subset of utility customers who 
have taken direct action to reduce their contribution to climate disruption by owninga 
share of, or subscribing to, a distributed generation NEB project. These electricity 
customers deserve our collective gratitude, and support via the existing tax exemption. 
e...:ET" .“ ': ‘l%i'.:1>.i1 ‘;‘.'“ ——- J “’*’.€l ... i;:.t.' .»».;;~;r,:,litaL< —c<;.. ' " a;;a1$;Z/7wW7..u.....,,;-7..;.;:::: ’ ..:..;' ‘;w,;'L4. “;;L~1"""'_' . "v7IWTv? a. ':;:.v»:4-<. ‘.,1,;:;:1f:-4%»... ::t.’?\1*‘“'*Tf ’”f""V'** "1 ' ”"iZi1Ij'sl"T5" I —""t.'J-;7.%.. ‘1T'» 
44 Thompson St. Brunswick, ME Q4011-3026 267.751.9337 www.solarenergymaine.org
These statutory definitional requirements put a lid on the use ofthe existing 
exemption. it appears the future applicability ofthis exemption is likely to be limited 
further, by revising the NEB program in ways that would eliminate many future projects 
from eligibility that currently would qualify for this tax exemption. (Please see later 
commentary in this testimony about this.) We think this validates the wisdom of the 
criteria currently in statute which must be met to qualify a project for tax exemption. . 
The existing tax exemption is a vitally important incentive for customers of the 
smallest distributed generation projects to which it applies. Specifically, it encourages 
utility customers to invest their own capital in eligible solar projects, or sign up as 
subscribers to a project owned by a third party. (Wind projects typically are too large to 
qualify for this tax exemption.) This is the only way nonprofits (e.g., municipalities, 
schools, churches) can take advantage of the Federal renewal energy equipment tax 
credit. These smaller projects are the foundation of the dynamic, two-way 
generation/use grid of the future. Over time, we are going to rely more fully on 
distributed electrical infrastructure. These small projects also have long economic 
payback periods, which justified the tax exemption in the first place. From personal 
experience and that of the members of the clean energy utility customers l speak for 
today, I can vouch for the importance of this tax exemption to facilitate investment in 
small-projects. 
A common criticism of clean energy initiatives (and even energy efficiency 
measures) is that key incentives are often funded through inclusion in utility electricity 
rates. This criticism is one~dimensional when it is based solely on lost utility revenue, 
and ignores offsetting benefits that (i) reduce the net bill impact, and (ii) benefit Maine 
people in ways that do not show up on the bill (e.g., reduced greenhouse gas emissions 
and other pollutants). Nevertheless, minimizing ratepayer bill impact is a legitimate 
goal, especially when natural gas commodity pricing is causing large increases in the 
cost of energy. The goal of minimizing ratepayer bill impact is supported by funding 
incentives for the development of clean energy, especially including distributed 
generation projects, with State General Fund revenues. This is what the limited tax 
exemption that would be eliminated by LD 1153 does — it funds an important clean 
energy incentive and spreads the burden over all the general revenue sources of the 
State. in this case, we think this is sound fiscal policy which should be continued. 
. 2
I
This tax exemption generates plus revenues for municipalities, through the 
Maine constitutional provision for at least 50% reimbursement for each municipality 
where an exempt project is located. Since these projects create new valuation when 
they become eligible for the exemption, this means the municipality gets additional tax 
revenues, along with other benefits of hosting such projects. From a municipalA 
perspective, this isan economic development incentive creating new tax revenues. We 
think this was a consideration when the legislature enacted this limited tax exemption, 
which is just as valid today. Note this particular tax exemption is limited to small 
projects (less than 5MW), and only in circumstances where all the energy of the project 
goes to utility customers who receive a net energy billing utility bill credit. 
This specific existing limitation on the type and size of projects to which the tax- 
exemption under consideration applies is critically important. lt means the future 
application of this tax exemption effectively is limited to smaller DG projects, and only 
those with named off-takers. This is the net energy billing (NEB) program, a subset of 
the more general term distributed generation (DG). We think other changes (see below) 
are likely to reduce the applicability of the current tax exemption, without eliminating 
the crucially important economic incentive of the exemption for the very smallest NEB 
projects. 
The future scope and character of distributed generation (including the NEB 
program) is under active consideration. In 2021 the Legislature established a major 
study initiative to develop a ”successor NEB program," establishing a DG Stakeholder 
Group for policy oversight. It met something like 18 times over two years. The 
Governor's Energy Office (GEO) staffed this work, the Public Utilities Commission (PUC) 
participated, and two first-class consultants did extensive economic analysis. ln 2022 
the Legislature imposed additional limits on the scope of DG development and reduced 
the off-taker billing creditfor Commercial and Institutional utility customers (known as 
the C&l tariff). The clear intent ofthese activities was to limit the future scope of the 
NEB program, while retaining the many benefits of distributed generation defined more 
broadly. 
The DG Stakeholder ‘ Group economic consultants looked at the total pipeline of 
NEB projects (up to 5 MW), segregated it by size, did extensive economic analysis of 
total benefits and costs, and looked specifically at ratepayer impacts. lt is widely 
acknowledged that the pipeline figures overestimate what will actually be built, for
3
multiple reasons. Nonetheless it is a baseline. Roughlythree-quarters of planned 
projects are in the 2-5 MW range; over 90% are in the 1-5 MW range (see below). 
Smallest projects (up to 1 MW) 120 MW 7% 
Medium tier projects (1-2 MW) 340 MW 19% 
Larger NEB projects (2-5 MW) 1,290 MW 74% 
Total NEB pipeline 1,750 MW 100% 
The DG Stakeholder Group's recommended a successor program for projects in 
the 1-5 MW range that would reduce the utility electric bill rate for all Maine regulated 
utility ratepayers. It would accomplish this by restructuring the successor program to 
allocate several additional monetary values to the utilities, in a competitive 
procurement, which would acquire wholesale energy from these projects. Of critical 
importance to today's bill, this means most projects in this size range would no longer 
have customers who receive a utility bill credit. Therefore these projects would be‘ 
ineligible for the tax exemption presently in force. These projects would be taken out of 
the NEB program, with its designated off-takers. lmporta ntly, this would leave the 
smallest projects (up to either 1 or 2 MW, depending on where the size limit ultimately 
is set by statute), which need the tax exemption the most, as the only solar projects 
eligible for the existing tax exemption. 
The bottom line is at least 75%, and possibly over 90%, of future projects 
(valuation) currently eligible for this property tax exemption would become ineligible for 
the exemption. Only the smallest future projects would be left in the NEB program and" 
be eligible for the tax exemption. This would be a far more surgical, beneficial change 
than eliminating the tax exemption for all future solar projects as proposed in LD 1153. 
Admittedly the foregoing scenario is still in proposal form, but it is one consistent 
with the general feeling the NEB program has gotten too big and the incentives (paid by 
other ratepayers) are stronger than they need to be. It seems highly that if LD 1153 is 
set aside, the definition of future projects eligible for the tax exemption (i.e., those with 
a utility customer or customers that receive a utility bill credit for the energlgenerated 
by the solar equipment) will shrink dramatically. .
4
The foregoing discussion is based on the premise that LD 1153 would apply to 
future projects only, and would not eliminate this tax exemption for operational 
projects, or those currently under development that become operational before the 
statutory deadline of December 31, 2024. (Previous legislation set this operational 
deadline for 2-5 MW NEB projects in the pipeline.) Eliminating the tax exemption for 
existing projects would be unfair and possibly unprecedented. 
With these factors in mind, and considering the positive policy reasons for 
retaining the tax exemption for the smallest distributed generation projects, we think 
this is a case where the best course is to do nothing. 
Thank you for your service and consideration of our perspective. 
Attachment: Total Pipeline of NEB projects, November, 2022 
SEAM LD 1153 TAX Committee Testimony 4-5-23 (final)
5
2 
Figure7 
Net energy billing capacity in the pipeline, by project size 
November 2022 
1,200 
1,000            
800 
600 
400 
200 
Active Not Operational 25kWorless "226kW-1MW I1.01-2MW I2MWormore Toiglg 
Pending 
Central Maine Power 
Figure 8 Q-1w\w £2-0 
l-2~M\r/ 5410 
2»-'5M\J L-2»q¢> 
l,‘¥5'O 
Active Not Operational Pending 
Versant Power 
Net energy billing capacity in the pipline, by project size, status, 
and program 
November 2022 
700 
600 
§ 500 
3 400 
gvsoo 
E 200 
100
0                    
25kWorless ii26l<W--1MW I1.01~2MW I2MWOrrn0re                                
Central Maine Power Versant Power 
kWh program ' -_ ,_                                                 
Central Maine Power Versant Power 
C&l ta riff program 
Based on the average offtaker capacity illustrated in Figure 5 and Figure 6, as well as the potential net 
energy billing capacity in the program pipeline illustrated in Figure 8, an estimated additional 82,000— 
18|Page
