 
 
 
April 5th, 2023  
 
Senator Stacy Brenner , Senate Chair  
Representative Lori Gramlich , House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC Testimony in OPPOSITION to L.D. 1171: An Act to Raise Funding to Support Waste 
Reduction, Reuse, Recycling and Composting in Maine  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee:  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide 
business organization consisting of a netw ork of more than 5,000 small and large employers across Maine. The 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce is submitting testimony in opposition to L.D. 1171.  
 
Construction and demolition debris  (CDD) and solid waste is a statewide issue that has a long history in our 
state. The Maine Chamber weighs in on issues when they impact the business community as a whole and if L.D. 
1171 were to pass, it would impact all businesses in Maine. L.D. 1171 proposes t o increase the disposal fee at a 
landfill of municipal solid waste and municipal solid waste ash from $2 per ton to $ 7 per ton and to increase the 
fee imposed on the disposal at a landfill of construction and demolition debris and residue from the processi ng 
of construction and demolition debris from $2 per ton to $ 7 per ton. This increase  in CDD will drive up the 
costs of doing business in  Maine . The other increase in costs on solid waste will be passed along to every single 
person living in  Maine . The cos ts of doing business in Maine already are high and every little bit adds up, 
including increased disposal fees.  
 
Solid waste and CDD are a part of our culture, and  the business community wants to deal with it in an 
economical and environmentally sensitive  manner. Maine’s  landfills do a great job for Maine’s businesses and 
citizens ensuring that we maximize our capacity in Maine. To have facilities  available for Maine businesses into 
the future is not only important but necessary. The Maine Chamber has alwa ys advocated for more certainty in 
Maine’s long term business climate and waste disposal of CDD and municipal solid waste is part of that 
equation.  
 
Maine businesses have been dealing with significantly increased costs over the last couple of years. We sho uld 
not be passing legislation that drives the costs up even more. Any time the cost of doing business increases it 
hurts future investment into a company and their employees and it could hurt future investment into job 
creation.  
 
 
 
 We would respectfully ask  the committee to vote, “ought not to pass” on L.D. 1171. We appreciate the 
opportunity to testify today and we will be happy to answer any questions and bring back additional information 
for the work session if needed. Thank you.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
