   
Agri-Cycle Energy  
95 Pleasant Hill Rd. Ste. G 
Scarborough, ME 04074  
1 (800) 850 -9560  
 
 
In Support of LD 1171,  An Act to Raise Funding to Support Waste Reduction, Reuse, Recycling and 
Composting and Reduce the Landfilling of Municipal Solid Waste in Maine   
 
 
April 5, 2023  
 
 
Senator Brenner, Representive Gramlich, and members of the Committee on the Environment and 
Natural Resources , 
 
Thank you for the opportunity today to express our support for LD 1171.   A core mission of Agri -Cycle 
and its sister company, Exeter Agri -Energy, is to divert food waste from Maine’s landfills and conve rt it 
into renewable energy.  Doing so is widely accepted as one of the most critical actions we can take as a 
society in fighting climate change, prolonging the lifespan of our landfills, and helping Maine achieve its 
longstanding 50% recycling goal.  By  increas ing the cost of landfilling and put ting that money  toward  
support ing food waste recovery programs , LD 1171 supports  this core mission , and in turn we support 
its passage.   
 
As you know, this bill would increase revenue from landfilling in Maine and  use the collected funding to 
support strategies in reduction, reuse, recycling, and composting on the higher rungs of the solid waste 
hierarchy through grants to Maine municipalities and organizations.   For Maine to continue increasing 
its food waste dive rsion rate, such efforts need bolstering.  This bill does that.  
 
All out-of-state waste will be subject to landfill fees , but it won’t be eligible for this funding.   This will  
help ensure that out side waste is deterred from coming into Maine, and that rec overable materials are 
pushed up the solid waste hierarchy  by providing funding to Maine municipalities.  We support both of 
these goals.  
 
In summary, LD 1171 will help  municipalities encourage their residents to do the right thing with their 
food waste by  creating financial incentives to divert this stream to higher and better uses, such as 
digestion and composting.  As a result, Agri -Cycle Energy and Exeter Agri -Energy support this bill.  
 
Thank you for your time and consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Greg Willia ms 
Greg Williams  
 
Director of Organics, Agri -Cycle Energy  
