 
 
 
Testimony IN OPPOSITION to L.D. 1171, “An Act to Raise Funding to Support Waste Reduction, 
Reuse, Recycling and Composting in Maine” 
By 
Mark C. Draper, Solid Waste Director 
Aroostook Waste Solutions 
 
 
Hello Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and other distinguished members of the 
Committee on the Environment and Natural Resources.  I am Mark Draper and I am the Solid 
Waste Director of Aroostook Waste Solutions (“AWS”); a not-for-profit corporation owned by 
the municipalities of Fort Fairfield, Limestone, Presque Isle, and Caribou.  AWS owns two (2) 
relatively small landfills in Aroostook County, providing disposal capacity through various 
contracts for approximately 74% of the County’s population; and also provides drop-off 
recycling services for approximately 20 municipalities in the central and northern Aroostook 
region.  I would have preferred to provide this testimony in person, but a prior engagement 
prevented me from making the trip to Augusta.   
 
While we can appreciate the intent of L.D. 1171, we believe it incorrectly removes local 
decision-making authority for municipal solid waste management from municipalities, and 
instead gives it to the State.  Municipalities are required by Maine Statute (Title 38 MRSA, 
Chapter 13, Section 1305) to provide municipal solid waste management disposal for domestic 
and commercial sources in their communities.  Consequently, municipalities are required to pay 
for those services, and may raise the funds to do so through property taxation or other funding 

mechanisms.  Since these local services are provided with local funding, then it seems 
appropriate for local decision-makers to establish priorities and make spending decisions.   
 
AWS is governed by a Board of Directors that are appointed annually by the respective 
governing bodies of each Owner municipality.  The Board generally meets monthly to evaluate 
operations, review financial statements, plan for future facility and program development, and 
approve annual budgets and appropriations.  They are well-versed in solid waste management 
matters; and are accountable to elected officials and to those that elected them.  It would seem 
that these local folks are best-suited to make those decisions.  If the Board wants to consider 
changing or implementing a waste management program, whether it be for disposal, recycling, 
reuse, composting, etc., they would evaluate options; determine the costs and benefits of each; 
seek local input; and appropriate the necessary funding based on local priority.  L.D. 1171 
removes (in part) that local control. 
 
If the Bill is approved, then AWS will have to raise an additional $200,000 to $250,000 annually 
from local municipalities, and send that money to the State, who will then decide what it is 
spent on.  Unless AWS (or the municipalities we serve) receives at least that amount back in 
grant funding each year, then ultimately our local tax dollars are being spent on projects in 
other municipalities, based on State priorities.  That seems unfair and unjust.  Instead, please 
let us keep our local money for local projects and programs. 
 
For these reasons, we respectfully request that you vote that L.D. 1171 “Ought Not To Pass.” 
 
Thank you for considering our comments.  
