City of Presque Isle, Maine 
 
12 Second Street            Presque Isle, ME 04769-2459            Phone: 
207.760.2780               Fax 207.764.2501  
 
The City of Presque Isle is an equal opportunity provider. To file a complaint, write 
to  
HR Manager, 12 Second Street Presque Isle, ME 04769, or call (207) 760-2700. 
The Office of City Manager 
Martin Puckett 
Email:  mpuckett@presqueisleme.us 
April 5, 2023 
 
Testimony IN OPPOSITION to L.D. 1171, “An Act to Raise Funding to Support Waste Reduction, 
Reuse, Recycling and Composting in Maine” 
  
 
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and other distinguished members of the Committee on the 
Environment and Natural Resources.  I am Martin Puckett, City Manager of Presque Isle.  I serve as the 
Chair of Aroostook Waste Solutions (“AWS”); a not-for-profit corporation owned by the municipalities 
of Fort Fairfield, Limestone, Presque Isle, and Caribou.  In 2018, Presque Isle merged solid waste 
operations and landfills with the Towns of Fort Fairfield, Limestone and Caribou.  These four 
communities realized that a collaborative effort would lead to many efficiencies, cost savings and 
provide long term stability for solid waste management and recycling for the majority of Aroostook 
County municipalities.   
 
AWS is unlike other recycling and solid waste entities.  The Board of Directors of AWS consists of 
appointed individuals from the four communities, appointed annual from their individuals select 
boards/councils. The Board generally meets monthly to evaluate operations, review financial statements, 
plan for future facility and program development, and approve annual budgets and appropriations.  Mark 
Draper is the Executive Director of AWS and is very knowledgeable and up to date with emerging 
technologies.  We are proud to provide an affordable, locally operated, regional recycling and solid 
waste solution for residents. 
 
I support the Committee’s efforts and the intentions behind L.D. 1171 but concerned about the fees it 
imposes during a time that we have had to struggle with costs increases- increases residents themselves 
are all too familiar with.  With the combined turmoil of decreased market for recyclables, AWS has tried 
to be fiscally responsible to our residents.   If L.D. 1171 is approved, then AWS will have to raise an 
additional $200,000 to $250,000 annually from local municipalities, to be sent the State.  Presque Isle 
residents will have to raise over $36,000 annually.  These additional fees will be a burden to our 
taxpayers.  I am concerned that the competitive grant program would not directly benefit the residents 
that paid the  additional fees.   
 
Due to the existing cost of municipal waste, lack of local control for the supplementary fees, and 
additional costs to taxpayers, I am strongly opposed to LD 1171.   
 
 
