 
◼  207-664-1700  
◼  execdirector@mrcmaine.org  
  20 Godfrey Drive, Suite 3 00◼ 
 Orono, ME 04473 ◼ 
www.mrcmaine.org  ◼ 
 
 
 
MRC Testimony on LD 1171 “An Act to Raise Funding to Support Waste Reduction, Reuse, 
Recycling and Composting in Maine”  
MRC Executive Director Michael Carroll  
April 5, 2023  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Joint Standing Comm ittee of 
Environment and Natural Resources (ENR), my name is Michael Carroll, and I  am the Executive 
Director of the Municipal Review Committee (MRC). I am submitting testimony neither for nor against 
LD 1171.  
 
As you know from our briefing to the ENR Com mittee on March 8, 2023, the MRC is diligently working 
toward reopening the Hampden facility, a recycling and municipal solid waste (MSW) processing 
facility in Hampden for the benefit of 115 Maine municipalities and its residents. This facility  was 
design ed in mind with the State of Maine’s Solid Waste H ierarchy for MSW  disposal  and has  proven 
to divert MSW from landfills . We are working tirelessly to open it again.  
 
MRC 115 members are locked into a 15 -year contract to dispose of their MSW with the Hampd en 
facility, which the clock starts at commercial operations or 01/01/2024, whichever comes first. Raising 
tip fees on landfilling would put additional financial burdens on us and waste management 
organizations like ours , making it more difficult to reopen  and operate to provide necessary services 
to their communities. This added financial pressure could make it even more challenging to achieve 
our goal of reopening , Municipal Waste Solutions (MWS), the new identity of the Hampden facility, 
and increased MS W diversion  from landfills .  
 
The Hampden facility is an essential part of the region's waste management infrastructure, and its 
closure has had a significant impact on the surrounding communities / Our members have committed 
to what the State is asking  by contract ing long term with a  facility that falls higher up the  hierarchy of 
waste disposal . The MRC has been working tirelessly to find a way to reopen the facility, and 
increasing tip fees would only serve to impede our progress and make it more  difficult to achieve our 
goal. MRC members have already chosen to do the right thing and have locked in on long -term waste 
solutions at a fixed rate. The tip fees proposed in LD 1171  should not apply to the processing 
facilities considered in the hierarc hy during bypass times , whether that is  for the restart or times of 
annual maintenance.  
 
For the hierarchy  of landfill I believe  there are aspects of this legislation that would take our region 
and state backward  rather than forward . By making landfilling more expensive, this legislation has the 
unintended consequence of disincentivizing waste processing and recycling at MWS .  
 
I urge you to consider exceptions to this legislation that would not penalize the MRC or similar 
organizations. Doing s o would help to protect the interests of the MRC who are working to reopen the 
Hampden facility and provide essential waste management services to their communities.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this important matter.  Please do not hesitate to con tact me if you 
have any questions.  
 
 
 

