 
 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Opposition To 
LD 1171 - An Act to Raise Funding to Support Waste Reduction, Reuse, Recycling and Composting in 
Maine 
April 5, 2023 
 
Sen. Brenner, Rep. Gramlich and distinguished members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham and I submitting testimony in opposition LD 1171 - 
An Act to Raise Funding to Support Waste Reduction, Reuse, Recycling and Composting in Maine, on 
behalf of the Maine Municipal Association, which represents the interests of municipal government 
before the Legislature. The positions of the Association are established by our 70-member Legislative 
Policy Committee (LPC), who are elected by the councils and selectboards of municipalities in each of 
Maine’s 35 Senate districts. 
This bill will not generate the effects it intends to because the setting for it to succeed has not 
been previously fostered and does not exist, despite raises to fees in the past years. Overnight LD 1171 
creates a five-fold increase in disposal fees that municipalities can do nothing to avoid on behalf of the 
businesses and residents they serve.  
Revenue from municipal waste management services cannot keep pace with expenses, yet the 
service must be provided. LD 1171 further places communities and its property taxpayers between a rock 
and a hard place to support a grant program for which they will never benefit from. 
As drafted, this bill suggests the funds that municipalities pay at the landfill will continue to 
support a grant program to those same communities that have available recycling facilities. This is a 
southern Maine benefiting program funded on the backs of rural communities in northern and western 
Maine, suggesting that they too can benefit from the grant program. They cannot, do not and there is no 
evidence to date that the existing grant program provides the education or outcomes that it continues to 
suggest occurs.  
The existing competitive grant process also raises concerns. Municipal officials recognize that 
private entities are equally entitled to a portion of the redistribution since they pay considerable fees, 
however the process is not equal. The Solid Waste Diversion Program assumes public entities have the 
same resources to compete with private entities for grant funds. In most cases municipalities cannot keep 
up. 

In summary the bill: (1) pushes an already expensive service to further levels of unaffordability; 
(2) offers no practical near-term alternatives to the disposal method it seeks to disincentivize; (3) steals 
revenue for the implementation of locally appropriate solutions; (4) provides an underwhelming return on 
investment to those paying fees; and (5) promotes a grant program that is not strongly supported nor 
equally beneficial at the municipal level. 
 For these reasons, municipal officials are strongly opposed to LD 1171 and any effort to reduce 
the landfilling of solid waste until there is ubiquitous alignment in solid waste policy, adequate and 
uniform access to facilities across the state for recycling a waste reduction, and recognition that 
municipalities are not the generators of the waste they must dispose of with no viable market alternative 
solution.  
 
