Natural Resources Council of Maine 
3 Wade Street Q Augusta, Maine 04330 a (207) 622-3101 ~ Fax: (207) 622-4343 e www.nrcm.org 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against LD 1171, 
An Act to Raise Funding to Support 
Waste Reduction, Reuse, Recycling and Composting in Maine 
Sarah Nichols, NRCM Sustainable Maine Director 
April 5, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Sarah Nichols, and I am the Sustainable Maine 
Director for the Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM). I appreciate this opportunity to 
speak to you neither for nor against LD 1171. 
NRCM endorses the fundamental rationale behind LD 1171, which is the use of ﬁnancial 
incentives to encourage generators of waste to move materials up the solid waste hierarchy. 
However, we do not believe that now is the right time to impose a signiﬁcant $5 per ton increase 
to Maine’s municipal taxpayers for disposal of municipal solid waste (MSW) or municipal solid 
Waste ash, nor for disposal of construction and demolition debris (CDD), or residue from 
processing that debris. We reach this conclusion for three reasons: 
0 First, municipalities that have contracted with Casella to dispose of their sludge have 
experienced a sudden unanticipated price increase, and this proposal would impose yet 
another signiﬁcant increase for which they haven’t budgeted. 
0 Second, municipalities continue to struggle with the cost of managing packaging 
materials through recycling or disposal while they await the beneﬁts of Maine’s new 
Extended Producer Responsibility for Packaging law due to be implemented by 2027. 
Beneﬁts of that law include an equitable shift of waste management costs from taxpayers 
to the producers of packaging waste and creating more opportunities to reduce, reuse, 
recycle, and avoid disposal fees throughout the state. We believe a better time to consider 
higher disposal fees would be after the EPR for Packaging program has been 
implemented. 
0 And third, at the present time, Maine has limited options for moving CDD materials up 
the waste hierarchy. Thus, it would not be fair for the State to increase CDD disposal 
costs until more sustainable waste management options are widely available. 
We also are concemed that LD 1171 is not clear about how the funds generated through the fee 
increases would be utilized and how that might impact existing beneﬁcial programs. The $2/ton 
fee generated from MSW and MSW ash is currently being deposited into the Maine Solid Waste 
Management Fund, which supports the Maine Solid Waste Diversion Grant Program. And the 
$2/ton generated from CDD is currently used to reimburse municipalities for iandiill closure 
gag, and there is an additional $3/ton CDD disposal fee accumulating to the Maine 
Redevelopment Land Bank Fund. 
Thank you for your consideration of these comments, and I am happy to answer any questions.
