i %-~ i w-.1--ww-tr» wvs 31 Freedom Parkway @ Hermon, ME 04401 p. 207-848-7551 ~ f. 207-848-5581 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee 
Testimony of Shelby D Wright, Manager of Engagement, Casella 
Neither For] Nor Against 
LQ 1171 
April 5, Z Q23 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and esteemed members of the joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Shelby Wright, and I am the 
Eastern Region Manager of Engagement for Casella. 
Thank you for the opportunity to address LD 1171 “An Act to Raise Funding to Support Waste 
Reduction, Reuse, Recycling and Composting in Maine" which proposes an increase of fees 
levied for some solid waste that is disposed of at commercial, municipal, state-owned, and 
regional association landﬁlls. 
Materials included for a proposed $5 fee increase are MSW/ash and construction and 
demolition debris and residue from the processing of construction and demolition debris. 
While it is well established that ‘Reduction, Reuse and Recycling are the ﬁrst and highest goals 
in the never-ending quest to eliminate waste in our consumer driven society, we believe that 
the proposals in LD 1171 do not fully support Maine's solid waste hierarchy. 
By continuing the historical practice of equating raw materials with processed materials for 
the purpose of landﬁll disposal fees, LD 1171 doesn't take the opportunity presented to 
promote recycling. 
At this time in particular, we ﬁnd ourselves collectively working toward increasing the 
recycling rate for CDD. Casella is working diligently to support volume reduction and 
encourage the recycling of more in state generated CDD to offset the recent loss of these 
materials from other sources. 
Yet, Ll) 1171 misses an opportunity to incentivize the processing and recycling of raw ('IDD 
materials. 
An alternative idea would be to establish lower disposal fees on processed CDD materials, 
this in and of itself, could promote more recycling of CDD materials and thus volume 
reduction on those materials disposed of in landﬁlls. 
It could also act to spur more in-state recycling of CDD at a time when (IDD process residual 
(OBW] is desperately needed as a bulking agent for the increase volumes of municipal WWTP 
sludge being disposed of at the state-owned landﬁll. 
Casella is neither for nor against LD 1171. I welcome the opportunity to answer questions 
and be available for the work session on this bill. 
Shelby D Wright 
Eastern Region Manager of Engagement, Casella 
RECYCLING ' SOLUTIQNS ' ORGANICS ' COLLECTlON ' ENERGY ' LANDFILLS casella com
