l\/lArNi: ASSOCIATION 
or 
HEALTH PLANS 
Testimony of Dan Demeritt - March 7, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Testimony in Opposition 
LD 722 An Act to Expedite the Health Insurance Referral Process for Specialists by 
Allowing Referrals from Urgent Care Facilities 
Senator Bailey, Representative Peny, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
My name is Dan Demeritt. I am the Executive Director of the Maine Association of Health Plans 
(MeAHP). Our member plans include Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Cigna, CVS / Aetna, 
Community Health Options, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, and United Health Care. They 
provide or administer health insurance to about 600,000 Maine people. 
Our mission as an association is to improve the health of Maine people by promoting affordable, 
safe, and coordinated healthcare. 
Maine’s health care system is designed with primary care providers at its core. Carrier networks, 
our healthcare systems, and our laws — including the requirements that patients receive their first 
primary care and behavioral health office visits Without cost -sharing every year — place primary 
care providers at the center of healthcare coordination. 
The Wait times that can make it difficult for patients to see a primary care provider can be even 
longer when it comes to seeing a specialist. This corrnrrittee has had many discussions already 
this session about access to care and What needs to be done to increase Maine’s physician 
Workforce. We are also concemed referral parity would disincentivize patients from establishing 
a health home with a primary care provider. 
Creating referral parity among urgent care centers and primary care physicians may make for 
faster referrals but significantly increase the number of patients referred to specialists without the 
expertise and patient insights of a PCP. It also circumvents the primary care provider responsible 
for coordinating the member’s care. The primary care provider needs a complete picture of the 
patient’s health issues and health care needs. 
In a time when we have shortages of healthcare service providers, our standards of care and 
policies must focus on achieving the best possible outcomes. 
Thank you for the chance to speak with you today. We urge the committee to vote ought-not-to- 
pass. 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine (207)852-2087
