The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings. 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health all Maine people
TO: Joint Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance & Financial Services
FROM: Dan Morin, Director of Communications and Government Affairs
DATE: Tuesday, March 7, 2023
RE: NFNA, LD 722; Act to Expedite the Health Insurance Referral Process for 
Specialists by Allowing Referrals from Urgent Care Facilities
The Maine Medical Association appreciates the opportunity the submit the following comments 
Neither for Nor Against for LD 722. The MMA is the largest statewide professional association 
of physicians representing over 4,300 current and future Maine physicians in all clinical 
specialties, organizations, and practice settings.
Opinions on this bill ranged from total opposition to complete support. Mostly what we heard was 
the need for any potential legislation to be written more specifically with a focus on medium 
ground.
While we appreciate some children and families use acute care services outside the medical 
home because there is a perceived or real benefit related to accessibility, convenience, or cost 
of care, MMA leadership urges legislators, including payers, to avoid any incentives that 
encourage visits to external entities for acute issues as a first preference over the medical home 
primary care clinician. 
Reforms in delivery should focus on care management planning, chronic care management, and 
transitional care management rather than episodic care. Primary care clinicians are critical in 
any potential shift to value-based care. The primary goal should be preventing disease and 
illness rather than proverbial Band-Aids of care and putting out fires and increases in the 
traditional volume-based medical care model leading to more fragmented care.
There were cases members were supportive of LD 722 covering and expressed willingness to 
take the risks that some patents may be inappropriately or inefficiently referred to ensure faster 
access to needed care.
Here are isolated examples from a spectrum of scenarios discussed surrounding LD 722:
Areas where it makes perfect sense. 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings. A child visits urgent care for a fracture and is referred to orthopedics. There should be no 
need for a primary care visit and referral.
Areas where it would not be preferred. 
Referral to a nephrologist due to an abnormal lab test.
In addition, most general surgeons approached did/do not support referrals from urgent care 
because there hasn’t been a comprehensive medical workup. They prefer primary care clinician 
evaluation.
The last bullet point prompted extended discussion on the current challenges of unavailable 
and/or limited capacity of existing health services in our communities. The MMA has received 
regular and consistent concerns from smaller independent practice primary care members of the 
current and serious systemic constraints of physician specialties outright refusing out of system 
referrals due to capacity issues. We are searching for creative ways to help them navigate the 
limited resources available within our current system for existing patient referrals.  
The legislation could be helpful if the referrals are based on best practices, appropriate 
standards, and makes logical sense but how will that be determined?
The Maine Medical Association thanks the committee for accepting our comments.
