Lisa M. Keim _, 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 19 l av 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
Assistant Republican Leader THE MLAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Lisa Keim before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
LD 269, “An Act to Designate Granitic Pegmatite as the Maine State Rock 
February 14, 2023 
Good Afternoon Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Govermnent. I am Lisa Keim, and I proudly represent the citizens of 
Senate District 19, which includes much of Northern Oxford County and Northern Franklin County. I 
am proud to sponsor LD 269, “An Act to Designate Granitic Pegmatite as the Maine State Rock.” 
This bill idea was brought to me by my constituent, Myles Felch, Curator and Staff Geologist at the 
Maine Mineral and Gem Museum. Located in Bethel, this remarkable museum showcases Maine’s 
geological history, displays renowned mineral and rock collections speciﬁc to our state, providing 
educational opportunities that includes a display focused solely on pegmatites. My tour of the Museum 
reignited my rockhounding interests, and gave me a greater appreciation for formations I walk on 
every day, yet hardly consider the wonders they contain, especially the focus of today’s bill, Maine’s 
oh-so-common Granitic Pegmatite. 
Granitic Pegmatite ’s importance to Maine comes from its prevalence in the State, its ties to the history 
of Maine, and that it is the host rock for the Maine State Mineral, Tourmaline. Granitic Pegmatite can 
be found in at least 14 of Maine’s counties, and is still being quarried in many Maine towns including 
Auburn, Newry, Paris and Poland. 
Pegmatites have brought and continue to bring Maine international recognition. In 1820, the year of 
Maine’ statehood, the ﬁrst discovery of gem tourmaline was made at Mt. Mica in Paris. The Roebling 
apatite, considered one of the great mineral specimens in the world, from the Pulsifer Quarry in 
Auburn is displayed at the Smithsonian lnstitution. Some of these pegmatites in Maine also host 
economic quantities of spodumene, a mineral resource that is essential to the development of Lithium- 
ion battery, which are key to meeting the demands of energy and technological development. 
When Myles ﬁrst approached me, I was surprised to learn that Maine had not already designated a 
State Rock, after all, tourmaline was designated as the state gemstone in 1971. I am excited to havea 
small part in hopefully making it happen. I highly recommend a committee tour of the Maine Mineral 
and Gem Museum as you consider this bill; it will inspire pride in our state and the vast and beautiful 
material that makes up our land. 
Granitic Pegmatite seems a perfect ﬁt. It has signiﬁcant historical signiﬁcance to the State, while at 
the same time, has the potential to be a critical part of our future. 
I thank you for your consideration of this bill, and suggest you reserve questions for Myles Felch, who 
will be presenting on this bill. His love of rocks and incredible knowledge of geology will be so much 
more inspiring than any answers I provide. 
Govermnem ()vers1'g/it (.‘ 0mmi1‘tee 
Stare House (20?) Z87-1505 * Fc1x(2U7) 287-1527 * T0/I Free I-800-423-6900 * 'I7'l"7]I 
Lisa. Keinz@feg{slafm~e, mamegov * fegis/c1f2z1*e.I1;'c1ine.gr)w/ivenate
