2/14/2023 
l.D#269 Testimony 
Dear Members of the State and Local Government Committee, 
Good afternoon and Happy Valentine's day! 
l'd like to thank committee Chairs, Tim Nangle and Holly Stover and the entire State and Local 
Government Committee for allowing me to speak with you today and testify in favor the 
l.D#269: An act to designate granitic pegmatite as the Maine state rock 
My name is Myles Felch and l am a Curator and Geologist at the Maine Mineral & Gem Museum 
located in Bethel, ME. And l am here today to provide a guick geology lesson and more 
importantly to explain the significance of one particular rock type: Granitic Pegmatite. 
S0, class is in session, let's get the terminology down first 
1) Granite, a familiar rock type that was quarried extensively in Maine, is an igneous rock, 
meaning it cooled and crystallized from a magma. Granite is primarily composed of2 
minerals: feldspar and quartz, where individual grains are commonly under an inch in 
size. 
2) Pegmatite is also an igneous rock; however, it contains very large mineral grains. For 
context, some crystals from Maine pegmatites have been found up to 30' in length (see 
image at the end of this testimony)l 
3) So, a Granitic Pegmatite is a rock that has the composition of granite, but with 
exceedingly large crystals. However, some pegmatites in Maine also contain rare and 
unusually mineral species that have been prized by miners and field collectors for over 
200 years! Such as the state mineral tourmaline 
Granitic pegmatite is a very common rock type found in at least 14 of 16 counties including 
many of Maine's State and National parks: Acadia, Bradbury Mountain, Grafton Notch, 
Popham, Reid, Wolfes Neck are just a few examples. Although the most well-known quarries 
are located in Western and Midcoastal Maine 
In 1820, the first discovery of gem tourmaline in North America was made at Mt. Mica, in the 
town of Paris. However, pegmatite mining really began in the mid 18005 with the pursuit for 
feldspar to make porcelain products. Mica and numerous other ore minerals were recovered 
from these deposits over the years, including the lithium-bearing mineral, spodumene.
Subsequent discoveries of tourmaline over the years have provided enough gem rough to make 
tourmaline an economically viable gem material, including the largest single discovery of gem 
tourmaline discovery in north America at the Dunton Quarry in Newry Maine, nearby the site of 
the propose lithium mine which as been in the news. The fabulous 1972 discovery was made 
one year Qf§gTourma|ine was designated the Maine state mineral! 
But tourmaline is not the only gem material derived from some of Maine's granitic pegmatites. 
Several quartz varieties including amethyst, rose and smoky as well as beryl varieties like 
aquamarine, heliodor and morganite are also abundant enough that they too are marketable. 
With over two centuries of pegmatite mining in Maine, these deposits have fostered an entire 
industry of miners, gem cutters and minerals shops stretching from Bethel to Machias. They 
have also provided countless opportunities for recreating in the outdoors as families and "rock— 
hounds" try their luck at finding minerals all while learning about geology. 
There is even an entire museum devoted to preserving and presenting the history of pegmatite 
mining in the state: The Maine Mineral & Gem Museum. 
Lastly, l want to demonstrate that many of us, perhaps unknowingly have a relationship with 
this rock type. Let's have a little classroom participation, please: 
Show of hands, who in the room has 0 cellphone? 
Great, like I thought, everyone in this room has a cell phone, therefore everyone in this room 
has lithium on them in the form of a lithium-ion battery. According to the USGS, over half the 
world's lithium is derived from granitic pegmatites, so statistically speaking, over half of us in 
the room have lithium originating from the mineral, spodumene, which is found in some 
granitic pegmatites. 
This designation of Granitic Pegmatite as the ME state rock is a means to start a productive 
conversation and bring an awareness to where our mineral resources are derived past, present 
and future. 
l want to thank you for your time and am happy to take any questions. 
Myles Felch 
Curator, Maine Mineral & Gem Museum 
Bethel, Maine
Granitic Pegmatite (white) cross cutting metamorphic rocks in midcoastal 
Ivlaine. Pegmatites in Maine range in width from a few feet to hundreds of 
feet in width. David P. West photo, courtesy of the Maine Geological Survey.
»
4 
_ 5% \ .11“- . ‘ctr <~
* 
~ ~ , 
xX 
Circa 1927, Large beryl crystals from the Bumpus Quarry, Albany, Oxford Co.,ME
"Watermelon" tourmaline slices from l\/lt. Mica, Paris, Oxford Co., ME. 
\ .».>%;%< », 
Remains of a tourmaline pocket, an open cavity in solid rock, 
at the Havey Quarry, Poland, Androscoggin Co., ME. Note the 
pink and green colors of tourmaline and lepidolite mica.
