. 
U, ., _<.@~~ 
‘a .- /-‘ 
\A __' 
Richard A. Bennett 5 3 State House Station 
Senator, District I8 Augusta, Maine 04333 7' 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
In Support of LD 269, “An Act to Designate Granitic Pegmatite as the Maine State Rock” 
14 February 2023 
Good Afternoon Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on State and Local Government. I am Senator Rick Bemaett of Oxford, and 
I have the honor of serving 14 communities in Western Maine in the State Senate. I am pleased 
to cosponsor LD 269, “An Act to Designate Granitic Pegmatite as the Maine State Rock.” 
Granitic Pegmatite has a rich history throughout Maine, and as you have heard the rock hosts the 
Maine State Mineral, Tourmaline. According to the Department of Agriculture, Conservation 
and Forestry ’s website, “The best [tourmaline] examples in Maine are found in a very coarse- 
grained type of granite called ‘pegmatite. ’ The slow cooling and solidiﬁcation of the pegmatite 
veins allowed the mineral grains to grow to much larger sizes than in ordinary granite. The black 
tourmaline crystals and many of the brightly colored ones are usually encased in the surrounding 
rock. However, conditions in some places favored the development of open cavities in which 
elbaite crystals grew with greater perfection and clarity. These pegmatite ‘pockets’ are the source 
of Maine's ﬁnest gem tourmalines. ” 
There is a long history of industry here in Maine centered on our superior totnmalines. 
Beginning in the mid-1800s mining began in the Topsham and Georgetown region and continues 
to this day in other locations. Areas of my district have become meccas for amateur rockhounds 
as well as for more commercial actors, having yielded some of the most remarkable gem 
discoveries in history. Our mineral shops and an industry of gem cutting bring in state revenue 
throughout Maine. There is also a world-class museum in Bethel that preserves and presents that 
history: The Maine Mineral & Gem Museum. 
I am extremely proud to represent the town where the ﬁrst discovery of gem tourmaline was 
made, and I encourage you all to support this legislation. Thank you. I would be happy to 
answer any questions. 
Fax: (207) 287-1527 * 77')’ (207) 287-1583 * Message Service I-800-4236900 * Web Site: legislature.maine.g0v/senate
