  February 9, 2023
State  and Local Gove rnment Committe e
LD# 269 -  An Act to De signate Granitic P egmatite  as th e Maine State  Rock
Dear Senator Nan gle, Representative  Stove r, and Maine’s State -and-Local Gove rnment
Committe e, 
I am w riting to you in  suppor t of LD#269 th at is pr esented to de signate Granitic
Pegmatite  as th e Maine State  Rock. On e may q uestion  why our  state  should h ave identify this
geological f eature of our state  as w orthy of recogn ition ; the answer lies in the fact th at M aine
pegmatite s are unique. The min erals found in these rocks n ot on ly have playe d a r ole in our
economy, but w ill enhance our state ’s wealth as e xplor ation  continues and new deposits ar e
unearthed an d brough t to mar ket. I suspe ct th at th e legislatur e is familiar  with the recent
discove ry of a, heretofore, unexpected de posit of  a podume ne-rich pegmatite  on the north side
of Plumbago M ountain in Oxf ord Coun ty. Th e min eral, podume ne (a lith ium- alumin ium
inosilicate ), is n ot a h ouse hold name  and on e would n ot be  amiss it h ad ever crosse d on e’s
path . Yet, the min eral is a pr incipal sour ce of lithium w hich is requisite  for our electronics an d
batte ry industr ies in ever increasing quantities. Until recently, most of  the world’s lith ium
supply or iginated from Ch inese deposits. A nd, as w e are aware, tension s between the U.S. an d
China can  be volatile  depending on  what political e vents occur . With an increasing
production and futur e reliance on electrical ve hicles in our coun try, economists h ave continued
to be  concerned about th is par ticular  supply ch ain. The podume ne deposit of  the Plumbago
North Pegmatite , which may por tend th e discove ry of addition al min eral resour ces, has be en
estimate d to con tain 10 M t of ore with a higher than average Li2O con tent w hich is gr eater than
any of the ten top spodume ne-producin g de posits in  the world. P relimin ary estimate s of its
value  in 2020 e xceeded 1 billion  dollar s. Hence, once these resour ces are extracted an d refined,
we all w ill be nefit. No oth er Maine min eral h as had, or  will have, such  an impact on  our state
and its citize ns. But, podume ne will con tinue to remain  essentially un known to th e average
American. This is be cause  one Maine min eral recove red from pe gmatite , tour malin e, has be en
revered for the past tw o centuries.
I suspe ct th at tour malin e is familiar  in any an d all M aine house holds, an d I don ’t
believe I need to r epeat its h istor y, economic, or  cultur al valuation . A quick Google  search
returns mor e than 1.5 million  results in  less th an a se cond. A nd, as pe gmatite  deposits w ould
have it, a 1972 discove ry of the min eral on  Plumbago M ountain shocked the gem-and-mineral
world. Tw o me tric ton s of gems w ere recove red from th e “Big P ocket” w hich was th e largest
gem find in Nor th America. A t the time , the tour malin e was value d at ~$50 million  dollar s
which, at today’ s cur rency, is w orth mor e than $361 million  dollar s. As such , the Maine
legislatur e has de signated it as th e Maine Mineral. Now  is th e time  to de signate its h ost rock,
Granitic P egmatite , as th e state ’s rock.
I look f orward to r eadin g about th e succe ssful passage  of LD#269 in  the current
legislative  session  because , I be lieve, this is an  uncontentious issue  and can  only be  of value  to
the State . If I may be  of any further assistan ce in the deliberation s of the committe e or
legislative  body, ple ase feel free to con tact me .
Sincerely,
Robe rt A. Gastaldo
Whipple -Coddin gton  Professor of Geology, Eme ritus
Portland, M aine
