TO: The Honorable Joseph Baldacci 
The Honorable Michele Meyer, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
DATE: April 4, 2023 
RE: LD 536 - An Act to Provide Natural Organic Reduction Facilities for Maine 
Residents for the Conversion of Human Remains to Soil i 
My name is Debra McDonough and I am a 20-year resident of Scarborough. I'm here today to 
testify in support of LD 536 - An Act to Provide Natural Organic Reduction Facilities for 
Maine Residents for the Conversion of Human Remains to Soil. I want to thank 
Representative Doudera and the impressive list of cosponsors, many of whom submitted similar 
pieces of legislation that have been combined into the bill in front of you. 
I support LD 536 because I want Natural Organic Reduction for my own end of life care - and 
without this legislation this option won’t be available to me. I am by training a biologist, by 
persuasion an organic gardener and by vocation an advocate for creation care, and I believe 
that the molecules currently serving as an essential component of my own body are also an 
essential component of the broader nutrient cycle - a cycle that is disrupted by many of the 
common funerary practices. 
I first encountered this concept last summer when I arrived at my parents’ house in Colorado. 
After the obligatory round of Dad’s “When-I-Die-Scavenger-Hunt, ” he announced that he’s 
changed his mind and wants to be composted. I told him l’d do what I could, but was pretty 
sure that wasn't legal. As fate would have it, the podcast l’d cued up for the next leg of my drive 
included an interview with Katrina Spade, describing the phenomenal work she and her 
colleagues have done in Washington state to develop a safe, ecologically sound and respectful 
process to return a human body to the soil. That night in my motel, I learned that Colorado had 
recently passed enabling legislation. I also learned that Maine had not. 
And that's where you come in. I hope that each of you will support this bill, so that I - and others 
in Maine who feel as I do - can choose Natural Organic Reduction for our end of life care. The 
beautiful thing about this bill is that it does not restrict the options for anyone else. People who 
want to be buried in a cemetery can still choose to be buried in a cemetery. People who want to 
be cremated can choose cremation. This bill simply expands our options. 
I do have one more request. The end product of Natural Organic Reduction is finished compost 
— safe and suitable for use as a soil amendment. lt’s not clear to me from the bill text whether 
the family or authorized representative of the deceased will be able to retrieve this material for 
use on their own landscape plantings. While I can not predict what my own family might 
choose, I do encourage you to ensure that this will be an option.
