Karen Marysdaughter
Bangor
LD 536
LD 536 - Natural Organic Reduction - Testimony
March, 2023
Karen Marysdaughter
21 Mt Desert Dr.
Bangor, ME  04401
To the Members of the Health and Human Services Committee:
I am writing to urge you to support LD 536, “An Act to Provide Natural Organic 
Reduction Facilities for Maine Residents for the Conversion of Human Remains to 
Soil”.
I and my partner grow most of our own vegetables in our large urban garden, and I 
am a Master Gardener Volunteer with Cooperative Extension.  We have composted 
all our food waste for decades to feed our garden.  The idea of composting human 
remains makes complete sense to me.
We have also worked very hard to live in an environmentally sustainable way, which 
has included living on a lower income than many of our peers.  We would like the 
disposal of our remains after death to reflect the environmental values we have 
practiced in life and to be financially viable for us and our families.
Current practices for disposing of human remains are environmentally detrimental, 
expensive, and a poor use of land.  Burial usually involves embalming with harmful 
chemicals that then leach into the surrounding soil and water.  It is resource intensive 
in its use of materials for coffins and in the manufacturing of coffins, as well as labor 
intensive in the embalming and burial process.  It requires setting aside land that can 
never again be used for other purposes, and maintaining cemeteries in perpetuity.  A 
traditional burial can be very expensive.  Green burials are much more 
environmentally friendly, but still require setting aside land and maintaining it in 
perpetuity.  We simply have too many people on the planet to be setting aside burial 
plots for them.
Cremation, although a less expensive option than traditional burials, requires large 
amounts of energy to consume human remains, and releases toxic gasses into the 
atmosphere.  Alkaline hydrolysis is a good environmental alternative to traditional 
burials and cremation, but still uses lots of water in the process.
All this to say that I would like to see the option of Natural Organic Reduction added to what is
available in Maine.  Although I understand there are initial set up costs in terms of the 
composting bin materials, and some climate control costs for composting facilities, overall it 
eliminates most energy, pollution, and land use concerns.  It would still likely be more 
expensive than cremation, at least initially, although I hope other, less expensive options for 
composting human remains could be put in place over time.

