 
www.recompose.life  
 
To: Maine H ealth and Human Services Committee  
Dear Commi ttee,  
My name is K atrina Spade , founder and CEO of Recompose. Recompose is a  licensed funeral home  
based in Seattle, WA, that  provid es natural organic reduction to the publi c. We strongly support s LD 
536.  
Natural organic reduction  is safe, sustainable, and informed by nature. This process offers significant 
savings in carbon emissions and land usage over conventional burial or cremation. It also empowers 
consumers  with an additional end -of-life choice  and create s business opportunit ies for funeral homes to 
expand their offerings.  
As Recompose founder and CEO, I  deve loped the process of natural organic reduction . Recompose led 
the passage of SB 5 001 in Washington, which was the first bill in history to legalize natural organic 
reduction. Since opening in late 2020, Recompose has transformed over 250 bodies into soil and have 
over 1300 people who have signed up to choose Recompose for their future death care.  
Natural organic reduction has been proven safe and effective  and has been used in agricultural settings 
for over three decades . As a human death care option, it is already legal in six states including California 
and New York. It has been practiced safely since 2020 in Washington State.  
To demons trate the safety and efficacy of natural organic reduction, Recompose partnered with Dr. 
Lynne Carpenter -Boggs, professor of Soil Science at the College of Agriculture, Humans, and Natural 
Resources Sciences at Washington State University. This 2018 scient ific study found all safety thresholds 
were met, heavy metals were well under EPA limits, and over 95% reduction in pharmaceuticals that were tracked during the study.  
Natural organic reduction offers an additional choice for after -death care that is natu ral and sustainable. 
It is a respectful option for the individuals and families who find it  a meaningful choice, it is a business 
opportunity for the funeral industry,  and a carbon -friendly approach to disposition of remains.  
For the above reasons, Recomp ose is in strong support of LD 536.   
Sincerely,  
 
Katrina Spade  
CEO, Recompose   

