Nancy Audet
Topsham
LD 536
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and other members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services, my name is Nancy Audet, and I am 61 years old. 
I live in Topsham now but I spent the first 50 years of my life in Lewiston/Auburn.
I’m writing to urge you to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 536 An Act to Provide Natural Organic 
Reduction Facilities for Maine Residents for the Conversion of Human Remains to Soil.
I open with my age because I want you to understand the topic of end-of-life options is not 
theoretical to me. I am at the age where it’s a good idea to be thinking about such things. 
Both of my parents have passed away and I will be forever grateful to them for having 
planned and pre-paid for their funeral and burial arrangements. They took the burden of 
making such decisions while grieving the loss of a parent off the shoulders of me and my 
siblings. I would like to do the same for my own children.
When my parents died, it was so clear to me that what made them the people they were was 
gone. And what was left was a body that had been the vessel for their spirits during their 
lifetimes. That’s when I started to question traditional burials and began my quest to explore 
alternatives.
Since that time, I have done a fair amount of research into burial options. I’ve considered the 
pros and cons of cremation versus natural burial. I read about mushroom spore shrouds, and 
I looked into Maine laws regarding the disposition of human remains. And all the while, I 
remembered the gift my parents gave me – the gift of making their passing a little bit easier 
on their children.
It's no surprise that my research led to Natural Organic Reduction (NOR). NOR ticks off all 
the boxes for me – it’s better for the environment than either traditional burial or cremation, it 
allows me to plan ahead and take the burden off my children, and it allows my body to 
become one with the Maine soil I so dearly love.
The idea of being turned into compost and literally becoming one with nature appeals to me 
on many different levels.
Growing up and raising my children in Maine, I have a deep and abiding love of nature – the 
ocean, lakes and rivers, mountains, farmland, and forests. I love it all. I’ve passed that love to 
my children and I am now lucky to be sharing it with my grandchildren.
While I was never a very good gardener, I did pass along the value of eating locally grown 
food to my family. One of my daughters grows an amazing number and variety of vegetables 
in her backyard garden in Portland. And my other daughter operates a farmstead in Pownal 
with her husband where they grow fruits and vegetables and raise animals that supply their 
family with most of their food. When my daughter and her husband first bought 30 acres of 
mostly forested land, I half-jokingly said, “Oh good, now I have a place for a natural burial 
when I die.”
I recently asked my farmer daughter if she’d be willing to use compost made from my body on
her farm. Without hesitation, she answered, “Absolutely.” And then she added, “I like that 
much better than the thought of having to bury your body.” 
I urge you to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 536 so my family and I can have the wonderful 
experience of my body giving back to the land we love so much after my spirit is gone.

