Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services, my name is Peter Wiley, and I’ve been a resident of Brunswick for the last 15 years. I am here 
in support of LD 536, An Act to Provide Natural Organic Reduct ion Facilities for Maine Residents for 
the Conversion of Human Remains to Soil , and  I urge you to vote “Ought to Pass” on this legislation.  
I had not heard of n atural organic reduction until a few months ago, so you’re not alone if this seems 
like a new co ncept. I first heard about it in a newspaper article  I read  in December . It’s really a pretty 
simple concept that is more in line with what humans have done with bodies for thousands of years, 
excluding the last 150 years or so.  As the father of three scho ol-aged childre n, I try to do what I can to 
minimize the impact I have on the environment  and believe that collectively, we can act to turn the tide 
on climate change  to leave our children and grandchildren with a bright er future.  Natural organic 
reduction  would be a pretty easy way to reduce carbon emissions. When my wife and I started a family, 
I made up a will and I had noted that I want to be cremated, thinking this was an environmentally 
friendly option —it’s actually not, I’ve learned recently, at leas t compared to natural organic reduction. 
Natural organic reduction emits just one -eighth to one -tenth1 of the carbon dioxide emitted by 
cremation. Cremation is now the most popular option  in the US  for putting the dead to rest  (with 
cremation accounting for nearly 60%2 of those who die ), and Maine actually ranks second in the country 
in terms of cremation, with 80%2 of those who die being cremated.  Natural organic reduction would just 
be another consumer choice for folks, and that’s all we’re asking for here —that it be a choice. I want the 
freedom to decide what happens to my body , and that’s what this legislation will support.  
This legislation would also support a potential economic  opportunity for Maine for companies  that have 
already figured  out efficient technology for natural organic reduction . Why not welcome more business 
development in our state? NOR  would all take place within a licensed, regulated industry —this isn’t 
something anyone can just do in their backyard, and this legislation offers assurance  that only 
professionals will handle NOR . 
Also, Maine wouldn’t be the first state to make natural organic reduction legal. In fact, six other states 
have already gone before us. As you know well, many Mainers would surely welcome this eco -friendly 
option, wanting to be buried in a way that minimizes environmental impact.  
Finally, on a spiritual level, there’s some appealing to me about being folded back into the organic life 
cycle. Maybe that sounds weird  and some may say this isn’t a “digni fied” option , but for me, the idea of 
returning my body to natur e is perhaps the most dignified option with respect to this planet.  I know 
there are folks who might oppose this bill on religious grounds, but  as a Christian,  I find comfort in the 
Bible’s repeated reminders  that we’re all just made of this earth , like this one from Genesis  3:19, “By the 
sweat of your brow , you will eat your bread  until you return to the  ground, since from it you were taken; 
for dust you are and to dust you will return.”  NOR is very much in line with a Christian view on what 
should happen to our bodies when we die.  
Again, please pass  this legislation, and t hank you for listening to me  today. 
 
 
1 Caitlin Doughty,  “If You Want to Give Something Back to Nature, Give Your Body,” The New York Times , 12/5/22,  
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2022/12/05/opinion/human -composting- new -york.html   
2 Cremation Association of North Am erica , 3/29/03,  https://www.cremationassociation.org/page/IndustryStatistics  
