April 4, 2023 
Good morning Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services. 
I am grateful for the opportunity to share my support of LD 536--An Act to Provide Natural 
Organic Reduction Facilities for Maine Residents for the Conversion of Human Remains to 
Soil-- with you today. 
My name is Polly Shyka. I grew up in Orrington and I now live and work in Freedom. My 
husband and I own Villageslde Farm where we grow organic seedlings and vegetables for 
midcoast Maine. I am also an agricultural consultant and I am on the Spiritual Care Team at 
Inland Hospital in Waterville, where I serve ill and dying patients. I am studying to be a hospice 
and/or hospital chaplain. 
I'd like to talk a bit about soil and soil organic matter for my time with you this morning...and 
hopefully inspire you to see compost as an absolutely incredible gift to leave the earth and life 
on earth. . 
Natural organic reduction is, just as the words say, a natural and organic process where 
microbes that have co-evolved with terrestrial life over millions of years get to do their good work 
of reducing life forms to basic components. 
Some of these components are nutrients, meaning they can be taken up by plants and fungi 
and used in their growth, but some of these components are what farmers and soil scientists 
call soil organic matter. Soil organicmatter gives soil its structure. It is the matrix-- between rock 
fragments, water and air molecules. 
Simply put, many human actions destroy soil structure and soil organic matter, and composting 
is one of the few that creates it. 
Dr. Robert Parnes writes in Fertile Soil that 
“The most important benefit of organic residues is their effect on soil structure. Substitutes exist 
for all other benefits; for example we could spread commercial fertilizer and spray commercial 
pesticides...there is however, no practical way to produce a stable soil structure without organic 
residues. ” (Parnes, Robert, PhD. (1990) Fertile Soil. Davis, California: agAccess.p. 22) 
Compost and soil are incredible substances. In this tablespoon of soil from my farm fields there 
are more microbes than there are humans on earth. Billions. 
Some would say humans have created a lot of damage, cooked up multiple global crises in the 
last few thousand years. Clearly, there is not one answer to the predicament we are in.
We must discuss and make changes on one hundred, one thousand,.no, really, 151 thousand, 
different issues. We must piece together our understanding and try ten thousand new ideas and 
solutions in order for life on earth to continue. Like the best innovations, in my opinion, NOR 
takes its cues from nature and natural processes.p 
NOR is one innovation we can try. This process uses far less fossil fuel, hardwoods, steel, 
concrete and polluting chemicals than cemetery burial. Compared to cremation, NOR is net zero 
in carbon dioxide emissions. 
Let’s follow Washington state's and a growing number of other states’ lead and bring this option 
to Maine. 
l am very hopeful that LD 536 will make a clear, smooth path for this disposition choice to be 
added to the other options like burial and cremation in Maine. 
As a chaplain-to-be I understand and respect that each person has their own needs and desires 
for their end of life and after death decisions. I am not against other forms of disposition but l am 
very, gag much FOR the addition of Natural Organic Reduction as a choice for me, my 
neighbors, my children and family and thereby all Mainers. 
l urge you to vote “ought to pass” on LD536 in its current form and I look fon/vard to hearing any 
questions you may have of me or other advocates. Thank you for your time and consideration 
and for serving our state in all of the ways that you do. 
Polly Shyka 
Villageside Farm 
Freedom, ME 
pollyshyka@gmail.com
