' 
STEVE WEEMQ 44 THOMPSON STREET, BRUNS\VlCK, ME 040i i-3026 
Tel: {Z07} 729-7624 Cell: I207} 751-943? Email: slweemsQi:gmail.c0m 
Testimony in Support of LD 536 
An Act to Provide Natural Organic Reduction Facilities for Maine 
Residents for the Conversion of Human Remains to Soil 
Steven Weems, Resident of Brunswick, Maine 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
March 30, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and other distinguished members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services: my name is Steve 
Weems, a resident of Brunswick, Maine. Usually l'm across the hall at the Energy, 
Utilities and Technology Committee, volunteering on behalf of the Solar Energy 
Association of Maine. Today I appear as an individual with a great interest in the 
subject of LD 536. l fervently hope you can find a way to report it out favorably, 
which would allow me and other members of my family to become customers ofa 
facility offering natural organic reduction when we ”shuffle off this mortal coil." 
Thank you to Representative Doudera and her cosponsors for bringing it forward. 
s 
As a lone individual, I will be brief. Please know, however, that my plea for 
support of LD 536 is heartfelt.l
* 
I've been composting for over 50 years, professionally and personally. I've 
experienced compostingas a spiritually satisfying, natural organic reduction physical 
and chemical process. The organic residuals have great beneﬁts as a natural soil 
amendment. Done properly, natural organic reduction would be an affirming way 
for living family and friends to celebrate the cycle of life, knowing that selecting this 
choice was soothing to the departed individual. .
1
My dear mother passed away 28 years ago. Like many sons, I wish I had loved 
her more demonstratively when she was alive. Yet her spiritual presence continues 
as a great source of well-being. When she died, my youngest brother, in charge of 
an arboretum, dedicated a young fern-leaf beech tree to her, and nourished this tree 
with some of her ashes. Then a living cutting from this tree made its way to Maine, 
and took root in our back yard. Now this offspring is a beautiful juvenile tree, 
displaying, to me at least, the essence of my mother's gentleness, talent, and good 
will towards all living things. With this tree as a daily physical reminder, she 
continues to provide guidance and loving comfort. 
What do I wish? I would like to be able to instruct my spouse and two sons 
we brought into this world to compost my remains via the process of natural organic 
reduction that would be authorized by LD 536. Then celebrate my life by adding the 
remaining organic material to the soil around my mother's memorial tree, here in 
Maine. It's a simple wish that could be granted by enacting LD 536, with whatever 
improvements may be appropriate. Regarding technical details, I'll defer to others 
with more expertise and jurisdiction, including members of the Committee. 
It would be a great comfort to contemplate this natural disposal of my 
remains while I'm still around, as I'm sure it would be to other people as well. It 
would be a blessing to add a sustainable, natural option of this nature to the limited 
choices currently available. Thank you for your service and consideration. 
Weems LD 536 HHS Committee Testimony 3-30-23 (final)
2
