Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and other members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, 
I’m writing to urge you to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 536 An Act 
to Provide Natural Organic Reduction Facilities for Maine 
Residents for the Conversion of Human Remains to Soil. 
I am a resident of Lewiston, a former Clinical Laboratory 
Scientist with a graduate degree in Public Health, a former 
hospice volunteer, a chaplain in training, and presently working 
as a patient health care advocate and end of life navigator.  
Having choices in regard to the disposition of a dead body is 
important. There are a number of factors to consider; cost, 
convenience, cultural and religious sensibilities, and the 
environmental impact.  
The consideration of environmental impact of body disposition is 
important to me and to most people that I know. A conventional 
burial with embalming, a hardwood casket, a cement vault, and a 
deep hole in a cemetery is resource intensive, expensive, 
damaging to the environment, and not sustainable. Cremation 
burns fossil fuels, and emits carbon dioxide and dangerous 
particulates into the atmosphere. It’s not the environmentally 
sound alternative that we had hoped.  More options for body 
disposition that are environmentally sound, affordable, and 
accessible are needed.  
Natural Organic Reduction is one most environmentally sound 
options for body disposition requiring minimal resources to 
maintain a facility. The process replenishes   resources in the 
form of rich soil to the earth instead of removing.  NOR makes 
the option of natural decomposition available to the many folks 
who don’t have access to a green cemetery, or a homestead plot 
where a body can be laid to rest un-embalmed in a simple shroud 
or pine box. An option available to very few people.  
For me personally I can think of nothing more sacred that having 
my remains transformed to soil to nourish the earth that has 
sustained me.  I hope that this option becomes available here in 
Maine. Please vote “Ought to Pass”.  
 
Respectfully,  
Theresa Bessette, MPH, MT (ASCP), BCPA 
Lewiston, ME  
 
