1/25/23 5:35 PM 1Good afternoon (NEED NAMES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS).  
My name is Tracy Lentz, and I am the President of the National Institute of Funeral 
Service (NFIS), a proposed new funeral college in Maine.  I have been a funeral director for 27 
years, a funeral service professor for the last 15 years, and I sit on a crematories Board of 
Directors as well. 
I want to thank you for the opportunity to speak to you briefly and to answer any 
questions that you might have about Natural Organic Reduction - NOR (AKA Human 
Composting, or Terramation).  This proposed legislation would amend the current law to add 
natural organic reduction (NOR) as another disposition choice, providing a sustainable 
alternative to cremation and burial. It will conform NOR to existing death care laws and expand 
upon a precedent that gives families the right to choose their own method of disposition.
Up until now the normal means of disposition in Maine are burial and traditional 
cremation. This is the same for most states.  However, over the last few years we have seen a 
new concept of NOR.  It is now available in 6 states (Washington, Oregon, California, Vermont, 
Colorado, and New York).   
I would like to give you the basic facts about NOR.  It takes approximately 30-45 days and 
produces 1 cubic yard of soil.   In its simplest form, it is the transformation of human remains 
into soil. The process uses large vessels to hold human remains which are combined with straw, 
wood chips, and other natural materials. The decomposing process creates heat of over 131° F, 
which kills viruses (including Covid 19), bacteria, and pathogens, and exceeds EPA requirements 
for heavy metals, which are stabilized in the soil, not volatilized. The resulting soil is safe for 
gardens, trees and general land use. The NOR process does not smell, it creates a healthy 
environment for microbes to thrive, with a specific moisture content and ratio of carbon and 
nitrogen, which are contained in the soil and not released into the environment.
One might ask, why do we need to find another mode of disposition?  NOR is a green 
alternative, and according to the National Funeral Directors Association, 60.5% of people are 
interested in a green alternative.
Cornell University’s Mary Woodsen estimates that more than four million gallons of 
embalming fluid (a known carcinogen) are used in US burials each year, in addition to: 
“Cremation uses fossil fuels to maintain temperatures of 1900° F for between one and three 
hours at a time. Each cremation produces 535 lbs. of CO2, which is equivalent to a 609 mile car 
journey in an average sized car. In total cremation produces   about 1.04 billion lbs. of CO2 each 
year in the US alone.” At the peak of COVID-19 places like Los Angeles County, had so many 
1/25/23 5:35 PM 2bodies to cremate that air quality regulators temporarily lifted cremation limits meant to 
minimize air pollution.  Burial is not green either, it leaks chemicals into the ground and takes 
up scarce land.  NOR facilities that meet state permitting and licensing requirements could be 
located anywhere in Maine. The proposed bill will fall under the jurisdiction of the Division of 
Environmental Health, they are also responsible for the oversight of burial grounds, cemeteries, 
mausoleums, and crematoriums.
The question of safety also arises.  And yes, all research shows it is safe.  Farmers have 
used mortality composting for many decades in order to safely dispose of deceased livestock 
and control odor.  It has also been tested and scientifically proven at Western Carolina 
University and Washington State University (WSU) has demonstrated the viability of NOR as a 
natural method of disposition, and WSU’s Soil Science Department conducted a pilot study 
which proved the safety and efficacy of the process.
Is there a downside, yes it is costly; but can we put a price on the environment?  The cost 
for NOR is $5,000- $7,000.  Whereas a cremation cost $300- $600, and cemetery openings can 
be $800 to $4000 on average.  NOR is expensive because it requires a large start up cost for the 
pod system, and each pod is tied up for over month.  
This poses the question could I bury someone in my backyard? In rare instances people 
do, the law reads “burial on private property is possible in Maine. You must record a family 
burying ground of up to one quarter of an acre in the registry of deeds of the county where the 
body is buried. You must enclose the family burying ground with a fence or otherwise make it 
clear where the graveyard is situated. If you ever sell the property, you keep the right to access 
the graveyard. ( 13 M.R.S.A. § 1142).” And you still need a licensed funeral director to remove 
the body of the deceased (hospital, home, nursing home, etc.), the funeral director must also 
fill out a portion of the death certificate and file it to get the burial permit for you.
Thank you for your time.  If there are any questions, I would be happy to answer them.
