Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director
i 
Testimony 
In Support 
LD I592: An Act to Amend the Law Governing Special Motions to Dismiss to Include Workplace 
and Title IX Claims 
Ben Grant - General Council, Maine Education Association 
Before the Judiciary Committee 
April 24, 2023 
My name is Ben Grant (he/him) and I am proud to serve as General Counsel for the Maine Education 
Association (MEA). The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, including teachers and 
other professionals in nearly every public school in the state, and faculty and other professional staff in 
the University of Maine and Community College Systems. 
I am pleased to convey the MEA’s support for LD 1592. As the Committee knows, there are a few bills 
this session designed to make changes to Maine's anti-SLAPP statute. LD 1592 is one of those proposals 
that we gag support, as it does create additional, important protections for certain kinds of speech - in 
this case what is required for an individual to pursue legal action under the Maine Human Rights Act 
and under Title IX. 
The law should not be a tool for aggrieved parties to shut the courthouse door on legal claims. There 
are already procedural hurdles in place to weed out non-meritorious claims — like the sufficiency 
determination by the MHRC, or motions to dismiss in civil court. Though I am not aware of the specific 
circumstances giving rise to this bill, it is easy to infer that a frustrated defendant attempted to suea 
discrimination claimant for defamation based on statements made in support of the claim. As a policy, 
we should not stand for this type of manipulation of the laws of defamation. It is difficult enough fora 
person to endure the facts of discrimination and then to have the courage to make a legal claim.A 
policy that allows these claims to be attacked in such a way will only serve to have a chilling effect on 
legitimate claims that need to be brought into the light. 
Maine has a long-established process for making discrimination claims. Anti-SLAPP should be 
strengthened to ensure that this process remains viable for claimants. For these reasons, the MEA is in 
support of LD 1592. Thank you for your service to the people of Maine and I will do my best to answer 
any questions you may have. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 06330 I I349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 06736 I 29 Christopher Toppl Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
