 SUSTAINABILITY  
OFFICE  
 
CASHEL STEWART  
Sustainable Transportation 
Coordinator  
 
Testimony of Cashel Stewart, City of South Portland Sustainable Transportation 
Coordinator  
In Support of LD 256: An Act to Add Electric Bicycles to the Electric Vehicle Rebate 
Program  
Hearing Date: February 7, 2023  
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler , and members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities 
and Technology, I appreciate the opportunity to testify in support of LD 256: An Act to Add 
Electric Bicycles to the Electric Vehicl e Rebate Program.  
I am here today to share three points from a municipal perspective:  
Electric b icycling offers enormous promise for our climate action goals.  
The transportation sector is responsible for over half of Maine’s greenhouse gas emissions. In 
South Portland, it’s responsible for 32% of our emissions. While automobiles have an  
inevitability in Maine and automobile electrification and alternative fuels will play a crucial role 
in reducing these emissions, the most impactful change we can make is through mode shift . It is 
well-documented that r eplacing vehicle miles traveled (VMT) with bicycling leads to substantial 
decreases in greenhouse gas emissions , essentially eliminating emissions . A majority of 
automobile trips are under 5 miles, trips t hat could easily be offset with an electric bicycle.  
One Climate Future , South Portland’s joint climate action plan with Portland, passed in 2020, 
sets the goal that 26% of trips in the two  cities will use public transit or active transportation by 
2035.   The most r ecent assessment has it at 12%. The plan also sets the  goal of 5% of all trips 
will be completed by bike by 2040. It is currently at less than 1%.  
Maine Won’t Wait , the state’s climate action plan passed in 2020, sets a goal to reduce light -duty 
VMT by 10% by 2025 and 20% by 2030.  
Electric Bicycles are a game -changer compared to conventional bicycles.  
A common deterrent  for prospective bicyc le commuters , especially  as a commuting option,  is the 
physical exertion required of it. Electric bicycles allow the rider to traverse roads and paths with 
relative ease, reducing the need to overexert. It also opens up a world of activity for  work 
commuters,  the elderly , and mob ility-impaired, who would otherwise not be able to confidently  
and conveniently  bicycle. Electric bicycles allow the rider to go further distances, upwards of 40 
miles on a single charge , allowing for more vehicle trips to be replaced. Electric bicycles also 
 SUSTAINABILITY  
OFFICE  
 
CASHEL STEWART  
Sustainable Transportation 
Coordinator  
allow for the r ider to easily haul cargo such as groceries and even other people, potentially 
offsetting even more vehicle trips.  
Creating a culture of bicycling is a key component of One Climate Future  and aligned with a 
number of programs and polici es the City is working on. The City is currently developing a 
Street Design Technical Manual to put into action its complete street policy adopted in 2017  and 
continues to expand and  improve its bicy cling network each year. The work we are doing to 
support  bicycling at the municipal level needs to be augmented at the state level in order for us to 
meet our climate action goals.  
Rebate programs as incentives for green initiatives make all the difference.  
The City of South Portland launched its Electrify Everything!  program on September 1, 2022. 
The program gives  South Portland  residents rebates  for electrifying various aspects of their lives , 
providing direct assistance to those at <100% AMI to replace equipment that is powered by 
fossil fuels. The progra m includes electric bikes  and electric cargo bikes . In the 5 months s ince 
the program launched, the City has awarded 25 electric bike rebates to residents, worth $300 for 
an electric bike and $500 for an electric cargo bike.  
A statewide r ebate program wou ld expand the reach of our budding program  and open up 
residents of other cities to the benefits  of rebates . Financial assistance is often the difference 
between buying an elect ric bicycle and not buying one and i ncome -based rebates ensure that our 
evolving sustainable transportation system is equitable and inclusive for all.  
I support LD256 because I believe bicycling is critical to Maine meeting its climate action goals, 
that electric bicycle technology is particularly transformative and inclusive, and that an electric 
bicycle incentive program is the best way to jumpstart a vibrant bicycle culture here in Maine.  
 
Thank you,  
Cashel Stewart  
South Portland Sustainable Transportation Coordinator  
207-767-7611 ext. 7546  
cstewart@southportland.org  
 
