 
 
 
Testimony before the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
February  7, 202 3 
 
LD 256 – An Act to Add Electric Bicycles to the Electric Vehicle Rebate Program  
 
Senator Lawrence , Representative Zeigler,  and members of the Committee  on Energy, Utilities 
and Technology, my name is Emily K. Green  and I am a senior attorney with  Conservation Law 
Foundation. I appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of LD 256, An Act to Add Electric 
Bicycles to the Electric Vehicle Reb ate Program.  
 
CLF, founded in 1966,  is a public interest advocacy group that works to solve the environmental 
challenges threatening  the people, natural resources and communities in Maine and across New 
England. In Maine for almost four decades,  CLF is a member -supported organization  that work s 
to ensure that policies are developed, implemented and enforced that protect and restore our  natural 
resources . We advocate for solutions that equitably address the climate crisis while advancing 
Maine’s economy and protecting the environment.  
 
To mitigate climate change, Maine adopted aggressive greenhouse gas emissions reductions levels 
set fo rth in 38 M.R.S. § 576 -A. Maine’s transportation sector contributes nearly half of the state’s 
greenhouse gas emissions . The state has identified e lectrification as a princip al strategy for 
decarbonizing . According to state modelling, r educing emissions 45% within the next seven years 
demands robust and rapid electrification . Maine law requires that equity be a core component of 
climate mitigation (and adaptation) strategies , including transportation electrification.  
 
LD 256 would  expand  the Efficiency Maine Trust’s electric vehicle rebate program to include 
electric bicycles . We support this bill  because it would enable more people in Maine to benefit 
from clean, zero-emission  transportation.  We applaud the Efficiency Maine Trust for tak ing 
several steps in the last year to increase access for low -income drivers to its electric vehicle 
purchase incentives . But even with those enhancements, there will be Mainers for whom an electric  
bicycle is an appropriate and certainly more affordable way to get around . There is no one -size-
fits all solution to clean mobility , so the state should simultaneously pursue complementary 
strategies . We therefore support the establishment of a program to assist Mainers with the purchase 
costs of ele ctric bicycles, to supplement the EV rebate program the Trust already administers. We 
urge that the program be designed to prioritize  disadvantaged and low-income Mainers for 
benefits . 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testify in support of LD 256. 
 
Emily Green
Conservation Law Foundation
LD 256
Please find the testimony of Conservation Law Foundation in support of LD 256 
attached. Thank you for your consideration.
