PO Box 88Belfast, ME 04915Phone: (207) 761-5616www.sierraclub.org/maine
To:Members of the Joint Committ ee on Committ ee onEner gy, Utilities andTechnologyFrom:Jacob St ernDate:February 7, 2023Re:Testimon y inSupport of L.D . 256:An Act to AddElectric Bic ycles to the ElectricVehicle Rebate Pr ogram
 Senat or La wrence, R epresentati ve Zeig ler, and the members of the Joint Committ ee onEner gy, Utilities, and T echnology ,
I am submitting the f ollowing t estimon y today on behalf of Sierr a Club Maine, r epresentingover 22,000 support ers and members stat ewide. F ounded in 1892, Sierr a Club is one of ournation ’s oldest and lar gest en vironmental or ganizations. W e work diligentl y to amplify thepower of our 3.8 million members nation-wide as w e work towards combating climat echange and pr omoting a just and sustainable econom y. To that end, w e ur ge an “oug ht topass” r eport on L.D . 175:An Act to Add Electric Bic yclesto the Electric V ehicle RebateProgram.
E-bik es, w hich ar e curr ently regulat ed in Maine (see Title 29- A, MSRA § 2063, ¶14) ha vebeen e xpanding in popularity acr oss the stat e and the nation. E-bik es pr ovide electricassistance t o riders and, unlik e mopeds or mot orcycles, do not f eatur e combustion engines.E-bik es can r each a maximum speed of ar ound 28mph, althoug h depending on the model,some bik es ha ve a lo wer top speed. The centr al benefit of e-bik es is that the y allo w riders t oeasil y travel gr eater distances o ver hillier t errain than with a r egular bicy cle. C urrentlymor e than 75% of car trips ar e to destinations 10 miles or less fr om the dri ver’s home.E-bik es pr ovide a cheaper , reliable, alt ernati ve transportation option f or those trips t o thegrocery st ore or the doct or’s office. A dditionall y, some consumers and businesses ar ealready experimenting with car go e-bik es, w hich can be used t o transport gr oceries, goods,pets, and childr en.
By adding e-bik es to the r ebat e pr ogram, the stat e will mak e this gr owing t echnology mor eaccessible t o a slice of r esidents w ho, f or ph ysical, geogr aphic, or economic r easons, ar eunable t o tak e ad vantage of other tr ansportation options. F or example, the y can serv e as areliable alt ernati ve for lo w income Mainers w ho ma y strugg le to aff ord car pa yments orhigh gas prices. E-bik es also ha ve the pot ential t o mak e cycling mor e accessible f or agingMainers w ho ma y not ha ve the stamina or str ength t o pedal the same distance on an

unassist ed bicy cle.  In man y rur al communities that lack public tr ansportation, e-bik es ar e agreat option f or non-car o wners. I can speak personall y to this benefit as someone w hogrew up in a coastal community w here the near est g as station w as near ly 10 miles fr om m yhouse.
Like standar d bicy cles, e-bik es pr oduce zer o on-sit e car bon emissions and ar e ther efore aclimat e-friendl y transportation option f or the tw enty -first century . Currently, Maine’stransportation sect or accounts f or mor e than half the stat e’s emissions. Off ering accessibleother tr ansportation options be yond standar d passenger v ehicles will be necessary t oreach the stat e’s climat e goals.
We ur ge an “oug ht to pass” r eport on L.D . 175: An A ct to Add Electric Bicy cles t o the ElectricVehicle R ebat e Pr ogram. Thank y ou for your time and consider ation.
Sincer ely,Jacob St ern
--Vice Chair , Executi ve Committ eeSierr a Club Maine Chapt er
