LD 256 "An Act to Add Electric Bicycles to the Electric Vehicle Rebate Program" 
Good afternoon Members of the Energy, Utility, and Technology Committee. My 
name is Jamie Wright, and I am the founder and owner of Gorham Bike & Ski.I 
am a resident of Cape Elizabeth, and I am here today to urge you to vote in 
SUPPORT of LD 256. 
Gorham Bike & Ski has been in business for 28 years and has been selling E-bikes 
for over half that time. In 2022 E-bikes represented 10% of our total sales, which 
has grown rapidly over the last five years. Our company mission is ”To help 
people find and pursue their passion for a healthy, active outdoor lifestyle." And 
we believe E-bikes play a significant role in helping our customers achieve their 
goals. 
With our 5 locations here in Maine, from Waterville to Wells. We see a real 
opportunity for more people to commute or do daily errands on an E-bike. 
What we see are the benefits of owning an E-bike? 
0 They can save you money. Owning an E-bike is far cheaper than buying, 
insuring, and maintaining a car. 
0 They will help you ride further, faster, and longer because you've got an 
added bit of oomph on board so that you can travel further distances from 
home. 
0 They can help with your fitness. If you're riding your E-bike to do errands or 
commute to work, you are pedaling more, even if that electric motor is 
occasionally helping you out.l 
I have used Efficiency Maine rebates to update the lighting in my stores, which 
lowers my energy cost and also benefits the environment. I also added heat 
pumps in my home for the same reason. 
I think offering a rebate on E-bikes is a win for everyone involved. It reduces the 
upfront costs of owning one, which helps lower-income Mainers afford one. E- 
bike reduces traffic congestion and parking problems in urban areas. It has health 
benefits for the rider and is good for our environment. 
I would encourage you to support LD 256 for these reasons. 
Thank you for your time, and I would gladly answer any questions.
