Hello,
My name is John Clark and I am a resident of Portland. I am writing to encourage your
support
of LD 256.
This past June, I was fortunately in a situation to utilize my $850 inflation relief payment from the
state to purchase a commuter electric bicycle to use instead of my aging car. I immediately
began using it for my 27-mile round-trip commute almost daily, and continue to do so throughout
the winter. Since purchasing my e-bike, I have put over 2,500 miles on the odometer, which by
typical mileage rates, equates to over $1,500 I would have spent had I driven those same
commuting miles.
Not only has an e-bike been a massive relief to my family's budget, it has also provided an
avenue for me to make my commute without polluting the planet and contributing to the
ever-increasing traffic in the greater Portland area.
Owning an e-bike has given us the
flexibility to sell one of our two cars, and we are extremely thankful to be in a position
where we are able to do so.
Numerous studies have found that most car trips are under 10 miles in length, many even under
5. Most of these trips could easily be performed by an e-bike rather than a car, and in some
cases, may even take less time. Unfortunately, the fact of the matter is that when saddled with
car expenses that you can't stop paying as you need it to get to work, there isn't much room in
the budget to spend $1,000-$3,000 on an e-bike, even if it will more than pay for itself over time.
As a state, we recognize that the initial cost of purchasing electric can be a hurdle to most
families that wish to do so, hence the subsidy for purchasing an electric car. However, even with
subsidies, electric car ownership is still far too expensive for low-income Mainers, with monthly
payments that rival housing expenses. Additionally, despite not burning gas,
electric cars still
rely on car-centric infrastructure which is damaging our environment and endangering
pedestrians and bicyclists.
We should be providing
Mainers who are able to change their
commuting style to one which is environmentally friendly, and safer, the ability to do so, and I
feel extending the electric vehicle subsidy to include e-bikes is a fantastic way to support this
effort.
Thank you for your consideration.
