          February 7, 2023 
 
 
Testimony of Lauri Boxer -Macomber IN  SUPPORT of  LD 256 : An Act to Add Electric Bicycles to 
the Electric Vehicle Rebate Program  
  
Members of the Energy, Utility and Technology Committee :  
 
My name is Lauri Boxer- Macomber . I am a resident of Portland, Maine , a long -standing board 
member of the Bicycle Coalition of Maine , an active  transportation advoc ate, and the head of Kelly, 
Remmel & Zimmerm an’s bicycle and p edestrian law practice.   
 
Over the last d ecade, my work  as an attorney in Maine  has been almost entirely focused on 
bicycle and pedestrian law.   In the scope and course o f my work , I have been i ncreasingly expose d to e -
bikes  here in Maine , nationally and abroad.  E-bikes are part  of our low carbon mobility future . The 
interest in , and use of , e-bike s in the State of M aine is an  extraordinarily positive development.   
 
Incentivi zing the use of e -bikes and expanding access to them through the Electr ic Vehi cle 
Rebate Program makes sense for many  reas ons, includi ng the reasons set forth below.  
 
1. E-bikes have the potential to reduce th e number of cars on our roadways, especially in urban 
areas  where most  motor vehicle  trips involve travel of less than five miles  and could easily be 
substituted with an e -bike . 
 
2. E-bikes help m itigate the harmful effects of clim ate change and have  an even  greater potential 
than e -vehicles to reduce emissions  and congestion  on our roadways , which  means that they 
may be  even better suited than e- vehicles t o accomplish the environmental , public health and 
other purposes  of the Electr ic Vehicle Rebate Program . 
 
3. Diversifying the State of Maine ’s clean transportation st rategy is consis tent with th e Maine 
Department of Transportation’s  Draft  Active Transport ation P lan.  
 
4. E-bikes ar e significantly  more affordable  than e -vehicles , making them more accessible  to a 
wider range  of Maine  residents , especially tho se wh o have a hard time affording gas, parking , 
and public transportation.  
 Please vote in support of LD 256 . 
  
Thank you for your time , consideration,  and public service . 
