 
 
 
 Testimony of the Efficiency Maine Trust  
 Michael D. Stoddard, Executive Director  
 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST ( NFNA)  
 
LD 256 - An Act to Add Electric Bicycles to the Electric Vehicle Rebate Program  
  
 Presented to the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology (EUT)  
 
 February 7, 2023  
 
  
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler , and Members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology, the Efficiency Maine Trust (the Trust) appreciates the opportunity to testify today neither 
for nor against  LD 256 - An Act to Add Electric Bicycles to the Electric Vehicle Rebate Program .  
 
The Trust is engaged in fosteri ng market transformation for cost -effective , low -carbon alternatives . We have no 
objection to any form of electric vehi cle so long as it  is str ategically effective in achiev ing carbon reductions  
consistent with the requirements of 38 MRS §576 -A (Greenhouse gas emissions reductions ), the climate action 
plan  of the Maine Climate Council , and the  Efficiency Maine Trust Act .  As a general rule , the Trust  also require s 
measures promoted through its program s meet minimum requirements of cost -effectiveness.  (Exceptions may 
be made for pilot projects and for grant s that dictate specific uses.)  
The Trust understands that there is potential  for E -Bikes to displace the use of  cars in a way that will 
reduce carbon emissions and may be cost -effective. That said, meeting thi s potential will depend  on the 
circumstances  of how each individual E -Bike is used .  For example, it would save little or no energy or 
carbon if an E -Bike simply displaces another bicycle , or a ride on a transit or school bus.  And we would 
need to find a way to increase our confidence that the E -Bike is likely to remain and be used in Maine 
and not carried off or sold in another state.  
For this latter reason, if this bill goes forward we would ask that language modifying the requirements 
for registration be further r evised.  While we understand that many models of E -Bike are not required to 
be registered with  the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, the proposed phrasing could unintentionally eliminate 
the requirement for EV cars and trucks to be registered in Maine , an outcome we would strongly 
oppose.  
We also seek to manage expectations about the potential for E -Bikes.  There are various  aspects of 
transportation in Maine that are likely to make it challenging for E -Bikes to play a major role in 
displacing the fuel consumption and carbon emissions of a typical car or truck.  For example, a  recent 
study in Vermont found that the average displacement of car travel by E -Bikes was 760 miles/year.   By 
contrast, t he typical vehicle miles traveled (VMT) of a car in Maine is nearly 12,000 miles per year.   
2 
 
 
 
 
168 Capitol Street, Suite 1, Augusta, ME 04330     |     (866) 376 -2463     |     efficiencymaine.com  Thus, for most people, the use of an E -Bike will be only a partial solution to their transportation needs, 
and less than 10 % of needs of an average driver.  Moreover , given the reality of Maine ’s weather and 
road system, there will be a very significant number of the 1.2 million cars and trucks in Maine that 
simply are not suitable for replacement , or displacement,  by an E -Bike.  Additionally, the Vermont study 
found that the incremental cost of a n E-Bike is about $1,250 .  Assuming that an average E -Bike traveled 
760 miles in a year and displaced a car that would get 28 miles per gallon, that E -Bike would save 27 
gallons of gas wor th about $95 per year at $3.50/gal gas prices.  It would take more than 10 years of 
operation to pay off the incremental cost. We urge the Committee to keep the potential of E -Bikes in 
perspec tive.  For these reasons, if this bill goes forward the Trust would expect to start with a limited 
scope of eligibility for E-Bike  incentives.  
Finally, t he Committee will recall that it considered a bill last week  – LD 122 – proposing to amend this 
same section of statute  in th e context of  “medium duty and heavy duty vehicles .” If both bills move 
forward, we request that the Committee  to ensur e that the amendments to sub-section 1 of §10121 are 
harmonized  so there are not conflicts between them . 
 
Respectfully,   
/s/MDS  
Michael D. Stoddard  
Executive Director  
 
