Testimony of the Efficiency Maine Trust 
Michael D. Stoddard, Executive Director 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST (NFNA) 
LD 256 - An Act to Add Electric Bicycles to the Electric Vehicle Rebate Program 
Presented to the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology (EUT) 
February 7, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology, the Efficiency Maine Trust (the Trust) appreciates the opportunity to testify today neither 
for nor against LD 256 - An Act to Add Electric Bicycles to the Electric Vehicle Rebate Program. 
The Trust is engaged in fostering market transformation for cost-effective, low-carbon alternatives. We have no 
objection to any form of electric vehicle so long as it is strategically effective in achieving carbon reductions 
consistent with the requirements of 38 MRS §576~A (Greenhouse gas emissions reductions), the climate action 
plan of the Maine Climate Council, and the Efficiency Maine Trust Act. As a general rule, the Trust also requires 
measures promoted through its programs meet minimum requirements of cost-effectiveness. (Exceptions may 
be made for pilot projects and for grants that dictate specific uses.) 
The Trust understands that there is potential for E-Bikes to displace the use of cars in a way that will 
reduce carbon emissions and may be cost-effective. That said, meeting this potential will depend on the 
circumstances of how each individual E-Bike is used. For example, it would save little or no energy or 
carbon if an E-Bike simply displaces another bicycle, or a ride on a transit or school bus. And we would 
need to find a way to increase our confidence that the E—Bil<e is likely to remain and be used in Maine 
and not carried off or sold in another state. 
For this latter reason, if this bill goes forward we would ask that language modifying the requirements 
for registration be further revised. While we understand that many models of E-Bike are not required to 
be registered with the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, the proposed phrasing could unintentionally eliminate 
the requirement for EV cars and trucks to be registered in Maine, an outcome we would strongly 
oppose. 
We also seek to manage expectations about the potential for E-Bikes. There are various aspects of 
transportation in Maine that are likely to make it challenging for E-Bikes to play a major role in 
displacing the fuel consumption and carbon emissions of a typical car or truck. For example, a recent 
study in Vermont found that the average displacement of car travel by E-Bikes was 760 miles/year. By 
contrast, the typical vehicle miles traveled (VMT) of a car in l\/laine is nearly 12,000 miles per year.
Thus, for most people, the use of an E-Bike will be only a partial solution to their transportation needs, 
and less than 10 % of needs of an average driver. Moreover, given the reality of Maine's weather and 
road system, there will be a very significant number of the 1.2 million cars and trucks in Maine that 
simply are not suitable for replacement, or displacement, by an E-Bike. Additionally, the Vermont study 
found that the incremental cost of an E-Bike is about $1,250. Assuming that an average E-Bike traveled 
760 miles in a year and displaced a car that would get 28 miles per gallon, that E-Bike would save 27 
gallons of gas worth about $95 per year at $3.50/gal gas prices. lt would take more than 10 years of 
operation to pay off the incremental cost. We urge the Committee to keep the potential of E-Bikes in 
perspective. For these reasons, ifthis bill goes forward the Trust would expect to start with a limited 
scope of eligibility for E-Bike incentives. 
Finally, the Committee will recall that it considered a bill last week — LD 122 - proposing to amend this 
same section of statute in the context of ”medium duty and heavy duty vehicles." if both bills move 
forward, we request that the Committee to ensure that the amendments to sub-section 1 of §10121 are 
harmonized so there are not conflicts between them. 
Respectfully, 
[S[lVlDS 
Michael D. Stoddard 
Executive Director 
168 Capitol Street, Suite 1, Augusta, ME 04330 i (865) 376-2463 I efficiencymaine.c0m
