Myles Smith
Portland
LD 256
Dear EUT Committee Members,
I wanted to add a personal story to the many great pieces of testimony you have heard
on this bill. In particular, I wanted to add a use case of what this subsidy could mean 
for Maine families. 
Our family of four recently boomeranged back to Maine after a long time living 
overseas. We are the exceedingly rare family of four in the state who can afford two 
cars but chooses to have only one. We can do this because we own a cargo e-bike. 
We use our cargo e-bike to transit our kids to school and after-school programs, pick 
up a week's groceries, or even visit family in Westbrook. Each trip we take removes 
cars from streets and parking spaces, reducing congestion and pollution. While it is 
true that we ride it about 1000 miles per year, much less than most people use their 
cars, the fact is that most vehicle trips are incredibly short. E-bikes can replace many 
in-town car trips, which will make our cities more livable, less polluted, and 
congested. They also promote the health of the rider, and enable greater active 
mobility to folks who wouldn't ride a regular bike. 
Indeed, these bikes have a barrier to entry in the price. The health, congestion, road 
maintenance, and air quality benefits we receive from reducing unnecessary private 
vehicle trips will save all of us in the long run. One study found that the public cost of
each mile traveled by private cars runs is as much as $8/mile. 
Finally, while electric cars are an improvement on fuel-injection, they are no panacea.
Even if every car in Maine were electric, we would still have incredible congestion, 
parking, road maintenance, and road violence costs that would be paid by all of 
society. While there is a pollution reduction benefit with electric vehicles, most 
studies estimate this is only about one-third of the total carbon footprint of the car. 
This is largely because of the massive cost to mine and produce lithium, and that the 
heavier electric vehicles wear down the roads more quickly.
The only way to have a sustainable future would be to divert as many private car trips 
to other, more sustainable uses. This bill does just that. I urge you to support it.
Thank you kindly
