Thaddeus St John
Lincoln & Main
LD 256
LD 256 TESTIMONY 
NOTE: 
Thaddeus St John
Lincoln & Main - Electric Bike Café & Winery
1/30/2023
Testimony in SUPPORT of
LD 256 “An Act to Add Electric Bicycles to the Electric Vehicle Rebate Program”
Good Afternoon Members of the Energy, Utility and Technology Committee. My 
name is Thaddeus St. John and I am writing to you on behalf of Lincoln & Main 
Electric Bike Cafe. I am a resident of Saco and I am here today to urge you to vote in 
SUPPORT of LD 256.
INTRO – I co-own and operate Lincoln & Main, Maine’s only exclusive Electric bike
dealer. I started this company for my love of electric bikes and the ability that they 
have to make biking more than just a recreational activity. The potential for electric 
bike used for more of a utilitarian purpose is huge. 
SECTION I – Our business is located in the heart of the industrial neighborhood of 
South Portland. Last year South Portland created a citywide rebate “Electrify 
Everything” that gave a financial incentive for people to purchase Ebikes. Not only 
did this program create an overall awareness of the world of electric bikes, it put more
people on electric bikes through our business. We saw a significant boost in business 
because of that rebate program. There are so many positives with this type of program
- A means of transportation for low income Mainer’s, better for the environment, and 
life longevity. 
SECTION II - Having Ebikes as part of the efficiency Maine program would create a 
healthier Maine. That's the bottom line.  The possibility of having neighbors use their 
cars less and become greener as a collective unit would dramatically increase 
longevity, community building and a socially conscious.
SECTION III – I urge you on behalf of the community that I serve that with your 
support we can advance to a healthier and happier statewide community. We are all 
neighbors - we choose to live in a place that offers so much, why wouldn't give back 
to it anyway we can? I encourage you to vote in support of LD 256 because I believe 
it's the right thing to do.
Thank you for your time and I would be glad to answer any questions

