LD 256 TESTIMONY 
NOTE: 
Thaddeus St John 
Lincoln & Main - Electric Bike Cafe & Winery 
1/30/2023 
Testimony in SUPPORT of 
LD 256 “An Act to Add Electric Bicycles to the Electric Vehicle Rebate Program” 
Good Afternoon Members of the Energy, Utility and Technology Committee. My name is 
Thaddeus St. John and l am writing to you on behalf of Lincoln & Main Electric Bike Cafe today 
to urge you to vote in SUPPORT of LD 256. 
INTRO — l co - own and operate Lincoln & Main - Maine’s only exclusive Electric bike dealer. l 
started this company for my love of electric bikes and the abiﬁty that they have to make biking, 
speciﬁcally electrical powered biking more than just a recreational activity. 
SECTION l — Our business is located in the heart of the industrial neighborhood of South 
Portland. Last year South Portland created a citywide rebate “Electrify Everything ” that gavea 
financial incentive for people to purchase Ebikes. Not only did this program create an overall 
awareness of the ever growing world of Electric Bikes it created a bigger awareness of how we 
can use bikes as a utiﬁtarian purpose. We saw a significant boost in business because of the 
“Electrify Everything? ’ program and our number 1 selling bike frame was a cargo bike. There are 
so many positives with this type of program - A means of transportation for low income Mainer’s, 
better for the environment, and life longevity for generations of Mainers. 
SECTION ll - Having Ebikes as part of the efficiency Maine program would create a healthier 
Maine. That's the bottom line. The possibility of having neighbors use their cars less and 
become greener as a collective unit would dramatically increase longevity, community building 
and socially conscious people. 
SECTlON lll - I urge you on behalf of the community that l sen/e that with your support we can 
advance to a healthier and happier statewide community. We are all neighbors - we choose to 
live in a place that pffers so much, why wouldn‘t give back to it anyway we can? I encourage 
you to vote in support of LD 256 because l believe it's the right thing to do. 
Thank you for your time and l would be glad to answer any questions that you may have 
Thaddeus St. John
