STATE OF MAINE HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES ' 
HOUSE REPUBLlCAN OFFICE 
“U” AUGUSTA. MATNE 04333-0002 OH“ “(F ‘S’ l—l4(l ice: l- /)_t/- 
AMYB./XRATA Cell: (Z07l333-lb ’l7 
ASSISTANT HOUSE REl"UBLlCAl\' LEADER Fax: ( I07 l I S 7- 1 449 
E ~ M 11 i l : .1\|1\)'.s\i"a\a({: legisluiuimnziim go\ 
March 23, 2023 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 558 
An Act Regarding Rental Housing Applications 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the 
Judiciary Committee, my name is Amy Arata and l represent New Gloucester and 
part of Gray. 
l have been a landlord in Maine since 2007, with hundreds of happy customers. 
My experience encompasses economies when it was a renters’ market as well as 
the current landlords ’ market. l oppose LD 558 for the following reasons: 
0 This bill is unnecessary. The information to be assessed is self—evident 
because it is listed on the application. if it were not important, it would not 
be on the application. 
0 Credit reporting agencies require applicants to approve the use of their 
credit information as they are filling out the form. 
0 Criteria may change if there are many more or fewer applicants than 
expected. The market is constantly changing.A 
0 Negative information that a landlord had never expected may come to light 
during the screening process. Conversely, positive information that 
overcomes a negative issue may arise. 
0 There are credit "fixing" services that erase negative information 
temporarily. I once had an applicant who had a mortgage recorded in the 
registry of deeds, but had no reference to it on her credit report. 
0 ln practice, most landlords do pr_ e-screen tenants before showing thema 
property or accepting an application fee.
In practice, many landlords allow one application to be used for multiple 
properties if they are applied for within a month or two. Application fees 
are not a source of profits. 
Twelve months is too long for an application to remain accurate. A tenant 
may stop paying bills and have a credit score drop tremendously in a short 
period of time. 
In summary, it's.in the best interest of both landlords and tenants for an 
applicant to be selected who will have a successful tenancy. This bill will 
make that more difficult, and will limit the number of people who want to 
rent out property at a time when we're trying to incentivize people to 
become landlords. Thank you for consideration of my concerns and I'd be 
happy to answer any questions. 
Respectfully, 
Amy Arata 
State Representative
