March 21, 2023
Testimony in  OPPOSITION to LD 558 "An Act Regarding Rental Housing Applications"
To the Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary:
The Central Maine Apartment Owners Association (CMAOA) is a landlord membership organization of over 
650, as well as a cooperative team member of other landlord associations across the State of Maine including: 
Southern Maine, Lewiston Auburn, Greater Bangor Area, and Augusta Area.  We provide educational events, 
sponsor community events, provide access to discounts on supplies and industry needs like fuels, flooring 
materials and paint. Our overall goal is to support Landlords in providing safe and affordable housing in 
collaboration with the valuable good renters in our area.  CMAOA and the other organizations are neutral, 
nonpartisan, member led groups that have the common goal of keeping the rental housing industry safe, 
educated, and competitive.  
We are asking you to Oppose LD 558 "An Act Regarding Rental Housing Applications" as it is written.
We educate and urge our members on following the Maine Human Rights Act.  This bill creates a lot of 
questions about when and what to disclose to prospective tenants BEFORE they even fill out an 
application.  To what extent must you disclose you are going to check i.e. social media accounts or 
personal references. Will you need to disclose what questions you will ask?  
Our membership has expressed concerns that as the specific words you must say/not say creates that is 
outside the parameters of the clear definitions in the Maine Human Rights act will force them to explore 
online or other outside services for criminal and credit checks for applications.  This added cost will have 
to be passed on the property (aka residents).   Not only will this eliminate the personal nature of an 
application (giving people a chance that has bad credit for example) but will also lengthen the time period 
of application consideration.  You will see rents go up as more landlords have higher administration fees.
If the goal is to reduce the chance that a property owner is using application fees as an opportunity for 
more income this bill will not do it.  If the goal of this bill is to reduce “hits” on someone’s credit report, 
this bill will not do it.   What is the goal of this bill and is the answer?
We urge you to oppose LD 558.
Board of Directors of Central Maine Apartment Owners Association, Waterville, Maine  
Click Here for CMAOA Website and Contact Information 
