T1 HE 
LAW OFFIQE 
W DANIEL]. BERNIER —"§~.§-' — LLC 
March 21, 2023 
To The Distinguished Members of the Judiciary Committee 
From Daniel J. Bernier, representing the 
Central Maine Apartment Owners Association Working in conjunction with the Rental 
Housing Alliance of Southern Maine, the Greater Bangor Area Owners’ and Managers ’ 
Association, the Capital Area Housing Association, and Lewiston Auburn Landlord 
Association. 
Re." LD 558 An Act Regarding Rental Housing Applications 
I am submitting this memo in opposition to this legislation. This legislation will likely 
increase homelessness by forcing apartment owners into a cookie cutter approach to 
screening tenants. It will also discourage investment in housing thereby making the 
housing crises worse. 
The method in which apartment owners’ screen tenants varies greatly. Some apartment 
owners use screening services, others use an application where they ask for references. 
References can include a professional reference, a prior landlord and a personal reference. 
Some landlords do little to no screening. Pushing landlords into a standardized format for how 
they screen tenants is not in the "best interest of tenants. 
When you have tenants that are on the margin, meaning they are coming out ofa 
homeless shelter, they have prior evictions, or they have a criminal record. Their best shot at 
getting a tenancy is going to be with the landlord who uses references. If they have an employer 
who will give a good reference for the tenant, if they have a prior landlord who will give thema 
good reference or if they have some good personal references, they can overcome those 
obstacles. When you are calling and asking for a reference, the landlord does not have control 
over what the other person is going to say. The call to the reference may just be a discussion 
rather than some formal questions. If you micromanage how landlords screen tenants, you are 
very likely to drive landlords into using the standardized screening services and a cookie cutter 
approach to screening. This will result in people with bad credit histories, prior evictions or 
criminal records will having a much harder time getting housing. 
Apartment Owners already must comply with the Maine Human Rights Act and the 
Federal Fair Housing Act in how they screen tenants. 
Page 1 of2 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Watewille, Maine 04901 * t207.877.8969 * dan@bernierlawof ﬁce.com
This bill takes the legislature down the road of micromanaging the screening process for 
tenants. Micromanaging the screening process for tenants will be one of the biggest things that 
would discourage investment in housing; thereby making the housing crisis worse and 
increasing homelessness. Apartment owners own the property. If you cannot do 
meaningful screening of a person before letting them rent your property, you are much 
less likely to want to invest in property. Discouraging investment in property will just 
make the housing shortage worse. 
On prohibiting fees for applications, many apartment owners do not charge fees. Some 
will charge the cost of rumiing a credit report or the screening service. Others will make a proﬁt 
on it. While many apartment owners feel that landlords should not be charging application 
fees, this also takes you down the road of micromanaging the apartment owner’s business 
which we oppose. Landlords who do not charge a fee for an application will have a competitive 
advantage over the landlords that do charge a fee. That is the real way to solve this issue. We 
need to educate tenants to run their own credit history so they can just hand their credit history 
to the landlords. That way landlords do not have to pay to mn a credit history and if they apply 
for ﬁve apartments you do not have ﬁve different landlords pulling a credit history. 
We also should get some data on how prevalent these fees really are and how much are 
they rather than just relying on inuendo. Are they more common in certain parts of the state‘? 
Are they more connnon among large landlords? 
Thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer any questions on this 
legislation. 
Very truly yours, 
1/‘V 
/. 
l J. Bernier 
DJ B/hb 
Page 2 of2 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Waterville, Maine 04901 * t207.877.8969 * dan@bernierlawof ﬁce.com
