3/10/2023  
RE: Oppose  LD 558  
Dear Members  Judiciary Committee,  
I’m opposed to LD 558. I’d like to explain our screening process to help explain my opposition to this bill. 
When we have a lead come in, we give them a brief free pre -screening to complete to determine if they 
will meet our basic screening criteria. After  that they will be invited to an in person viewing if they would 
like one. After that they start their application  and background reports . We use a service called 
apartments.com. Apartments.com charge s tenants $29 per adult applicant to send us a copy of t he 
credit report and background check.  After that we make a yes or no decision. To be clear, we don’t 
make any money in applications. In fact, we lose money as we spend hours calling references and 
reading the reports, without any compensation. The entire ty of the $29 goes to apartments.com to pay 
for the background services.  
Apartments.com lets applicants  send up to 10 screening reports  for 30 days after they pay for them 
which helps tenants  reduce application fees  should they not move forward with us.  After 30 days, we no 
longer have access to the screening reports  to comply with the Federal Fair and Accurate Credit 
Transaction Act . 
The major problem  with this bill  is there are security concerns and liability concerns that come with 
keeping screening repo rts around  for longer periods . In fact, federal law1 requires landlords to dispose 
of screening reports after they are done with them. Landlords are done with the report after the 
decision has been made to accept them  or not, not after 12 months. LD 558 w ould put landlords in 
violation of federal law  forcing us to keep screening reports around for 12 months.  This would increase 
the risk that tenant s would experience identity theft as there would be more opportunity  for hacking of 
their information if land lords needed to keep this private information on their computers or in their 
office for 12 months.  This will result in fines and lawsuits that many landlords cannot afford to get 
caught up in.  I’d remind you that most landlords are small mom and pop landlo rds with a unit or two. 
They do not have the ability to build secure networks to hold this information outside of their online 
screening services vender.  
I understand this law is trying to reduce the cost for tenants to apply for housing, which is 
commend able, but this is not the way to do it. Unfortunately, federal  laws conflict with the wording of 
this bill.  Finally,  I know many landlords use a similar free pre -screening method to reduce fees on 
potential applicants. This bill ought not to pass.  
Regards , 
Justin Giroux  
Fairfield, ME  
Manager  
Habitat For ME, LLC  
 
1 https://www.ftc.gov/business -guidance/resources/using -consumer -reports -what -landlords -need -know  
