Senator Tim Nangle and Representative Holly Stover  
State and Local Government Committee  
 
Dear Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and Committee Members,  
 
The American Heart Association (AHA) is the nation’s oldest and largest voluntary organization dedicated to 
fighting heart disease and stroke, whose mission is to be a relentless force for a world of longer, healthier lives. 
We are testifying in opposition  to LD 662, An Act to Prohibit Municipal Flavored Tobacco Product Bans on State -
licensed Tobacco Retailers” .  
 
Tobacco use kills 480,000 people in the United States each year, making it the leading cause of preventable 
death.1 One of the most effective ways to reduce the negative impact of tobacco in the United States is to adopt 
laws that limit youth access to tobacco products, such as laws prohibiting tobacco sales to minors and restricting 
youth exposure to tobacco products and advertising.1,2, 3 Laws that successfully restrict youth access to tobacco 
products reduce tobacco use among youth.1, 4 Unfortunately, some local jurisdictions lack the legal authority to 
enact effective “youth access” laws because of preemption.  
 
By preempting local youth access laws, state governments are depriving local governments of a crucial tool for 
reducing the burden of tobacco in their communities. Preemption also limits local innovation and disincentivizes 
local organizing. It undermines the  ability of communities to respond to local emerging needs. It compromises 
the ability of localities to be laboratories of democracy.4 What is most important, however, is that preemption 
is bad for public health. State preemption of local government author ity to reduce youth access to tobacco 
products has a profoundly adverse impact on health. It’s crucial that our state fights to not allow preemption of 
laws that limit youth access to tobacco products and protect against any future efforts to establish you th access 
preemption within their states.  
 
LD662 would preempt and limit local governments’ ability to create and adapt policies based on what they know 
is best for their communities and residents. What works for a city or town in one part of a state may not work 
for communities in another part of the state. That is why local governments exist —to create laws that most 
accurately reflect the unique views, values, and needs of the people who live there. Good ideas often start 
locally, including policies that help create healthier communities. Local governments have proven that they can 
step in and find a solution when it has not been addressed by either the state or federal government. By 
ensuring local governments can innovate and enact laws that are eff ective in promoting health and equity, it can 
lead to adoption by other communities or even the state.  Thank you for the opportunity to provide this 
testimony, we urge you to vote “ought not to pass” on LD662. I would be happy to answer any questions you 
may have about this testimony.  
 
Sincerely,  
Allyson Perron  Drag  
American Heart Association/ Stroke Association  
Senior Government Relations Director  
300 5th Avenue, Suite 6  
Waltham, MA  02451 -8750  
 
Reference s 
1. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of Smoking — 50 Years of Progress A Report of the Surgeon General.; 2014. 
Available at: www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/50 -years -of-progress/full -report.pdf . 
2. Guide to Commun ity Preventive Services. Community mobilization with additional interventions to restrict minors’ access to tobacco products.  2001. 
Available at: www.thecommunityguide.org/tobacco/communityinterventions.html . 

3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Best Practices for Comprehensive Tobacco Control Programs.; 2014. Available at: 
www.cdc.gov/tobacco/stateandcommunity/best_practices/pdfs/2014/comprehensive.pdf . 
4. Mermin T. Preemption: What it is, how it works, and why it matters for public health. 2009.  Available at: 
www.changelabsolutions.org/publications/preemptionmemo . Accessed July 29, 2014.  
 
 
