Good Afternoon Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and members of the State and Local Committee. 
My name is Anthony Scott, I am a business owner with several tobacco specialty stores in the State and 
am submitting testimony in favor of LD 662. Based on my own experience and those of store owner 
across Maine, it is clear that the State needs to step in and help with the problems stakeholders face 
with municipalities enacting bans, or prohibit this utilization of "home rule" as expressed in 
Representative Perry's bill. I want to provide my testimony to legislators to share my strong frustration 
with the municipalities that have enacted flavor bans throughout the state which have had a significant 
impact on my business.
Throughout the last year, several local communities have enacted bans on flavored tobacco products. I 
participated in the discussions in Portland and South Portland, but found the bans were enacted with 
little input and engagement allowed from stakeholders leaving us feeling dismissed. Studies done by the 
State, Universities, and other Government agencies showing declines in youth vaping were disregarded 
and outdated reports and studies were cherry picked by the group leading the charge on banning this 
product throughout Maine municipalities. Many stakeholders, specifically the state tobacco license 
holders, were disregarded and ignored during these conversations. 
The Anti-tobacco groups have made it clear in their messaging that they believe the State has failed to 
act on a flavor ban, so they have to work to enact these bans at the city and town level. They search the 
State looking for opportunity for bans and play on the emotions of councilors, city officials, and 
townspeople to push their bans at the local level. These bans aren’t the answer to the overall problem 
and are just pushing sales to neighboring cities. I’m frustrated as a State licensed tobacco retailer to 
have started a business and now watch a local municipality remove about 70% of my revenue with little 
discussion to the impact it will have to not only my business, staff, but also the legal age and law abiding 
consumers we service daily. I feel like there needs to be a more in-depth conversation that doesn’t 
happen at the city level. 
I’m glad this is being discussed and hope this raises some good questions with legislators and starts a 
conversation that can lead to some action. It seems that the municipalities are acting with little regard 
to economic consequences, and I question what the cities lose monetarily from the State when it bans 
these products. Tobacco products have a large excise tax on them and sales tax as well. Will cities that 
enact bans on these products lose funding from the Tobacco excise taxes? Will they lose money from 
Sales tax or any other funding by the State?
Thank you for your consideration,
Anthony Scott
 
