Executive Committee 
President 
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP 
Vice President 
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP 
Treasurer 
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP 
Secretary 
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP 
Immediate Past President 
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP 
Board of Directors 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP 
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP 
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP 
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP 
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP 
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP 
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP 
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP 
Riley Heroux** 
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP 
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP 
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP 
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP 
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP 
Maria Libertin, MD* 
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP 
Valerie O'Hara, DO, FAAP 
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP 
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP 
Austin Wheeler Steward“ 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP 
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP 
Aaron Wallace, MD* 
*Resident Board Representatives 
**Medical Student Representatives 
Staff 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN 
Admin & Project Coordinator 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME 04351 
office: 207-480-4185 
www.maineaap.org Maine Chapter 
lNCORl’ORA'l'liD IN MAINE 
American Academy of Pediatrics 
DP,D!C)\Tlln TO THE HF.IU.TH OP ALI. CHILDREN ‘ 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 620, An Act to Promote Free Trade by 
Preventing Municipalities from Prohibiting the Sale of Legal Goods and 
LD 662, An Act to Prohibit Municipal Flavored 
Tobacco Product Bans on State-licensed Tobacco Retailers 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and distinguished members of the Committee 
on State and Local Govermnent, my name is Dr. Deborah Hagler, MD, MPH. I ama 
resident of Brunswick, a pediatrician, and the immediate past president of the Maine 
Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics. 
We all wish for our children to grow up safe and healthy and localities are moving to do 
this by ending the sale of ﬂavored tobacco products because they know that tobacco 
product initiation begins in youth. 80-90% of adults who smoke started in adolescence 
and only 1% of the population will ever begin using a tobacco product after the age of 
26. Thus, the tobacco industry is always Working to cultivate a steady stream of 
replacement customers. They do this by starting their marketing to young, impulsive 
youth and making sure their products appeal to and are marketed to these youth. Products 
are sold in bright colorful packages and promoted by cool and charismatic models and 
available in a host of delicious ﬂavors. They all contain a highly addictive substance - 
nicotine. 4 out of 5 youth initiate use because of ﬂavors such as mango, cotton candy, 
mint and menthol, and many unwittingly become quickly addicted to the nicotine. Many 
don’t even realize the product they are using contains nicotine. 
The adolescent brain is particularly ripe for nicotine addiction. Nicotine ﬁts very well 
into a receptor for a key chemical in the brain that is important in learning, and the 
regulation of mood. The growing teen brain is undergoing remarkably rapid change both 
functionally and structurally. New connections between cells are being established and 
new receptors are being deployed. These new receptors quickly become dependent on 
the presence of nicotine based on how the brain is functioning, feeling, and leaming. 
The brain becomes dependent on the presence of nicotine and the young brain becomes 
addicted. Exposure of the brain to nicotine during critical moments of development can 
have lasting impacts on how teens learn and how they are able to regulate emotion, and 
it can make them more likely to develop addictions to other substances like cocaine. 
Municipalities around the state have ﬁgured out the “customer generation game” played 
by big tobacco corporations. To protect the health of future generations, these 
towns/cities have ended the sale of ﬂavored tobacco products by passing city ordinances. 
LD 620 and LD 662 ask legislators to allow the state to remove the local municipalities 
authority to make determinations about public policy that protects the health and well- 
being of its citizens at the local level. Many efforts to strengthen the public health of the 
community have been piloted on the local level to allow for engagement and education 
of the community. Removing the authority of the community to regulate products that 
may harm the health and safety of its citizens severely limits opportunities to experiment 
and protect communities. It is often the most marginalized communities that lose out 
when states seek the ability to override local control to protect public health. 
We strongly urge you to vote against the passage of LD 620 and LD 662.
