March 16, 2023
Jill Goldthwait for the Bar Harbor Town Council
207-460-5461; jillgold@gwi.net
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION
to
LD 662 – An Act to Prohibit Municipal Flavored Tobacco Product Bans on State-licensed 
Tobacco Retailers
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and members of the State and Local Government 
Committee:
On March 7, 2023, the Bar Harbor Town Council passed an ordinance that reads in part: “No 
retailer shall sell or offer for sale any flavored tobacco product, or display, market, or advertise 
for sale, within the Town of Bar Harbor, any flavored tobacco product.” It will go into effect 30 
days after passing.
The Council considered the rights of adults to make their own decisions about the use of legal 
products, but ultimately agreed unanimously that in the case of flavored tobacco it is 
appropriate to intervene because advertising around these products appeals to children, and 
the product promoted has significant health risks.
The Public Hearing held by the Council was overwhelmingly in favor of a ban. Those who spoke 
included three local physicians, the CEO of our YMCA, a Community Health Educator from MDI 
Hospital, a representative of Healthy Acadia, the Health and Physical Education teacher at our 
K-8 school, the Assistant Principal and Dean of students at MDI High School, and the Executive 
Director of the Maine Public Health Association. Parents spoke too, and fifth grade students 
made a video urging the Council to pass the ban.
These witnesses testified to the adverse impacts of flavored tobacco use including ADHD, 
depression and anxiety, addiction to tobacco products and, for pregnant women, pre-term 
deliveries and low birth weight babies. The MDI High School Dean of Students described the 
success of the historic campaign to urge the public to quit smoking, resulting in a significant 
decrease in tobacco use in the U.S,, until the introduction of flavored tobacco reversed the 
progress, significantly increasing the numbers of addicted students bringing these products to 
school.
A ban on the sale of flavored tobacco will not by itself solve the problem in any community, but 
if our town chooses to use a ban as one tool to help decrease the use of this harmful product by 
children, why should that choice not be ours? 
Bar Harbor is the fifth Maine community to enact a ban. Rather than fighting this trend, the 
Maine Legislature could take the lead and ban flavored tobacco statewide, as five other states 
have already done. If that is not to be, at least allow those communities who choose to do so 
the opportunity to protect kids with a municipal flavored tobacco ban.
Jill Goldthwait
Bar Harbor Town Council
LD 662
March 16, 2023
Jill Goldthwait for the Bar Harbor Town Council
207-460-5461; jillgold@gwi.net
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION
to
LD 662 – An Act to Prohibit Municipal Flavored Tobacco Product Bans on State-licensed 
Tobacco Retailers
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and members of the State and Local Government 
Committee:
On March 7, 2023, the Bar Harbor Town Council passed an ordinance that reads in part: “No 
retailer shall sell or offer for sale any flavored tobacco product, or display, market, or 
advertise for sale, within the Town of Bar Harbor, any flavored tobacco product.” It will go into 
effect 30 days after passing.
The Council considered the rights of adults to make their own decisions about the use 
of legal products, but ultimately agreed unanimously that in the case of flavored 
tobacco it is appropriate to intervene because advertising around these products 
appeals to children, and the product promoted has significant health risks.
The Public Hearing held by the Council was overwhelmingly in favor of a ban. Those
who spoke included three local physicians, the CEO of our YMCA, a Community 
Health Educator from MDI Hospital, a representative of Healthy Acadia, the Health 
and Physical Education teacher at our K-8 school, the Assistant Principal and Dean of
students at MDI High School, and the Executive Director of the Maine Public Health 
Association. Parents spoke too, and fifth grade students made a video urging the 
Council to pass the ban.
These witnesses testified to the adverse impacts of flavored tobacco use including 
ADHD, depression and anxiety, addiction to tobacco products and, for pregnant 
women, pre-term deliveries and low birth weight babies. The MDI High School Dean 
of Students described the success of the historic campaign to urge the public to quit 
smoking, resulting in a significant decrease in tobacco use in the U.S,, until the 
introduction of flavored tobacco reversed the progress, significantly increasing the 
numbers of addicted students bringing these products to school.
A ban on the sale of flavored tobacco will not by itself solve the problem in any 
community, but if our town chooses to use a ban as one tool to help decrease the use 
of this harmful product by children, why should that choice not be ours? 
Bar Harbor is the fifth Maine community to enact a ban. Rather than fighting this trend, the 
Maine Legislature could take the lead and ban flavored tobacco statewide, as five other 
states have already done. If that is not to be, at least allow those communities who choose to 
do so the opportunity to protect kids with a municipal flavored tobacco ban.

