 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 
Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
March 14, 2023  
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and di stinguished members of the 
Committee on State and Local Government, my name is Joe Anderson.  I am a 
resident of Portland, a hospital -based pediatrician, and I sit on the Board of the 
Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics.  I am writing today  to 
express our opposition to  two bills:  LD 662, An Act to Prohibit Municipal Flavored 
Tobacco Product Bans on State -Licensed Tobacco Retailers , and LD 620, An Act to 
Promote Free Trade by Preventing Municipalities from Prohibiting the Sale of Legal 
Goods .  We ask that you vote Ought Not to Pass on th ese two  piece s of 
legislation that would undo efforts that several  communities across our state  
have made to improve child health and reduce youth smoking rates . 
As an ex -smoker of 15 years who became hoo ked as a teenager smoking flavored 
cigarettes, I can personally attest to how enticing flavored tobacco products can 
be to young adolescents, often leading to long -term use and addiction.  Tobacco 
companies agreed to stop selling flavored cigarettes in 200 6, but that same year, 
electronic cigarettes were first introduced in the US.  Although the products they 
sell may have changed, the tactics of the tobacco industry have not.  Tobacco 
companies continue to use appealing flavors to entice teens to use their  highly 
addictive products.  
The damaging health effects of tobacco use are well -known.  Despite this 
knowledge, tobacco use among Maine youth has risen 25% since 2015, and 29% 
of high -school students report using e -cigarettes, a rate that has nearly double d in 
the past two years.  4 out of 5 kids who have used tobacco started with a flavored 
product, with names like Cherry Crush, Pop Tart, and Cotton Candy.  The tobacco 
industry knows that 95% of adult smokers start by age 21, and it’s clear that they 
are c ontinuing to use flavored products and other deceptive practices to target 
our adolescents and lock in addicted consumers for years to come.  
The Maine American Academy of Pediatrics strongly supports both local and 
statewide efforts to end the sale of flav ored tobacco products, and we’re proud 
that Portland, South Portland, Bangor, Brunswick, and Bar Harbor have prioritized 
the health of our young people in this regard.  We urge  you to oppose these  two 
bills which  would  invalidate the efforts of local communities to keep their kids 
healthy . 
Respectfully,  
 
Joe Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Co-Chair, Advocacy Committee  
Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics  
  

