TESTIMONY of Megan Diver 
Vice President 
Maine Energy Marketers Association 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
In Support of LD 662 
An Act to Prohibit Municipal Flavored Tobacco Product Bans on State-licensed Tobacco Retailers 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the State and Local Government Committee, 
my name is Megan Diver, I am the Vice President of the Maine Energy Marketers Association (MEMA). 
My name is Megan Diver, and I am the Vice-President for the Maine Energy Marketers Association. We 
represent more than 300 members who own and operate 70% of Maine's 1,300 convenience stores. I 
am here today to voice our association's SUPPORT for LD 662, which would prohibit local governments 
from enacting flavored tobacco bans on state-licensed tobacco retailers. In doing so, this would ensurea 
uniform and effective statewide policy for retail tobacco and vapor sales. 
For years, our members have been integral contributors to the economic well-being of the state of 
Maine and its communities where they operate. They provide a wide array of products and services that 
strive to maintain everyday conveniences for consumers, employ hard-working members of the 
communities, and participate in charitable activities in their towns. Maine convenience stores provide 
daily food products, sodas, candy, personal necessities, alcohol, snacks, fuel, and tobacco and vapor 
products. Each product is an important component to their stores’ viability to not only survive but to 
grow. 
According to the National Association of Convenience Stores, tobacco sales account for 37.8% of all in- 
store sales. It is a significant contributor to a convenience store's business, which is being increasingly 
threatened by a growing patchwork of different local tobacco ordinances being passed in this state. For 
example, in the cities of Brunswick and Portland, well-paid public health advocates convinced the city 
councils to pass tobacco flavor bans based on false claims that it would stop people from smoking and 
protect youth from getting their hands on this product. We know that's simply not true. There is no 
evidence of public health benefits resulting from these bans, but there is evidence that Brunswick and 
Portland retailers were severely disadvantaged and hurt by the local ordinances in their cities. 
When the local flavor bans were enacted in Brunswick and Portland on June 1, 2022, adult tobacco 
consumers simply purchased their flavored tobacco in neighboring cities where such products remain 
legal. In Brunswick, cigarette volume in stores has decreased by 17%, while it increased by over 23% in 
neighboring stores located in Topsham. Similarly, volume in Portland also shifted to neighboring stores 
in Westbrook and Falmouth where cigarettes sales increase by over 11%. As you can see, these local 
flavor bans are only punishing law abiding retailers in localities where they are enacting these flavor 
bans. All state-licensed tobacco retailers in Maine should be able to equally sell flavored tobacco 
products, which is why LD 662 is necessary to protect the retailers in this state.
Our members are responsible, state-licensed retailers who comply with federal law and only sell tobacco 
to adults after confirming their age of 21 or older with proper ID. They are already doing their part by 
making sure youth cannot buy tobacco in their stores. The greater issue that needs to be addressed is 
the internet sales of kid-enticing flavors that can be delivered right to the homes of youth, without 
anyone ever physically checking an ID. 
We ask this Committee to support LD 662 and protect Maine retailers across this state. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
