The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings. 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health all Maine people
TO: Joint Committee on Health and Human Services
FROM: Mikenzie Dwyer, Public Health & Government Affairs Associate 
DATE: March 16, 2023
OPPOSE – LD 662; An Act to Prohibit Municipal Flavored Tobacco Product Bans on State-
licensed Tobacco Retailers
Good afternoon, Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and the members of the State and 
Local Government Committee. My name is Mikenzie Dwyer, I am the Public Health and 
Government Affairs Associate for the Maine Medical Association and I live in Windham. The 
MMA appreciates this opportunity to submit the following comments in opposition to LD 662. 
This bill would prohibit a municipality from adopting or enforcing an ordinance prohibiting a 
tobacco retailer from selling flavored tobacco products. Prohibiting local ability to respond to 
the expressed needs of their communities can have an adverse effect on their community's 
health and wellbeing. 
 
Tobacco use remains the leading cause of preventable disease, death, and disability in the 
United States. Not only is flavored tobacco more addictive than regular tobacco1, it also is 
more likely to lead to continued tobacco2 use and increases the prevalence of youth tobacco 
use3. Over 80% of youth and young adult tobacco users reported using flavored tobacco. 
Three-fourths of flavored product users said they would no longer use the tobacco products if it 
was not flavored. You will hear from a few Pediatricians on the prevalence of this issue among 
youth and the widespread opposition of the physician community to prohibit municipal control. 
 
Several local governments in Maine (Brunswick, Bar Harbor, Portland, Bangor, South 
Portland) have successfully passed ordinances prohibiting the sale of flavored tobacco 
products to protect youth in their communities. Public health movements often start at the local 
level where the community can come together to work on policies to meet the needs and 
concerns of their neighbors, family, and friends. Local control assists in public education, 
changing social norms, and providing support to those who may need it. It is essential we 
protect the ability of individuals and experts to make decisions that are best for them and to 
protect the health and safety of all residents. For this reason, we urge the committee to vote 
ought not to pass on LD 622.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments. Please contact us with any 
questions. 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
Sincerely, 
Mikenzie Dwyer 
 
Email: mdwyer@mainemed.com  
