 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
March 16, 2023  
 
Senator  Tim Nangle , Chair  
Representative  Holly Stover , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 662 - An Act to Prohibit Municipal Flavored Tobacco Product Bans on State -licensed Tobacco 
Retailers  
 
Dear Senator  Nangle , Representative Stover, and Members of the  State an d Local Government 
Committee:  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to weigh in on  LD 662, An Act to Prohibit Municipal Flavored Tobacco 
Product Bans on State -licensed Tobacco Retailers , and the potential impact of the proposed legislation , if 
enacted. The Maine Center of Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC) strongly opposes  this bill  
and offers the following information for your consideration . 
 
LD 662  prohibits a municipality from adopting or enforcing an ordinance prohibiting  a tobacco retailer  
from selling flavored tobacco products.  
 
Cigarette smoking is the number one modifiable cause of death and disease in the United States (U.S.  
Department of Health and Human Services, 2014). In Maine, 2,400 adults die annually from smoking,  
and 27,000 Main e youth currently under the age of 18 will die prematurely from smoking -related illness  
(Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids, 2020).  
 
Nationally, cigarette smoking is linked to between 80% and 90% of lung cancer deaths (Centers for  
Disease Control and Preventio n, 2020). In 2015, Maine’s age -adjusted tobacco -related cancer incidence  
rate (excluding lung and bronchus cancer) was 131.3 cases per 100,000 population, which was higher  
than the U.S. rate of 127.9 cases per 100,000 population (Yob, et al., 2019). The 2015 age -adjusted  
incidence rate of lung and bronchus cancer, of which smoking is the leading cause, was significantly  
higher in Maine than the U.S. (69.7 cases vs. 58.83 cases per 100,00 population) (ibid). It is estimated  
that in 2021, there will be 1,53 0 new cases of lung and bronchus cancer in Maine, causing 840 deaths  
(American Cancer Society - Cancer Statistics Center, 2021). In 2017, 30.1% of cancer deaths in Maine  
were caused by smoking, and tobacco use was the leading preventable risk factor for fo ur of the top five  
causes of death: cancer, heart disease, lung disease, and stroke (American Cancer Society - Cancer Action 
Network, 2017).  
 
In 2019, tobacco use was estimated to cost $811,120,557 in direct health care expenditures in Maine.  
This includes  $261,000,000 in MaineCare costs and $647,000,000 in productivity losses (Campaign for  
Tobacco -Free Kids, 2020).  
 
 
According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Office on Smoking and Health, 
flavors (including, but not limited to menth ol) can alter the way the brain registers the sensations of taste 
 
 and pain. In cigarettes, menthol creates a cooling sensation in the throat and airways, making the smoke 
feel less harsh and easier to inhale. Menthol is also used in other commercial tobacc o products, such as e -
cigarettes, cigars, hookah tobacco, smokeless tobacco, nicotine pouches, and heated tobacco products.  
 
Tobacco companies add flavors to commercial tobacco products to make them seem less harsh and more 
appealing to young people and to  people who have never used tobacco products.  Nicotine is the addictive 
drug in cigarettes and other tobacco products  and f lavors can enhance the effects of nicotine on the brain , 
making  tobacco products even more addictive  and more difficult to quit .  
 
Tobacco companies aggressively market flavored tobacco products to different groups of people. This 
marketing contributes to targeted population groups being more likely to use flavored tobacco products 
than other population groups.  Young people, racial an d ethnic minority groups, LGBTQ+ people, women, 
people with a low income, and people with mental health conditions also are more likely to use flavored 
tobacco products than other population groups.  
 
Maine can help reduce flavored tobacco use and help peop le quit using tobacco products by:  
• Increasing equitable access to evidence -based quitting resources, including counseling and 
medication.  
• Implementing policies that prohibit or decrease sales of flavored tobacco products.  
• Supporting community prevention partnerships.  
 
The Maine CDC partners with schools, youth serving entities, municipalities, and other community 
groups across the State to prevent youth tobacco use  and reduce overall tobacco use . Several 
municipalities in Maine have already pas sed bans on flavored tobacco products , an authority recognized 
at the federal level  and evidence of community support of restric ting sales and reduce use of these 
products . LD 662 will weaken prevention measures possible at the community -level , impacting the State 
as a whole . In 2019, Massachusetts became the first state to ban all flavored tobacco products, including 
menthol. California became the second state implement a flavor ban. That ban was challenged and was 
upheld by the Supreme Court. Other states and localities/municipalities have also passed flavor bans , as 
done in Maine . The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is currently considering a ban on flavored 
tobacco products as well.   
 
In summary, the Maine CDC respectfully recommends this bill  ought not to pass . The Maine CDC  
supports  municipal authority  for discretionary  matters  impacting community health and wellness . In 
absence of a state -wide ban,  Maine is seeing growing community interest in  having  in place  these  local 
ordinances that prohibit these  dangerous  products . Federal courts have found that federal law does not 
limit the authority of these jurisdictions to prohibit the sale of tobacco products in accordance with the 
Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act .   
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide additional details 
for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  

