Owen Casas
Maine Vapers Association
LD 662
Maine Vapers Association testimony on LD 662, neither for or against. 
Good afternoon Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and members of the Committee on 
State and Local Government. My name is Owen Casas and am submitting testimony by the 
Maine Vapers Association neither for or against LD 662. We also thank Representative Perry 
for submitting this bill, as the concerns it aims to address are important and in need of review.
Of all the bills addressing tobacco use, LD 662 has generated the most discussion within the 
Association. Prior to working with the Maine Vapers Association I had served in the 
legislature, on municipal boards & committees and had been Town Administrator for a coastal
municipality. I bring this up because my perspective on the core issue of LD 662, removing 
"home rule" (my opinion that it is the "core issue"), is different from most of the consumers 
and business owners in the Association. I very much value the home rule principle codified in 
the state constitution and the allowances, awkwardly sprinkled throughout state statute, it 
provides to municipalities. So my firmness to submit testimony neither for or against LD 662 is
almost exclusively driven by my overall respect for municipal home rule, although our 
experiences attempting to engage with municipalities considering flavor bans did cause me to
waiver a little... if I was honest. 
To say that engagement with the municipalities that have considered flavor bans could be 
improved would be an understatement. With all the experience I've had with boards, councils,
committees, administrators, managers, department heads etc and considering the nature of 
the topic (stated as "youth tobacco access"... which wasn't necessarily what was actually 
discussed by the councils), it can be challenging to figure out a good approach to lead with. 
After discussion and debate we settled on a strategy of proactive engagement with council 
members and staff, always asking for the same thing: a robust and balanced community 
discussion. I am more than willing to acknowledge areas and aspects of engagement where 
our Association could have done better, yet in nearly every case of consideration and 
passage of a flavor bill a "robust and balanced community discussion" was not had. In spite of
our efforts. 
In short, the process required by the state for a municipality to "make more restrictive" 
something allowed under state statute is flawed. Although some flaws in "municipal process" 
have minimal or no impact to the state, age restricted items regulated by the state DO directly
affect the state as nearly every age regulated product sold legally is associated with 
dedicated tax revenues/ funds that stay within the states purview and are not distributed 
proportionally as part of municipal revenue sharing (I&II). 
In many instances, or possibly stated better as "during different times", the loose 
requirements given from the state to municipalities have generally worked. However I am 
sure that testimony from myself and others helps everyone understand that review and 
changes are needed at this time. For example, Title 22, subsection 1556 states, in part, 
"When a municipality intends to consider an ordinance or regulation or intends to amend an 
ordinance or regulation so that the ordinance or regulation would be more restrictive than this 
chapter, the municipality shall give notice of that intention by mail, at least 30 days prior to 
consideration of the ordinance, regulation or amendment, to the last known address of each 
retail tobacco licensee doing business within the municipal corporate limits. This notice must 
state the time, place and date of a hearing or proposed enactment and the subject matter of 
the proposed ordinance, regulation or amendment." 
This language might seem clear(ish) at first pass and yet I found many areas of confusion 
when attempting to clarify with is meant by "intends to consider" and/ or when the 30 day 
notification requirement begins? There are no penalties expressed in the subsection related 
to the municipalities if they do not notify and many retail establishments are unaware of the 
judicial review allowances within the Administrative Procedures Act in Title 5. Who in the state
is notified that a municipality is restricting allowances given under a state license? Is there 
someone, like the AG's FOAA ombudsman, whose job it is to track these actions taken locally
(I tried to find that person How does the state account for, specifically in its biennium budget 
process and revenue forecasts, a municipality that prohibits the sale of these products? 
There are many more questions I would suggest be asked, yet I don't want to bog down the 
overall intent of this testimony so will close with two items: desire and suggestions.
Desire- the Maine Vapers Association desires to be a strong partner and resource for policy 
makers and others as we all collectively work together to address concerns regarding youth 
access & exposure to tobacco. 
Suggestions- 
State to hold public hearings and work sessions. Like the Department of Marine Resources 
works collaboratively with municipalities to host public hearing on permit & license 
applications in state waters, we ask that municipalities utilizing their constitutional "home rule"
authority to make age regulated products "more restrictive", do so under the 
guidance,oversight and direction of the agency of oversight. 
Grandfather product inventory and/ or reasonable accommodation period between enactment
and enforcement. Unlike a permanent structure located within the shoreland zone and 
allowed under prior ordinance constructs, a license issued by the state is not "grandfathered" 
in the same way. Only some of the municipalities that enacted flavor bans on tobacco 
products gave consideration & allowance for the business to continue to sell existing products
or inventory in the time between enactment and enforcement of the ordinance. Feedback 
from consumers and business was positive towards the allowance to sell existing inventory 
and negative when the council was completely dismissive of the concept or moved with such 
speed for passage that aspects such as this were simply never addressed.
Consider expanding existing job specifications for AG office staff or creation of "municipal 
ombudsman" in state structure. Consider a passionate individual's desire to see some item 
under discussion either pass or fail, and when it doesn't go their way they cry foul and look for
some underlying "reason" they lost. Enter FOAA and disruption it can cause for an 
organization (like school board, municipal or any quasi municipal orgs subject to FOAA/ 
FOIA). I've been here personally and was VERY happy to have the resource of the state's 
FOAA ombudsman to ground me in the laws and regulations that dictate this process. This 
position is NOT empowered to "make decisions" that impact outcomes, yet they ARE experts 
in the area under debate and can function as an informational referee, limiting confusion and 
misunderstanding while increasing knowledge and understanding. As more regulated 
products, like cannabis, enter into our local economies I can see impasses between 
advocates and local legal council increasing in frequency so very much suggest this be 
considered. 
Review, identify and interpret "home rule" allowances within statute. As referenced before, 
what does "intends to consider" mean? I'm sure someone knows and after asking all of my 
professional (legal) contacts I have a better idea with it means, yet I couldn't find case law 
and or detailed statute that clarified this. And unlike some municipal actions where the state 
isn't involved directly or indirectly (like giving certain building permits that are retroactively 
taken partially through construction), the APA in title 5 gives much grace and priority to 
aggrieved business whose permit/ license is "taken" (in whole or in part) by a state 
department, agency or bureau. Although the potential of a municipal ordinance being passed 
in a fashion that gives licensees standing for judicial review is low, the consequences to the 
state could be high. Importantly as well is the inability for me to see how the state is notified 
and or becomes aware that these actions are being taken, which could increase the 
consequences to the state as it could be "caught off guard" to the case due to this perceived 
disconnect. 
That's enough for now. My hope is that this testimony is compelling during your consideration 
of LD 662 and that the suggestions respect the complexity of codified and long standing 
precedent, like home rule, interacting with current and impactful actions taken by municipal 
officers. There is a big issue here when a request for "robust community discussion" is 
rejected and holders of state licenses on the chopping block have only "public comment" time
to make their arguments. I do not this the solution is to revoke home rule (honestly I don't 
think this bill could do that anyway as a constitutional amendment is likely needed to 
withstand any court challenges) and offer the suggestions herein alongside our commitment 
to work with stakeholders in and out of this committee for your consideration. 
Thank you for your time and please let me know if attendance and or participation during a 
work session would be helpful. I know this is a challenging subject, as we all want to protect 
our children, so I appreciate the due consideration given to those law abiding legal age 
individuals being negatively affected. 
Respectfully,
Owen Casas
Maine Vapers Association
-- 
Owen Casas
(207) 333-0067owencasas@gmail.com
The world is run by those that show up.... so show up.

