122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  
 
       
 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association  in Opposition to : 
LD 662: An Act to Prohibit Municipal Flavored Tobacco Product Bans on State -licensed Tobacco 
Retailers  
 
Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government  
Room 214, Cross State Office Building  
Thursday, March 16, 202 3 
 Good afternoon, Senator Nangle , Representative Stover , and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on State and Local Government . My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and 
executive director of Maine Public Health Association.  MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations acr oss the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve 
and sustain the health and well -being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health 
inequities – but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied to a national agenda, w hich means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that 
responsibility seriously.  MPHA is in opposition to LD 662: “ An Act to Prohibit Municipal Flavored Tobacco Product Bans on State -
licensed Tobacco Retailers. ” This bill would  prohibit a municipality from adopting or enforcing an ordinance 
prohibiting a tobacco retailer from selling flavored tobacco products.  While this bill is specific to tobacco, it would set precedent and further erode municipalities’ ability to enact polic ies that are more protective of public and environmental health than state policies  – policies  such as 
preventing the use of harmful pesticides on school property, ending the use of flame retardants that increase cancer risk, establishing smoke -free policies in restaurants and bars, preventing tar sands pipelines , and others. 
Indeed, it is often the case that local governments are leaders in advancing public health protective policies that are then enacted at the state and federal levels.  
 According to the American Public Health Association
 (APHA) , preemption is a legislative tool whereby a 
“higher level ” of government (such as the federal government or a state government ) overrides  the authority of 
a “lower level ” of government (such as  a state or municipal government) to act on a particular issue. Preemption 
is not inherently adversarial to public health, equity, or good governance . Indeed, preemption has been used for 
the betterment of public health – such as prohibiting smoking on airplanes. Generally, though, entities seeking preemption policies are those that benefit financially , which is the case with this bill. According to APHA, 
“‘alcohol and tobacco companies increasingly are seeking state preemption of local restrictions concerning alcohol and tobacco availability and promotion;’ therefore, its recommendations include supporting local governments’ authority and opposing ‘state and federal laws preempting local governments’ ability and authority to enact their own more stringent restrictions on alcohol and tobacco availability.’”  
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 • 207- 808-0487 • mainepublichealth.org  These efforts by the tobacco industry are unsurprising. Indeed, the  tobacco industry wrote the playbook for all 
future industries that rely on predatory and damaging practices that harm human, environmental and ecological 
health. Their widely adopted playbook of misinformation, denial, and regulatory delay has been adopte d by 
other poisoning and polluting industries. Across the country, state legislatures have preempted local laws related to labor standards, civil rights, public health and safety, cannabis, technology, environmental protection, local zoning, and local taxe s.  
 Restricting a lower level of government’s ability to respond to its community ’s public and environmental health 
challenges perpetuates health risks and threatens health equity. Indeed, state, and local governments are often at 
the forefront of public health challenges and tend to be nimbler and more responsive to community needs.  
 
Here in Maine, s everal municipalities have been leaders in standing up to the tobacco  industr y by restricting 
flavored tobacco sales , a policy that  is protective of public and envi ronmental health . As such, we respectfully 
request the committee vote LD 662 “Ought Not to Pass.” Thank you for considering our testimony. 
