 
 
 
May 23rd, 2023  
 
Senator Mark Lawrence, Senate Chair  
Representative Paige Zeigler, House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC In Support of L.D. 1943, An Act Regarding Future Energy Procurements for Renewable 
Energy Development in Northern Maine  
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Energy, Utilities, and Technology Committee:  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I liv e in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce. The 
Chamber is the voice of Maine business, speaking for approximately 5,000 Maine businesses of all sizes 
throughout the State. The Maine State Chamber of Commerce is testifying in suppor t of L.D. 1943, we 
appreciate Senate President Jackson for bringing this legislation forward, and the strong group of bipartisan 
cosponsors.  
 
As many are aware, our northern Maine electric grid is not connected to the rest of the State of Maine. This has 
been an issue in delivering renewable energy generated in Northern Maine to the energy markets south of it. In 
2021, the Chamber supported successful  legislation addressing  this problem by establishing the Northern Maine 
Renewable Energy Development Program, which will finally connect the northern Maine electric grid with the 
southern part of the state. The Northern Maine Renewable Energy Development Program will help create  jobs 
in Northern Maine in the renewable energy sector as well as in other industries. That legislation was truly a win -
win for our state —growing our economy and finally connecting our electric grid, and in turn, our people.  
 
The line procured by the Maine  Public Utilities Commission because of that legislation has a capacity to deliver 
1,200 MW. But today, only eighty percent of the line’s capacity has been accounted for, which means there is 
still 200 MW of room on the line. We encourage this committee to  pass LD 1943 and fill the Northern Maine 
line to its intended capacity.   
 
The PUC concluded  that the first 1,0 00 megawatts of power on the Northern Maine transmission line will save 
Mainers $1.08 billion compared to market prices. Those are dollar figures we’d like to see more of.  
 
 
 
 
 Maine can maximize the economic benefits of this transmission line —taxes, infrastr ucture, jobs, services —by 
facilitating the construction of this additional renewable generation within our state. The additional power will 
be procured by competitive bid, ensuring the lowest possible price for rate payers.  Connecting  the County to the 
rest of the New England grid is a huge step for our state. Including renewable energy generation in that equation 
will be an even bigger step. Now, let’s make sure Mainers are getting what they paid for when we procured this 
line. 
 
I encourage the Committee t o vote Ought to Pass on LD 1943 and fill the Northern Maine transmission line. 
Thank you for your time.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
