S'r.\."rr: or M.%!.\’E 
()FFl(TE or THE G()VER?\ ‘()R 
4, iS'r.u‘ra Hovsr; S'l‘ .-&Tl().\i 
A1%(;rs'r.t, Muss 
0433341001 
J.~\;\'FKi' MILLS D_»\1\’ BI ?RGESS 
G()\"ER§\ ‘()R DIRI~l(TT()R or GOVERNOR'S 
E?\’ER(;Y OFFICE 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE 
An Act Regarding Future Energy Procurements for Renewable Energy Development in 
Northern Maine 
L.D. 1943 
GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFICE 
May 23, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology (EUT): My name is Caroline Colan, and I am the Legislative Liaison for the 
Governor's Energy Office (GEO). 
The GEO testifies in support of L.D. 1943. 
ln 2021, the Legislature established the Northern Maine Renewable Energy Development Program (35-A 
§3210-I) through bipartisan legislation signed by Governor Mills. Pursuant to this legislation, the Public 
Utilities Commission gave conditional approval to two projects through a competitive bidding process to 
promote renewable energy development in northern Maine, finding them in the public interest and 
necessary to meet Maine's climate and greenhouse gas reduction goals. 
The selected bids include a 1,200-megawatt (MW), 345-kilovolt transmission line and associated 
interconnection facilities that will allow 1,000 MW of new wind generation to connect to the lSO—NE 
grid. This transmission project addresses a long-standing challenge — unlocking northern Maine's high 
quality renewable energy potential which will in turn, unlock the significant economic and community 
benefits that come along with them. At present, the state of Massachusetts has agreed to partner on 
these projects, sharing in up to 40 percent of the output and financing, leaving Maine with the 
remaining 60 percent. Should these two projects move ahead as proposed and receive final approval 
from the Commission, the GEO expects that approximately 200 MW of transmission capacity will remain 
available for development. L.D. 1943 would direct the Commission to contract for generation to fill this 
remaining capacity through a competitive bidding process should they determine a contract to be in the 
public interest. As long as the current 1,000 MW wind generation project and associated transmission 
project is not negatively impacted, the GEO is supportive of this effort. 
As we transition to a clean energy economy, electrifying both heating and transportation, electricity 
demand is on track to increase significantly. The U.S. Department of Energy has estimated that 
nationally the U.S. will likely need to increase new transmission capacity by more than 50 percent to 
keep up with growth in electric demand and clean energy? Increased transmission capacity can improve 
grid reliability and resilience; improve renewable resource integration and access; support electrification 
efforts; and reduce congestion and curtailment. 
' 
httpsI/fwww.energy.g0vfsites!defauItf ﬁles,/2023~02f022423-DRAFTNeedsSt11dyforPublicComment.pdf
l
Developing additional new renewable resources in northern Maine to be paired with the remaining 
transmission capacity is a significant opportunity that could contribute to meeting lvlaine and the 
region's clean energy goals. The GEO's most recent analysis of the RPS indicated that a combination of 
existing generation and resources under development will likely be sufficient to meet state needs for 
RPS compliance until 2026, but beyond that point, new resources with capacity between 800 and 900 
MW by 2030 will be needed? Maine households and businesses continue to confront volatile energy 
costs resulting from New England's longstanding overreliance on expensive, imported fossil fuels to heat 
our homes and businesses and generate our electricity. By leveraging this transmission investment to 
maximize renewable development, bringing new clean energy resources to Maine and our neighbors, 
these projects will not only help reduce energy costs over the long-term by placing downward pressure 
on regional electricity prices but will also help confront challenges from climate change by meeting our 
RPS and reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
The GEO supports this legislation ’s common-sense directive to leverage the investment in the northern 
Maine transmission line with additional renewable generation should capacity remain and would 
suggest bid evaluations by the Commission focus on cost-effectiveness and likelihood that a project will 
be successfully built._ 
Thank you for your consideration. 
C0/\J0»¢-Czqo-v\ Caroline Colan, Legislative Liaison 
Governor's Energy Office 
2 https://www.maine.govfenergyfsitesfmaine.gov.energy/ ﬁlesfinline- 
files,/GEO __State%20of%20Maine%2ORenewable%20Energy%20G0aEs%20Market%20Assessment “Final_March% 
202021 I .gdf 
Page 2 of2
