 
May 23, 20 23 
 
Maine Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
American Clean Power Association FOR – LD 1943  
 
Chairman Lawrence, Chairman Zeigler, and members of the Committee : 
 
The American Clean Power Association (AC) is  uniting the power of wind, solar, transmission and storage 
companies and their allied industries, to champion policies  that enable the growth of renewable energy 
in the United States.  
 
On behalf of our member s, we are for LD 1943, wh ich would ensure full build our and benefits of the 
Northern Ma ine R enewable Energy Development Progr am.  
 
An economic assessment o f construction of 1,200 MW of wind generation  shows significant 
employment  and economic development pot ential – with 1,500  job years  and $85 million in wages. The 
project would generate nearly $324 million in economic activity, adding almost $140 million to GSP. 
Addit ionally, in -state purchases of equipment and supplies would result in nearly $72 million in sales 
taxes paid within the state. The Maine Public Utilities Commission is in the process of awarding a 
contract to Longroad Energy for a 1,000 -megawatt wind farm under this program. By awarding the 
remaining 200  megawatts of generation projects, Maine can accrue the maximum benefits as noted 
above.  
 
Renewable capacity continues to provide significant and quantifiable  benefits to the New England grid 
and its customers . In December  2022 Daymark Energy Adv isors released a n analysis (commissioned by 
ACP) of the proposed 1,200 MW project and transmi ssion l ine. As a large source of low -cost, non -
emitting energy, the report found that the addition of the renewable projects will reduce the need fo r 
the ISO -NE to dispatch fuel-fired resources, lowering wholesale energy market prices and providing 
significant energy cost savings for consumers in New England states  – upwards of $200 million.  
 
Finally, by enabling the addition of  200 megawatts of wind generat ion and filling the transmission line, 
Maine can m ake a quantum leap in meeting its emissions goals.  Adding 1,200 MW of wind generation 
would reduce CO2 emissions by over 1.5 million tons per year across New England. This is equivalent to 
taking over 330,000 cars off the road, based on recent EPA estimates. Additionally, these projects would 
prevent the r elease of significant am ounts of particulate matter (PM 2.5) and pollutants such as nitrogen 
oxides (NOx) and sulfur dioxide (SO2) which have serious impacts on our environment and on human 
health.  
 
By passing LD 1943, the Legislature can ensure that Mainers will benefit from a full 1,200 M W of clean 
power built and opera ted in Northe rn Maine.  Thank you for your consider ation of this important 
legislation . 
 
Moira C yphers  
Director, Eastern Region State Affairs  
American Clean Power Association  
MCyphe rs@cleanpower.org  
  
