 
 
 Testimony before the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology in support of LD 1943: An Act Regarding Future Energy Procurements for Renewable Energy Development in Northern Maine  May 23, 2023  Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology, my name is Phelps Turner, and I am a senior attorney at Conservation Law Foundation (CLF). I appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of LD 1943: An Act Regarding Future Energy Procurements for Renewable Energy Development in Northern Maine.  CLF is a public interest advocacy group that works to solve the environmental challenges threatening the people, natural resources and communities in Maine and across New England. In Maine for almost four decades, CLF is a member-supported organization that works to ensure that laws and policies are developed, implemented and enforced that protect and restore our natural resources; are good for Maine’s economy and environment; and equitably address the climate crisis.  CLF supports LD 1943 because it will help maximize the economic and climate mitigation opportunities presented by the Northern Maine Renewable Energy Development Program (Program). The law establishing the Program requires clean energy generation and transmission projects that will grow Maine’s economy and help Maine cost-effectively achieve its legislatively mandated greenhouse gas emissions reductions and renewable portfolio standard (RPS).1 As the Public Utilities Commission (Commission) indicated, “[t]hese projects will provide significant benefits to Maine and the region, including jobs during construction, property tax revenue for local communities, and environmental benefits from new renewable energy displacing fossil fuels.”2  The development of renewable energy generation as contemplated in the Program presents economic development opportunities throughout the associated supply chains3 and can have a “significant positive impact on the economy.”4 Furthermore, in-state generation resources like those contemplated in the Program can provide more stable energy costs, and the economic  1 35-A M.R.S. § 3210-I, 38 M.R.S. § 576-A, 35-A M.R.S. § 3210. 2 Maine Public Utilities Commission, “Commission Issues Key Decision to Move Forward with Northern Maine Renewable Energy Projects,” January 31, 2023, https://www.maine.gov/tools/whatsnew/index.php?topic=puc-pressreleases&id=10285146&v=article088. 3 Maine Governor’s Energy Office, “Renewable Energy Goals Market Assessment,” prepared by Energy and Environmental Economics and Applied Economics Clinic, March 2021, https://www.maine.gov/energy/studies-reports-working-groups/current-studies-working-groups/renewable-energy-market-assessment, at 11. 4 “Resolve To Study Transmission Solutions To Enable Renewable Energy Investment in the State, Stakeholder Study, Final Report,” January 3, 2020, https://www.maine.gov/energy/sites/maine.gov.energy/files/inline-files/LD1401_Transmission_Renewable_Energy%20Study_Stakeholder%20Report.pdf, at 3. 
  
  -2-  
benefits and payments for purchase of these sources of energy can stay within the state, rather than going to out-of-state fossil fuel providers.5 LD 1943 will help ensure that ratepayers get the maximum benefit of the Program. In addition to creating economic opportunities, the Program will help Maine meet its climate and clean energy goals. Renewable energy resources will be needed as early as 2026 to meet the state’s increasing RPS, and action to develop these resources is needed well before 2026.6  The Legislature has explicitly directed the state to procure renewable energy generation and transmission infrastructure in northern Maine. These mandated actions will create economic opportunities and help Maine meet its renewable energy and climate mandates. As the Maine Climate Council determined in its initial climate action plan:  Transitioning to cleaner energy generation and greater energy efficiency offers exciting new economic opportunity. Maine currently spends roughly $4.4 billion annually on imported fossil fuels. Clean and renewable energy solutions can help keep those energy dollars in Maine, catalyzing a transformative economic impact, while significantly reducing emissions.7  By requiring the procurement of additional renewable generation capacity in the event that more than 5% of the selected transmission proposal would not be used by the selected generation proposal, LD 1943 allows Maine and Maine ratepayers to maximize the benefits of the program in general and the transmission infrastructure in particular.  LD 1943 can and should be strengthened by: clarifying that the additional generation contemplated in the bill will be qualified renewable energy generation; and by clarifying and/or providing criteria by which the Commission will determine that a bidder has “significant experience,” as that term is used in proposed 35-A M.R.S. § 3210-I(3-A)(C)(2)(b), and by which the Commission will determine that the proposal “[c]omplements the proposals previously selected,” as that phrase is used in proposed 35-A M.R.S. § 3210-I(3-A)(C)(2)(c).   Thank you for this opportunity to testify in support of LD 1943.  5 Maine Governor’s Energy Office, “Renewable Energy Goals Market Assessment,” at 11. 6 Id. at 1. 7 Maine Climate Council, “Maine Won’t Wait: A Four-Year Plan for Climate Action,” December 2020, https://www.maine.gov/future/sites/maine.gov.future/files/inline-files/MaineWontWait_December2020.pdf  at 13. 
