SU9PORT, EDUCATE, PREVENT 
March 27, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services: 
My name is Amanda Chambers and l am submitting testimony today on behalf of Rape Response 
Services and the Penquis Children's Advocacy Center in support of LD 816, An Act to Provide integrated 
Behavioral Health Services to Sexual Violence Survivors. 
Rape Response Services is the sexual assault support center that provides services to those impacted by 
sexual violence throughout Penobscot and Piscataquis Counties. We provide 24/7 accompaniments and 
helpline services, support groups, and referrals for services that survivors rely on for healing, safety, or 
justice. All of our services are free and available to survivors throughout their lifetime, regardless of the 
type of assault or how long ago the assault occurred. 
The Penquis Children's Advocacy Center is a child-focused, facility-based, multidisciplinary team 
approach to the investigation of child sexual abuse. By design the child's needs are at the center of the 
response. As a primary function ofthis model, the CAC often makes referrals for the child and non~ 
offending caregivers to outside support services such as counseling. 
When someone experiences sexual violence, there are critical opportunities for intervention which can 
support resilience and promote healing. For the survivor to be heard and believed, to have autonomy 
and choice over their body and their story, and to have access to trauma informed services, are critical 
aspects to healing. 
The survivors whom we support are experiencing long waitlists for behavioral health services that are 
delaying their healing. Our CAC has linkage agreements with two major providers of clinical services in 
our catchment area. When the CAC makes a referral, the agency prioritizes that referral and moves the 
child to the top of their waitlist. Even with these linkage agreements, children referred by the CAC are 
still waiting approximately six months before their first appointment with a therapist. They must wait at 
least six long months after they have told their story and had their whole world turned upside down, 
before they are able to access therapy to help them process what has happened and begin to heal. 
Helpline: 1-800-871-7741 
TTY:1-888~458-5599 
www.rrsonline.org 
262 Harlow St. v Bangor, ME 04401 ~ 207.973.3651 
50 North St. ~ Dover-Foxcroft, ME 04426 ~ 207.564.7116 
0 PENQUIS subsldlorz
Page2 
This is still much better than the wait times for the adult survivors Rape Response Services supports, who 
are unable to beneﬁt from CAC linkage agreements. Adult survivors experience even longer wait times, 
sometimes up to a year. 
After speaking with our colleagues from other centers across the state, we realize this is a crisis that 
everyone is experiencing when referring survivors to community agencies for clinical services anda 
problem that is getting worse instead of better. As a result, our helplines and support groups are 
overwhelmed. Our helpline calls at Rape Response Services have tripled compared to the number of calls 
we received prior to the pandemic. The types of calls that we are receiving indicate that callers have 
increased mental health needs. Our advocates and volunteers do not have the skill or training to offer 
the therapeutic techniques that only clinicians can provide. 
By supporting LD 816, you would be giving survivors of all ages access to the critical behavioral health 
services they need, when they need it, without long waitlists or a complicated referral process. 
Thank you for your consideration. We hope you will support LD 816 and would be pleased to answer any 
questions you might have.
