HoUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
to (207) 287-1400 
Holly Stove]. TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
71 Dover Rd. 
Boothbay, ME 04537 
Phone: (207) 633-5979 
Holly.Stover@legiSlature.mainegov 
Testimony of Representative Holly B. Stover presenting 
LD 816, An Act to Provide Integrated Behavioral Health Services to Sexual Assault Survivors 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and Human Services Committee, 
I am Holly Stover, and I represent the Towns of Boothbay, Boothbay Harbor, Edgecomb, Southport, South 
Bristol and Westport Island. I am pleased to present LD 816, An Act to Provide Integrated Behavioral 
Health Services to Sexual Assault Survivors. 
Sexual Assault Support Centers and Children ’s Advocacy Center Staff repoit that 85 to 95 percent of their 
clients seek mental health support but have barriers to accessing adequate services. This indicated a need for 
more trained professionals in Maine to eliminate delays and waitlists by having trauma-trained clinicians ready 
and available to work with survivors. There is also a need to reduce cost-prohibitive copays for some insurances 
that require reporting the survivor's diagnosis. 
LD 816 would fund a pilot program of four positions across the state to provide direct services to survivors at 
Sexual Assault Support Centers and Children ’s Advocacy Centers. These professionals would be trained to 
handle victims of sexual assault, sexual exploitation, sexual violence and related trauma or receive training after 
being hired. To do this, the bill will provide a General Fund appropriation of $100,000 in FY24 and an ongoing 
appropriation of $775,000 in FY25. 
In Maine, an estimated one in five women and one in four men have experienced unwelcome or forceful sexual 
contact in their lifetime. This can lead to damaging trauma and outcomes for a survivor. The impact of post- 
traumatic stress, and responses to sexual trauma can result in mild to truly debilitating mental health impacts to 
a victim, including but not limited to depression, anxiety, eating disorders and substance use disorders. These 
should be viewed as the way survivors manage trauma, yet all too often, they are pathologized in traditional 
mental health settings. ,' 
It may not surprise any of you to hear that Maine is experiencing a shortage of mental health clinicians and 
providers of mental health services. This shortage directly impacts survivors of sexual assault who have limited 
to no access to mental health treatment services. 
The Children ’s Advocacy Centers report that children are on waitlists for 9 months or more to be seen bya 
mental health clinician after disclosure of child sexual abuse. We know that the right amount of treatment at the 
right time is a determinant of healing after horriﬁc abuse and trauma. 
The 2022 Governors ’ Advisory Council on Military Sexual Trauma report recommended increasing access to 
behavioral health providers. The report also recommended “to propose legislation that allows VA services to 
District 48: Boothbay, Boothbay Harbor, Edgecomb, South Bristol, Southpoit and Westport Island
currently serving members” related to mental health sen/ices. lt cites reimbursement issues with military health 
insurance that are a barrier for veterans needing mental health services. 
We can and must do better in ensuring timely and appropriate mental health services for our children who are 
survivors of sexual trauma. Most importantly, we can reduce the stigma and shame that survivors face when 
seeking mental health services. 
Thank you for your consideration, and I am happy to answer any questions. 
District 48: Boothbay, Boothbay Harbor, Edgecomb. South Bristol, Southport and Westport Island
