LD 1255: An Act to improve the Security of Voting Places 
My name is Ann Sawchuck and l am a resident of Cumberland, Maine. 
Chairpersons Hickman and Supica, and members of the Veterans and Legal 
Affairs Committee, thank you for listening to my testimony today in support of 
LD 1255, An Act to Improve the Security of Voting Places. 
l have served as a nonpartisan election observer at Maine elections for several 
years, starting prior to the pandemic and during the pandemic. l plan to serve 
again in the future. 
Voting is arguably the most important duty a citizen of a democracy has. As an 
election observer, l have learned that Mainers take this responsibility very 
seriously. Our election workers are well trained and serious about their work, 
and our voters turn out in great numbers. During the most crowded times the 
workers and voters are patient and usually good humored. Many people bring 
their children with them so they can see Democracy in action. 
It thrills me to see Mainers from all walks of life participating in our elections. 
And l believe that a voting place should be a safe place where people may freely 
exercise their First Amendment right to vote. 
LD 1255 would ban dangerous weapons in a voting place or on public property 
within 250 feet of a voting place during the time that the polls are open until the 
completion of election duties on election day. Exceptions are made for law 
enforcement officers in the performance of their duties and persons may leave 
their weapons locked in their car while they vote without legal penalty. 
Maine law does not currently prohibit dangerous weapons from being brought 
into town offices, sports arenas, churches or other possible polling places. 
Dangerous weapons are banned from courts, the Statehouse and public and 
private school property. Town clerks, poll workers and voters deserve the same 
protection from dangerous weapons as courthouse workers, statehouse workers 
and educational workers. 
Fear of violence cannot be allowed to rule our democratic processes. LD 1255 
represents the adoption of a basic standard that we apply to our other state 
democratic institutions and that our election workers and voters desen/e. 
Thank you for your service to Maine and for listening to me today.
