,47,,a/ $4413 
Good afternoon Senator Hickman, Representative Sipica and distinguished 
members of the Committee on Veteran’s Affairs. My name is Betsy Williams andI 
live in Brunswick. I stand before you in support of LD 1255, An Act to Improve the 
Security of Voting Places. 
Last November I was collecting referendum signatures on Election Day at the 
Augusta Civic Center. It was for Paid Family and Medical Leave, and I’ll tell you, it 
was a busy table! People of all ages stopped to chat and sign the petition. And the 
last thing I expected to have catch my eye among those bent over the petition wasa 
revolver, attached to the belt of a middle-aged man. 
Now Pd be exaggerating to say I was scared. I wasn’t. There was nothing 
threatening about the man. But it isn’t an exaggeration to say I was alarmed. My 
concern grew when he started boasting to a nearby man about What kind of gun it 
was and where he got it. I say “boasting ” because it was clear to me that he relished 
the attention it drew. It seemed the likely reason he wore it. 
As I looked around the space, I wondered who might in fact be very frightened 
seeing this gun and hearing this talk. He all but took it out of the holster to show it 
off. Is that allowed? What would have happened if he had? How would I and others 
have felt? Reacted? Might someone have done or said something to escalate the 
situation? And why should I, or any other member of the public even have to wonder 
these questions when we go to vote? It’s totally inappropriate and unnecessary. 
I don’t begrudge someone the opportunity to show off something they are proud of or 
share their enthusiasm for something they value. But when that something isa 
lethal weapon reported by the CDC to have killed over 19,000 people in our country 
in one year alone‘ , I believe it calls for a different standard. And that standard 
should include prohibition of lethal weapons in places wherever the public is 
required to go to vote. 
On April 16, 1974, a good friend of mine, Nick Shields, age 23, was making room in 
a friend's car for a rug he had just purchased when he was shot in the back three 
times. He was a victim of a racially motivated series of drive-by shootings called 
Zebra Murders. His father dedicated the rest of his life to advocating for reasonable 
gun safety regulations. It was all he could do to honor his son’s short life. 
Now it’s my turn. Please vote Ought to Pass on this bill and provide a measure of 
reassurance to the voting public of Maine by this simple regulation. 
Thank you. 
* 
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020 statistics
