TO: Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee 
FROM: Brett Bulmer, Gardiner, Maine 
RE: LD1255 “An Act to Improve the Security of Voting Places” 
DATE: April 5, 2023 
 
Imagine for a moment that I proposed we could cure cancer simply by posting “No Cancer 
Allowed” signs. 
Imagine for a moment that I suggested we could effectively eliminate various mental health 
issues by posting signs like “No Depression Allowed” or “Anxiety-Free Zone”. 
Imagine for a moment that I claimed we could combat heart disease by posting “No Heart 
Attacks Allowed” signs. 
You would respond in one of two ways. You would either laugh at me, or you would look at me 
with pity because I was clearly delusional and completely out of touch with reality. 
Yet, some people honestly believe that a “No Weapons Allowed” sign will actually make us 
safer. A sign. A piece of paper. A piece of paper that an evil or dangerous person will ignore 
without hesitation. 
If you really want to combat cancer, you do so by reducing exposure to cancer-causing agents 
and investing in effective treatments. Not posting signs. 
If you really want to improve mental health, you do so by allocating sufficient resources to 
legitimate treatments and therapies. Not posting signs. 
If you really want to reduce heart disease, you do so by promoting lifestyles that result in 
healthier hearts. Not posting signs. 
If you really want to make polling places safer, you do so by beefing up security and enabling 
good people to protect themselves. Not posting signs. 
A no weapons policy would stop only the law abiding from carrying a weapon into a polling 
place. The people you are worried about won’t care about your little sign. 
I urge you to oppose LD1255. It would do absolutely nothing to make you safer. At best, this law 
would give delusional people a false sense of security; at worst, it would make you less safe by 
sending a very dangerous message to would-be criminals. There’s a reason shooters 
overwhelmingly target gun-free zones. If you really want to make us safer, you need to start by 
abandoning fantasy and protecting the rights of law-abiding citizens. 
Thank you for considering my testimony. 
 
Brett Bulmer
Gardiner
LD 1255
TO: Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Veterans and 
Legal Affairs Committee
FROM: Brett Bulmer, Gardiner, Maine
RE: LD1255 “An Act to Improve the Security of Voting Places”
DATE: April 5, 2023
Imagine for a moment that I proposed we could cure cancer simply by posting “No 
Cancer Allowed” signs.
Imagine for a moment that I suggested we could effectively eliminate various mental 
health issues by posting signs like “No Depression Allowed” or “Anxiety-Free Zone”.
Imagine for a moment that I claimed we could combat heart disease by posting “No 
Heart Attacks Allowed” signs.
You would respond in one of two ways. You would either laugh at me, or you would 
look at me with pity because I was clearly delusional and completely out of touch 
with reality.
Yet, some people honestly believe that a “No Weapons Allowed” sign will actually 
make us safer. A sign. A piece of paper. A piece of paper that an evil or dangerous 
person will ignore without hesitation.
If you really want to combat cancer, you do so by reducing exposure to 
cancer-causing agents and investing in effective treatments. Not posting signs.
If you really want to improve mental health, you do so by allocating sufficient 
resources to legitimate treatments and therapies. Not posting signs.
If you really want to reduce heart disease, you do so by promoting lifestyles that 
result in healthier hearts. Not posting signs.
If you really want to make polling places safer, you do so by beefing up security and 
enabling good people to protect themselves. Not posting signs.
A no weapons policy would stop only the law abiding from carrying a weapon into a 
polling place. The people you are worried about won’t care about your little sign.
I urge you to oppose LD1255. It would do absolutely nothing to make you safer. At 
best, this law would give delusional people a false sense of security; at worst, it would
make you less safe by sending a very dangerous message to would-be criminals. 
There’s a reason shooters overwhelmingly target gun-free zones. If you really want to
make us safer, you need to start by abandoning fantasy and protecting the rights of 
law-abiding citizens.
Thank you for considering my testimony.
