4/5/23 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the committee, Good afternoon. 
I am here today in strong opposition of LD1255, an act to improve the security of voting places. I 
respectfully ask for a unanimous vote of Ought not to pass.' 
Though the thought of and the intent of GFZs to reduce violence is the goal, the exact opposite is 
overwhelmingly the effect. 
Referencing just the last well publicized shooting in Nashville, the perpetrator walked up to a door witha 
Gun Free Zone sign on it, shot out the glass and then walked through it to wreak havoc, mayhem and 
murder on the defenseless occupants behind the sign. There are papers from that person stating 
speciﬁcally that that target was chosen because ofthat and there are numerous incidents in the past 
with the same circumstances and evidence. 
GFZs do Not enhance safety, security or protection. They in fact, do just the opposite by taking away 
every persons right and means of defending themselves from them. Only the good, law abiding persons 
will respect them. 
The lunatics and sociopaths that go on a murdering rampage will have absolutely no respect or regard 
for those signs, laws or even human life itself. The only thing that stops such a person is meeting them 
with equal or greater force and GFZs take that ability away from everyone that enters them. Making 
more people defenseless has, and can never, make people safer or more secure. 
Voting season in Maine is also hunting season. Thousands of hunters carry ﬁrearms with them during 
hunting season and many will also have them in the vehicle when they head to a polling place. Though 
this law does have an exception for keeping them locked in the vehicle, most residents do not read the 
full laws as they are written. This will lead to many people not knowing they can still vote and many will 
just steer clear of all polling places just to be sure they're not breaking the new law which will result in 
them not voting. 
Regarding smaller towns where the voting takes place at the town ofﬁce. Many clerks have permits and 
carry on a regular basis and this law would render them defenseless on the busiest day of the year. They 
do not have Police departments and are their own ﬁrst responders. Some of those places it could take 
thirty minutes or more for any Law Enforcement agency to arrive in an emergency. Rendering them all 
defenseless during voting times is unacceptable. 
Respectfully, 
Bruce Ashmore 
Sgt. Ret. USA 
Bucksport, ME
