gg) M! 
sauna '1‘ 
SAM-ILA 
205 Church Hill Road, Suite 3, Augusta, ME 04330 
David Trahan, Executive Director 
david@sam,ofmaine.o,rg 
vvww.samiIa.org 
Testimony in Opposition 
LD 1255, An Act to Improve the Security of Voting Places 
Before the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
Presented by David Trahan, Executive Director of the Sportsman ’s Alliance of Maine- 
Institute for Legislative Action (SAM-ILA) 
Monday, April 5, 2023 
The Honorable Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, members of the Veterans and 
Legal Affairs Committee, my name is David Trahan and I represent the Sportsman ’s 
Alliance of Maine - Institute for Legislative Action testifying in opposition to LD 1255, An 
Act to Improve the Security of Voting Places as drafted. 
Most reasonable people agree keeping guns out of voting places is a good idea, but it is not 
as simple as this bill implies. First, this question should be answered, is there a rash of 
polling place shootings that must be addressed. If there is, I cannot ﬁnd evidence to 
support that claim. 
Schools are gun free zones and at election time act as voting places, we can all see what is 
happening across the country when school is in session, yet we seem frozen in place, 
unable to ﬁnd a solution, this bill could expand that problem. Maybe the problem is not 
guns, but the fact that we have created and advertised our schools as soft targets without 
providing adequate security. 
Passing a law that mandates the establishment of new gun free zones and then advertises 
that fact to terrorists or active shooters creates a whole new set of soft targets for violence. 
Any reasonable person would say, and they would be right, if you create a gun free zone, 
you should be required to provide armed security. My organization agrees, if this bill 
passes, each voting place affected should be required to provide a security plan and ﬁle 
that plan with the Department of Public Safety.
Again, it is not that easy, there is a long and passionate debate Whether there should be 
armed police ofﬁcers in voting places. There are several states that have passed laws 
banning armed police ofﬁcers in a voting place, the foundation of this policy is deeply 
rooted in some of our nation’s darkest moments. And there lies the life and death dilemma 
with this bill. 
This bill does not reference voting place security and does not contemplate public safety, 
but it should. Passing this law as written tries to create safety, while making voting places 
more dangerous and vulnerable to active shooters. You cannot have the debate about this 
new policy without addressing both issues. Some will argue against visible, armed police 
ofﬁcers in the voting places, I agree, it is a bad idea. The debate about armed police 
officers in voting places need not be a distraction. Security can be provided in a much less 
intimidating Way than uniformed police officers. Metal detectors, plain clothed trained 
ofﬁcers, etc. All should be explored if this bill moves forward. 
In conclusion, this bill creates a situation in which mass shootings would become easier. 
Without an adequate security plan that guarantees public safety.
 
 
ATTACHMENTS 
ON FILE 
