ilﬂntnn at Zﬁrunstnttk, lllilaine 
INCORPORATED 1739 
O f OFFICE OF THE TOWN CLERK
e 
a Q _. ss UNION STREET TELEPHONE 207-725-6653 
~Ii‘ -~.._"‘*T*‘ *5 .-" 
°o "~“ BRUNSWICK, MAINE 04011-2418 FAX 207-725-sees 
April 5, 2023 
Honorable members of the Veterans & Legal Affairs Committee 
RE: LD 1255 
Good afternoon, Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Honorable members of the Veteran & 
Legal Affairs Committee. My name is Fran Smith, and I am here to speak in favor of LD 1255, "An 
Act to Improve the Security of Voting Places." I have been the town clerk in Brunswick for over 22 
years, with four years prior in Falmouth and two years working in the Secretary of State's Election 
Division. Over this time, I have seen many changes in the voting process, from how to get people to 
vote to having residents excited to participate in the process but expressing safety concerns when 
voting. 
In Brunswick, our Council and School Board voted to move our voting place out of Junior High 
School to the Recreation Center. Although there were multiple reasons, one of the biggest drivers was 
the safety of students and voters. If we receive approval from Secretary Bellows, I will be working to 
ensure voter safety at the new location, and this bill can help me do that. Both voters and election 
workers have expressed concerns for safety with acts of violence and intimidation that have happened 
in other places in our country. These threats are happening in Maine. In Brunswick last fall, we had to 
utilize the recent state law that protects election officials from being threatened. We had a voter who 
threatened to "take out" the workers if he didn't get to absentee vote, when there was no reason he 
wasn't going to get to do so. This was the third time we had an unsafe experience with this person. 
What if he had a weapon, it was scary enough for our workers without one. I worry someone could 
have been hurt, or clearly, the level of intimidation would have risen. 
This bill is not about the extremists but disagreements that might elevate into "scary" situations and 
create intimidation for voters. There is no reason for dangerous weapons when voting. I ask you to 
provide election ofﬁcials with the tools they need to ensure that our voters can feel safe when they are 
voting either absentee or at the polls. I encourage this committee and the full legislature to do the right 
thing to ensure democracy is safe for all voters. Support LD 1255, and ban dangerous weapons from 
voting places. Thank you for your time and for hearing my comments. 
Fran Smith 
Town Clerk 
Brunswick, Maine
