Hillary Shende
Brunswick
LD 1255
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and esteemed members of the Veterans and 
Legal Affairs Committee, my name is Hillary Shende, and I am here to testify in favor
of LD 1255. Thank you for your time and attention today.
While most communities have their citizens cast their ballots at schools, which are 
already gun-free zones by law, some do not. My community, Brunswick, has recently 
made motions to move balloting from the Junior High School to the Recreation 
Center, and so it will soon be permissible for residents to show up there and brandish 
weapons when people are trying to vote.
While the presence of weapons may make a few people feel safer, particularly if they 
are the ones carrying those weapons, the vast majority  of people will be terrified, and
therefore deterred from voting. This is the stuff of third world countries with sham 
democracies. As a U.S. state which prides itself on its accurate conducting of free and
fair elections, Maine simply cannot allow such voter intimidation.
Equally as important, we must know the facts about whether the presence of firearms 
- in any circumstance - makes people safer from violence or not. And despite some 
folks’ claims that you can find a study that proves anything you want, this simply 
isn’t true. There IS a way to find the actual truth of any claim, this issue included. 
You have to apply critical thinking skills to ascertain whether the study is 
scientifically sound. You have to find answers to questions such as, “Who paid for the
study? Does that organization have a vested interest in the findings? What 
methodology was used? Was it double blind? Was there a control group? Was it 
experimental or simply correlational? Have the findings been replicated? And 
especially in the case of correlational findings, how many times?  And of vital 
importance, was the study published in a peer-reviewed scientific journal?”  Knowing
the answers to these questions tells you which studies are speaking truth and which 
ones should be ignored.
When it comes to the question of whether the presence of guns makes us safer from 
violence, the reputable studies all say the same thing: NO. Studies published by The 
American Academy of Physicians, the Oxford University Press, The National 
Institutes of Health, Scientific American, the Rand Corporation, Harvard University, 
the journal Nature, the New England Journal of Medicine, Boston University, The 
Kaiser Family Foundation and many others all concluded that the presence of 
firearms makes it significantly MORE likely, not less likely, that people in that 
vicinity will experience gun violence. 
I don’t want to experience gun violence. I want to vote in peace and even bring my 
children along so they can learn how to be engaged in the civic process of voting. 
Please ban firearms from all polling places in Maine. Thank you.

