LD 1255 - An Act to Improve the Security of Voting Places 
Memorandum of Opposition 
Date: April 5, 2023 
To: Honorable Members of the Committee On Veterans and Legal Affairs 
From: Jonathan Martell 
RE: LD 1255 - An Act to lmprove the Security of Voting Places1 
Members of the committee, l would like to express my Opposition of LD 1255 - An Act to Improve the Security of 
Voting Places 
My Name is Jonathan Martell. l am a Sanford City Councilor, Head of The Southern Maine Chapter for Gun 
Owners of Maine, Legislative Officer for Sanford Springvale Fish and Game Club and NRA Member. 
While this bill may appear well intentioned on the surface, to prevent voter intimidation, the results will be exactly 
what it is purportedly intended to stop. 
First, Maine Citizens have a right to bear arms and that right shall never be questioned, according to the Maine 
Constitution. Maine is one of the safest states in the country. Why is that you may ask? It is because it is one of 
the most actively armed states. You never know who may be carrying, and criminals rarely risk themselves being 
shot in areas where others might be armed. Shootings in malls, churches, and other areas have been stopped 
with armed citizens. Criminals prefer unarmed victims and this is precisely why schools and other “Gun Free 
Zones" are seen as soft targets. These areas are commonly used by those intent on harming others. This bill 
would create another soft target area. 
Second, Voter intimidation is a real problem in some areas across the country. Especially areas where citizens 
are not allowed to protect themselves. Members of the New Black Panther Party were accused of voter 
intimidation that took place on Election Day in November 2008, at a polling station in a predominantly African- 
American, Democratic voting district of Philadelphia. This type of intimidation would not only apply to voters, but 
also to city clerks and staff as they would be forcibly disarmed by law. 
Third, lt is already illegal to display weapons in a threatening manner under Title 25: INTERNAL SECURlTY AND 
PUBLIC SAFETY Subsection 2001-A, Section A: A person may not, unless excepted by a provision of law: 
Display in a threatening manner a firearm, slungshot, knuckles, bowie knife, dirk, stiletto or other dangerous or 
deadly weapon usually employed in the attack on or defense of a person 
Fourth, The very definition of “Dangerous Weapon" is extremely broad as to include any object. 
Legally, this would prevent even city clerks from doing theirjob since even a pen or book could be used asa 
weapon. 
Title 17-A: MAINE CRIMINAL CODE 
SS 2. Definitions 
Section 9. Dangerous weapon. 
A. "Use of a dangerous weapon" means the use of a firearm or other weapon, device, instrument, 
material or substance, whether animate or inanimate, which, in the manner it is used or threatened to be 
used is capable of producing death or serious bodily injury. [PL 1977, c. 510, §t0 (RPR).] 
B. "Armed with a dangerous weapon" means in actual possession, regardless of whether the possession is 
visible or concealed, of: (1)Afirearm; (2) Any device designed as a weapon and capable of producing death or 
serious bodily injury; or (3) Any other device, instrument, material or substance, whether animate or inanimate, 
which, in the manner it is intended to be used by the actor, is capable of producing or threatening death or 
serious bodily injuiy. For purposes of this definition, the intent may be conditional. [PL 1977, c. 510, §10 (RPR).] 
C. When used in any other context, "dangerous weapon" means a firearm or any device designed as a weapon 
and capable of producing death or serious bodily injury. [PL 1977, c. 510, §1O (RPR).] 
D. For purposes of this subsection, proof that a thing is presented in a covered or open manner as a dangerous 
weapon gives rise to a permissible inference under the Maine Rules of Evidence, Rule 303 
that it, in fact, is a dangerous weapon.
Fifth, This bill places a 250ft radius around poling places, ballot drop boxes, and city clerks offices at various 
times that would not be known by the general public going about their daily business. These areas would extent 
into residences and other private property not under the control of the city. This law would either be completely 
non enforceable, or selectively enforced to target certain persons or groups. This is reminiscent of Jim Crow 
laws that targeted minorities. 
This is nothing more than another thinly veiled attempt to erode the citizens constitutionally protected rights in 
the name of safety. Voters will be far from safe if this bill moves fon/vard. Please support citizen rights, and vote 
Ought Not to Pass for this bill. 
Sincerely, 
Jonathan Martell 
Sanford, ME 
Sanford City Councilor 
Head of The Southern Maine Chapter for Gun Owners of Maine 
Legislative Officer for Sanford Springvale Fish and Game Club 
National Rifle Association Member
