 
 
In Regard to: 
 LD 1255: An Act to Improve the Security of Voting Places 
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, Members of the Committee on Veterans and Legal 
Affairs:  
My name is Laura Parker. I am the President of Gun Owners of Maine and am submitting 
testimony on behalf of our Board of Directors, and our members who are unable to submit 
testimony on this piece of proposed legislation. 
Gun Owners of Maine is an organization whose sole purpose is to ensure that the fabric of our 
State Constitution does not stray from our founders’ intent: Every citizen has a right to keep 
and bear arms and this right shall never be questioned. We are resolutely non-partisan and 
have a membership composed of people from all walks of life.  
We are blue and white collar. We are nurses, welders, teachers, students, and retirees. We, 
more than any other entity in the state, join Mainers from Kittery to Madawaska under the 
banner of one cause: gun rights.  
We maintain: Gun rights are civil rights. Gun rights are women’s rights. Gun rights are 
inalienable. 
For this reason, we oppose LD 1255.  
The language of LD 1255 is vague and therefore unenforceable as written.  Under Part 1, there 
is no way a lawful person carrying a firearm would be aware that a prohibition is in place.  
Sections 1, 2, and 3 all prohibit the carrying of firearms within 250 feet of a place under certain 
circumstances, with no way of knowing when those circumstances are taking place.   
Section A establishes a prohibition at a “voting place or on public property within 250 feet of a 
voting place during the time that the polls are open until the completion of election duties at 
the voting place on election day”.  While a person may be easily aware that a polling place is 

open for voting, how is a person supposed to know when the election duties have been 
completed once the polls have closed?  How are “election duties” defined?  If a person is 
walking past, within 250 feet of a voting place at 10 pm, will it be obvious that the voting duties 
have been completed?   
Section B establishes a prohibition “in a location where absentee voting is occurring in the 
presence of the clerk or on public property within 250 feet of that location”.  Again, if a person 
is walking past a place where absentee voting is occurring, how will said individual be aware 
that such a prohibition has been legally established?  
Section C establishes a prohibition “in a location where the clerk's office is receiving or 
emptying absentee ballots via a secured drop box or on public property within 250 feet of that 
location”.  Once again, how is it that a person would be aware that the conditions set forth by 
this bill would establish a prohibition?  What indications would there be that a person is within 
the 250 feet limit of a drop box?  This section would create a maze of gun-free zones that would 
be impossible for a person who be aware of before they are within the 250-foot limit. 
All three sections of this bill that establish a prohibition on the carrying of firearms are vague 
and unenforceable and should therefore not become law.  
Furthermore, the title of the bill itself, “An Act to Improve the Security of Voting Places” is a 
misrepresentation of what the bill would do if it becomes law.  In what way does disarming law-
abiding citizens make a place safer from criminal activity?  Most mass shootings take place in 
gun-free zones.  There is a reason for that: the majority of mass shootings are stopped by 
another person with a gun, whether it be a member of law enforcement or an armed citizen – 
and criminals prefer to choose places where their victims are helpless and disarmed.   There is 
no evidence that creating a gun-free zone at a voting place will improve the safety of that 
location.  Has Maine had a problem with crimes taking place at voting places?  Will this bill do 
anything to prevent crime at a voting place that is a gun-free zone?   
Maine has a very long tradition of protecting the right to self-defense.  Making voting places 
gun-free zones goes against this long tradition.  A person should not have to give up their 
constitutional rights simply because they choose to vote.   
We encourage you to vote in opposition to LD1255:  
• It is vague and unenforceable 
• It will not make voting places safer  
• It establishes a patchwork of gun-free zones that is nearly impossible to navigate 
• It violates the rights of Maine Residents to be secure in the defense of their own person. 
I welcome any questions you may have, they can be directed to my email address as noted 
below. 
Thank you for your time and consideration, 
Laura B. Parker, President 
laura@gunownersofmaine.org 
