4/5/2023 
ln support of LD 1255 An Act to improve the Security of Voting Places 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Veterans & Legal Affairs Committee 
My name is Lynn Ellis and l live in Brunswick. The bill's sponsor is my Representative and a co-sponsor is 
my Senator. I am honored to support their legislation and their commitment to keeping my town and 
my state secure. 
LD12S5 would help prevent armed intimidation at the polling places where citizens go to do their civic 
duty and exercise their right to vote. Dangerous weapons intended to intimidate or harass in and around 
polling places are a real and imminent threat to free and fair elections in Maine and across the country. l 
urge this legislative body to empower localities to prohibit all such weapons in and around polling places 
and keep armed intimidation out of politics. Attorney General Merrick Garland said "The Justice 
Department has an obligation to guarantee a free and fair vote by everyone who's qualiﬁed to vote and 
will not permit voters to be intimidated." 
Years ago, I helped organize a public event in the local park in Brunswick where we presented resources 
on safe firearm storage, suicide prevention resources and music and games for the children. About half 
a dozen individuals arrived to this family-focused event with their ﬁrearms clearly visible on their hips. 
As one of the organizers of the event, l was terriﬁed. With so many children present and the ongoing 
trauma of mass shootings across our country every day I had no idea what to expect. What was the 
purpose of this show of weapons? Intimidation. 
As reported by The Brennan Center for Justice on Feb. 27, the Department of Homeland 
Security announced a change in its Homeland Security Grant Program that could make a huge difference 
for election ofﬁces around the country. in ﬁscal year 2023, states must dedicate at least three percent of 
the money they receive from this $1 billion program to election security needs, opening up tens of 
millions of dollars for state and local election ofﬁces in need of better security for their workers and for 
voters. This new funding has the potential to provide meaningful support to our guardians of 
democracy. It could help reverse the flow of dedicated professionals leaving the election administration 
field because they don't feel safe in the new climate of harassment and threats. 
Make no mistake, the threats against election workers are a new and deeply disturbing trend in 
American elections and will require far more than the new funds promised by FEMA. The Brennan 
Center for Justice at NYU Law has estimated that the nationwide cost for instituting best practices to 
protect election workers from the rise in threats of physical violence could be as much as $300 
million over the next five years. Just as importantly, money alone cannot solve this problem. All levels of 
government must do more, including by arresting and prosecuting those who have illegally threatened 
election workers. 
Please support the passage of LD1255. We should not allow this type of dangerous intimidation to 
interfere with a cornerstone of our democracy. 
Lynn Ellis 
Brunswick
