Comments in support of LD I255 "An Act to Improve the Security of Voting 
Places” 
Good afternoon, Chairs Hickman and Supica and committee members: 
Three minutes is not much time to present a Supreme Court decision, so I'm 
going to fly through this. 
l\/Iy name is Michele Stapleton. I live in Brunswick, and my very firstjob out of 
law school was clerking for a U.S. federal district judge, researching and 
drafting legal opinions for him. So, when I see legislation like this, I can't help 
but put on my law clerk hat and ask: What happens when the right to vote 
and other important rights come head to head? And after research, my 
conclusion is that voting wins. 
l\/ls. McGehee spoke to you about Bruen and I'd like to add Burson v. 
Freeman, 504 U.S. 191 (1992), which reaffirmed "a State's power to regulate 
conduct in and around the polls in order to maintain peace, order and 
decorum...." (emphasis added). 
Burson addressed campaigning outside of polling places; campaigning is 
political speech and obviously protected by the First Amendment. 
In high school civics and again in law school, I learned that the framers 
regarded speech, press, religion, etc. as the very most important rights in the 
Bill of Rights and that's why they put that amendment very ﬁrst. So, if a state 
can restrict our veiy most important rights, then Burson is authority for also 
restricting Second Amendment rights in that zone immediately around the 
polls. 
Justice Harry Blackmun noted that "[n]o right is more precious in a free 
country than that of having a voice in the election of those who make the 
laws ....”
Tennessee offered two "compelling interests" for this zone around the polls: 
1. protecting the right of citizens to vote freely, and 2. protecting their right 
to conduct the election with integrity and reliability. 
The court applied "exacting scrutiny, ” a very high standard of review, and still 
found both interests "obviously compelling" saying " 
right to vote freely for 
the candidate of one’s choice is of the essence of a democratic society. ” 
Speaking to the size of the zone, Blackmun said "A State is not required to 
prove [the] regulation is perfectly tailored... ” 
l-le also upheld the right of legislatures to act in advance, before any 
incidents occur. 
Do we sometimes have lines outside of polls 250 feet long? Yes. Plus, poll 
workers and voters-—especially those who bring their children, need to feel 
safe not just standing in a line that might snake outside the door, but also 
walking to and from their cars. 
Are there dangerous weapons that can pose a threat from 250 feet? Yes, 
studies say that using the most popular semi automatic rifle in the United 
States today, the average shooter can hit a human-sized target at least 50% 
of the time from 547 yards—not feet, so almost two football fields, https:/Z 
www.minutemanreview.com/ar-15-effective-range/ so even 250 feet might 
not actually be safe enough. 
lt's worth noting that Maine already uses a 250-foot zone around polls, so this 
would not treat dangerous weapons any different from any other prohibited 
activity, https://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/statutes/21-a/title21- 
Asec<’>82.html 
Conclusion: This proposed bill is an allowable move to help ensure the safety 
of voters and poll workers and the integrity of our elections. Let's senda 
message to those that would threaten our polls that Maine will not tolerate 
this behavior.
