Peggy McGehee 
Falmouth, Maine 
Good aftemoon, Chairs Hickman and Supica and Members of the Committee: 
I am Peggy McGehee, a resident of the Town of F almouth and former attorney poll watcher and 
town councilor. l speak in support of the L.D. 1255 bill to ban dangerous weapons near polling 
places. I do so with respect for both our country’s First and Second Amendments, coming froma 
gun-owning, military and public service family. Our son is a U.S. Marine captain who has served 
active duty in Iraq. My daughter ’s son, my grandson, lives in rural Maine and is learning to 
shoot. We, and all the law-abiding and responsible gun owners here today, lose nothing if this bill 
passes, but we will have helped secure voters’ First Amendment rights to vote without fear. 
This bill in no way violates our Second Amendment right to bear arms. As Justice Clarence 
Thomas himself said in last year’s U.S. Supreme Court decision in Bruen: “[as to] legislative 
assemblies, Qolling glaces, and courthouses...it settled that these locations were "sensitive 
places " where arms carrying could be prohibited ’ Further, the U.S. Supreme Court has long 
noted that “the display of a gun instills fear in the average citizen. ”1 
More states are enacting laws prohibiting dangerous weapons at polling places, including 
California, Arizona, Florida, Louisiana, Texas and Georgia, and recently, Virginia, Washington, 
New York, New Jersey, Colorado and Washington. Michigan, Massachusetts and Nevada are 
considering similar legislation in 2023. Colorado adopted such a ban last year, in response to 
incidents where gun-carrying persons at polling places caused voters to feel intimidated. On 
March ll, 2022, Politifact reported: 
“As voters walked up to a ballot drop box... in Colorado on Nov. 2, 2020, they saw 
two men — one wearing a holstered handgun — ﬁlming voters as they dropped off their 
ballots. Some voters told county officials they felt threatened. [In response, Colorado 
enacted] the Vote Without Fear Act, a bill that bans open carry within 100 feet of a ballot 
drop box [and] polling site ...” 
There is already internet chatter, among those who are angry over the outcome of the 2020 
election, about becoming armed “monitors ” ofpolling places in the 2024 presidential election. 
So the concern is real, even here in Maine. This bill should pass, because, as one election worker 
stated, a voting site "should be a safe place and people should be ﬂee to exercise their First 
Amendment and vote for who they want to v0te_/or witllout fear and im‘i1n:'a’ation." 
Thank you for your consideration ofthcse comments. 
Pe 1 McGehee gg .. 
ptiicgelice4(c _Qgii1zt|l.com 
‘ 
New York State Rifle & Pistol Ass' 
n v. Bruen, 597 U.S. (J. Thomas), June 23, 2022. 
2 
McLaughlin v. United States, 476 U.S. 16, 17-18 (1986).
