Good afternoon, Chairs Hicks and Supica and Members of the Committee. 
My name is Peter Fromuth, I’m a resident of Yarmouth and an attorney. I speak today in support 
of L.D. 1255, an Act to ban dangerous weapons within 250 feet of voting places, including drop 
boxes and clerk’s ofﬁces where voting is occurring. Violations are a civil offense punishable by 
a $1000. ﬁne. 
On most Election Days I serve as an attorney vote monitor. Campaigns in recent election cycles 
campaigns have grown more heated, more divisive and vitriolic -- especially in presidential 
years. But that is rarely the atmosphere at polling places, at least not those where I have 
monitored, in both Districts. Despite our differences most Mainers seem to share a tacit 
agreement to keep our voting places apart from campaign battles, as safe islands of civility. We 
can be proud of that. 
But dangerous weapons at the polls will replace safety with menace. The Supreme Court said 
the display of a gun is “typically and characteristically dangerous ” and often “instills fear in the 
average citizen. ” Their words, not mine. If it’s true of the “average citizen” it’s probably true of 
the average voter. And this is not new. As long ago as 1874 a Georgia court held that the 
presence of guns at polling sites was “improper ” , and “wholly useless. . .” . Georgia bans ﬁrearms 
at voting sites today so do many other states. 
Maine prohibits dangerous weapons from several public places - - schools, courts, the 
Legislature - - but no such restriction protects polling places. A bill to do that failed in 2021 
when opponents argued that their Second Amendment right to carry arms was effectively 
boundless, a kind of super-right that trumped the public’s First and Fifteenth Amendment 
entitlement to vote in safe, non-threatening places. 
Supreme Court rulings repudiate that argument. The Court has long held that governments can 
regulate where ﬁrearms are permitted or excluded. And just last year in the Bruen decision it 
spoke to voting directly and explicitly, stating that it is “settled” law that polling places were 
“sensitive places” where arms carrying could be prohibited. ” 
I don’t know how the constitutional basis for regulating ﬁrearms at polling places could be 
clearer. Surely, we can agree that government has a duty to protect the vote and the voter, 1et’s 
not make polling places another front in the culture war. 
Please vote “ought to pass” this bill. 
Peter Fromuth, Yarmouth
