April 5, 2023 
LD 1255; An Act to Improve the Security of Voting Places
I 
“Ell a 1 C 5.. 
Senator Hickman, Representative Fl ay and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs. My name is Polly Haight Frawley and 
I live in Cumberland. This testimony is submitted in favor of the above 
referenced bill. 
This bill would protect the First Amendment constitutional right of Maine 
residents to vote, without intimidation or fear. It would impact me. 
I understand that for many, carrying or being in the presence of a dangerous 
weapon is a part of their day to day lives. However, I am not comfortable around 
dangerous weapons, I am intimidated and anxious. I have had this experience 
and should not have to feel this way, especially when I vote, wondering what 
may happen next. My anxiety is heightened knowing that background checks and 
training in the use of ﬁrearms are not required to possess many types of 
dangerous weapons. 
Maine already has a history of protecting voters from intimidation and 
undue inﬂuence at the polls. Persons are not permitted any attempt to inﬂuencea 
voter with 250 feet of the polls. Title 21-A, sec. 682. This proposed bill uses that 
same 250 feet demarcation. 
This bill provides that the dangerous weapons could be locked in a car 
while their owners vote, similar to what occurs when those citizens enter schools, 
court houses, correctional facilities, or in fact this building. 
Finally, you may ask why couldn’t I cast my vote at a voting box if I am 
intimidated? However, placing the burden on me, who does nothing other than 
show up to vote, to be the one to take extra precautions seems misplaced. 
Furthermore, offering me the voting box as an alternative to going into the 
polling place does nothing to protect the hundreds of volunteers and paid 
municipal employees who work at the polls and may have this same fear. 
Thank you for listening and for your work. These are very tough times. 
Polly Haight Frawley 
Cumberland, Maine
