District 101: Brunswick (part)  
                                                                                                                              April 5, 2023 
 
Testimony of Rep. Poppy Arford in support of 
LD 1255, An Act to Improve Security at Voting Places   
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs, I am Representative Poppy Arford. I proudly serve House District 101 in 
Brunswick. Thank you for the opportunity to present LD 1255, An Act to Improve Security at Voting 
Places.   
  
I will start by stating what this bill does. LD 1255 will prohibit the carry or discharge of any dangerous 
weapon during the time that polls are open until the completion of election duties at a voting place on 
Election Day, where absentee voting is taking place, and where a secured ballot drop box is located.  
 
In all three instances, the dangerous weapon prohibition extends out 250 feet on the public property 
surrounding the voting place, be it the polls on Election Day, an in-person absentee voting site, or a 
ballot drop box. Importantly, the 250-foot prohibition concerns public property; it does not apply to 
private property such as a residence or place of business located within 250-foot zone.  
 
There are two exceptions. First, the bill does not apply to a dangerous weapon stored inside a locked 
vehicle. Second, it does not apply to law enforcement officers in the performance of the officer's official 
duties. 
 
Dangerous weapons are defined in the Maine Criminal Code, Title 17-A, as “a firearm or any device 
designed as a weapon and capable of producing death or serious bodily injury.” For example, in addition 
to firearms, this would include a sword, switchblade, battle ax, machete and other deadly devices.  
 
I submitted LD 1255 after my community began the process of relocating our polling place. Last fall, at 
the request of the school board, the Brunswick Town Council voted to move our Election Day voting 
location. In the 35-plus years I have lived in Brunswick, the community has voted in a school, most 
recently the Junior High School. Pending approval by the Secretary of State, we will now vote at the 
Brunswick Recreation Center. 
  
Poppy Arford 
8 Quarry Road 
Brunswick, ME 04011 
(207) 522-1997 
poppy.arford@legislature.mne.gov HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
    2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
               (207) 287-1400 
          TTY:  Maine Relay 711 
 
                                                                                        
                                                                   
 

District 101: Brunswick (part) As long as we voted at the Junior High School, dangerous weapons were not allowed at our polling 
place, because – as you likely know – weapons are prohibited on school property by both state and 
federal law. If we move to the Rec Department, which is public property, this will no longer be the case. 
This made me wonder how many other communities are in the same situation. When I investigated, I 
found that – contrary to what many of us would guess – just one in five Maine municipalities hold 
voting in a school. That means many polling places – a total of 480 out of our 631 Maine voting districts 
– are located on public property other than a school. Due to there being no dangerous weapons 
prohibition on non-school polling places, dangerous weapons are permitted at all 480 public sites. 
 
Polling places play a very important role in our democracy. This is where we all gather in our 
communities to exercise our constitutional right to vote freely, unimpeded, without any form of 
intimidation or undue influence. The presence of dangerous weapons at a polling place can intimidate 
voters. Since introducing this bill, Maine people have shared with me their personal experiences. Several 
have reported incidents where another person carrying a weapon at the polls made them fear for their 
safety. In some cases, this intimidation is entirely unintentional. In others, individuals may be 
intentionally displaying weapons to threaten voters. 
 
As policymakers, we in the Legislature have recognized that it is appropriate to put reasonable 
limitations in place to protect the right to vote. For example, we regulate the exercise of free speech by 
keeping campaign materials a minimum of 250 feet from polling places. We do so because we recognize 
that the people of Maine have the right to vote without interference or intimidation.  
 
The United States Supreme Court has also recognized that locations like polling places are subject to 
special consideration. Last year, the Supreme Court reaffirmed in its New York State Rifle and Pistol 
Association v. Bruen decision that it is constitutional to prohibit weapons in “sensitive places” such as 
schools and government buildings, legislative assemblies, courthouses and polling places— they 
referred to this as “settled” law. 
 
Maine will not be the first. States across the political spectrum are prohibiting dangerous weapons at 
their polling places, including Arizona, California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, 
Missouri, Ohio, South Carolina, Texas and Virginia, as well as the District of Columbia and Puerto 
Rico. In 2023, at least six states, Hawaii, Indiana, New Hampshire, New Mexico, New York, and Maine 
are considering prohibitions on dangerous weapons in polling places. 
 
LD 1255 would protect Mainers’ most basic democratic right: the right to vote. Maine has a long history 
of free, fair and open elections, and we are proud of our high participation rates. This bill works to 
ensure that this tradition continues.  
 
Your thoughtful consideration of LD 1255 is appreciated. There are experts who will testify today to 
share additional information, and I have provided a list of sources and resources that speak to much of 
what I have shared in my testimony. I am also happy to answer any questions you may have for me.  
 
Please vote ought to pass on LD 1255. Thank you.  
 
 
 
District 101: Brunswick (part) SOURCES AND RESOURCES 
  
LD 1255, LD 1255, An Act to Improve Security at Voting Places 
http://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/bills/getPDF.asp?paper=HP0803&item=1&snum=131  
 
Veterans and Legal affairs Committee https://legislature.maine.gov/committee/#Committees/VLA  
 
Title 21-A: ELECTIONS Chapter 9: CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS Subchapter 2: ELECTION 
PROCEDURE Article 4: RESTRICTIONS 
https://legislature.maine.gov/statutes/21-A/title21-Asec682.html  
 
Title 17-A: Maine Criminal Code Part 1: General Principals Chapter 1: Preliminary §2. 
Definitions 9. Dangerous Weapon  
 https://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/statutes/17-A/title17-Asec2.html  
 
TITLE 52—VOTING AND ELECTIONS Subtitle I—Voting Rights, CHAPTER 101—
GENERALLY §10101. Voting rights (b) Intimidation, threats, or coercion  
https://www.justice.gov/crt/title-52-voting-and-elections-subtitle-i-and-ii  
 
GEORGETOWN LAW Fact Sheet: Protecting Against Voter Intimidation  
https://www.law.georgetown.edu/icap/wp-content/uploads/sites/32/2020/10/Voter-Intimidation-Fact-
Sheet.pdf  
 
League of Women Voters: Understanding the Supreme Court's Gun Control Decision in NYSRPA v. 
Bruen: The Silver Lining: Potential Protections for Voting Spaces. 
https://www.lwv.org/blog/understanding-supreme-courts-gun-control-decision-nysrpa-v-bruen  
 
New York State Rifle & Pistol Association, inc, et al. v. Bruen, Superintendent of New York 
State Police, et al. Decision ”sensitive places” (10/2021) pp 21, 33  
https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/21pdf/20-843_7j80.pdf   
 
NCSL: Polling Places Resource  includes a section on firearms and dangerous weapons. In short, 
twelve states; Arizona, California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, Ohio, 
South Carolina, Texas, and Virginia—the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico explicitly prohibit 
firearms and other weapons at polling places. In 2023 at least six states have introduced bans on 
forearms and dangerous weapons in polling places; Hawaii, Indiana, New Hampshire, New Mexico, 
New York, and Maine.  
