 
 
Testimony of Sarah Woodbury, Director of Advocacy, Defend Our Health 
In Support of LD 1255, “An Act to Improve the Security of Voting Places” 
Before the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee 
April 5, 2023 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Veterans and 
Legal Affairs Committee: My name is Sarah Woodbury. I am a native Mainer and the director of 
advocacy for Defend Our Health. Defend Our Health’s mission is to make sure that everyone 
has equal access to safe food and drinking water, healthy homes and products that are toxic-
free and climate friendly.  I am here to testify in Support of LD 1255, “An Act to Improve the 
Security of Voting Places.” 
 
The right to vote is one of our most fundamental rights as Americans. It may seem curious that 
an organization that works on environmental health issues would engage in issues around 
voting rights and access to the ballot. As we see it, a functioning democracy is necessary to 
protect the health and environment of its citizens. Voting is an integral part of that functioning 
democracy, and we should do everything we can to make sure that voting is easy and 
accessible for all citizens.  
 
LD 1255 would restrict dangerous weapons at polling places with exceptions for law 
enforcement and weapons locked in a car. Maine would not be an outlier in instituting this 
policy. There are twelve other states that currently prohibit dangerous weapons at polling 
places. Dangerous weapons have no place at polling locations. They can be construed by 
others in the polling place as intimidation, making other voters fearful of exercising their 
constitutional right to vote. Voter intimidation is illegal in the U.S. and brandishing a firearm or 
other dangerous weapon should not be permitted so that everyone feels safe in their polling 
place. 
 
Voting is one of the most fundamental, sacred rights of our democracy. We need to make sure 
that there are no barriers to access to the ballot. That includes making sure that everyone feels 
safe when they walk in to cast their vote. Democracy flourishes when more people are engaged 
in the process. Maine must do all it can to make sure that every voice is heard. 
 
Therefore, Defend Our Health urges the committee to unanimously vote “ought to pass” on LD 
1575. 
 
Thank you for your time. 
 
 
 
