$ Department of the Secretary of State 
- 
Bureau of Corporations Elections and Commissions 
‘aw Julie L. Flynn 
Shenna BeH°WS ' 
Deputy Secretary of Sta te 
Secretary of State 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows, Secretary of State 
Department of the Secretary of State 
April 05, 2023 
Testifying in favor 
L.D. 1255 “An Act to Improve the Security of Voting Places” 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, my name is Shenna Bellows and I am the Secretary of State and the chief elections 
officer. I am speaking today in support of L.D. 1255. 
Election Day has traditionally been a day for celebrating, for voters to see their neighbors at the polls, 
and a shared sense of pride in the privilege of carrying out our civic duty. However, with rampant mis-, 
dis- , and malinformation and the dramatic increase in documented threats against election officials 
across the country and here in Maine, Election Day now carries an underlying feeling of fear and 
tension. We should all be alarmed with the direction in which the feelings around Election Day have 
gone and one way to combat this shift is through this bill. 
When election workers and voters feel threatened, our democracy itself is threatened. Imagine fora 
moment the consequences of that situation — a person at the polls with a dangerous weapon who is 
upset and becomes increasingly agitated and what that could mean for every voter in that polling place, 
not to mention the safety and wellbeing of the election official, who would undoubtedly be called upon 
to de-escalate the situation. 
Some might think such a threat unlikely. Perhaps a decade ago it would have been unthinkable but in 
July, the FBI announced a new law enforcement task force to deal with threats against election 
workers. In 2021, a national news organization, Reuters, conducted a nationwide investigationl and 
identified 850 messages that met the level of threat that is a violation of federal law. Here in Maine, the 
Secretary ’s office received documented reports of at least two threats of physical violence against 
municipal clerks last year. In a 2022 Reuters/Ispsos pollz ahead of the midterm elections, 43% of 
registered voters stated they “were concemed about threats of violence or voter intimidation while 
voting in person.” 
1 
Threatened U.S. election workers get little help from law enforcement (_reute1s.comL 
2 Exclusive: Two in five U.S. voters WO1T _V about intimidation at polls -Reuters/Ipsos I Reuters. 
10] State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0101 
www.Maine.gov/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
Ensuring our polling places are safe and secure places Where voters can peacefully cast their ballot isa 
goal, I hope, that should be shared by all. Passage of this bill would assist in canying out this goal. 
For these reasons, we support L.D. 1255. Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I am happy to 
answer any questions you may have. 
101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333-0101 
www.Maine.gov/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
