L LEAGUE OF WOMEN VOTERS" 
- £17? lei 
TO: The Honorable Craig Hickman 
The Honorable Laura Supica, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
DATE: April 5, 2023 
RE: LD 1255 - An Act to Improve the Security of Voting Places 
Good morning Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Veterans and Legal Affairs. 
lVly name is Will Hayward. l’m a resident of Portland. l am here today as the Advocacy Program 
Coordinator for the League of Women Voters of Maine. l am testifying in support of LD 1255. 
We believe that the right to vote is sacred and must be protected. Voters must be able to cast their 
ballots, and election workers must be able to perform their duties, freely and without fear. Federal and 
Maine law make it illegal to intimidate or interfere with voters or election officials. 
We are dismayed by reports of rising threats against election workers and voter intimidation tactics. 
Thankfully, there have been very few incidents in lvlaine, but threats have happened even here.1 
LD 1255 is a timely and reasonable response to concerns about safety at the polls. It simply requires that 
owners keep their dangerous weapons locked in their vehicles while they are in or near voting places. 
Failure to comply is a civil violation and carries no criminal penalty. This modest bill takes a small but 
important step by protecting voters and election workers from intimidation through the display of 
dangerous weapons, and from fear of harm by accidental or - God forbid -- intentional use of a knife, 
firearm, or other weapon. 
We should all be able to agree that there are places where dangerous weapons should be prohibited. 
Everyone in this room had to pass through a security check. You can't take a dangerous weapon into the 
place where Maine's laws are made. Places where citizens are voting deserve the same protection. A U.S. 
Supreme Court decision acknowledged this in a ruling that's relevant to your consideration of LD 1255. in 
June 2022, in New York State Rifle and Pistol Association v. Bruen, the Court struck down a New York law 
that required showing proper cause in order to carry a concealed firearm in a public place. But that 
ruling had a silver lining: the court's decision did not overturn the so-called "sensitive-places doctrine," 
which allows banning firearms in sensitive places such as schools and public buildings. According to this 
‘Pegues, Jeff. "Unusual levels of threats to election workers persist in 7 states." CBS News, October 3, 2022. 
https://www.msn.com/en-us/news/us/unusual-levels-of-threats-to-election-workers-persist-in-7-states/ar-AA12yM 
8D 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
info@1wvme.org 207.622.0256 wwW.1wvme.org
LWVME to VLA 2 
LD 1255 April 5, 2023 
ruling, banning firearms in sensitive places is not unconstitutional. The League of Women Voters fileda 
brief in this case arguing that voting places should be considered “sensitive places," and the court 
agreed.’ 
in its Amicus brief, the League stated that the right to vote is meaningless without the right to vote 
safely. We urge you all to take a step forward in protecting our voters and our election workers by voting 
Ought to Pass on LD 1255. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. l would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee. 
Z 
League of Women Voters of the US, "Understanding the Supreme Court's Gun Control Decision in NYSRPA v. 
Bruen." July 12, 2022. 
https://www.lwv.org/blog/understanding-supreme-courts-gun-control-decision-nysrpa~v-bruen 
PO 18187 Portland, ME 04112 
info@1wvme.org 207.622.0256 www.1wvme.org
