 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
CORRECTED VERSION  
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO  
 
L.D. 1152  
 
AN ACT TO MAKE LONG -TERM DISABILITY INSURANCE COVERAGE  
AVAILABLE TO PUBLIC EMPLOYEES  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative Roeder  and members of the Labor and H ousing  Committee.  I am Deborah 
Roberts, Chief Financial O fficer/Insurance Trusts Administrat or for  Maine School Management Association, 
testifying on behalf of the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School 
Superintendents Association , in opposition to  L.D. 1152 . 
 
L.D. 1152 re quires an employer to offer long -term disability (LTD) insurance coverage to its M ainePERS 
member employees with the total cost of the LTD premium borne by the employer.  Currently, in districts 
where LTD is offered, the cost is borne by the covered pe rson,  or shared between the employer and covered 
person.  
 
The provision of this type of insurance has been transferred from a “may ” to a “shall” and the cost has been 
transferred from the employee or shared between the employee and employer now to the em ployer.  
 
Districts already have an option to provide long -term disability coverage for all of their benefit -eligible 
employees. They prioritize this benefit along with other employee benefit options at the local school district 
level – allowing for local  decision . School districts can define their eligible group, usually based upon one or 
more bargaining groups, and/or classes of employees not belonging to a bargaining group. Cost sharing of 
premiums is also negotiated at the local level. Districts can ch oose amon g the plan options for a plan design 
which works best for them.  
 
For full disclosure, Maine School Management Association offers LTD to its member districts.  MSMA Group 
Insurance Trust has offered a fully -insured group long -term disability plan  to its part icipating school districts 
for over 30 years . Currently MSMA Group Insurance Trust has 61 participating member districts with 2 ,128 
total participants  – covering both M ainePERS and non-MainePERS eligible employees.  Some take advantage 
of this opportu nity, while other districts may select a different provid er. A mandatory MainePERS LTD plan 
could jeopardize coverage for those employees not eligible for MainePERS.  
 
Following is the Employer Perspective laid out in the study group’s report that was su bmitted to the Labor  
and Housing Committee  in November  2022:  
 
Employ er Groups’ Respective Statements on Program Design Specifications  
 
Maine School Management Association asserts the benefits offered to employees of school districts is a local 
decision and tha t school districts should not be mandated to offer  a speci fic be nefit, one that would require 
negotiations if it were implemented. They also note that the MSMA Group Insurance Trust has offered a 
 
 fully -insured group long -term disability insurance plan to i ts participating school districts for over thirty  years.  
 
Maine  Municipal Association asserts the benefits offered to employees of municipalities are a local decision 
and that municipalities should not be mandated to offer a specific benefit. The Maine Municipal Employees 
Health Trust offers both a self -insured Income  Protection Plan and a fully -insured Long Term Disability Plan, 
so that municipalities m ay select the disability benefits that best meet the needs of their employees.  
 
State of Maine government, as Maine’s second largest employer, understands  and emp athize s that long -term 
disability coverage is a need for some employees. The state interpret s that this coverage must be offered, but 
that the employer is not obligated to contribute. The state also clarifies that non -leave benefits for state 
emplo yees are  not b argained. As is the case with any benefit, the state must consider the need, cost and impact 
to the entirety of its employee group, as well as administrative, implementation and oversight efforts. The 
state would seek to balance any Long -Term  Disabil ity In come program with other programs as well as the 
current and future funding requirement s of its existing comprehensive benefit package.  
 
The anticipated expense of this shift, per employee would be substantial.  The cost of this insurance would  be 
borne tota lly by the employer.  If this is not an unfunded mandate, we don’t know what would be. 
 
MSSA and MSBA both oppose this proposed legislation as an unfunded mandate, and urge the  Labor and 
Housing  Committee to vote ought not to pass on L.D. 1152 . 
 
