Testimony of Jeff McCabe 
Maine Service Employees Association, SElU Local 1989 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
ln Support of LD 1152, An Act to Make Long-term Disability Insurance Coverage Available to Public 
Employees 
Sponsored by Senator lngwersen of York 
April 4, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Amy Roeder, members of the Committee on Labor and Housing, l'm Jeff 
McCabe, Director of Politics and Legislation for the Maine Service Employees Association, Local 1989 of 
the Service Employees International Union. The Maine Service Employees Association represents over 
13,000 public sector and private sector workers. 
Like many bills before the Legislature, LD 1152 has been in development over several legislative sessions. 
it comes from issues and problems surrounding both disabilities covered and the disability 
determination process at the Maine Public Employees Retirement System (MainePERS). 
We are committed to working to improve MainePERS beneﬁts for participants and feel that we are 
partners with MainePERS in meeting this goal. MainePERS staff and leadership have in recent years 
continued to be a resource in sharing important knowledge with this committee and making important 
updates in the delivery of services. MainePERS has clearly made a commitment to better serve plan 
participants. This, however, does not mean MainePERS can always be proactive or advocate for a speciﬁc 
position. 
What is proposed in LD 1152 is long overdue. This is a beneﬁt that will strengthen efﬁciencies for 
MainePERS, help workers who are facing life-changing illnesses avoid potential ﬁnancial ruin, and help 
with recruitment and retention within MainePERS. 
For the proposed program to work as originally identiﬁed, it must not be an optional beneﬁt buta 
program that public sector employers provide. This beneﬁt might be the exact thing that allows someone 
to focus on their health and will being with the outcome of them returning to work someday, or, in some 
cases, the transition to disability retirement. g 
Attached you will ﬁnd ﬁrst-hand experiences of MainePERS participants that brought us to this point in 
time. Below the worker testimonials are excerpts from testimony by both MainePERS and the Maine 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services on related legislation from 2020 on this issue. That 
particular legislation, LD 1978, died during the 129*“ Legislature. Please vote to support LD 1152 to make 
long-term disability insurance coverage available to all MainePERS participants. Thank you and I'm happy 
to answer any questions.
1
Voices of MainePERS participants 
Randy Bodge, former Maine DOT worker: 
http_:[/wwvmmainelegislature.org/legg/biIls[getTestim0nyDoc.asp?id=139331 
"Because of the stage 4 carcinoid cancer, I currently get a shot every three weeks in my hip, and I will for 
the rest of my life. The side effects from this form of cancer and treatment are unbearable at times. I get 
up every day and do what I can, but I tire easily and I don t sleep well. I hide my pain, and I struggle with 
depression and anxiety. If you have never had cancer, you will never know or understand the pain that 
comes along with it. I applied for disability retirement from MainePERS in the fall of 2013. My wife andI 
were shocked when MainePERS denied my claim."
t 
Christopher Kroot, former Maine State employee: 
htt[.5[/www.mainelegislature.org/legg/bills[getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=139332 
”I applied for disability retirement in September of 2016. All of my primary doctors have said that I am 
unable to work and will never be able to work. This includes a primary care physician whose practice I've 
been going to for 25 years, a trauma expert that I see in Boston for 10 years, a physiatrist, an 
acupuncturist in naturopathic doctor I've been seeing for 10 years, and a psychiatrist who was the past 
Clinical Director of the Trauma and Dissociative Disorders Program at McLean Hospital. Over the next 
three years I would suffer denials and appeals without ever being seen by a doctor representing the 
retirement system." 
Kathy Morse, former DHHS employee: 
httgﬂwww.mainelegislature.org/Iegybills[getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=136823 
"I worked at DHHS for 6 months when I got into a terrible accident. I had stayed late at work and as I was 
driving home I was hit head on. It broke bones in my feet, leg, knee, ribs, and my ankles — they were 
destroyed. I couldn't put any pressure on my feet for 6 months. I didn't want to lose my job so returned 
as soon as possible, maybe too soon. It was still hard mentally and became hard physically too, butI 
pushed myself and never thought of leaving. I'd been back for 5 months when I got rear-ended whileI 
was working. I didn't take any time off although I was injured. I continued to push myself, but because of 
pain from unsuccessful healing and arthritis, nerve damage, low stamina, PTSD, depression, 
comprehension problems, emotional instability, and memory impairment I wasn't able to push like I had 
before. I can't tell you how hard it still is for me to get Into a vehicle. I can't walk far or for long, I lose my 
balance, can't remember things or control my emotions, and get confused very easily. Even simple things 
are extremely hard for me. I started the process of getting accommodations, but my doctor returned the 
form saying it wouldn't help and I'm unable to work.....Over the years I've been diagnosed with several 
things that impact my mental and physical health. Since the accident in December 2014 I've had2 
primary care doctors, a neurologist, 2 psychologists, and a neuropsychologist all claim I have several 
permanent disabling conditions that prevent employment. The evidence is clear and valid. It will soon be 
3 years since I've worked. The board has changed what they've said, ignored facts, and made ridiculous
2
statements. They disregarded everything that my doctors have said and seem to make up rules to suit 
themselves." 
Gina Pellieter, former worker at the Bureau of Liquor Enforcement: 
htt(51/www.maine|egislature.org/legg/bills[getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=139323 
l am writing this testimony because after two-years-plus of trying to recover from that brain injury and 
battling the symptoms, I was unable to build that layer of protection around my nervous system. In July 
2016, my sister brought me into PERS to submitan application for disability. I gave PERS access to all of 
my medical records physical, emotional and mental health. I carried my Anthem medical payment so 
when their decision was made, I would still have insurance in my future. I went through their courtroom 
process of hearings twice. As l said earlier, l have been in a courtroom several times never as a criminal 
but on the right side of the law. We discovered that PERS has their own version of courtroom 
procedures, like the questioning by the PERS attorney (or prosecutor) is downright humiliating never 
before had lfelt like a criminal until the PERS prosecutor tried to "poke holes" into my life story. The 
hearing ofﬁcer (or unbiased judge) seemed fair initially but showed her bias in November 2019 by ruling 
against my case. The Medical Board (or hidden jury) are somehow able to review my physical, mental, 
emotional health (the most personal and intimate details of my life) and create a narrative that gets 
them to "application denied.”- 
From DAFS Testimony on LD 1978 in the 129"‘ Legislature: 
httgl/www.mainelegislature.org/legg/bills[getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=139335 
”For disabilities that are permanent, the Maine Public Employees Retirement System provides the 
existing disability retirement beneﬁt. Permanent disability retirement beneﬁts are similar to regular 
retirement beneﬁts: in both cases, it is anticipated that the person receiving beneﬁts will never be 
returning to work which is why these two beneﬁts are combined in the same beneﬁt plan. 
When the illness or disability lasts more than 12 months, but is not considered permanent, there isa 
gap. This is a very different demographic, representing people who may be able to return to work at 
some point in the future. The State does not currently offer a beneﬁt to cover this situation. We 
recognize this deﬁciency and how terrible it can be for employees who are already in a very difficult 
poﬂﬁon? 
From MainePERS Testimony on LD 1978 in the 129"‘ 
Legislature: 
httpi/www.mainelegislatureorg/legis/bills[getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=139322 
“The second way to expand the beneﬁt is through the long-term disability insurance program (LTDI) we 
are implementing later this year. These issues are the reason that, in the last Legislature, we requested 
and received legislative authority to offer a voluntary LTDI program which would provide income 
replacement up until the time a member would qualify for a disability pension. Voluntary LTDI hasan
inherent drawback that won't ﬁx the problem before you today. We know from experience thata 
predictably low number of people voluntarily enroll in coverage they have to pay for, which then doesn't 
achieve the policy goals of L.D. 1978 or by itself alleviate the problems that exist today. 
Employer-paid LTDI coverage avoids this problem because it covers all employees automatically, and is 
more cost-effective as a result. There are three key advantages to employer-paid coverage. The ﬁrst is 
that all members have consistent coverage and can get early intervention and assistance, possibly 
limiting their time away from work or enabling them to successfully return to work with the 
accommodations needed to make them successful. The second is that members lives are improved 
because they receive income protection while they are disabled instead of no income until they are 
eligible for disability retirement. The third is that most of the information needed for a disability 
retirement can be gathered in the LTDI process, with a smooth transition between the carrier and 
MainePERS for individuals who become permanently disabled. ”
4
r ' EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR “ 
a I n e .'~3:1nclra J. Matheson 
V, 
‘it’ PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
DATE: January 29, 2020 . 
TO: Senator Shenna Bellows, Chair 
Representative Mike Sylvester, Chair 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
FROM: ' 
Sandra J. Matheson, Executive Director 
SUBJECT: Testimony on L.D. 1978 — An Act to Improve the Disability Retirement 
Program of the Maine Public Employees Retirement System 
Good afternoon, Senator Bellows, Representative Sylvester, and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing. l am Sandy Matheson, Executive Director 
of the Maine Public Employees Retirement System. 
We are testifying neither for nor against L.D. 1978. However, we want to be clear that 
we agree with the policy goal of this bill. Expanding income replacement to our 
members for a broader range of disability situations will help address many of the 
situations that exist today. 
We currently provide retirement benefits to approximately 46,500 retirees, of which 
approximately 1,970, or 4%, are disability retirees. The disability retirement we 
administer as provided for in law is a narrow benefit that is currently structured 
differently than Social Security or Workers Compensation. it is a pension beneﬁt. As 
we see and experience, and listen to today, it does not meet the needs of all that apply. 
And that causes difliculties, pain, and frustration for our members. And for us. 
My goal since I came to the System a decade ago was to improve this program and 
eliminate these difﬁculties for our members. We have worked with stakeholders, made 
a significant amount of process changes, and introduced legislation, but dishearteningly 
always find ourselves back at this same point, which is why we agree with the intent of 
this bill. 
It is clear the only substantive way to address the issues that will always plague the 
program as provided by existing law is to expand the benefits available. Currently, the 
assistance most of our members have when they find it too difficult to work isa 
patchwork of sick time policies, member-paid short-term disability insurance, and less 
frequently, access to long-term disability insurance. For many their only option is to 
www mainepers.org LOCATION LOCAL FAX 
_ 139 Capitol Street, Augusta, ME 04332 207-512-3100 207-512 3101 
MAILING ADDRESS TOLL-FREE MAINE RELAY 
P.O. Box 349, Augusta, ME 04332-0349 1-800-451-9800 711
M a ine P E R S LD 1918 Testimony 
PUBLIC El-IPLOYEES RETIRE!-HENT SYSTEM January 
apply for disability retirement, for which they may not yet qualify. This is the core of the 
problem. 
There are two ways to expand benefits and reduce or eliminate the problems you see 
here today. L.D. 1978 is the first. lt broadens the scope of the disability retirement 
benefits we provide by expanding the definition of disabled and making interim benefits 
available to applicants. We think this can definitely relieve some of the problems. You 
may want to consider that, while it expands the number of people that qualify, it draws 
another line for qualification without addressing the patchwork path of inconsistent ~ 
benefits most members go through before they apply to us. 
The second way to expand the benefit is through the long-term disability insurance 
program (LTDI) we are implementing later this year. These issues are the reason that, 
in the last Legislature, we requested and received legislative authority to offera 
voluntary LTDI program which would provide income replacement up until the timea 
member would qualify for a disability pension. Voluntary LTDI has an inherent 
drawback that won't fix the problem before you today. We know from experience thata 
predictably low number of people voluntarily enroll in coverage they have to pay for, 
which then doesn't achieve the policy goals of L.D. 1978 or by itself alleviate the 
problems that exist today. 
Employer-paid LTDI coverage avoids this problem because it covers all employees 
automatically, and is more cost-effective as a result. There are three key advantages to 
employer-paid coverage. The first is that all members have consistent coverage and 
can get early inten/ention and assistance, possibly limiting theirtime away from work or 
enabling them to successfully return to work with the accommodations needed to make 
them successful. The second is that members’ lives are improved because they receive 
income protection while they are disabled instead of no income until they are eligible for 
disability retirement. The third is that most of the information needed for a disability 
retirement can be gathered in the LTDI process, with a smooth transition between the 
carrier and MainePERS for individuals who become permanently disabled. 
The annual, or normal cost of employer-paid LTDI is comparable to the annual cost of 
L.D. 1978. It simply expands coverage in a different way. Both approaches increase the 
annual cost by approximately the same amount, an average of .2% of payroll. ‘ The 
cost difference between the two is that L.D. 1978 creates an unfunded actuarial liability 
of approximately $17.25 million for the State/'l'eacher plan because it expands 
retirement benefits beyond what has been built into the pension rates. Under the State 
Constitution, the $17.25 million would have to be appropriated at the time the expansion 
1 
This equates to approximately $3.9 million in additional annual costs -- approximately $2.4 million for 
State employees and approximately $1.5 million for teachers.
z?_'.- - 1' M a P E R S LD 1978 Testimony 
PUBL|C Ef~lP|.QYEE$ RET|REMENT SYSTEM 
became effective. This number was carefully calculated to reflect the costs of providing 
additional retirement income to those that would qualify for these expanded benefits 
based on our experience. 
LTDI is prospective, and the benefits do not come out of the pension trust. Therefore, 
LTDl does not create an unfunded actuarial liability. Our voluntary LTD! policy will be 
available in the next few months. We interviewed three outstanding long-term disability 
insurance carriers last week and are in the decision-making process of selecting a 
finalist at this time. lf the Legislature chooses to make this mandatory for state A 
employees and teachers, it can be added to our pension rates as a convenience to 
employers. This means that the normal cost of the pension would stay the same, but 
the total we bill employers would increase by an average of approximately .2% of 
payroll. The State would see this increase for state employees, legislators and judges; 
school districts for teachers; and our PLD employers for their employees if they approve 
that change. While mandatory LTDl coverage does not require an up-front payment, it 
would require a statutory amendment to permit funding through an add-on to pension 
rates. 
We have met with the sponsor and stakeholder groups to discuss L.D. 1978 and 
expressed to them that we agree with the policy goals of the bill. We have identified the 
cost impacts to them, along with some improvements we think would help clarify the 
bill’s intent for administration of the program and some concerns. Those areas are 
outlined in an attachment to this testimony. We would be very pleased to continue to 
work together with the sponsor and stakeholders to reach consensus on an improved 
process and beneﬁts for our members. 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony. l would be pleased to answer your 
questions, and we will be available at your work session.
% R S LD1978Testimony 
PUB‘ H.‘ EYYPLQYEES RET|KE|'1ENT SYSTEM 
L.D. 1978 - Possible Areas for Clarification or Concern 
Section 7 of the bill defines “health care provider" in an ambiguous way. We 
suggest deleting “or any business establishment providing health care services." 
Section 12 of the bill is unclear about the role of the MainePERS Board of 
Trustees in reviewing disability applications. To the extent day-to-day 
administration of the program by the Board is intended, that would not be 
compatible with the Board's structure and composition. 
Section 12 also is unclear on the process for reviewing final Board decisions. 
The language suggests that an independent hearing officer would review the final 
Board decision and then make a recommendation back to the Board. 
Section 12 contains a requirement that a health care provider performing an 
independent medical examination "may not have any association with the board 
other than providing the independent medical examination. ” This language is 
ambiguous and may be read as prohibiting the use of a particular provider more 
than once. 
The preapproval benefit in Section 12 likely would be subject to a 10% early 
withdrawal penalty under federal law for some recipients. lt is unclear whether 
this penalty also would apply to some recipients of disability retirement benefits if 
Section 15 were enacted. 
The language of Section 13 should be revised to be consistent with Section 12. 
Section 12 provides for independent medical examinations, not medical 
consultations, and does not require them in all cases. 
Unless othenrvise intended, the bill's revisions should carry across all retirement 
programs administered by MainePERS. 
The bill will increase administrative costs in the form of independent medical 
examination costs and member’s attorney fees. It may be difficult to ﬁnd enough 
health care providers to perform all of the independent medical examinations.
