 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  (MMA)  
 
In Opposition to  
LD 1152 , An Act to Make Long -term Disability Insurance Coverage Available to Public Employees  
 
April 4, 2023  
 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee.  My name is Kate Dufour, and I am submitting testimony in opposition to LD 1152 
on behalf of the 70 municipal leaders elected by their peers to serve on the Association’ s 
Legislative Policy Committee and directed to establish positions on bills of municipal interest.   
Municipal leaders strongly oppose LD 1152, as it  shifts decision making authority away 
from the  local legislative bod y (e.g., town meeting or council)  and into the hands of the members 
of the Maine State Legislature, who are under no obligation to consider  how th is mandate d 
benefit  impact s the property taxpayer s, mil rat e, or the provision of municipal services and 
program s.   
 Annually, MMA conducts a fiscal survey  with the collected data used to project statewide 
expenditures and revenues.  In FY 2019, it is projected that municipalities statewide raised $2.7 
billion in property tax revenues to fund K -12 education, county  services and both mandated and 
desired local government programs.  Of the total expenditure, $192 million was raised to fund 
employee salaries and benefits.  While the expenditure pales in comparison to the property taxes 
raised to fund the local share of public education, the cost represent s 7% of all property taxes 
raised statewide .  When treating the state as one large community , the fund s appropriated for 
salaries and benefits is equal to one mil.   
 Additionally, LD 1152 seeks to  place an unwelcome  wedge between municipal 
employers and employees, who already have the authority  to negotiate wages and salaries.  
When the legislature inserts itself in these discussions, it tips the scales in favor of employee 
groups to the  disadvantage of the property ow ners who are left  to pay more without say .   The 
over 300 municipalities who are members of the Maine Municipal Health Trust can access such 
a program, should the community elect to offer long -term disability insurance.   
 Municipal officials strongly urge that you vote “ought not to pass” on LD 1152 and 
continue to trust local decision makers to do what is best for their communities, or at the very 
least include a fiscal note requiring reimbursement for the costs incurred by schools and 
municipalities.   It is only fair that the state pays for its mandate d policies.    
 Thank you for considering the municipal perspective.  If you have any questions about 
the Association’s position on this bill, please do not hesitate to contact me at 1 -800-592-4038 of 
kdufour@memun.org .  

