%? " CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
a ‘ n e — Dr. F’€ebec<;a WI. WyI<e Brian H. Noyes, Chair 
Richard T. Fﬂetivéer, I/ice Chair 
r>ueuc: EMPLOYEES aEtam:"Mz;r~Ir E§‘w’B"'i’IEM i"i@‘"”Y S%i'\_» SWQ "'@<'“§"'”"’? EX ‘3”'”"" 
Johr S. Eel ‘ 1' 
1 Neal: 
Shirrin L. 8Iai:scIeIE 
Qlark A. Srunton 
John H. %<EmbaII 
Kermeth L. ‘liliiiiama 
DATE: April 4, 2023 
TO: Senator Michael Tipping, Chair 
Representative Amy Roeder, Chair 
Members, ]oint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
FROM: Kathy]. Morin, Director, Actuarial and Legislative Affairs 
SUBJECT: Testimony on L.D. 1152 - An Act to Make Long-term Disability Insurance 
Coverage Available to Public Employees 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Ioint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is Kathy Morin, and I am the Director of 
Actuarial and Legislative Affairs for the Maine Public Employees Retirement System. 
MainePERS is neither for nor against L.D. 1152. We are here to provide information and offer 
any assistance the Committee might need regarding this bill. We are supportive of offering 
long-term disability insurance (LTDI) coverage to our members, whether through a plan 
offered through MainePERS or through an alternative plan offered by an employer. However, 
we do not endorse or oppose any specific position on allocating the costs of providing 
coverage. 
LTDI would assist in filling income protection gaps for public employees who are temporarily 
unable to work due to a disabling condition. MainePERS disability retirement provides 
income replacement for those permanently disabled, but is not available to those temporarily 
unable to work. 
Public Law 2021, c. 277, Sec. 43 required MainePERS to" ... convene a stakeholder group, 
including representatives of participant employers and employee groups, to develop an 
implementation plan for providing mandatory long-term disability insurance coverage to 
retirement system members through their employers...(and)...submit an implementation 
plan, including any recommended legislation..." 
MainePERS convened the stakeholder group and facilitated the discussion on the 
development of the LTDI Implementation Plan. The group represented employees and 
employers and as such brought differing views and opinions to the discussion. While there 
were key areas in the design of the plan in which agreement was reached, there were other 
areas where disagreement remained, including how the plan should be funded. The LTDI 
Implementation Plan MainePERS submitted to the LBHS Committee on December 15, 2022, 
wwvv.mainepers.org LOCATION LOCAL FAX 
I39 Capitol Street, Augusta, I\/IE O/I-330 207-~512 —3I0O 207-512-3101 
MAILING ADDRESS TOLL-FREE MAINE RELAY 
PO. Box 349, Augusta, I\/IE 043320349 1-800-451--9800 711
. LD 1152 Testnmony 
Ma|ne March28 2023i 
Piltékitl re:-§§>L<>vez55 RET!R£I~i§£?~li s‘;'s1‘£~::=: Page2 
included two versions of proposed legislation, one that mandated employer-paid coverage 
and one that did not. L.D. 1152 is the version of proposed legislation favored by the labor 
members of the stakeholder group that requires employers to fully fund LTDI for covered 
employees. Although MainePERS is in favor of providing the coverage, as previously 
indicated, we do not have a position on how a LTDI program should be funded. 
If the Committee is interested in receiving a more detailed briefing of the proposed LTDI 
program as detailed in the Implementation Report, we would be happy to provide that at the 
Committee's convenience. 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony. I would be happy to answer your 
questions and will be available at your Work session.
