15 University Drive 
Augusta, Maine 04330 
Maine Water Utilities Association 2O7'623'951 1 
— Organized 1925 
April 4, 2023 
Honorable Michael Tipping, Senate Chair 
Honorable Amy Roeder, House Chair 
Joint Legislative Committee on Labor and Housing 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, l\/lE 04333 
Re: Testimony in opposition to LD 1152, An Act To Make Long-term Disability Insurance Coverage 
Available To Public Employees 
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Members of the Committee on Labor and Housing: 
The Maine Water Utilities Association (MWUA) appreciates the opportunity to provide testimony in 
opposition to LD 1152. 
About MWUA. The Maine Water Utilities Association is a nonprofit association based in Augusta that 
provides support for water works professionals throughout the State of Maine in advocating for safe 
drinking water through educational and technical programming as well as advocacy on the local, state, 
and national level. The Association was formed in 1925 and counts approximately 109 water utilities in 
Maine as members. 
Discussion. LD 1152 requires the Maine Public Employers Retirement System to offer long-term 
disability insurance. Under LD 1152, employers are required to cover the cost of the premiums. 
While MWUA appreciates the desire to provide this type of insurance to employees, we are opposed to 
the requirement that employers have to cover the cost of the premiums. The principal source of income 
for water utilities is water rates. Therefore, the costs of providing this insurance will be passed on to our 
ratepayers — the public. If the Legislature determines this is a priority, we request the insurance to be 
optional with the ability for employers to pass the cost onto employees who opt into the coverage. 
Conclusion. MWUA asks that the Committee vote ought not to pass on this unfunded mandate. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
lj//A 
Ro er Crouse, 
Legislative Committee Chair, Maine Water Utilities Association 
General Manager, Kennebec Water District 
cc: Bruce Berger, Executive Director (MWUA) 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, Legislative Counsel
