Mame Assocmnom OF Rermzes 
Ec- ,5 
TO: Senator Nicole Grohoski, Chair 
Representative Joe Perry, Chair 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Taxation DATE: March 16, 2023 
FROM: Thomas Record 
Vice President, Maine Association of Retirees 
SUBJECT: LD 37, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Property Tax Stabilization for Senior 
Citizens to Eliminate the Requirement of an Annual Application 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee, I am Thomas Record and am Vice 
President of the Maine Association of Retirees (MAR), a nonproﬁt organization comprised of public service 
retirees including state retirees, retired educators, and retirees from participating local districts. 
We thank Senator Pouliot for bringing LD 37 forward. 
The Property Tax Stabilization Program which was enacted during the 130th Legislature is designed to protect 
senior citizens who qualify for the Maine homestead exemption from property tax increases. During MAR’s 
regional member meetings in the fall of 2022, we learned that the program was extremely popular with our 
members as the majority had already signed up. 
As currently structured, seniors must apply to their municipality for the program by December 1 of each year. 
In addition to the burden on seniors, this also places an administrative burden on municipalities which must 
process applications received. As currently structured, municipalities are not reimbursed for processing 
applications. 
By providing for only a single application for the Property Tax Stabilization Program as is already done with 
respect to the homestead exemption, LD 37 replaces needless bureaucracy with a common sense and much 
simpler process. 
MAR is ready to participate in work sessions on the bill or to provide whatever other assistance the Committee 
may require. 
CC Senator Michael Pouliot 
Leading the Way for Maine Retirees 
280 Maine Avenue, Farmingdale, ME 04344 William H. Laubenstein Ill — President 
Telephone Number: (207)582-1960 Diane M. Bailey — Executive Director 
1-800-535-6555 email: l\/lAR@!VlaineRetirees.org 
(207)707-1722 FAX www.maineretirees.org
