TESTIMONY OF BREENA BISSELL 
DIRECTOR, STATE OF MAINE BUREAU OF HUMAN RESOURCES 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
TESTIFYING IN OPPOSITION OF 
L.D. 106, “An Act to Standardize Service Credit Qualifications for State Retirees ” 
SPONSORED BY: Representative Parry 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Hearing date: February 9, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing; I am Breena Bissell, Director of the State of Maine Bureau of 
Human Resources, and I am here to testify on behalf of the Administration in opposition to this 
proposed legislation. 
LD 106 seeks to require that when a member of the Maine Public Employees Retirement 
System in a position covered by a special plan transfers to a position that is not covered by a special 
plan and has completed 80% of the member’s service under the special plan, that additional time 
in the position not covered by the special plan is calculated as though the member had remained 
in the special plan. 
There are currently three special retirement plans created by statute for a limited number 
of careers in state government. These special plans recognize the unique nature of the work 
required, and the inherent risk to the individuals conducting thework, with retirement beneﬁts 
designed to appropriately compensate retirees for their service time in these speciﬁc job 
classiﬁcations. 
The retirement law already in place affords employees who transfer from a job Withina 
special retirement plan to a job outside of a special retirement plan to be compensated in retirement 
by computing retirement beneﬁts based on both the time in the special plan and the time outside
of the special plan~—without counting the time outside of the special plan as if it were time the 
member remained in the special plan. 
To expandthe special retirement plan calculations to include years worked outside ofa 
special plan as if the member remained in the special plan raises additional questions. For example: 
let’s consider the case of an employee disciplined for misconduct by transfer to a position outside 
of the special plan with the requirement the employee no longer be permitted to work in a role 
covered by the special plan. Under this proposed law change, the transferred employee no longer 
working or permitted to work in a position covered by a special plan could be afforded the special 
plan beneﬁt as if they had remained in the special plan. 
Expanding the special retirement plan calculations to include years worked outside ofa 
special plan dilutes the intent of the special plan-the recognition of the unique duties and risks 
associated with speciﬁc jobs in state government. It may also generate unintended consequences, 
such as an adverse impact on the morale and retention of the public servants dedicating their 
careers to the speciﬁc jobs covered by special retirement plans. 
Expansion of the law would have a ﬁscal impact as well, which under the constitution, 
requires full funding. 
It is the position of the Administration that the current language of the law, which already 
calculates retirement beneﬁts based on years in the special plan and years outside the special plan, 
is appropriate as written. 
I respectfully urge you to vote ought not to pass. Thank you for this opportunity to testify.
