Dear Labor and Housing Committee members 
My name is Jeremy Kemp I am writing to provide written testimony regarding LD 106.  I am not available 
to appear in person.  I want to be clear that I am here testifying as a private citizen and my testimony is 
not the opinion of the Maine Warden Service. 
I began my state service in 1995 as a seasonal employee at a state park.  I worked at that same state 
park for three seasons, 95, 96, and 97 with no break in service.  I then worked seasonally for the Maine 
Atlantic Salmon Commission in 1998, again there was no break in service.  I went to work full time year 
round in the spring of 1999 at the Grand Lake Stream fish hatchery and worked there for almost two 
years until I was hired by the Warden Service in winter of 2001.  During the time I worked for the state 
of Maine from 1995 to the winter of 2001, I contributed to Maine State Retirement. 
When I began working under the Warden Service “special retirement”, I had almost six years of prior 
state service.  I never had a break in service, nor did I withdraw any of my own contributions. 
At this point in the year 2023, I have been a Game Warden for almost 22 years, and I am a member of a 
“special retirement program”.  My understanding is that when I retire, the years of state employment 
that I worked before working for the Warden Service will be penalized to a point that I will get very little 
for those years.  As of May 2023 I will have worked on a permanent status for the state of Maine for 28 
years.  As I round the bend into the last few years before I become eligible for retirement.  I can’t help 
but think about those prior years of state service.  Essentially, it feels as though I am being penalized to a 
great extent because I entered a “special retirement program”, special retirements generally seem to 
provide an incentive to attract and retain good applicants to high stress, dangerous and often 
unpredictable careers, it seems to compensate in some way for loss of quality of life.  In my years of 
service, I have responded to many life and death calls in all conditions, day or night, subzero 
temperatures, intense weather events, dangerous individuals, underwater, and under-ice conditions.  I 
have ventured out onto thin ice in subzero wind chills in the middle of the night to save stranded 
snowmobilers, collected a drunk man who was passed out in the trail to his cabin and escorted him to 
the comfort of his cabin. I’ve recovered many drowning victims during all seasons of the year, and 
worked in countless other inhospitable circumstances to help keep folks safe and comforted.  Many 
other members of special retirement programs are allowed to move years from other service into the 
special retirement programs, for example, military and prior police work.   
I would ask that you all consider LD 106 and allowing years worked prior to joining a “special retirement 
program” to be calculated as the same rate used for those years within the special retirement.  I do 
think that this should be considered when those joining special retirement have completed the years 
required under the special retirement.  I think there are situations where the current law would serve as 
an obstacle for staff with 10 years or more of state service coming to State Law Enforcement.  In this 
time of uncertainty in the law enforcement field, it has become much more difficult to recruit and retain 
staff, I and believe this will add to the list of reasons to join our ranks. 
Thank you for your time 
-Jeremy Kemp 
Sangerville, Maine 
