To whom it may concern,
Thank you for your time and consideration in this matter regarding my future as it pertains to planning 
for my retirement.
My name is Jon Brown, I am from Saint Albans. I have been employed as a trooper by the Maine State 
Police for the past fifteen years. Prior to becoming a police officer, I served as a corrections officer at the 
Maine State Prison in Thomaston and Warren. I am a former Marine and I continue to serve in the 
Maine Air National Guard. These professions have been very rewarding. I am honored and humbled to 
have served the people of the United States of America and the State of Maine in while in uniform. 
Service in these uniforms has required me to see the best and the worst that mankind has to offer. I 
have worked within the walls of our facilities that house our violent offenders. I have responded to 
remote parts of our state alone at all hours of the night to act as a protector against those who intend to 
harm others. I have informed parents that their child has been killed.  I have been involved in numerous 
violent encounters. I have been shot at, bitten, kicked, punched, spat upon, and have had feces and 
urine thrown in my face. However, rewarding my service has been, it has not been without sacrifice. 
These encounters have chipped away at me little by little over the years as they have many others who 
have served alongside me. 
I must admit, I have not served in these capacities entirely out of honor.  I have also served for selfish 
reasons. I have served because it has fulfilled me. I have served because I did not want a boring 
mundane life. I have served because I was contracted to do so in return for an opportunity at a 
prosperous life and an appreciative retirement.  These are reasons why I have fulfilled all of which has 
been asked of me.   
I am here today to address the state of our retirement plan.  I will address what I have been informed 
upon and give my thoughts pertaining to that.  I began employment in April of 2000 at the Maine State 
Prison in Thomaston as a prison guard. This was before the new facility was constructed in Warren and 
we were retitled correction officers.  When I was hired, I was informed that I would be required to work 
for twenty-five years and reach the age of fifty-five before I could retire and collect from that plan.  I was 
told that if I worked for five years I would be “vested” in that plan and could then collect a lesser 
amount at age fifty-five.  I was assured that this was the case.  I never planned a lifetime career as a 
prison guard or corrections officer but, figured that it was a good place to start my service to our state.  
So, I set forth with this service and completed over five years before moving on to work as a police 
officer at the town of Dexter.  My goal had been for many years to become a Maine State Trooper, and 
this would be my path.  I continued to seamlessly pay into the Maine State Retirement System for 
another two and a half years before finally becoming a trooper. I had finally gotten there! Now I could 
live my dream! So, on I went doing the things that troopers do; all the while planning for my retirement.  
My retirement plan has been very simple, and it looks something like this. I was “vested” into the Maine 
State Retirement System after five years of employment at the Department of Corrections. I continued 
to pay in while employed at the town of Dexter for two and a half years. I then served fifteen years as a 
trooper which brings me to where I am today. I expect to have to work as a trooper for another ten 
years before I am eligible to collect under the retirement plan that the troopers have. This would put me 
at the age of fifty-eight.  I would then be able to collect 50% of my State Police pay and a percentage of 
my Department of Corrections retirement plan based on my years of service (not being penalized for 
age since I would be over the age 55). I have recently been informed that my understanding of what and 
when I can collect from my Department of Corrections plan may be incorrect.  I have been informed that 
I may be penalized until age 62. This information has been a shock to me!  I hope that this information is 
incorrect.  I would hope that all contracts that I have entered, with the State of Maine, will be upheld. I 
have and will continue to fulfill my end of that agreement.
Please consider those who have honorably and faithfully served.
Respectfully,
Jon Brown
            
       
