Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and Di stinguished Members of the Labor 
and Housing Committee, 
 
 
My name is Kari Kurth. I am writing you to voice my  support for LD 106. As a private 
citizen, the bundling of previous and future retire ment plans without financial penalties 
proposed by this bill is of great interest to me as  a private citizen. I offer several 
arguments in support of this proposed legislation.  
 
1. Currently, there is a unified state retirement p rogram for educators. Teachers 
are able to move from district to district without impacting their retirement 
investment. This financial freedom allows teachers to seek competitive offers 
for their experience. It also affords districts the  opportunity to recruit 
experienced teachers to increase their academic com petency.  
2. Currently, law enforcement is not regarded as a single entity as educators are. 
Prior to my current standing as a law enforcement o fficer, I started my career 
at another law enforcement agency. I had four years  invested into my 
retirement plan. To date, I will incur severe finan cial penalties if I cash out that 
plan and re-invest it into my current retirement ac count. As a result, those 
monies accrue minimal interest if any at all. For a ll intents and purposes, my 
account is not simply passive, it is dormant. Had I  more years invested into my 
first retirement account, I would not have transfer red to the Maine State 
Police.  
3. Further complicating the issue are the arbitrary  retirement policies of these 
competing funds. For example, as a member of the fi rst fund, I am unable to 
access penalty-free benefits until age 65. In contr ast, members of the MSP 
Fund are able to withdraw benefits after 25 years o f service, irrespective of 
age. In my particular case, I will be eligible at a ge 62, three years earlier than 
the first fund.  
4. There is a recruitment crisis for all law enforc ement agencies. not only for the 
State Police, but for other law enforcement agencie s. Due to the current 
fragmented retirement programs, experienced officer s are hesitant to transfer 
to other agencies in light of potential financial p enalties.  
5. With a unified retirement program, young recruit s would be more receptive to 
small department policing to gain experience before  moving to larger 
departments. Seasoned officers, at the apex of thei r careers, would be more 
receptive to joining smaller departments if potenti al retirement penalties were 
eliminated. One potential windfall of this financia l freedom is mentorship of the 
next generation. A cycle of new hires to seasoned 
officers/deputies/wardens/Troopers to mentors would  raise efficacy and 
competency of all law enforcement agencies across t he state. This self-
perpetuating cycle of excellence could be initiated  with the creation of a 
common retirement fund for all law enforcement agen cies.  
 
Thank you for your time and the opportunity to speak and be heard.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Kari A Kurth 
 

