Q; ' CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFlCER BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
Jw qg 
a I n e g Dr. Rebecca M. Wyke Brian H. Noyes, Chair 
Richard T. Metivier Vice Chair 
.. 
PUBUC EMPLGYEES RETHQEMENT _¢5Yg»§»EM Henry Beck, State Treasurer, Ex Off/clo 
John S. Behveau 
Shirrin L. Blaisdeli 
Mark A. Brunton 
John H. Kimball 
Kenneth L. Williams 
DATE: February 9, 2023 
TO: Senator Michael Tipping, Chair 
Representative Amy Roeder, Chair 
Members, Ioint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
FROM: Kathy]. Morin, Director, Actuarial and Legislative Affairs 
SUBIECT: Testimony on L.D. 106 — An Act to Standardize Service Credit Qualifications for 
State Retirees 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Ioint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is Kathy Morin, and I am the Director of 
Actuarial and Legislative Affairs for the Maine Public Employees Retirement System. 
MainePERS is neither for nor against L.D. 106. We are here to provide information and offer 
any assistance the Committee might need regarding this bill. 
Most state employees are covered by the regular plan, which requires twenty-five years of 
service and/ or attainment of normal retirement age of 60, 62 or 65. Retirement after twenty- 
five years of service but prior to normal retirement age results in the application of an early 
retirement reduction to the benefit, which for most members is 6% for each year below normal 
retirement age. The reduction reflects that benefits will be paid to the retiree over a longer 
period of time. In essence, lower benefits paid over a longer period of time equate to a higher, 
unreduced benefit, being paid over a fewer number of years. Special plans typically allow for 
retirement with fewer years of service and / or at a younger age. Because of the more favorable 
provisions of the special plans, they are more expensive to fund. 
Special plans are typically provided to employees in law enforcement positions. These plans 
require that a certain number of years of service, specified in statute, must be completed while 
employed in a plan-covered capacity in order to meet the eligibility requirements of the plan. 
So, for example, to qualify to retire under a plan that provides for retirement after twenty-five 
years of service, regardless of age, the service must be earned in a position covered by that 
plan. Typically, service earned in other plans, such as the regular plan, may not be included 
towards meeting the years of service eligibility requirement. Any benefit for service earned in 
a different plan is calculated under the plan in which it was earned, which could result in the 
application of an early retirement reduction. 
As drafted, L.D. 106 would permit a member covered by a special plan to leave that plan prior 
to meeting plan eligibility requirements, and continue to earn service credit in that special 
www.mainepers.org LOCATION LOCAL FAX 
139 Capitol Street, Augusta, |\/IE 04330 2073512-3100 207-512-3101 
MAILING ADDRESS TOLL-FREE MAINE RELAY 
PO. Box 349, Augusta, ME 043320349 L800-451-9800 711
LD 106 Testlmony 
February9 2023 ‘@>~ 
¥l1){5l.!(?Ei- ‘lPLD\lEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM Page2 
plan, even though no longer employed in an otherwise plan-covered capacity. While under 
current law, benefits earned in a regular plan subsequent to leaving the special plan would be 
determined under the regular plan benefit calculations, under L.D. 106, all benefits would be 
based on the special plan benefit calculations. This could have two results: 1) the member 
could qualify for a special plan benefit when, under current law, that qualification may not be 
met; and 2) the member could receive a higher benefit at retirement, since any early retirement 
reduction, if applicable, would be based on the special plan provisions rather than the regular 
plan provisions. 
L.D. 106 will have a fiscal impact because the Constitution does not allow the creation of new 
or additional benefits unless immediately and fully funded. New benefits are created under 
L.D. 106 because retirees would be receiving higher benefits than currently accounted for and 
funded, creating a new unfunded actuarial liability (UAL). We also think it important to note 
that both the member and employer normal costs for the special plans are typically higher than 
those costs for the special plans. It is unclear from the bill as to how those increased costs will 
be paid for a member employed in a regular plan position but earning special plan benefits. 
We have not yet determined an estimate of the costs associated with this bill, but will do so 
once we have a better understanding of its intent and application. 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony. I would be happy to answer your 
questions and will be available at your work session.
