LD 106 
AN ACT TO STANDARDIZE SERVICE CREDIT QUALIFICATIONS FOR STATE RETIREES 
PUBLICE HEARING BEFORE THE 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOR AND HOUSING COMMITTEE 
FEBRUARY 9, 2023 
TESTIMONY OF THE MAINE LA W ENFORCEMENT LABOR COALTION 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Labor & Housing Committee. My 
name is Michael Edes, and I am before you today representing the Maine Law Enforcement 
Coalition. The Maine Law Enforcement Coalition represents the Maine Troopers Association, 
the Maine State Law Enforcement Association the Maine Association of Police and the Fraternal 
Order of Police. Collectively we represent the majority of Maine's law enforcement 
professionals from York County to Aroostook County. 
I am before you today to speak in support of LD106, An Act to Standardize Service Credit 
Qualifications for State Retiree. Our hope is that you will support this act and come up with 
final language in this bill that provides solutions to some unfair practices within our State 
Retirement System. Finding resolutions to these issues will help promote recruitment and 
retention of state employees, specifically state law enforcement officers. 
Currently, an employee can work for the State of Maine for several years under the general 
state employee's retirement plan. If he/she decides after a few years of employment with the 
State, that they want to enter the field of state law enforcement, there is a swift and harsh 
penalty to their previous state service time when they meet their special plan service credit and 
retire. 
For example, several years ago a state police lieutenant retired at age 52. Prior to joining the 
State Police, this Lt. had served with the Maine Dept. Of Transportation for 5-years. There was 
no break in service to the State of Maine and the trooper went right from DOT to the State 
Police. When the lieutenant went to retire under the State Police "Special Plan," he was told 
that it was mandatory that he start drawing on his previous DOT time, even though he wanted 
to wait until he was age 62 to start drawing. Because of this "forced" withdrawal of his 
retirement on his prior state service prior to age 62, he automatically loses 6% of the 
retirement for each year under the age of 62. So, by the time that this state police lieutenant 
reaches age 62, he will have lost 60% of his entire 5 year DOT retirement benefit.
This is merely one example of the conflict within the law that creates a disincentive for current 
state employees to move into the various state law enforcement positions. We are at vacancy 
numbers statewide that is creating huge implications for the profession which directly impacts 
the public safety of our communities. Recruiting and retaining employees into law 
enforcement is tough enough without complicating service credits for previous state service. 
This bill has a tremendous impact on recruitment and retention throughout all areas of Maine 
law enforcement. 
We ask for your support on LD106, and are willing partners in helping resolve the other issues 
you will hear today from Maine Law Enforcement Officers. We would like to make ourselves 
available to you at the committee for discussions in the upcoming work session. 
I would be happy to answer any questions from any committee members. 
Michael Eu 
des ~ Maine Law Enforcement Coalition
