Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and member of the Labor and Housing 
Committee. 
My name is Scott Bryant. lam a sergeant with the Maine State Police. l am here today on a day off to 
testify in support of LD 106. LD 106 is intended to correct the issue of Maine PERS not providing service 
credit to state employees currently in a special plan who had service credits in a prior special plan or for 
state employees who were previously enrolled in the regular plan. l am here testifying as a private 
citizen and my testimony is not the opinion of the Maine State Police. 
I have always wanted to be a Maine State Trooper. In Maine you must be 21 years old to be a full-time 
police officer. After graduating high school, l joined the United States Air Force and served as a law 
enforcement specialist. I ended my enlistment on May 18,1992 when I was hired as a prison guard at 
the Maine State Prison in Thomaston. l accepted this position while I waited for the Maine State Police 
to open trooper positions once more. I was told that service within the Maine State Retirement System 
would count towards retirement from the Maine State Police. The Maine State Department of 
Corrections was under the 25 years of sen/ice and 55 years of age special retirement plan. The Maine 
State Police did not hire any new troopers from 1989 through 1994. 
On November 5, 1995, l was hired as a Maine State Police Trooper. When l applied to be a trooper there 
were over 3,000 applicants. The 44"‘ Maine State Police Academy graduated 43 Maine State Troopers. 
The 3,000 applicants are unheard of these days. 
The special retirement plan with the Maine State Police is 25 years of service with no age requirement. l 
transferred from the Maine Department of Corrections to the Department of Public Safety with no break 
in service. 
Many years later, as l got closer to retirement age, l began communication with Maine State Retirement. 
I was surprised when l was told that my 3 ‘/2 years of sen/ice with the Department of Corrections was 
going to be penalized by 6 percent per year for evew year that l am under 62 years of age. Maine PERS 
says this is because I did not fulfill my 25/55 special plan even though l had no break in service. I will be 
52 in a couple of weeks. If l were to retire today, l would receive a 60 percent penalty on my time with 
the Maine Department Corrections after being a faithful state employee for nearly 31 years. There is no 
option for sen/ice credits conversion for my Department of Corrections time. This is simply not a fair 
practice and must be corrected. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Scott Bryant
