February 9th, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing 
Committee. My name is Tom Gonneville Sr. I am currently a trooper with the Maine State Police. I am 
here today on my (off duty) time representing myself as a private citizen. 
I stand before you in support of LD 106 An Act to Standardize Service Credit Qualifications for State 
Retirees. My hope is that you will support this act and create a final bill stopping the current inequities 
within the Maine Retirement System, while also creating a more conducive environment for state 
employees to move within state government. 
I began serving the citizens of this state as a coach and teacher in 1989. I accumulated 5.5 years of 
service credits in the Maine State Retirement System through my service within the Department of 
Education prior to being hired as a trooper in 1998. I have sen/ed every year since in the Department of 
Public Safety. 
As I have approached the service obligation for retirement from the State Police, I began 
communications with MPERS. This conversation revealed that although I may fulfill the requirements to 
retire from the state police after 25 years of service, MPERS will be immediately enforcing a 6% penalty 
upon my Teaching benefit, for every year that I retire prior to turning age 62. Currently, I would be 
penalized a total of 54% of my entire Department of Education retirement benefit. Although others may 
have been granted the opportunity from MPERS to either convert or possibly buy service time intoa 
”Special Retirement plan" , those opportunities are not afforded to those of us with state service time in 
a regular plan. After more than 28 years of faithful service to the citizens of this state, I stand to lose 
over half of my teaching retirement benefit. This current practice of penalizing state employees is quite 
simply unjust. 
I ask for your support of LD 106 to eliminate the unfair practices currently being employed. Possible 
solutions to correcting the inequities within the Maine retirement system could occur by allowing a 
conversion of Maine state retirement service time from a regular plan into a special plan (at a 3 to2 
rate) or affording the opportunity other state employees currently benefit from, by allowing the 
purchase of state retirement service time from a regular/special plan into a Special plan. A conversion 
of multiple state retirement plans would simplify the retirement process, eliminate unjust penalties, and 
aid in recruitment with greater portability for current and future state workers. I look forward to the 
solutions you bring forward in a final bill that I hope will end the current unfair penalties being levied 
against loyal state employees. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Tom Gonneville Sr.
