Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Labor and Housing
Committee:
My name is Troy Dauphinee.  I am a warden with the Maine Warden Service.  I am writing this in
support of LD 106.  I want to be clear that I am writing this as a private citizen and my testimony
is not the opinion of the Maine Warden Service.
When I graduated from high school, I began to work towards my goal of becoming a law
enforcement officer and more specifically a Maine Game Warden.  I enrolled at the University of
Maine in Augusta and earned an Associate’s Degree in Criminal Justice.  In 1997, I began
working for the Penobscot Sheriff’s Department as a Corrections Officer.  I then got hired full
time as a Corrections Officer for the State of Maine Department of Corrections at the Charleston
Correctional Facility in December 1997.
During my time in corrections, I was under at least two retirement plans.  The last plan that I was
under was a 25 years of service and 55 years of age special retirement plan.  I was told that my
service within the Maine State Retirement System would count towards retirement from the
Maine Warden Service after I reached 25 years with the Maine Warden Service.
In February of  2001, I was hired full time as a Game Warden.  The special retirement with the
Maine Warden Service is 25 years with no age requirement.  I transferred from the Department
of Corrections to the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife with no break in service.
A few years back I learned that I would be penalized for the first part of my corrections time
under the regular plan, but still thought that my time in the 25/55 special plan would be honored,
as long as I was 55 years old when I retired.  I have recently learned that this is not the case
and that all of my 3 plus years of corrections time will be penalized at 6 percent per year for
every year that I am under 62 years of age when I retire.
If I were to retire at age 50, I would have a total of 28 plus years of continuous state service and
I would be penalized 72 percent on my three years of service in the Department of Corrections.
I feel this is not fair practice and must be corrected.
LD106 is simply a correction to the issue of Maine PERS not providing service credit to state
employees currently in a special plan who had service credits in a prior special plan or for state
employees who were previously enrolled in the regular plan.
