Ag.‘ HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 2 STATE HOUSE STATION
a w AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
VVayne R. Parry MAINE RELAY 711 
S5] .l\iﬁ'ed Road 
Arundcl. ME (I40-16 
\\’a\*ne.l’urr\"((: lctvislalu1 ‘e.|n;1inc.co\ 
Residence: (207) 286-QI46 
Testimony on 
L.D. 106, “An Act to Standardize Service Credit Qualifications for State 
Retirees ” 
Presented by 
Representative Wayne R. Parry 
District 140 
Labor and Housing Committee 
Thursday, February 9, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing: 
I am State Representative Wayne R. Parry, and I proudly represent District 140, Aiundel, 
Dayton, and a portion of Lyman. It is an honor to appear before you today for the purpose of 
introducing L.D. 106, “An Act to Standardize Service Credit Qualifications for State Retirees. ” 
This measure was originally brought forward on behalf of a constituent. However, after 
speaking to additional State employees, there are other underlying issues that this panel needs to 
address. It has also come to my attention that there may be other pieces of legislation coming 
forward that may have similar issues. 
L.D. 1 06 mainly looks at “special plans” and State service outside special plans. There wasa 
slight drafting error, which I blame myself for missing. As drafted, the bill reads -- State service 
after being in a special plan -- whereas my intent was any State service before or after being ina 
special plan. 
As many of you know, I am a lobstennan outside of the Legislature, so I have dealt with the 
Maine Marine Patrol a lot over my nearly 30-year career. I know the Patrol is currently having 
huge problems with recruiting, while the Maine State Police is having similar difficulties. 
Special plans require 25 years of service to receive full pension. Presently, if someone in one of 
these services wishes to retire early, they are penalized at a 6% rate per year. As such, if 
someone in a special plan retires early, say two years, they get penalized 12%, which I totally 
understand. Nevertheless, here is the issue. . .if they have other State service years they are 
required to take that time also, but get zero credit towards retirement time. In the eventa 
Marine Patrol ofﬁcer wants to retire at 23 years, but also has 5 years at DOT or teaching time for 
District 140 Arundel, Dayton and Lyman (Part) Over’ please 
Printed on l€C\ cled papex
example, which retirement age is 62, that person gets zero credit for that service time towards 
their main retirement plan and is also penalized at a 54% rate on that extra service. It is going to 
be impossible to recruit inside State Government with these penalties. Part of this blame I place 
upon myself for supporting some of these penalties during the early years of the LePage 
administration. As we all know, there are times when the devil is in the details, and asa 
freshman legislator, one can, and I did, clearly missed them. 
The 80% number in this bill is what I used, where as that is the service plan the State goes by 
in calculating retirement service. Other State service can subsequently be added, or at least take 
a percentage of the other service, i.e. if one has ﬁve years outside a special plan, they would then 
get three years of credit toward the special plan. 
I am certain there are other possible options this working group can conceive. Ultimately, I 
do not believe we should penalize State Workers because they move from one State job to 
another. Any State Worker that reaches their plan requirements should not be penalized for any 
additional service. It should just be totaled. 
Perhaps in the end, you can look at this entire retirement circumstance and report outa 
related committee bill‘? 
In closing, you, the members of this committee, are the experts in these areas, so I leave it to 
you on how to best help our State workers with these penalty and extra service time concerns. 
Thank you for your consideration. I am happy to answer any questions you may have at this 
time.
