AMANDA FITZSIMMONS, DOMESTIC VIOLENCE SURVIVOR 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 692 
APRIL 10, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and public safety. My name is Amanda 
Fitzsimmons, I live in Franklin, and I am a domestic violence survivor. I am here today to testify 
in support of LD 692-An act regarding eligibility of county jail inmates for a community 
confinement monitoring program. 
I was in a 20-year relationship that started when I was 15 years old. I suffered every type of 
abuse that only grew worse as the years went by. 
Like most survivors, I left him but went back more than once. I knew what he was doing was 
wrong, but I stayed or went back to him out of fear of what he might do ifl stayed away. He 
had me convinced that I would suffer worse or that my family would suffer ifl left him 
permanently. The mind games that he played were unbelievably terrifying. He would tell meI 
was his and no one else would ever have me. He threatened not only my life, but our childrens, 
my parents and even my grandmother. 
Each time that I was brave enough to leave, he would do anything to contact me to cry and beg 
for forgiveness. Making false promises just to make me feel weak and sorry for him. When I'd 
go back, the abuse grew more than the time before. 
The first PFA was in 2014. I was free forjust over 2 months. He began talking to our son and 
convinced him that he had gone to rehab, was sober, going to therapy and was working on 
being a better man for his family. He begged our son for all of us to come home and be a family 
again. He broke that PFA more than once. He called me from an unknown number thatI 
answered not knowing it was him. He knew that all it would take to get me back was to talk to 
me. He cried and begged me for one more chance to prove his love for me. He knows how 
important family is to me and always used that to his advantage. Finally, I agreed to at least go 
to his house to talk. That talk only made me weaker to his lies. Less than 24 hours later, I was in 
court asking to drop the PFA. To my surprise, that PFA was easier to drop than it was to get ita 
few months prior. 
Things were ok for a few weeks until I suspected him of using drugs again. The fights and 
threats quickly flared up, only worse than ever. By June of that year (2015) I discovered thathe
was an IV addict. I begged him to get help and quit. He refused and threatened my life daily ifl 
left him again. By the end of that summer, our oldest 2 kids moved in with my parents to 
escape the daily abuse. Our youngest who was 10 at the time, refused to leave my side because 
"daddy won't hurt you as badly if I'm here mommy" with her little innocent voice saying those 
words to me, I had to do something and be smart about it! For months, I planned my way out, 
knowing that ifl didn't set up a safety plan, one day he would kill me and most likely in front of 
her. 
December 4"‘ 2015, was the closest he got to taking my life along with our kids and my mom. 
By the grace of God, I was able to finally out smart him, staying 3 steps ahead of him, but not 
before being held hostage for hours at knifepoint, seeing the fear in my kids‘ eyes as he 
screamed at them saying he was going to kill us all, enduring the worst abuse yet. I was able to 
sneak away once he fell asleep. Which was not an easy task as he had blocked the doors and 
screwed the windows shut. I ran to my neighbors house and she drove me to a family members 
house. That's when I heard all the sirens going towards his house. My safety plan was in place, 
and it was actually working. I should have felt relief at that moment, but all I felt was extreme 
fear he was going to get to me somehow. 
He went to jail and was held without bail until that Monday. His lawyer fought to get him bail 
using me and my lack of credibility against me because I have left and returned more than once 
so I must not be that scared. My lawyer knew how important it was for the safety of me and my 
children for him to stay in jail. He had 5 felony DV charges. The court sentenced him to onlya 
year after facing up to 25 years. He only served 11 months. 
Had he been released; I know he would have contacted me and gotten into my head again to 
convince me he was sorry and would never do it again. Those 11 months gave me time to heal 
and learn how manipulative and abusive he was. I was finally able to stay away from him! I am 
proud to say that 12/4/2015 was the very last time I have suffered abuse! 
Thank you all for listening to a tiny piece of my story. It's truly an honor to be here today 
standing up for all DV survivors!
