DV‘ 101 Western Ave.R 9' ' 
P 0 Box 5188 
The Maine Coalition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Domestic Violence 2O7_430_3334 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso, on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
In Support of LD 692: “An Act Regarding Eligibility of County Jail Inmates for a Community 
Confinement Monitoring Program. ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Monday, April 10, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, I am writing on behalf of the 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)1 in support of LD 692, “An Act Regarding 
Eligibility of County Jail Inmates for a Community Confinement Monitoring Program. ” 
When a person who has used domestic abuse and violence against their intimate 
partner is sentenced to serve a period of time in one of Maine's correctional facilities, it is 
rare that the incident was that person’s first offense or even the first time the criminal legal 
system attempted to intervene. More often than not, these residents have had the benefit 
of some sort of deferred disposition or diversion opportunity on a prior offense and have 
either continued to abuse their victim or have moved on to abuse a new victim. With that 
understanding, the county jails should be giving careful consideration to any application for 
the community confinement monitoring program when the applicant is incarcerated asa 
result of domestic abuse and violence. The process outlined in LD 692 will require the county 
jails to collect and consider important information to help ensure the decisions they make in 
response to applications for this program are informed with respect to how early release 
would impact victim and community safety. 
LD 692 would require a county jail administrator, before granting an application for 
the community confinement monitoring program for anyone who is incarcerated for a crime 
against a family or household member, to do the following: 
0 Review the applicant ’s criminal history to identify any pattern of behavior that may 
indicate the person poses a risk to the safety of others in the community if released 
early. 
0 Review the results of any available validated, evidence based risk assessment tool. In 
Maine, that would most often be the Ontario Domestic Assault Risk Assessment - 
_‘ MCEDV represents a membership of the eight regional domestic violence resource centers across 
Maine as well as the immigrant Resource Center of Maine. Last year, our programs provided services to more 
than 12,000 survivors of domestic abuse and violence and their children in our state. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
MCEDV Page 2 of3 
often referred to as ODARA - that is completed by law enforcement on-scene, after 
an arrest determination has been made. 
0 Make a good faith effort to be in contact with the victim to provide an opportunity 
for them to express concerns or considerations related to a resident's early release 
and have those issues taken into account in the decision-making process and any 
subsequent release conditions. 
0 Provide notice to the district attorney's office that prosecuted the underlying case to 
allow the DA’s office to provide any additional insight. 
To be clear, there are people sentenced to our county jails for domestic violence 
crimes that are appropriate for this community confinement monitoring program. There are 
crime victims who would welcome their offender ’s early release from the jail. For domestic 
violence victims, that is particularly true for those whose economic circumstances are 
intrinsically connected to the person who has harmed them, and those with children in 
common. There are also defendants that are not at all appropriate for the early release, and 
there are crime victims who would be vehemently opposed to the offender's release under 
this program. The process outlined in LD 692 would merely ensure the county jail 
administrators have all the information that should be considered as they make that decision 
and obligate the jails to provide timely notice to victims concerning that decision. 
Timely victim notification about corrections decisions that will result in early or 
unexpected release of the person who has caused harm back into the community is an 
incredibly important component of our communities ’ responsibilities to crime victims. This 
is not only because it allows the crime victim to take any steps necessary to address safety 
concerns, but also because the release of the person who has caused harm back into the 
community can be retraumatizing for crime victims, and timely notification can help them 
get the support they need to address that trauma as well as safety planning to avoid 
additional harm being done. Sadly, our laws concerning post-sentencing release 
notifications currently direct the county jails to notify a victim by mail that a release decision 
has been made no later than the date that the decision is made, without any additional 
requirements around timeframe. See 17-A M.R.S. § 2106(2). To illustrate the ineffectiveness 
of the current notification directive, if a decision is made by the county jail on Monday to 
release a resident into this program on Tuesday, what is required under current law is for the 
jail to mail a letter to the victim on Monday. This could result in the victim not knowing the 
person who harmed them had been released early until they saw that person in the 
community. That this is permitted under current law is a disservice to crime victims. 
MCEDV would note that the current pre-trial release notification requirement is 
equally dangerous; it is not trauma informed or responsive to the real-life safety concerns of 
victims and their need for timely information about the status of the person who has 
harmed them. Under current law, in the case of an alleged crime involving domestic 
violence, sexual assault or stalking the jail has up to one hour g the defendant has been 
released from the facility to notify the victim of that defendant's release. 17-A M.R.S.§ 
2107(2). As legislators continue to hear from victim services providers and victims
Dv. 101 Western Ave. 
P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coalition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Domestic Violence 2O7_43O_3334 
themselves on various legislative proposals that the state has utterly failed over the years to 
properly attend to the needs of crime victims time and time again, these pre-conviction and 
post~sentencing notification requirements are two prime examples of where victim rights in 
Maine, in practice, are functionally in name only. These anemic victim notification 
requirements are entirely reflective of the fact that policymakers and appropriators have 
never prioritized funding the county jails to meaningfully carry out victim notification 
obligations. 
LD 692 does not eliminate eligibility for anyone to be considered for or granted early 
release into the community confinement monitoring program. lt merely puts a belt and 
suspenders around the decision-making process to ensure that the decisions made about 
which residents are likely to not pose a risk to their victims or the broader community are 
appropriately informed. lf the county jails are going to release residents who have 
committed domestic violence crimes, they have a responsibility to victims and to the 
communities they serve to ensure they're engaging with all the information available to 
them. 
Thank you for the opportunity to be heard on this proposal. MCEDV and our member 
programs are happy to serve as a resource to this Committee as you continue to discuss 
these important issues. 
Contact Information: 
Andrea Mancuso, Esq. 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph= (207) 430-8334 
Email: a__ndrea@.mce_d.v,.Q.rg 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.0rg
