./t J 
_ -2- -\ 
“ -
1 
Maine Sheriffs ’ Association / .\-*“ '~ =§-‘; 
%/ . . 
gg “One Team, One Mzsszon” 
/ .s%:j>. 
A II 
Sheriff Dale P. Lancaster, President 
Sheriff Scott Nichols, 15' Vice-President, Sheriff William King, 2"“ Vice-President — Sheriff Barry Curtis, Secretary— 
Sheriff Todd Brackett, Treasurer — Sheriff Troy Morton, Immediate Past President— 
Sheriff Joel Merry, Past President-at-Large - Mary-Anne LaMarre, Executive Director 
April 10, 2023 
LD 692 An Act Regarding Eligibility if County Jail Inmates fora 
Community Conﬁnement Monitoring Program. 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished 
members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety committee. My Name is Kevin 
Joyce and I am the Sheriff of Cumberland County. I am here testifying on behalf of 
the Maine Sheriffs ’ Association in support of LD 692, An Act Regarding 
Eligibility of County Jail Inmates for a Community Conﬁnement Monitoring 
Program. 
When I read the language in LD 692, my ﬁrst response was that this is common 
sense. In the early 2000’s, the Cumberland County Sheriffs Ofﬁce periodically 
placed inmates into Community Conﬁnement, especially those sentenced inmates 
who were close to their release date. 
The requirement of conducting an investigation to identify any potential risk prior 
to the inmate’s release, making a good faith effort to notify the victim that is being 
considered for community conﬁnement, notifying the District Attomey’s Ofﬁce 
that prosecuted the individual and notifying the arresting law enforcement agency 
makes absolute sense. It is awkward when any of the aforementioned learns that 
the imnate is out on community conﬁnement when he or she is seen out in the 
community. Community conﬁnement is deﬁnitely a valuable option for inmates 
who are nearing the end of their sentence and are wanting to reintegrate back into 
the community. 
The Maine Sheriffs support Representative Doudera’s bill, LD 692, An Act 
Regarding Eligibility of County Jail Imnates for a Community Conﬁnement 
Monitoring Program. Additionally, the Maine Sheriffs ’ Association has been in 
contact with Representative Doudera about offering a friendly amendment to LD 
692. This amendment would add some verbiage to correct an issue regarding the 
authority of Corrections Ofﬁcers and Transports Ofﬁcers to utilize force to protect 
the inmates or prevent the escape of inmates once outside of the four Walls of the 
jail.~
In 2017, While reviewing our policies for law enforcement accreditation, We were 
asked how various job classiﬁcations derived their authority through state statute. 
We discovered that one of our job classiﬁcations, Transport Officer, which is 
deﬁned in state statute, did not have any corresponding authority to use force 
outside of the jail facility. In fact, certiﬁed corrections ofﬁcers have the authority 
to utilize force to protect inmates or themselves or to accomplish a lawful 
obligation while in the jail, but corrections ofﬁcers do not have the authority 
outside of the jail.i 
Each day, all 16 Sheriffs and MDOC have transport ofﬁcers shuttling or conveying 
inmates throughout the State of Maine. The lack of corrections ofﬁcers and 
transport ofﬁcers having the authority to utilize force outside of the jail places the 
corrections officer, transport ofﬁcer and the inmate in potential danger if 
something should happen. 
The attached language if added to state statute would fix the problem regarding the 
lack of authority by corrections officers and transport ofﬁcers, which is an issue 
lying in wait. This bill basically clears up an oversight in Maine Statute. 
Thank you and I hope that you will support LD 692, An Act Regarding Eligibility 
of County Jail Inmates for a Community Conﬁnement Monitoring Program and 
our request for a friendly amendment to add language to Title 14 and Title l7~A to 
clarify the authority of corrections ofﬁcers and transport ofﬁcers to utilize force if 
necessary to protect an inmate or prevent the escape of an inmate outside of the 
four walls of the correctional facility. 
I will be happy to answer any questions. 
Kevin Joyce, Sheriff 
Cumberland County
