April 10, 2023 
Good morning Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and honorable members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. My name is Mary Kamradt, I 
live in Rockport and I am a survivor of 35 years of domestic violence. As a representative of 
Finding Our Voices, I am here today to testify in support of LD 692. 
In 2015, my ex-husband set my home on ﬁre while I was in bed. I was injured, and my dog was 
killed. He was indicted for arson, attempted murder, and animal cruelty and released to await 
trial. During this time, my ex stalked me 24/7, coerced, and threatened me. He was arrested 
again, this time for witness intimidation. And once again he was released into the community 
pending trial. 
During this period of trauma, my victim advocate failed to communicate with me regarding 
hearings, plea deals, and even my victim impact statement. I found myself scrambling to obtain 
information about my case. I felt unseen and unimportant. My abuser was given a sweet plea 
bargain deal. He was sentenced to 22 months in prison, served only a year, and was released 
for “good behavior ’. 
After years of being terrorized by the person who vowed to love me, I was relieved when he 
went to prison because I knew he couldn't come after me to ﬁnish the job. But that sense of 
security vanished too soon. I live in constant fear for my safety and that of my family. It is my 
burden to make sure my address is confidential. It is my burden to try and scrub my personal 
information from the internet. And it is my burden to manage debilitating symptoms of PTSD 
while navigating my safety. 
Domestic abusers stalk and terrorize their victims. They perceive them as easy targets. And "Ll lis 
puts the community at risk. But victims are just as much a part of that community. They should 
be seen and heard. Because they know that If these cowards have no regard for their intimate 
partners or children (or pets), they certainly have no regard for anyone and thus, are 
“reasonably likely to pose a risk to the safety of others”. 
According to a Johns Hopkins study, 59.1% of mass shootings between 2014 and 2019 were 
DV-related and in 68.2% of mass shootings, the perpetrator either killed at least one partner or 
family member or had a history of DV.‘ 
I ask you to consider the voices of survivors here today, the safety of their families, and the 
community by passing this bill. Thank you. 
1 
Geller, L.B., Booty, M. & Crifasi, C.K. The role of domestic violence in fatal mass shootings in the United 
States, 2014-2019. Inj. Epidemiol. 8, 38 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40621-021-00330-0
