Hello Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. 
My name is Sandra Goulet from Casco, Maine.  I am a survivor of domestic violence.  
I am writing in support of LD 692 an Act Regarding Eligibility of County Jail Inmates for a Community 
Confinement Monitoring Program.  
I had a POA against Norman Strobel on July 5, 2016. He was in and out of jail due to continuous violations of 
the order. The fourth time, on Nov.19, 2016, he was let out of jail for "good behavior". I was notified 
approximately 15 minutes or less before he was released despite having no place to stay. Because of that and 
the fact that he constantly stalked and threatened me after each release, he should have been on a monitoring 
program. He contacted me relentlessly, even with the local police witnessing this. 
Shockingly I was only notified 15 minutes or less that he was being released. I didn't have any plans in place 
that day because of this early release and inadequate notification. I did scramble to ask a friend, during 
Thanksgiving holidays, to stay with her, which put her in danger as well.  A victim should not have to constantly 
look over their shoulder and I live in constant terror.  
Fast forward to Thanksgiving week, he broke into my home and stole my 2 dogs (11/23/16).  On Saturday Nov 
26, 2016, his behavior escalated further by trying to find me, arriving at my 2nd property 2 miles away. He saw 
my daughter's vehicle from Rhode Island, with her fiancé and decided to cause me pain by terrorizing killing 
her.   
He shot off 12 rounds from a 9mm gun through a window when he saw her. She flew to the floor and her fiancé 
(now husband) jumped on top of her, but not before taking 4 bullets through his back, causing major stomach 
and life- threatening injuries and more. Miraculously, he barely survived after incurring infections and 5 
surgeries in 3 wks. He presently still has medical, financial and psychological issues. This attack dramatically 
altered his life as well as my daughter and mine. Had I been there, I would be dead. During his tirade, 
unfortunately, he found an innocent and kind man who let him stay with him temporarily. He murdered this man 
on his way to finding me. He crouched across the river from my cottage watching and waiting to see me there. 
Evidence was collected there which highlight just how intent and angered he was which led to murder, 
attempted murder, stalking relentlessly and terrorizing me and those around me. It could have been avoided 
and de-escalated with time and monitoring. For an entire week, and with local police as a direct witness to his 
constant terrorizing me, I lived in constant fear. 
These abusers need to have restrictions for early release.  
There just can't be any choice for them or even for law enforcement officers to decide who poses risks or 
threats.! The offenders frequently repeat previous behaviors. In my case, he continued his threats and abuse 
after each release so he had a history. This type of abuser wants to be in control and WILL retaliate. 
My case is a perfect example. 
Coincidently, I have direct knowledge that they are using MY case as part of the DV/anger management class. 
It is important that domestic violence abuser receive a sentence which fits the crime. Shortened sentences for 
“good behavior” does not correspond to one who, seconds after release are already relentlessly pursuing their 
victim, will demonstrate that same “good behavior” they exhibited while being held. These reductions in a 
sentence and release back to the same people they were terrorizing puts everyone at risk. Especially when, as 
in my case, the abuser has repeatedly, after every release, continued the relentless pursuit of their victims, and 
even attacking the people associated with their victim or other innocent people. I urge you to think seriously, on 
what the dynamics of this bill would mean for this bill to go forward. The rights to enjoying a peaceful life are 
being violated by abusers who will stop at nothing to control.  
Thank you for your time, Respectfully,  
Sandra Goulet 
 
 
Sandra Goulet
Casco
LD 692
Hello Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and honorable members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety.
My name is Sandra Goulet from Casco, Maine.  I am a survivor of domestic violence. 
I am writing in support of LD 692 an Act Regarding Eligibility of County Jail Inmates
for a Community Confinement Monitoring Program. 
I had a POA against Norman Strobel on July 5, 2016. He was in and out of jail due to 
continuous violations of the order. The fourth time, on Nov.19, 2016, he was let out 
of jail for "good behavior". I was notified approximately 15 minutes or less before he 
was released despite having no place to stay. Because of that and the fact that he 
constantly stalked and threatened me after each release, he should have been on a 
monitoring program. He contacted me relentlessly, even with the local police 
witnessing this.
Shockingly I was only notified 15 minutes or less that he was being released. I didn't 
have any plans in place that day because of this early release and inadequate 
notification. I did scramble to ask a friend, during Thanksgiving holidays, to stay with
her, which put her in danger as well.  A victim should not have to constantly look 
over their shoulder and I live in constant terror. 
Fast forward to Thanksgiving week, he broke into my home and stole my 2 dogs 
(11/23/16).  On Saturday Nov 26, 2016, his behavior escalated further by trying to 
find me, arriving at my 2nd property 2 miles away. He saw my daughter's vehicle 
from Rhode Island, with her fiancé and decided to cause me pain by terrorizing killing
her.  
He shot off 12 rounds from a 9mm gun through a window when he saw her. She flew 
to the floor and her fiancé (now husband) jumped on top of her, but not before taking 
4 bullets through his back, causing major stomach and life- threatening injuries and 
more. Miraculously, he barely survived after incurring infections and 5 surgeries in 3 
wks. He presently still has medical, financial and psychological issues. This attack 
dramatically altered his life as well as my daughter and mine. Had I been there, I 
would be dead. During his tirade, unfortunately, he found an innocent and kind man 
who let him stay with him temporarily. He murdered this man on his way to finding 
me. He crouched across the river from my cottage watching and waiting to see me 
there. Evidence was collected there which highlight just how intent and angered he 
was which led to murder, attempted murder, stalking relentlessly and terrorizing me 
and those around me. It could have been avoided and de-escalated with time and 
monitoring. For an entire week, and with local police as a direct witness to his 
constant terrorizing me, I lived in constant fear.
These abusers need to have restrictions for early release. 
There just can't be any choice for them or even for law enforcement officers to decide 
who poses risks or threats.! The offenders frequently repeat previous behaviors. In my
case, he continued his threats and abuse after each release so he had a history. This 
type of abuser wants to be in control and WILL retaliate.
My case is a perfect example.
Coincidently, I have direct knowledge that they are using MY case as part of the 
DV/anger management class.
It is important that domestic violence abuser receive a sentence which fits the crime. 
Shortened sentences for “good behavior” does not correspond to one who, seconds 
after release are already relentlessly pursuing their victim, will demonstrate that same 
“good behavior” they exhibited while being held. These reductions in a sentence and 
release back to the same people they were terrorizing puts everyone at risk. Especially
when, as in my case, the abuser has repeatedly, after every release, continued the 
relentless pursuit of their victims, and even attacking the people associated with their 
victim or other innocent people. I urge you to think seriously, on what the dynamics 
of this bill would mean for this bill to go forward. The rights to enjoying a peaceful 
life are being violated by abusers who will stop at nothing to control. 
Thank you for your time, Respectfully, 
Sandra Goulet 

