Janet -p_ M5115 Maine Department of Health and Human Sernces 
Gavemnr Division of Licensing and Certiﬁcation 
H I 1. State House Station, 41 Anthony Ax enue 
Augusta, Maine 04333-0011 
Je=mne _ M_- Lambrew, Ph-ll ‘ 
Tel.: (207) zsv-9300; Toll Free: (800) 7914030 
Cﬂmmlsmner' 
TTY: our 111 (Maine Relay); Fax: (207) 287-4815 
Testimony of the Ofﬁce of Division of Licensing and Certiﬁcation 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services 
In Opposition to LD 1554, An Act to Repeal Certiﬁcate of Need Requirements for 
Health Care Providers 
April 27, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, my. name is Bill Montejo. I am the Director of the 
Division of Licensing and Certiﬁcation (DLC) for the Department of Health and Human Services. 
The Department is opposed to LD 1554, An Act to Repeal Certiﬁcate of Need Requirements for 
Health Care Providers, and we offer the Committee the following information for your 
consideration. 
Under current law, before introducing additional health care services and procedures in a market 
area, a person, corporation, or facility must apply for and receive a Certiﬁcate of Need (CON) 
from the Department of Health and Human Services. This bill seeks to eliminate that requirement. 
The CON process is a system of review of healthcare costs and needs review that seeks to ensure 
the applicant ’s proposal does not have a signiﬁcant negative impact on the MaineCare system and 
that there is sufﬁcient evidence of need to sustain the project being proposed. A person, 
corporation, or facility applies to the Department of Health and Human Services for review and 
approval of a proposed health care project prior to starting the proposed project and provides the 
Department with evidence to support the need for the project and the cost implications of the 
proposed project on the MaineCare system. The Department can approve that request, deny it, or 
approve it with conditions. The vast majority of CON applications are granted and at least 35 states 
have a CON law applying to at least some capital expenditures (according to the National 
Conference of State Legislaturesl). In Maine, not only are acute health care services covered by 
CON but also our Nursing Facilities and certain aspects of Residential Care Facilities. 
Maine’s CON laws were completely rewritten in 2004 and received a comprehensive update in 
2011. A key aspect of the CON program is an analysis of signiﬁcant healthcare expenditures to 
determine the impact on the MaineCare system as well as an external analysis of the proposed 
project to determine if there is sufﬁcient need for the proposed project to justify the expense and 
impact on the MaineCare system and the healthcare system in general. The unintended 
consequence of elimination of the CON process could be that health care facilities in close 
proximity to each other overextend ﬁnancially to acquire their own, very expensive, medical 
1 
NCSL. Certiﬁcate of need (CON) laws. Found at https://www.ncsl.org/health/certi ﬁcate-of~need-state-laws.'
equipment rather than work cooperatively to provide comprehensive healthcare services toa 
region. 
In the 130th Legislature, there were ﬁve bills to eliminate the CON in one way or another? None 
of these bills passed. 
DLC continues to be opposed to the elimination of the CON. I Want to thank you for your 
consideration of this bill. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have and will attend 
your Work Session if needed. 
2 LD 927 - An Act To Increase the Availability of Health Care Services by Eliminating the Certiﬁcate of Need for All Health 
Care Services; LD 931 - An Act To Increase Hospital Bed Capacity by Eliminating the Certiﬁcate of Need for Outside Hospital 
Beds; LD 932 -An Act To Increase Hospital Capacity by Eliminating the Certiﬁcate of Need for Hospital Beds; LD 935 - An Act 
To Increase the Ability of Health Care Facilities To Respond to Health Needs by Eliminating the Certiﬁcate of Need for Health 
Care Facilities; and LD 1004 - An Act To Ensure Access to Health Care Equipment by Eliminating the Certiﬁcate of Need for 
Major Medical Equipment.i-
