 
Testimony on Behalf of the Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United 
Before the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
 
In OPPOSITION to LD 1554 , An Act to Repeal Certificate of Need Requirements for 
Health Care Providers   
 
Thursday, April 27, 2023 1:00 PM, Cross Building, Room 220   
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services:  
 
My name is Coralie Giles. I am a registered nurse, President of the Maine State Nurses 
Association, Vice -President of National Nurses United, and a resident of Brewer.  The 
Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses Organizing Committee/National 
Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), representing 4,000 nurses and caregivers across the state 
of Maine , offers this testimony  in opposition to LD 1 554 and respectfully asks for your 
“No” vote .  
 
Strong certificate of need laws support effective health care planning  and access to cost-
effective services . For example, certificate of need laws limit corporations’ ability to 
selectively target only the most -profitable patient groups , such as those covered by 
private insurance,  leaving other health care facilities to cover uninsured pa tients and 
those with public insurance. Similarly, certificate of need laws limit corporations’ ability 
to siphon off profitable service lines from hospitals that provide a variety services. For 
example, corporations may attempt to siphon off lucrative ort hopedic surgeries or 
cardiac procedures by opening ambulatory surgery centers or specialty hospitals.  
 
For these reasons, MSNA/NNU opposes LD 1554 and asks for your “No”  vote.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Coralie Giles, RN  
President, Maine State Nurses Association  
Vice -President, National Nurses United  

Coralie Giles
Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United
LD 1554
Testimony on Behalf of the Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United 
Before the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services
In OPPOSITION to LD 1554, An Act to Repeal Certificate of Need Requirements for
Health Care Providers
Thursday, April 27, 2023 1:00 PM, Cross Building, Room 220
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Committee on
Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services:
My name is Coralie Giles. I am a registered nurse, President of the Maine State 
Nurses Association, Vice-President of National Nurses United, and a resident of 
Brewer. The Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses Organizing 
Committee/National Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), representing 4,000 nurses and 
caregivers across the state of Maine, offers this testimony in opposition to LD 1554 
and respectfully asks for your “No” vote.
Strong certificate of need laws support effective health care planning and access to 
cost-effective services. For example, certificate of need laws limit corporations’ 
ability to selectively target only the most-profitable patient groups, such as those 
covered by private insurance, leaving other health care facilities to cover uninsured 
patients and those with public insurance. Similarly, certificate of need laws limit 
corporations’ ability to siphon off profitable service lines from hospitals that provide 
a variety services. For example, corporations may attempt to siphon off lucrative 
orthopedic surgeries or cardiac procedures by opening ambulatory surgery centers or 
specialty hospitals.
For these reasons, MSNA/NNU opposes LD 1554 and asks for your “No” vote.
Sincerely,
Coralie Giles, RN
President, Maine State Nurses Association
