 
 
 
 
Testimony of Jai mie Cavanaugh in support of LD 1554  
Attorney, Institute for Justice  
Joint Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
May 1, 2 023 
 
Dear Chair  Bailey, Chair Perry , and Members of the C ommittee:   
 
My name is Jaimie Cavanaugh and I’m an attorney with the Institute for Justice . I’m submitting 
this testimony  in support of LD 1554.  
 
The Institute for Justice  (IJ) is a nonprofit , civil rights law firm dedicated to securing the 
foundations of a f ree society , which a llow all Americans to pur sue their dreams. As part of its 
mission, IJ  has represented healthcare entrepreneurs  who would like to offer innovative or low er-
cost alternatives  to available services  but are stymied by certificate of need (CON) laws. For 
example, IJ sued Kentucky when it denied two immigrant  entrepreneurs  the opportunity to open 
a modest home health agenc y to offer language -appropriate care to the aging Nepali -speaking 
community in the Louisville area.1 And IJ currently represent s an ophthalmologist  who want s to 
offer s afe surge ries from his offic e.2 Unfortunately , because  the doctor has been unable to get a  
CON to use his own surgery center, he has  been forced to perform surgeries at the local hospital , 
which adds thousands of dollars to the cost for  his patients.  
 
Aside from litigating the con stitutionality of CON laws, IJ also research es these laws. In 2020, I 
put together a comprehensive survey  of CON laws from across the country and reported on how 
states adjusted their CON laws in response to t he pandemic.3 
 
The pandemic laid bare the existing problems with CON laws . If CON laws actually created 
greater access to healthcare, as proponents argue, states would  have needed more  CON laws 
during the pandemic. But the exact opposite was true. Most states with CON  programs in place  
were forced to quickly suspend their programs  to allow hospitals to add beds and services , 
including Maine. Maine resorted to using emergency regulations, which required hospitals to 
apply for an emergency waiver to add beds or equipment during the pandemic. While some laud 
these rules as  adequate given the circumstances , others might question why hos pitals were forced 
to waste time with this paperwork at all during a healthcare emergency.  
 
 
1 See https://ij.org/case/kentucky -con/. 
2 See https://ij.org/case/north -carolina -con-ii/. 
3 See Cavanaugh, et al. , Conning the Competition: A Nationwide Survey of Certificate of 
Need Laws  (Aug. 2020 ) available at https://ij.org/report/conning -the-competition/#:~:text=  
A%20Certificate%20Of%20Need%20(CON,best%20to%20keep%20others%20out.  
Page 2 of 4 And th is problem wasn’t limited to covid. As cases of RSV soared last fall, hospitals around the 
country filled up again and  healthcare providers  need ed flexibility to respond to their patients’ 
needs in real time.4 This illustrates why doctors and patients, not bureaucrats, s hould decide 
when care is needed. Instead of waiting for the next emergency, you should  take this opportunity 
to support CON repeal  now.  
 
Another key finding from my report is  that CON laws decrease access to healthcare in rural 
areas .5 Alabama,6 Oregon7, Tennessee ,8 and W ashington9 are states with CON laws, however, 
they all exclud e rural areas from their CON programs , presumably to encourage hospitals  and 
other healthcare facilities to expand into rural areas.  Florida also excluded rural areas from its 
CON program  before it rep ealed the bu lk of its CON laws in 2019.  
 
Moreover , some of the country’s most rural states have no CON laws at all. States like Idaho, 
North Dakota, South Dakota , and Wyoming  don’t burden their healthcare providers with CON 
laws. And rural states like Colorado, Utah, and Wyo ming  haven’t had a single rural hospital 
closure since at le ast 2005 and n one of these  states have  a CON program.10 So it can’t be that 
CON is necessary to preserve healthcare facilities in rural areas. Just the opposite, repealing  
CON will encourage expansion of  facilities and services around th e state.   
 
Many n on-CON states are the same as Maine. Some argue that non -CON states are different . 
In fact, I hear this argument in every state  that is considering CON repeal: “We need CON here 
because we’re different. ” But all kinds of states ha ve functioning h ealthcare systems without  
CON laws . Nearly 40% of the nation ’s population live in a state without CON laws . If you ’re 
looking for a fellow democratic ally-controlled  state, Cali fornia is a non -CON state. If you ’re 
looking for rural states, states like Idaho , Utah, and  Wyoming have no CON laws. Maine ’s only 
neighboring state,  and fe llow northeastern state,  New Ha mpshire, also ha s no CON laws. New 
Ham pshire re pealed its CON program in 2016. And many state s that main tain CON programs, 
 
4 Hanna MacKay, Two Michigan hospitals  to add more b eds on emergency basis amid RSV 
surge , The Detroit News  (Nov. 23, 2022)  available at https://www.detroitnews.com/story/news  
/local/michigan/2022/11/23/two -hospitals -add-more -beds-on-emergency -basis -amid -rsv-
surge/69674623007/ ; Susan K. Livio, After holiday surge, N. J. pediatric hospital beds were 70% 
full with RSV, flu and C OVID cases , NJ.com (Dec. 8, 2022) available  at 
https://www.nj.com/healthfit/2022/12/after -holiday -surge -nj-pediatric -hospital -beds-were -70-
full-with-rsv-flu-and-covid -cases.html .  
5 Thomas Stratmann,  et al. , Public Health in Rural States: The Case against Certificate -of-
Need Laws , Mercatus Center George Mason University (Sept. 2020) attached hereto as Exhibi t 
A.  
6 See Ala. Code § 22-21-263(a)(4)  
7 See Or. Rev. Stat. §§ 442.315(b), 442.347  
8 See Tenn. Code § 68 -11-1626  
9 See Wash. Admin. Code § 246-310-042(1) 
10 See Map attached hereto as Exhibit B. 
Page 3 of 4 do so  in very few categories. For example, Indiana, Ohio, and Montana  only apply their CON 
laws to nursing homes /long -term care . Arizon a only has CON for ambulances . These examples 
should make you feel confident that Maine c an successfully repeal its CON laws.  
 
The research is not mixed; CON laws increase price, decrease quality, and decrease access 
to healthcare. Proponents of CON laws try to argue tha t the research on CON laws i s mixed  or 
inconc lusive. This is untrue. R eview of the bulk of peer-reviewed literatur e on CON paints a 
clear picture. CON law s do not achieve  any of their pur ported benefits. Quite the opposite , CON 
laws increase the cost of healthcare, both to government payor s and to patients, decrease the 
quality of services, and decreas e access to healthcare. In a study commissioned to aid the South 
Carolina legislature in considering CON repeal  there , PH.D. economist , Matt Mitchell , reviewed 
over 90 peer -reviewed papers that studied  CON  laws and their effects .11 He found that ten times 
as many stud ies concluded that CON is associated with higher costs. Only t wo studies found that  
CON increases a ccess to care, while 33 found that CON limits access to care. Four times as 
many studies found that CON undermines the quality of care. And CON has not been shown to 
increase the amount of charity care  that hospitals offer . Any researcher would tell you that these 
are not mixed results. The trend in the research is  clear. CON laws are all downside.  
 
Many agencies of the federal government agree that  states should repeal CON laws. These 
agencies include: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services  (HHS) , U.S. Department of 
the Treasury  (DOT) , U.S.  Department of  Labor  (DOL), Federal Trade Commission  (FTC) , and 
the Department of Justice  (DOJ) , Antitrust Division . In a 2018 report, HHS, DOT, and DOL 
concluded that “[s]tudies have found no empirical eviden ce that CON laws have restricted  ‘over-
investment. ’ However, CON laws can restrict investments that would benefit consumers and 
lower costs in the long term and are likely to increase, rather than constra in, healthcare cost s.”12 
The FTC and DOJ have been uniform in their criticism of CON 13for decades  and have offered 
testimony in support of states ’ efforts to repeal CON .14 Even Congress  admitted that  CON laws 
 
11 Matthew D. Mitchell, PH.D., South Carolina ’s Certificate of Need P rogram:  A 
Comprehensive Review of the Literature  (Mar. 2022)  availab le at 
https://palmettopromise.org/wp -content/u ploads/2022/04/2022_Response -to-SC-LAC -report -
PRINTED.pdf . Attached hereto as Exhibit C.  
12 U.S. Dep’t of Health and Human Servs., U.S. Dep ’t of the Treasury, U.S. Dep ’t of Labor, 
Reforming America ’s Healthcare System Through Choice and Competition , 50 – 57 (2018)  
available at https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default  
/files/Reforming -Americas -Healthcare -System -Through -Choice -and-Competition.pdf  
13 Fed. Trade Comm ’n, Dep ’t of Justice, Improving Health Care: A Dose o f Competitio n 
(July 2004) available a t https://www.ftc.gov/reports/improving -health -care-dose-competition -
report -federal -trade -commission -department -justice . 
14 See e.g. , Joint Statement of the Federal Trade Commis sion and the Antitrust Division of 
the U.S . Department of Justice Regarding  Certificate -of-Need Laws and Alaska Senate Bill 62, 
Which Would Repeal A laska ’s CON Program (Apr. 12, 2017)  available at  
https://www.ftc.gov/legal -library/browse/advocacy -filings/joint -statement -federal -trade -
commission -antitrust -division -us-department -justice -regarding ; Joint Statement of the Federal 
Page 4 of 4 failed  to achieve  their purpose by repealing t he legislation that forced states to adopt C ON laws 
in the first place.15 
 
State government ha s noticed th e problems with CON too.  For example,  North Carolina 
Treasurer, Dale Folwell, recently submitted a  friend of the court brief in support of IJ’s 
constitutional challenge to North Carolina ’s certificate  of need law s.16 Treasurer Folwell  noted 
that rising healthcare costs posed a challenge to maintain ing the solvency of the state ’s Teacher 
and State Empl oyers Health Plan, which is funded in part by taxpayers. Rep ealing CON would 
decrease healthcare costs for the P lan, which had almost $4 billion in expenditures in 2022.  
 
Treasurer Folwell explained:  
 
CON laws contribute to consolidated healthcare monopolies . . . by distorting 
market power in favor of large institutional hospitals. T his illegal distortion of 
market power th en results in higher prices, lower quality, and less availabili ty of 
healthcare  services. In turn, large institutional hospitals create incredible excess 
revenue while failing to earn their tax -exempt status through the provision of 
charity care and engage in business pract ices harmful to North Carolinians . 
 
The same problems exist in Maine . Repealing CON is one way to begin correcting them. 
Repealing CON is the right thing to do for voters who are both users of the healthcare system 
and taxpa yers.  
 
Thank you for considering my testimony. I urge yo ur support for LD 1554  and I ’d be happy to 
answer  follow up questions or further assist the Committ ee in an y way.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Jaimie Cavanaugh  
Attorney  
Institute for Justice  
jcavanaugh@ij.org  
248-895-1555  
 
Trade Commission and the Ant itrust Division of the U.S. Department of Justice on Certificate -
of-Need Laws and South Carolina House Bill 3250 (J an. 11, 2016) available at 
https://www.ftc.gov/leg al-library/browse/advocacy -filings/joint -statement -federal -trade -
commission -antitrust -division -us-department -justice -regarding . 
15 Pub. L. 93 -641, 88 Stat. 2225 (1975) (codified at 42 U.S.C. §§ 300k – 300n -5), repealed, 
Pub. L. 99 -660, § 701 , 100 Stat. 3799 (1986).  
16 Attached hereto as Exhibit D.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT A 
POLICY BRIEF
Public Health in Rural States: The Case against 
Certificate-of-Need Laws
Thomas Stratmann, Matthew C. Baker, and Elise Amez-Droz
September 2020
CERTIFICATE-OF-NEED LAWS ARTIFICIALLY RESTRICT PROVIDERS OF CARE IN 
RURAL AREAS
Despite the advances of medicine of the past few decades, individuals in rural communities con -
tinue to face barriers to access to healthcare. While hospital consolidation and provider shortages 
present real challenges, an underrated barrier to access to care stems from legacy laws that were 
implemented almost 50 years ago: certificate-of-need (CON) laws. These laws exist in 37 states 
(including 12 of the country’s 20 rural states) and put up artificial barriers to the provision of care 
by allowing regulators to decide whether new services are needed in a given geographic area. In 
practice, healthcare industry incumbents are heavily influential in the process and tend to block 
potential competitors from entering local markets. A new study by the Mercatus Center at George 
Mason University controls for social risk factors including race, education, and poverty status and 
finds that CON laws are associated with higher readmission rates and more emergency depart -
ment (ED) visits among Medicare beneficiaries in rural areas.1 CON laws in rural states are also 
associated with hundreds of dollars of additional expenditures and higher ambulance spending 
per Medicare beneficiary.
CON LAWS DO NOT ACHIEVE THEIR GOAL
Since CON laws were first implemented, research has shown that they have never achieved 
their intended purpose of reducing or controlling healthcare spending.2 State governments, 
with the help of local industry leaders, were to determine whether a new service was necessary 
3434 Washington Blvd., 4th Floor, Arlington, VA, 22201 • 703-993-4930 • www.mercatus.org
The views presented in this document do not represent official positions of the Mercatus Center or George Mason University.
2
MERCATUS CENTER AT GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITYto meet the needs of the population, with the objective being to limit the number of available 
healthcare services to prevent overutilization. The federal government encouraged such efforts 
in the early 1970s by giving states subsidies for setting up CON laws. It did not take long for 
policymakers to realize that CON laws were not achieving their goal, and in 1986, the federal 
government removed the corresponding financial incentives.3 Several states repealed their CON 
laws, but many did not. Today, 37 states have a CON program that applies to anywhere from 1 
to 29 healthcare devices, facilities, and services.4 Studies confirm what economic theory makes 
clear: all else being equal, restrictions on supply lead to increases in cost. Not only have CON 
laws backfired, but now ample evidence shows that CON laws have resulted in unintended side 
effects such as lower healthcare quality and restricted access to needed services, especially in 
rural states and counties.
RURAL STATES WITH CON LAWS FARE WORSE
The earlier-mentioned Mercatus Center study focuses on the country’s 20 rural states, 12 of which 
currently have CON laws.
These states have varying socioeconomic characteristics that are associated with poor health out -
comes. Still, when the researchers control for age, race, poverty status, and education, rural states 
with CON laws fare worse both in terms of health outcomes and healthcare spending than their 
non-CON counterparts (see figure 1).
Before controlling for the earlier-mentioned socioeconomic variables, CON states are associated 
with higher spending per Medicare beneficiary and higher readmission rates, more ED visits per 
1,000 beneficiaries, and higher ambulance spending. The disparities remain when including those 
controls: CON rural states spend $295 more per Medicare beneficiary and have 1.2 percentage point RURAL STATES WITH CON LAWS  
AS OF DECEMBER 31, 2015
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
Iowa
Maine
Mississippi
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
Oklahoma
Oregon
VermontRURAL STATES THAT HAVE  
REPEALED THEIR CON LAWS
Colorado
Idaho
Kansas
New Mexico
North Dakota
South Dakota
Utah
Wyoming
3
MERCATUS CENTER AT GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITYhigher readmission rates, 35.1 more ED visits per 1,000 beneficiaries, and $2.54 higher ambulance 
spending per beneficiary than do non-CON rural states. These are common metrics of potentially 
preventable—and often wasteful—spending, often linked to limited access to care that could have 
better managed chronic conditions and prevented the need for acute care.
Far from helping states save money and provide much-needed services to Medicare beneficiaries, 
CON laws have the opposite effect in rural areas and lead to worse outcomes than in states that do 
not have CON restrictions. States that wish to direct dollars toward high-value care and enhance 
clinical outcomes should consider pursuing some of the following reforms.
STATES CAN SOLVE THE PROBLEM, AND THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT CAN HELP
The most straightforward and effective way of simultaneously improving health outcomes and 
reducing healthcare spending is for rural states to repeal CON laws. Attempts to do so have often 
been met with fierce political opposition, however, as incumbent hospitals and service providers act 
as powerful special interests. Therefore, we propose other pathways to gradually repeal CON laws.
Partial Repeal of the Most Harmful CON Laws
CON states often have CON requirements for various types of procedures and services. Legisla -
tors should consider the full list of CON requirements in their state and determine which ones Figure 1.  Disadvantage for States with Certificate-of-Need Laws in Key Medicare Spending and 
Outcome Measures, 2015
0 10 20 30 40 50
ambulance events
per be neﬁciary
ambulance cost per beneﬁciary
emergency department
visits per beneﬁciary
hospital readmission rate
Medicare spending
per be neﬁciarydiﬀerence betw een C ON and 
non-C ON rur al states (per centage)
Note: The CON state disadvantage is the difference in means between rural CON states and rural non-CON states for each measure.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, “Public Use File” (dataset), Medicare Geographic Variation, 
2016, https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Medicare-Geographic-Variation/GV_PUF.
4
MERCATUS CENTER AT GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITYimpose the heaviest burden on the state’s residents.5 For example, some CON laws are more likely 
to affect vulnerable patients, such as CON laws for drug and alcohol abuse treatment centers 
(found in 24 states), CON laws for psychiatric care facilities (found in 28 states), and CON laws 
for intermediate-care facilities for those with intellectual disabilities (found in 28 states). Certain 
CON requirements apply to services that are unlikely to be overprescribed, which means that those 
who seek to provide such services are not looking to build unnecessary capacity that will drive 
up costs. Examples include CON laws for neonatal intensive care units (found in 22 states), CON 
laws for burn care units (found in 14 states), and CON laws for hospice care facilities (found in 18 
states). On similar grounds, other types of CON laws to consider removing are those that apply to 
inexpensive procedures and small investments, such as home healthcare services.6
Phased Repeal through Sunset Clauses, Contingent Action, or Increases in Approval Rates
When immediate repeal is infeasible, CON law repeal can be spread over time via different policy 
strategies: sunset clauses, or automatic phase-out timelines, can be included in bills so that CON 
laws eventually expire. Three rural states, Idaho, Kansas, and Wyoming, added sunset clauses 
to their CON laws when the federal government removed its incentives for states in the late 
1970s, and their CON programs subsequently expired. In 2012, New Hampshire approved a sunset 
effective 2015. Similarly, a CON state could make its CON laws contingent on policy decisions in 
neighboring states, so that its CON laws would go away should a neighboring state eliminate its 
CON laws also. Another route would be for states to mandate that CON boards approve a steadily 
growing share of CON applications, culminating with the approval of all applications, effectively 
amounting to a CON law repeal.7
Administrative Relief for CON Applicants
If the earlier-mentioned forms of repeal are infeasible, states with CON laws can make the pro -
cess of obtaining a CON less onerous by reducing fees and simplifying reporting criteria. They can 
also improve applicants’ odds of success by removing certain criteria, including nonduplication, 
utilization thresholds, and geographic requirements.8
Increased Transparency in the Approval Process
Applicants face a number of uncertainties when seeking a CON, including uncertainties regarding 
the amount of time the process will take and the total costs thereof. The outcome of the process 
may also be influenced by incumbents’ efforts to challenge the application and by potential finan -
cial ties of CON board members to incumbent businesses. Transparency on all these fronts would 
minimize uncertainty and help applicants maximize their odds of approval.9
5
MERCATUS CENTER AT GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITYCenters for Medicare and Medicaid Services Can Support Rural States’ Efforts
Through the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation, the Centers for Medicare and Medic -
aid Services has shown support for innovation in the delivery of high-quality healthcare services 
to Medicaid and Medicare beneficiaries. The presence of CON laws limits the number of services 
available to individuals in rural communities. Additionally, it also prevents providers from devel -
oping innovative services for patients by putting up high, artificial barriers to the provision of 
care. If spending differences are caused by CON laws, then the Centers for Medicare and Medic -
aid Services could reduce payments in states that have CON laws to give them incentives to scale 
down requirements.10
CONCLUSION
Although the negative effects of CON laws have been well-known for decades, new evidence about 
their elevated effect on rural states adds urgency to the need to remove restraints on providers 
in areas with poor health outcomes and high healthcare spending. At stake for residents of rural 
areas is not only their contribution to healthcare spending but also their health and livelihood.
This policy brief summarizes a variety of options for policymakers wishing to remove regulatory 
barriers to the care on which rural residents depend—primarily suggesting a full repeal of CON 
laws but, in recognition of legislative and political hurdles, offering feasible alternative fixes.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Thomas Stratmann is a senior research fellow at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University 
and professor of economics and law at George Mason University. His primary research interests are 
political economy, fiscal policy, law and economics, health economics, and experimental economics.
Matthew C. Baker is a PhD candidate at George Mason University and has worked for a hospital 
association as a health policy researcher for more than seven years. Matt currently holds an MS 
in agricultural and applied economics from Virginia Tech. His research areas include healthcare 
economics, healthcare quality measurement, and healthcare finance, especially Medicare pay -
ment policy.
Elise Amez-Droz is the manager of the Open Health project at the Mercatus Center at George 
Mason University. Previously, she has worked as a market research analyst for a startup company in 
the pharmaceutical industry. She is a graduate of the Fuqua School of Business at Duke University.
6
MERCATUS CENTER AT GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITYNOTES
1. Thomas Stratmann and Matthew Baker, “Examining Certificate-of-Need Laws in the Context of the Rural Health Crisis” 
(Mercatus Working Paper, Mercatus Center at George Mason University, Arlington, VA, July 2020).
2. Thomas Stratmann et al., “Certificate-of-Need Laws: Frequently Asked Questions,” Mercatus Center at George Mason 
University, August 29, 2017, https:/ /www.mercatus.org/publications/corporate-welfare/certificate-need-laws-frequently  
-asked-questions.
3. Matthew D. Mitchell and Elise Amez-Droz, “How Certificate-of-Need Reform Can Increase Access to Higher-Quality, 
Lower-Cost Healthcare in Vermont” (Mercatus Policy Brief, Mercatus Center at George Mason University, Arlington, VA, 
February 2019).
4. Stratmann and Baker, “Examining Certificate-of-Need Laws.”
5. Thomas Stratmann et al., “Certificate-of-Need Laws: How CON Laws Affect Spending, Access, and Quality across the 
States,” Mercatus Center at George Mason University, August 29, 2017, https:/ /www.mercatus.org/publications/corporate  
-welfare/certificate-need-laws-how-con-laws-affect-spending-access-and-quality.
6. Matthew D. Mitchell, Elise Amez-Droz, and Anna K. Parsons, “Phasing Out Certificate-of-Need Laws: A Menu of Options” 
(Mercatus Policy Brief, Mercatus Center at George Mason University, Arlington, VA, February 2020).
7. Mitchell, Amez-Droz, and Parsons, “Phasing Out Certificate-of-Need Laws.”
8. Mitchell, Amez-Droz, and Parsons.
9. Mitchell, Amez-Droz, and Parsons.
10. Mitchell, Amez-Droz, and Parsons.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT B 
Exhibit A   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT C 
SOUTH CAROLINA’S 
CERTIFICATE OF  
NEED PROGRAM:  
A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW  
OF THE LITERATURE
MATTHEW D. MITCHELL, PH.D.
DIRECTOR & SENIOR RESEARCH FELLOW
EQUAL LIBERTY INITIATIVE
MERCATUS CENTER AT GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY
MARCH 2022
Additional resources: palmettopromise.org
P.O. Box 12676 Columbia, SC 29211 | 803-708-0673

research conclusions about 
certificate of need
The research is conclusive. CON fails to achieve all of the reasons for its existence in the 
first place…executive summary
DOES CON PROMOTE HIGH QUALITY ? 
No. Nearly four times as many studies 
find that CON undermines quality of 
care than find that it enhances the 
quality of care.
 see pages 9-10DOES CON ENSURE MORE CHARITY  
CARE? 
No. Recent (2021) Johns Hopkins study 
is freshest evidence.DOES CON ENSURE ADEQUATE SUPPLY ? 
ENSURE RURAL ACCESS? ENCOURAGE 
ASCSs, MRIs?  
No. Just 2 studies find that CON 
increases access to care while 33 find 
that it limits access.
 see pages 8-9DOES CON RESTRAIN COST ? 
No. Overwhelming number of studies 
confirm. Ten times as many studies 
find that CON is associated with higher  
costs than find it is associated with 
lower  costs.
 see pages 7-8
3
palmettopromise.orgAbout four in ten Americans live in states with limited or no certificate of need 
requirements in health care. For several decades now, researchers have examined 
cost, access, and quality outcomes in these non-CON states, comparing them with 
outcomes in CON states. They have also studied changes in outcomes in states 
that have eased or eliminated their CON programs. A complete reading of this 
literature suggests that CON laws fail to achieve their stated goals. In fact, they 
likely undermine these goals by raising costs, limiting access, and diminishing the 
quality of care.
• Ten times as many studies find that CON is associated with higher costs than 
find it is associated with lower costs. 
• Just two studies find that CON increases access to care while 33 find that it 
limits access. 
• Nearly four  times as many studies find that CON undermines quality of care 
than find that it enhances the quality of care.  
— Matthew D. Mitchell, PhDIntroduction
4
palmettopromise.org
5
palmettopromise.orgTable of Contents
I. LAC Findings Regarding South Carolina’s CON Program............................7
II. The Broader CON Literature ...................................................................................7
A. Papers Assessing the Effect of CON on Costs and Efficiency...............7
Figure 1. Summarizing the CON and Cost Literature...........................................8
B. Papers Assessing the Effect of CON on Access to Care .........................8
Figure 2. Summarizing the CON and Access Literature......................................9
C. Papers Assessing the Effect of CON on the Quality of Care..................9
Figure 3. Summarizing the CON and Quality of Care Literature.................10
III. Summary and Conclusion....................................................................................10
IV. Appendix.....................................................................................................................11
Table 1. Studies Assessing the Effect of CON on Spending Per Service 
(Costs, Prices, Charges, or Reimbursements).. .............................. ...........................11
Table 2. Studies Assessing the Effect of CON on Spending Per Person 
(Per Patient or Per Capita) ........................ ........................ ........................ .......................... 17
Table 3. Studies Assessing the Effect of CON on Efficiency ............................ 22
Table 4. Studies Assessing the Effect of CON on Investment ....................... 25
Table 5. Studies Assessing the Effect of CON the Availability of and  
Access to Services ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ ................... 26
Table 6. Studies Assessing the Effect of CON on Volume ................................ 41
Table 7. Studies Assessing the Effect of CON on Quality of Care ...............52
V. Endnotes.....................................................................................................................69
6
palmettopromise.org
7
palmettopromise.orgI. LAC Findings Regarding South  
Carolina’s CON Program
Members of the South Carolina General Assembly recently asked the state’s Legislative Audit Council 
(LAC) to review South Carolina’s Certificate of Need (CON) program. In response, the LAC produced 
a report titled “A Review of the S.C. Department of Health and Environmental Control Certificate of 
Need Program.” The report offers a helpful and detailed look at a Certificate of Need program using 
information that only an agency like the LAC has access to. It also offers a short and incomplete review 
of the voluminous literature on CON, accounting for about one-fifth of the extant literature. While the 
19 articles reviewed by the LAC may give a somewhat mixed impression of the regulation, a complete 
reading of the literature does not. 
I commend the LAC for their detailed and helpful analysis of the South Carolina CON program. Among 
other findings, the LAC staff found that the state’s CON program limits and delays the introduction of 
new services. For example, they found that the “CON process is greatly lengthened due to appeals to 
the Administrative Law Court (ALC) and courts of appeal. Additionally, we found that the CON process 
has deterred some providers from expanding services.”1 More specifically, they report that “appeals can 
extend the length of time of the CON application process by more than a year.”2 For example, they 
report that the average number of days between a CON decision and an ALC decision on ambulato -
ry surgery facilities is 396 while the number of days between a CON decision and an ALC decision on 
emergency departments is 675.3
The LAC found that most CON decisions in the state are not opposed. However, it also appears that op -
position by incumbent providers is typically sufficient to kill a project. Among those applications that 
were approved, only 16% were opposed by incumbent competitors, while among those that were de -
nied, fully 78%  were opposed by competitors.4 The LAC reports that “In one case, providers contesting 
the construction of an acute care hospital in Fort Mill exhausted their appeals in February 2019 —nearly 
13 years after DHEC issued a decision on the CON applications in 2006 . During that time, the popula -
tions of Fort Mill and nearby Tega Cay increased by 105% .”5
Regarding the role of incumbent providers, the LAC noted that: 
A DHEC official explained the largest number of complaints about the CON program 
stem from the appeals’ timeline, and that the extended timeline is often a result of pro -
viders seeking to delay or stymie competition. Another DHEC official clarified most ap -
peals litigation involved an approved project that another provider is challenging, and 
that it is generally existing providers challenging the decision to approve a new CON.6 
 
II. The Broader CON Literature 
I have identified and read 93 peer-reviewed papers assessing the effects of CON laws on cost, access, 
quality, and other market conditions.7 These papers compare outcomes in CON states with those in 
non-CON states. They also track outcomes over time to see what happens in states that repeal their 
CON laws or pare those laws back. These studies typically include observations spanning years, if not 
decades, and they employ regression analyses that control for possibly confounding factors such as 
local economic, demographic, and health conditions. Although my colleagues at the Mercatus Center 
and I have conducted several peer-reviewed studies, most of these papers are not authored by us.
8
palmettopromise.orgThe most common assessments in the literature address the effects of CON on cost, access, and qual -
ity. As I will show below, most studies find that CON raises costs and limits access to care. Moreover, 
four times as many studies find CON undermines quality than find that it enhances quality.   
A. PAPERS ASSESSING THE EFFECT OF CON ON COSTS  
AND EFFICIENCY
CON laws were initially intended to rein in healthcare spending,8 and many people continue to sup -
port the regulations out of a belief that they reduce costs. There is little evidence that they do. Figure 1 
presents an overview of the CON and cost literature. Of 40 tests designed to assess the effect of CON 
on costs, just two find that the regulation is associated with reduced costs. Ten times as many tests— 21 
studies—find that CON is associated with higher spending or lower efficiency. While 17 studies reach 
mixed, insignificant, or inclusive results.  
Studies measure costs and efficiency in different ways and it is helpful to present them in separate cat -
egories. Table 1 (see Appendix) summarizes the papers that assess the effect of CON on spending per 
service. Seven  papers find CON is associated with higher spending per service. Six find mixed results. 
Zero  papers conclude CON is clearly associated with lower spending per service. 
Table I shows, for example, that reimbursement costs for coronary artery bypass grafts fell 2.8 percent 
in Ohio and 8.8 percent in Pennsylvania following repeal.9 Hospital charges are 5.5 percent lower in 
repealing states five years after repeal.10 Medicare reimbursements for total knee arthroplasty are 5 to 
10 percent lower in non-CON states than in CON states.11 Spinal surgery reimbursements fell faster in 
non-CON than in CON states (about 11 percent per year.12)  
Among the negligible results shown in table 1, CON appears to have no effect on Medicaid nursing 
home reimbursement rates.13 Nor does it seem to affect per diem Medicaid nursing home charges or 
per diem Medicaid long-term care charges.14 
Table 2 summarizes the papers that assess the effect of CON on spending per person. Eleven  papers 
find CON is associated with higher spending per person. Seven  find mixed results. Zero  papers con -
clude that CON is clearly associated with lower spending per person. 
Table 2 shows that Medicaid community-based care expenditures per capita are higher in CON than in non-
CON states.15 Hospital expenditures per adjusted admission are higher in CON than in non-CON states.16 And 
states that eliminate CON experience  5 percent reductions in real per capita health care spending.17 
Table 3 summarizes the papers that assess the effect of CON on efficiency. Two  find that CON is associ -
ated with reduced efficiency, two find it is associated with enhanced efficiency, and three  find mixed 
results. Finally, table 4 summarizes the papers that assess the effect of CON on investment. One  finds 
that CON is associated with more investment and the other reaches mixed conclusions.  
FIGURE 1. SUMMARIZING THE CON AND COST LITERATURE
Papers ﬁnding CON raises costs (21)
Papers ﬁnding CON either has mixed, insigniﬁcant, 
or statistically negligible efffects on costs (17)
Papers ﬁnding CON lowers costs (2)43%52%5%
9
palmettopromise.orgB. PAPERS ASSESSING THE EFFECT OF CON ON ACCESS TO CARE
Figure 2 summarizes the literature assessing the effect of CON on access. Among 45 tests, a large ma -
jority— 73 percent—find that CON is associated with diminished access to care. Ten studies— 22 percent—
find mixed or inconclusive results. And two studies associate CON with greater access to care. 
The typical patient in a CON state has access to fewer hospitals,18 hospice care facilities,19 dialysis clin -
ics,20 cancer treatment facilities,21 home health agencies,22 psychiatric care facilities,23 drug and sub -
stance abuse centers,24 open-heart surgery programs,25 revascularization programs,26 and percutaneous 
coronary intervention programs.27 Patients in these states have access to fewer hospital beds and are 
more likely to have been denied beds during the COVID-19 pandemic.28 These patients have access 
to fewer medical imaging devices.29 Patients in states with CON laws must travel longer distances for 
care,30 are more likely to leave their state for care,31 and must wait longer for care.32 And whereas CON 
programs do not seem to increase charity care,33 they do exacerbate Black-White disparities in the pro -
vision of care.34
FIGURE 2. SUMMARIZING THE CON AND ACCESS LITERATURE
There are two broad ways that the literature assesses the effect of CON on access to care. Some stud -
ies look at the effect of CON on the availability of services. These studies look to see if CON affects the 
number providers, the availability of certain services, distance to services, and wait times.  
Table 5 lists the twenty-eight  studies that assess the effect of CON on the availability of services. Of 
these, 26 find the regulation is associated with diminished access to services and 2 find mixed results. 
No study finds that CON is consistently associated with increased access to services. 
Other studies look at the effect of CON on the total volume of services. These studies look to see if 
CON affects the volume of services offered. Table 6 lists the seventeen  papers that assess the effect of 
CON on volume of care. Of these, seven  find that CON is associated with a lower volume of care, 8 find 
mixed results, and 2 find that CON is associated with a higher volume of care. 
C. PAPERS ASSESSING THE EFFECT OF CON ON THE QUALITY OF CARE
CON regulators typically do not assess provider quality when considering whether or not to grant a cer -
tificate. Still, the programs are often said to increase the quality of care by channeling more procedures 
through fewer providers, who then obtain greater proficiency through repetition. 
Despite these assertions, about four  times as many studies find that CON laws undermine quality than 
find that it enhances quality. In the typical CON state, patients experience higher mortality rates follow -
ing heart attack, heart failure, and pneumonia.35 They have higher readmission rates,36 are more likely 
to die from postsurgery complications,37 and are less likely to give their hospitals top ratings.38 Nurs -Papers ﬁnding CON reduces access (33)
Papers ﬁnding CON has mixed, insigniﬁcant, or 
statistically negligible efffects on access (10)
Papers ﬁnding CON is associated with enhanced 
access to care (2)73%5%
22%
10
palmettopromise.orging homes tend to get lower survey scores in CON states than in non-CON states,39 and nursing home 
patients are more likely to be restrained in CON states than in non-CON states.40 Home health agencies 
also receive lower scores in CON states than in non-CON states,41 and home health agency clients are 
less likely to see improvements in mobility.42 Finally, surgeries are more likely to be performed by low -
er-quality surgeons in CON states than in non-CON states.43
Figure 3 summarizes the twenty-eight  studies that assess the effect of CON on the quality of care. 
Fourteen  studies find that the regulation is associated with lower quality care, 12 obtain mixed results, 
and 4 studies find that CON is associated with higher quality care. Table 7 lists the studies in detail. 
FIGURE 3. SUMMARIZING THE CON AND QUALITY OF CARE LITERATURE
III. Summary and Conclusion
Four  in ten Americans live in states with either no CON laws or very limited CON laws in health care (as 
I write, this number is growing because recent reforms in Florida and Montana are now taking effect).44 
In these states, providers may open new facilities or expand their services without first proving to a 
regulator that their community needs the service in question. These non-CON states include high- and 
low-income, urban and rural, and coastal and intracontinental communities. Policymakers in South 
Carolina can learn from the experience of patients in these states to see how CON laws affect spend -
ing, access, and quality of care. Papers ﬁnding CON is associated with lower quality care (14)
Papers ﬁnding CON either has mixed, insigniﬁcant, or 
statistically negligible efffects on the quality of care (12)
Papers ﬁnding CON is associated with higher quality care (4)40%47%13%
LIFE AFTER CERTIFICATE OF NEED 
Hospital executives and policymakers often worry about what would happen in 
their state if their CON laws were repealed. They need not worry. And they need 
not speculate. They can look to the experiences of Americans in non-CON states 
to see what is likely to happen. They can also look to the experiences of states 
that have eased or repealed these regulations. These experiences, documented in 
over 90 peer-reviewed studies, strongly suggest that patients in a state like South 
Carolina would gain greater access to higher-quality and lower-cost care if CON 
laws were to be eliminated.
11
palmettopromise.orgIV. Appendix
Papers often assess CON along multiple dimensions. When they do, the paper will appear in multiple 
tables and I will list all of the findings in the summary column, but underline the particular finding that 
is relevant for the specific table in which the summary appears. 
TABLE 1. STUDIES ASSESSING THE EFFECT OF CON ON SPENDING PER SERVICE 
(COSTS, PRICES, CHARGES, OR REIMBURSEMENTS)
A. PAPERS FINDING CON IS ASSOCIATED WITH HIGHER SPENDING PER SERVICE
No. Paper Summary Quotes
1. Keith B. Anderson and 
David I. Kass, “Certificate Of 
Need Regulation of Entry 
Into Home Health Care: A 
Multi-Product Cost Function 
Analysis” (Washington, D.C.: 
Federal Trade Commission, 
1986).They examined the effect of 
CON on economies of scale 
and cost in the home health 
care industry. They found: 
1. Costs were 2 percent higher 
in CON states relative to non-
CON states.
2. No substantial economies 
of scale in the home health 
industry overall, 
3. Nor did they find a difference 
in economies of scale in CON 
and non-CON states. “costs were higher in the 
presence of CON regulation. 
The estimated average 
increase in cost was about 2 
percent…. We further suggest 
that the regulations may lead 
to price increases that cost 
consumers, health insurers, 
and government agencies 
upward to $100 million per 
year in increased payments 
for home health services.”
2. Monica Noether, 
“Competition Among 
Hospitals,” Journal of 
Health Economics 7, no. 3 
(September 1988): 259–84.CON increases the average 
price for specific disease 
categories such as congestive 
heart failure and pneumonia. “CON’s strongest effect is 
that it creates cost raising 
inefficiencies which are 
passed on in higher prices.”
3. Vivian Ho and Meei-Hsiang 
Ku-Goto, “State Deregulation 
and Medicare Costs for Acute 
Cardiac Care,” Medical Care 
Research and Review 70, no. 
2 (April 2013): 185–205.Removing CON decreases 
the cost of coronary artery 
bypass grafts, but not for 
percutaneous coronary 
intervention. In Ohio, 
reimbursements fell 2.8 
percent following repeal of 
CON and in Pennsylvania, 
they fell 8.8 percent following 
repeal. “We found that states that 
dropped CON experienced 
lower costs per patient 
for coronary artery bypass 
grafts (CABG) but not for 
percutaneous coronary 
intervention (PCI).”
12
palmettopromise.org4. James Bailey, “Can Health 
Spending Be Reined In 
through Supply Constraints? 
An Evaluation of Certificate-
of-Need Laws,” Mercatus 
Working Paper (Arlington, 
VA: Mercatus Center at 
George Mason University, 
August 1, 2016).Removing CON reduces 
hospital charges by 5.5% five 
years after repeal. “CON repeal . . . is associated 
with . . . a statistically 
significant 1.1% reduction in 
average hospital charges per 
year (a 5.5% reduction for a 
mature CON repeal).”
5. James A. Browne et al., 
“Certificate-of-Need State 
Laws and Total Knee 
Arthroplasty,” The Journal of 
Arthroplasty 33, no. 7 (July 1, 
2018): 2020–24.They examined the effect of 
CON on total knee arthroplasty 
(TKA) by comparing states with 
and without CON programs. 
They looked at 4 factors: 
1. Average Medicare 
reimbursements were 5% to 
10% lower in non-CON states,
2. CON was associated with 
lower TKA utilization per 
capita, but faster growth in 
utilization per capita. 
3. CON was associated with 
TKA in higher-volume 
hospitals, 
4. Examination of adverse 
events rates did not reveal 
any strong associations 
between any adverse 
outcome and CON status.“Average reimbursement (and 
thus Medicare spend) was 
5% to 10% lower in non-CON 
states at all time points (P < 
.0001).”
6. Chason Ziino, Abiram Bala, 
and Ivan Cheng, “Does 
ACDF Utilization and 
Reimbursement Change 
Based on Certificate of 
Need Status?,” Clinical Spine 
Surgery 33, no. 3 (April 2020): 
E92.The paper looks at 
reimbursements for spinal 
surgery in CON and non-
CON states, finding that 
reimbursements fell the 
most in non-CON outpatient 
settings (-11% compound 
annual growth) in non-CON 
states.“Reimbursement decreased 
across all settings, with the 
most pronounced decrease 
in the non-CON outpatient 
setting with an adjusted 
CAGR of −11.0%.”
13
palmettopromise.org7. Olivia A. Schultz, Lewis Shi, 
and Michael Lee, “Assessing 
the Efficacy of Certificate of 
Need Laws Through Total 
Joint Arthroplasty,” Journal 
for Healthcare Quality: 
Official Publication of the 
National Association for 
Healthcare Quality  43, no. 1 
(February 1, 2021): e1–7.They examined the effect 
of CON on total knee (TKA), 
hip (THA), and shoulder 
arthroplasty (TSA), finding: 
1. TKA and TSA costs were 
higher in CON states than in 
non-CON states (and these 
results were statistically 
significant); THA costs 
were lower in CON states 
but these results were not 
statistically significant.
2. CON is associated with a 
lower volume of procedures, 
though it was not statistically 
significant in the case of hip 
arthroplasty, and
3. CON has no statistically 
significant effect on 
complications (deep vein 
thrombosis and pulmonary 
embolism)“The average per-patient 
cost incurred on the day 
of TKA was $34,265 in CON 
states and $32,391 in non- 
CON states (p , .0001). Total 
hip arthroplasty was found 
to have a lower per-patient 
average cost in states with 
CON legislation—$31,758 
in CON states and $32,245 
comparatively. These 
results were not statistically 
significant (p 5 .3814). 
Conversely, the cost of TSA 
was higher in CON states 
at $37,576 versus $34,903 in 
non-CON states (p 5 .093)…. 
The rate of TKA in patients 
diagnosed with arthritis in the 
knee was 12.3% (8,984/73,139) 
in CON states and 13.8% in 
non-CON states (6,612/47,744). 
Access was significantly 
greater in non-CON states (p 
, .0001). For THA, the rate was 
lower in CON states when 
compared with non-CON 
states with rates of 21.4% 
(4,843/22,608) and 21.9% 
(3,239/1,481), respectively; 
however, this difference was 
not statistically significant (p 
5 .250). Similarly, TSA occurred 
at a decreased rate of 2.8% 
(683/24,675) in CON states 
compared with a rate of 
3.2% (523/16,436) in non-CON 
states. This difference was 
statistically
significant (p 5 .019)…. The 
apparent nonsuperiority of 
CON states in achieving their 
purported goals may call into 
question the effectiveness of 
additional bureaucracy and 
regulation, suggesting a need 
for further examination…. 
One-year postoperatively, 
there were no significant 
differences in the rate of DVT 
[deep vein thrombosis] or PE 
[pulmonary embolism] after 
TKA, THA, or TSA in either 
study populations (p 5 .605, p 
5 .713, p 5 .670).”
14
palmettopromise.orgB. PAPERS FINDING CON HAS MIXED, INSIGNIFICANT, OR NEGLIGIBLE EFFECTS ON  
SPENDING PER SERVICES
No. Paper Summary Quotes
1. Charlene Harrington et al., 
“The Effect of Certificate of 
Need and Moratoria Policy 
on Change in Nursing Home 
Beds in the United States,” 
Medical Care 35, no. 6 (1997): 
574–88.In a two-stage least squares 
regression, they assess the 
effect of CON, and/or moratoria 
on the growth of nursing 
home beds and Medicaid 
nursing home reimbursement 
rates. They found: 
1. CON had no effect on 
Medicaid nursing home 
reimbursement rates.
2. CON reduced growth of 
beds.“States that had a certificate 
of need and/or moratorium 
did have significant 
reductions in the growth 
in nursing home beds but 
Medicaid nursing home 
reimbursement rates were 
not related to change in bed 
stock.”
2. David C. Grabowski, Robert 
L. Ohsfeldt, and Michael A. 
Morrisey, “The Effects of CON 
Repeal on Medicaid Nursing 
Home and Long-Term Care 
Expenditures,” Inquiry: A 
Journal of Medical Care 
Organization, Provision and 
Financing 40, no. 2 (2003): 
146–57.CON repeal: 
1. Has no statistically 
significant effect on per 
diem Medicaid nursing 
home charges and 
2. No effect on per diem 
Medicaid long-term-care 
charges.“The results . . . show that 
regulatory change did not 
have a statistically significant 
effect on either Medicaid 
payment rates or overall 
days.”
3. Abhinav Khanna et al., 
“Certificate of Need 
Programs, Intensity 
Modulated Radiation Therapy 
Use and the Cost of Prostate 
Cancer Care,” The Journal of 
Urology  189, no. 1 (January 
2013): 75–79.The authors focus on intensity 
modulated radiation therapy. 
They find that: 
1. CON was not associated with 
any difference in cost growth
2. CON was associated with 
greater growth in intensity 
modulated radiation therapy“While the use of IMRT as a 
proportion of all
definitive treatments for 
localized prostate cancer (ie 
radical prostatectomy, IMRT, 
3D-CRT and
brachytherapy) increased 
dramatically during the study 
period in CON Yes (2.3% of all 
treatments in
2002, 46.4% in 2008 to 2009) 
and CON No (11.3% of all 
treatments in 2002, 41.7% in 
2008 to 2009) regions, greater 
growth of IMRT use was 
observed in
CON Yes (slope 0.403) vs CON 
No (slope 0.241) regions in 
adjusted analyses (p  0.001)…. 
Certificate of need programs 
were not effective in limiting 
intensity modulated radiation 
therapy use or attenuating 
prostate cancer health 
care costs. There remains 
an unmet need to control 
the rapid adoption of new, 
more expensive therapies 
for prostate cancer that have 
limited cost and comparative 
effectiveness data.”
15
palmettopromise.org4. James Bailey, Tom Hamami, 
and Daniel McCorry, 
“Certificate of Need Laws and 
Health Care Prices,” Journal 
of Health Care Finance 43, no. 
4 (2017).They find that prices are 
higher in CON states relative 
to non-CON states, but the 
difference isn’t statistically 
significant.  “We find that states with 
Certificate of Need laws have 
higher prices than states 
without Certificate of Need 
laws, but this difference is not 
statistically significant.”
5. Jourdan M. Cancienne et 
al., “Certificate-of-Need 
Programs Are Associated 
with a Reduced Incidence, 
Expenditure, and Rate of 
Complications with Respect 
to Knee Arthroscopy in the 
Medicare Population,” HSS 
Journal: The Musculoskeletal 
Journal of Hospital for 
Special Surgery 16, no. Suppl 
2 (December 2020): 264–71, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11420-
019-09693-z .They examine the effect of 
CON on knee arthroscopy, 
assessing its effect on: 
1. Charges and 
reimbursements: in t-tests 
without controls they 
found that charges (which 
are the prices set before 
any negotiation) were 
lower in CON states, while 
reimbursements (which are 
actual reimbursements) 
were not statistically 
significantly different.
2. Total volume: total volume 
and growth in total volume 
was lower in CON states than 
in non-CON states.
3. Volume within facilities: 
CON is associated with the 
presence of more high-
volume facilities, and 
4. Quality: There were more 
ER visits within 30 days 
of operation and more 
infections within 6 months 
of operation in CON than in 
non-CON states; there were 
no differences in in-hospital 
deaths or readmissions 
within 30 days of the 
operation between CON and 
non-CON states.  “Comparisons of charges and
reimbursements were 
performed using Student’s 
t tests…. CON states had 
significantly lower average 
per-patient charges for 
knee arthroscopy at all time 
points and overall compared 
with non-CON states ($3719 
and $4769, respectively; p < 
0.001 for all comparisons)…. 
However,
per-patient procedural 
reimbursements between 
CON
and non-CON states were not 
statistically different
($1790.36 and $1813.09, 
respectively; p = 0.429).”
16
palmettopromise.org6. Chason Ziino, Abiram Bala, 
and Ivan Cheng, “Utilization 
and Reimbursement Trends 
Based on Certificate of Need 
in Single-Level Cervical 
Discectomy,” The Journal of 
the American Academy of 
Orthopaedic Surgeons 29, 
no. 10 (May 15, 2021): e518–22, 
https://doi.org/10.5435/
JAAOS-D-19-00224 .They studied inpatient cervical 
discectomy in CON and non-
CON states in inpatient and 
outpatient setting. It appears 
that they did not use any 
controls, however. 
Regarding reimbursements, 
they find:
1. In the inpatient setting, 
reimbursement was 
lower in non-CON states 
($1,128.40) than in the 
CON states ($1,223.56). But 
reimbursements in the CON 
states were falling faster over 
time. 
2. In the outpatient setting 
reimbursement was higher 
in Non-CON states ($4,237.01) 
than in CON states ($3,859.31) 
and reimbursements were 
growing in the non-CON 
states but falling in the CON 
states.
Regarding access: 
3. In the inpatient setting, there 
were more patients in the 
CON setting than in the non-
CON setting (657 compared 
with 231) and utilization of 
the procedure was growing 
faster in CON than in non-
CON states but this does 
not appear to control for the 
larger population of CON 
states than non-CON states. 
4. Similarly, in the outpatient 
setting, there were more 
patients in the CON setting 
than in the non-CON setting 
(435 compared with 257) and 
utilization of the procedure 
was growing faster in CON 
than in non-CON states but 
again this does not appear 
to control for the larger 
population of CON states 
than non-CON states. We analyzed a private payer 
and Medicare database 
from 2007 to 2015. All single-
level cervical discectomies 
were selected then split 
into CON and non-CON 
states. Each group was then 
further split into inpatient 
and outpatient. Utilization 
and reimbursement were 
analyzed using the compound 
annual growth rate (CAGR), 
with reimbursement adjusted 
by the US Bureau of Labor 
Statistics Consumer Price 
Index. Results: We identified 
1,580 single level cervical 
decompressions in our 
study period: 888 were done 
in the inpatient setting, 
whereas 692 were done 
in the outpatient setting. 
Adjusted reimbursement 
only increased in the non-
CON outpatient setting, with 
a CAGR of 2.0%. All other 
settings had decreased 
reimbursement. Utilization 
increased across all four 
settings, with the highest 
growth seen in the CON 
outpatient setting, with a 
CAGR of 12.7%. The highest 
average reimbursement was 
in the non-CON outpatient 
setting at $4,237.
17
palmettopromise.orgTABLE 2. STUDIES ASSESSING THE EFFECT OF CON ON SPENDING PER PERSON 
(PER PATIENT OR PER CAPITA)
A. PAPERS FINDING CON IS ASSOCIATED WITH HIGHER SPENDING PER PERSON
No. Paper Summary Quotes
1. Frank A. Sloan and Bruce 
Steinwald, “Effects of 
Regulation on Hospital Costs 
and Input Use,” The Journal 
of Law & Economics 23, no. 1 
(1980): 81–109.Comprehensive CON programs 
have no effect on hospital 
expenditures per patient day, 
while noncomprehensive 
programs increase hospital 
expenditures by 5 percent per 
patient day.“The short-run effect of a mature, 
noncomprehensive program is to 
raise total expense per adjusted 
patient day by nearly 5 percent; 
the long-run effect is over twice 
this.”
2. Daniel Sherman, “The Effect 
of State Certificate-of-Need 
Laws on Hospital Costs: An 
Economic Policy Analysis | 
Federal Trade Commission,” 
Staff Report of the Bureau of 
Economics (Washington, D.C.: 
Federal Trade Commission, 
January 1988), https://www.
ftc.gov/reports/effect-state-
certificate-need-laws-hospital-
costs-economic-policy-
analysis .He estimates the effects of CON 
on cost functions using a sample 
of 3708 hospitals using data from 
1983-84. Though he uses the term 
costs, he is actually measuring 
operating expenditures. He finds 
that spending would fall by 1.4 
percent if states relaxed CON.“if states were to significantly 
relax the regulatory constraints 
hospitals face by doubling the 
threshold at which hospital 
expenditures were subject to 
CON review, total hospital costs 
would not increase, but rather 
would decline by 1.4 percent.”
3. Joyce A. Lanning, Michael 
A. Morrisey, and Robert 
L. Ohsfeldt, “Endogenous 
Hospital Regulation and 
Its Effects on Hospital and 
Non-Hospital Expenditures,” 
Journal of Regulatory 
Economics 3, no. 2 (June 1991): 
137–54.They measure the effect of CON on 
hospital expenditures, finding that 
it is associated with 20.6 percent 
higher spending per capita. “. . . the coefficient of CON 
is positive and statistically 
significant in all three 
expenditure equations. The 
most pronounced effect is on 
hospital expenditures, where 
CON appears to add 20.6 
percent to per capita hospital 
expenditures in the long run. 
This is consistent with the 
view that CON programs act to 
protect inefficient hospitals from 
competition.”
4. John J. Antel, Robert L. 
Ohsfeldt, and Edmund R. 
Becker, “State Regulation and 
Hospital Costs,” The Review of 
Economics and Statistics 77, 
no. 3 (1995): 416–22. They find that CON increases 
per-day and per-admission 
hospital expenditures but has no 
relationship to per capita hospital 
expenditures. “CON investment controls 
imply higher per day and per 
admission costs, but have no 
statistically significant effect on 
per capita cost.”
5. Nancy A. Miller, Charlene 
Harrington, and Elizabeth 
Goldstein, “Access to 
Community-Based Long-Term 
Care: Medicaid’s Role,” Journal 
of Aging and Health 14, no. 1 
(February 2002): 138–59.They find that CON increases per 
capita Medicaid community-based 
care expenditures.“Use of a nursing home CON 
or combined CON/moratorium 
was associated with increased 
community-based care 
expenditures.”
18
palmettopromise.org6. Nancy A. Miller, Charlene 
Harrington, and Elizabeth 
Goldstein, “Access to 
Community-Based Long-Term 
Care: Medicaid’s Role,” Journal 
of Aging and Health 14, no. 1 
(February 2002): 138–59.They find CON laws increase 
hospital expenditures per adjusted 
admission.“The results indicate that CON 
laws had a positive, statistically 
significant relationship to 
hospital costs per adjusted 
admission. . . .These findings 
suggest not only that CON do 
not really contain hospital costs, 
but may actually increase them 
by reducing competition.”
7. Patrick A. Rivers, Myron 
D. Fottler, and Jemima A. 
Frimpong, “The Effects of 
Certificate of Need Regulation 
on Hospital Costs,” Journal of 
Health Care Finance 36, no. 4 
(2010): 1–16.They find that stringent CON 
programs increase hospital 
expenditures per admission. “Implications from these results 
include the inability of CNR 
[CON] to contain HC [hospital 
costs] as assumed or expected, 
and the possibility that CNR 
[CON] may actually increase HC 
[hospital costs], while reducing 
competition.”
8. James Bailey and Tom 
Hamami, “Competition 
and Health-Care Spending: 
Theory and Application to 
Certificate of Need Laws,” 
Working Paper (Philadelphia, 
PA: Federal Reserve Bank of 
Philadelphia, October 2019), 
http://www.philadelphiafed.
org/the-economy/
competition-and-health-
care-spending-theory-and-
application-to-certificate-of-
need-laws .CON causes spending on those 
with less than excellent health to 
be as much as 20% higher. “Our own empirical work finds 
that CON increases overall per 
capita health spending by 10.5% 
but that this effect is quite 
heterogeneous. We find that 
CON has no significant effect 
on the spending of those with 
excellent health while increasing 
spending by the less healthy as 
much as 20.3%.”
9. James Bailey, “Can Health 
Spending Be Reined in 
through Supply Restraints? 
An Evaluation of Certificate-
of-Need Laws,” Journal 
of Public Health 27, no. 6 
(December 1, 2019): 755–60, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10389-
018-0998-1States that eliminate CON 
experience 5 percent reductions 
in real per capita health care 
spending. “Each year of CON repeal 
reduces total expenditures by a 
statistically significant 0.8%, so 
that after 5 years, total spending 
has fallen by 4% (Table 4). This 
result is driven by the fall in 
physician spending, which drops 
a statistically significant 1.4% per 
year, while hospital spending 
drops only a statistically 
insignificant 0.3%.”
19
palmettopromise.org10 Susan L. Ettner et al., 
“Certificate of Need and 
the Cost of Competition in 
Home Healthcare Markets,” 
Home Health Care Services 
Quarterly 39, no. 2 (June 
2020): 51–64.They examine the effects of home 
health agency CONs and nursing 
home CONs on home health 
agencies. They find that in states 
with home health agency CONs 
there are: 
1. Lower per patient 
expenditures (they don’t know 
if this is due to skimping or to 
economies of scale);
2. Higher expenditures per 
agency,
3. Higher expenditures per 
resident,
4. Slightly fewer home health 
agencies per capita,
5. Higher caseloads (volume) 
within agencies (this is what 
drives the higher expenditures 
per agency. “We used 2010-16 Medicare Cost 
Reports for 10,737 freestanding 
home health agencies (HHAs) 
to examine the impact of home 
health (HH) and nursing home 
(NH) certificate-of-need (CON) 
laws on HHA caseload, total 
and per-patient variable costs. 
After adjusting for other HHA 
characteristics, total costs were 
higher in states with only HH 
CON laws ($2,975,698), only 
NH CON laws ($1,768,097), and 
both types of laws ($3,511,277), 
compared with no CON laws 
($1,538,536). Higher costs were 
driven by caseloads, as CON 
reduced per-patient costs. 
Additional research is needed 
to distinguish whether this is 
due to skimping on quality vs. 
economies of scale.”
11. Thomas Stratmann and 
Matthew Baker, “Examining 
Certificate-of-Need Laws 
in the Context of the Rural 
Health Crisis,” Mercatus 
Working Paper (Arlington, VA: 
Mercatus Center at George 
Mason University, July 29, 
2020), https://www.mercatus.
org/publications/healthcare/
examining-certificate-need-
laws-context-rural-health-
crisis .They examine the effect of CON 
on two measures of spending and 
two measures of quality (all four 
are indicators of “overutilization or 
waste”):  
1. Medicare spending per rural 
beneficiary (they found this 
was $295 higher in CON states 
than in non-CON states)
2. Ambulance spending per 
beneficiary ($2.54 higher in 
CON states)
3. Hospital readmission rates (1.2 
percentage points higher in 
CON states)
4. Emergency room visits per 
1,000 beneficiaries (35.1 more 
emergency department visits 
per 1,000 beneficiaries in CON 
states),“To evaluate certificate-of-
need (CON) laws in rural areas 
and their relationship with 
selected healthcare outcomes 
and with common measures of 
potentially avoidable spending, 
we regress county-level Medicare 
data and state-level all-patient 
spending and utilization data to 
compare healthcare outcomes 
and common measures of 
wasteful spending in rural 
states with and without CON 
laws. Results show that patients 
residing in counties restricted 
by CON laws spend more per 
Medicare beneficiary and 
have higher utilization rates in 
ambulance services, emergency 
departments, and readmissions, 
both before and after controlling 
for social risk factors such as 
race, education, and poverty 
status.”… “In the version of the 
model with full controls and all 
counties in rural states, CON 
is associated with $295 higher 
spending, 1.2 percentage points 
higher readmission, 35.1 more 
emergency department visits 
per 1,000 beneficiaries, and $2.54 
higher ambulance spending per 
beneficiary.” 
20
palmettopromise.orgB. PAPERS FINDING CON HAS MIXED, INSIGNIFICANT, OR NEGLIGIBLE EFFECTS ON 
SPENDING PER PERSON
No. Paper Summary Quote
1. Frank A. Sloan, “Regulation 
and the Rising Cost of 
Hospital Care,” The Review 
of Economics and Statistics 
63, no. 4 (November 1, 1981): 
479–87.CON has no effect on hospital 
expenditures per admission, 
per patient day, or per adjusted 
patient day.“The certificate-of-need 
coefficients imply CON has had 
no impact on costs.”
2. Christopher J. Conover 
and Frank A. Sloan, “Does 
Removing Certificate-of-Need 
Regulations Lead to a Surge 
in Health Care Spending?,” 
Journal of Health Politics, 
Policy and Law 23, no. 3 (June 
1, 1998): 455–81.CON has no effect on total per 
capita health expenditures; 
there is no evidence of a surge in 
spending after repeal.“Mature CON programs are 
associated with a modest (5 
percent) long-term reduction 
in acute care spending per 
capita, but not with a significant 
reduction in total per capita 
spending. There is no evidence of 
a surge in acquisition of facilities 
or in costs following removal of 
CON regulations.”
3. Vivian Ho, “Does Certificate 
of Need Affect Cardiac 
Outcomes and Costs?,” 
International Journal of 
Health Care Finance and 
Economics 6, no. 4 (March 6, 
2007): 300–324.The study assesses the effect 
of CON on cardiac costs and 
outcomes. She finds: 
1. While CON is associated 
with lower average costs 
per patient, it also seems 
to be associated with more 
procedures and this is enough 
to offset the savings from 
lower average costs;
2. CON is associated with greater 
volume within hospitals, 
3. CON does not seem to be 
related to inpatient mortality. “This study compares mortality 
rates and costs for cardiac care 
in states with and without 
CON. CON appears to raise 
hospital procedure volume 
and lower the average cost 
of care. However, CON is 
associated with little reduction 
in inpatient mortality, and it 
may lead hospitals to operate 
on more patients than they 
would otherwise.” “However, the 
presence of minimum volume 
standards may lead hospitals 
in CON states to increase 
the number of procedures 
performed relative to states 
without CON. The predicted 
increases in the total number 
of procedures performed (41% 
for PTCA and 18% for CABG in 
the year 2000) are large enough 
to offset any potential savings 
resulting from lower average 
costs per patient treated as a 
result of CON regulation. These 
results are consistent with past 
research which has found CON 
regulations do not restrain 
expenditure growth.” 
21
palmettopromise.org4. Fred J. Hellinger, “The Effect 
of Certificate-of-Need Laws on 
Hospital Beds and Healthcare 
Expenditures: An Empirical 
Analysis,” The American 
Journal of Managed Care  15, 
no. 10 (October 2009): 737–44.CON is associated with fewer 
hospital beds, which in turn are 
associated with slower growth in 
aggregate health expenditures 
per capita. But there is no direct 
relationship between CON and 
health expenditures per capita.“Certificate-of-need programs 
did not have a direct effect on 
healthcare expenditures. . . . 
Certificate-of-need programs 
have limited the growth in the 
supply of hospital beds, and 
this has led to a slight reduction 
in the growth of healthcare 
expenditures.”
5. Momotazur Rahman et al., 
“The Impact of Certificate-
of-Need Laws on Nursing 
Home and Home Health Care 
Expenditures,” Medical Care 
Research and Review: MCRR 
73, no. 1 (February 2016): 
85–105.CON increases the growth 
in Medicare and Medicaid 
expenditures on nursing home 
care but decreases growth in 
home healthcare expenditures.“Compared with states without 
CON laws, Medicare and 
Medicaid spending in states with 
CON laws grew faster for nursing 
home care and more slowly for 
home health care.”
6. Christopher J. Conover and 
Frank A. Sloan, “Evaluation 
of Certificate of Need in 
Michigan. Volume II: Technical 
Appendices” (Raleigh, NC: 
Duke University Center 
for Health Policy, Law and 
Management, 2003).Dropping CON has 0% effect on all 
expenditures.No quotes available. 
22
palmettopromise.org7. Daniel Polsky et al., “The 
Effect of Entry Regulation 
in the Health Care Sector: 
The Case of Home Health,” 
Journal of Public Economics  
110 (February 2014): 1–14.They assess the effect of CON on 
home health agencies, using a 
research design that focuses on 
markets that straddle CON and 
non-CON states. They find that: 
1. Medicare expenditures are 
not statistically significantly 
different between CON and 
non-CON states;
2. Non-CON states have roughly 
twice as many home health 
agencies per Medicare 
beneficiary, 
3. CON states have 13.7 percent 
fewer home health admissions 
from hospitals;
4. 60 day (total) readmission 
rates are 5% higher in CON 
states than in non-CON states, 
but the effect is not sustained.
5. 60 day preventable 
readmission rates are 13 
percent higher in CON states 
than in non-CON states, but 
the effect is not sustained. 
6. In CON states there are fewer 
home health visits, fewer 
visits per week, and a lower 
proportion of visits by skilled 
nurses, but the effects are 
small and not statistically 
significant; 
7. The Herfindahl Index in 
the home health market is 
approximately 1,000 points 
lower in non-CON states;“We find that CON states use 
home health less frequently, but 
system-wide rehospitalization 
rates, overall Medicare 
expenditures, and home health 
practice patterns are similar.” 
TABLE 3. STUDIES ASSESSING THE EFFECT OF CON ON EFFICIENCY
A. PAPERS FINDING CON IS ASSOCIATED WITH LOWER EFFICIENCY
No. Paper Summary Quote
1. B. Kelly Eakin, “Allocative 
Inefficiency in the Produc -
tion of Hospital Services,” 
Southern Economic Jour -
nal 58, no. 1 (1991): 240–48.CON hospitals are less efficient 
than non-CON hospitals.“. . . hospitals subject to CON 
regulations have a greater 
measure of allocative ineffi -
ciency by .88 to 1.03 percent -
age points.”
23
palmettopromise.org2. Jomon A. Paul, Huan Ni, 
and Aniruddha Bagchi, 
“A Study of the Effects of 
Certificate of Need Law 
on Inpatient Occupancy 
Rates,” Service Science  11, 
no. 1 (March 1, 2019): 1–15, 
https://doi.org/10.1287/
serv.2018.0228 .States with CON laws have lower 
bed occupancy rates. The authors 
speculate that while CON reduc -
es the number of beds, it may 
also shorten the length of pa -
tient stay and the net effect is to 
reduce the occupancy rate. Note 
that this is the opposite of the 
intention (which was to reduce 
unused capacity).“From a theoretical stand -
point, CON can lead to a 
reduction in the number of 
beds as well as in the number 
of inpatient days (possibly 
by shortening the length of 
patient stay). However, these 
two effects impact inpatient 
occupancy rate in opposite 
directions. We test empirically 
to find out which of these two 
effects dominate. In this study, 
we investigate the impact of 
CON and its stringency…on 
the inpatient occupancy rate 
using panel data, and we find 
that, on average, CON legisla -
tion reduces occupancy rate 
in inpatient units.”
B. PAPERS FINDING CON HAS MIXED, INCONCLUSIVE, OR NEGLIGIBLE EFFECTS  
ON EFFICIENCY
No. Paper Summary Quote
1. Anderson and Kass, 
“Certificate Of Need 
Regulation of Entry Into 
Home Health Care: A Multi-
Product Cost Function 
Analysis.”They examined the effect of CON 
on economies of scale and cost 
in the home health care industry. 
They found: 
1. Costs were 2 percent higher 
in CON states relative to non-
CON states.
2. No substantial economies 
of scale in the home health 
industry overall, 
3. Nor did they find a difference 
in economies of scale in CON 
and non-CON states. “We also examined whether 
unrealized scale economies 
were smaller where Certificate 
of Need regulations were 
imposed than where entry 
was unrestricted. We found 
no differences in the extent 
of economies in the two 
cases. Thus, we have no 
evidence that CON regulation 
contributes to efficiency 
in the realization of scale 
economies… there was no 
significant difference in the 
degree to which firms in 
CON regulated markets and 
firms in unregulated markets 
achieved these economies 
(of scale). We therefore 
again failed to find a ‘public 
interest’ justification for CON 
regulation.” 
24
palmettopromise.org2. Chi-Chang Chen, 
“Estimating Nursing 
Home Cost and 
Production Functions: 
Application of Stochastic 
Frontier Models for the 
Analysis of Efficiency,” 
ProQuest Dissertations 
and Theses (Ph.D., New 
Orleans, LA, Tulane 
University, 2005), http://
www.proquest.com/
docview/305399421/
abstract/
F9AE5D67757C4ACAPQ/1 .CON is associated with greater 
cost efficiency, but diminished 
technical efficiency. “Technical efficiency appeared 
to be lower for nursing homes 
operated in a state where CON 
or moratorium regulations 
were in place. This observation 
is consistent with prior studies 
and confirmed that while 
CON/moratorium regulations 
might improve state Medicaid 
budget deficit, reduced 
market competition resulted 
from the regulations offered 
no incentives for nursing 
homes to become more 
technical or cost efficient. 
However, results from this 
study showed that these 
regulations had a positive 
effect on cost efficiency. It was 
actually observed to reduce 
cost inefficiency.”
3. Laurie J. Bates, Kankana 
Mukherjee, and Rexford 
E. Santerre, “Market 
Structure and Technical 
Efficiency in the Hospital 
Services Industry: A DEA 
Approach,” Medical Care 
Research and Review 
63, no. 4 (August 2006): 
499–524, https://doi.org/  
10.1177/1077558706288842 .CON hospitals are not any less 
efficient than non-CON hospitals.“Evidence also implies that 
the presence of a state 
certificate-of-need law was 
not associated with a greater 
degree of inefficiency in the 
typical metropolitan hospital 
services industry.”
C. PAPERS FINDING CON IS ASSOCIATED WITH GREATER EFFICIENCY
No. Paper Summary Quote
1. Gary D. Ferrier, Hervé 
Leleu, and Vivian 
Valdmanis, “The Impact 
of CON Regulation on 
Hospital Efficiency,” 
Health Care Management 
Science 13, no. 1 (March 
2010): 84–100.CON hospitals are more efficient 
than non-CON hospitals.“In general, we found that 
the hospital sector in states 
with active CON regulations 
performed better in terms of 
aggregate technical and mix 
efficiency, irrespective of the 
stringency or laxness of this 
oversight.”
25
palmettopromise.org2. Michael D. Rosko and 
Ryan L. Mutter, “The 
Association of Hospital 
Cost-Inefficiency With 
Certificate-of-Need 
Regulation,” Medical Care 
Research and Review 71, 
no. 3 (January 22, 2014): 
280–98.CON hospitals are more efficient 
than non-CON hospitals.“Average estimated cost-
inefficiency was less in CON 
states (8.10%) than in non-CON 
states (12.46%).”
TABLE 4. STUDIES ASSESSING THE EFFECT OF CON ON INVESTMENT
A. PAPERS FINDING CON IS ASSOCIATED WITH MORE INVESTMENT
No. Paper Summary Quote
1. Fred J. Hellinger, “The Ef -
fect of Certificate-of-Need 
Legislation on Hospital 
Investment,” Inquiry 13, no. 
2 (1976): 187–93.CON legislation induced hospi -
tals to increase investments.“The empirical results support 
the hypotheses that [CON] 
legislation has not significantly 
lowered hospital investment 
and that hospitals anticipated 
the effect of [CON] legislation 
by increasing investment in the 
period preceding the enact -
ment of the legislation.”
B. PAPERS FINDING CON HAS MIXED, INSIGNIFICANT, OR NEGLIGIBLE EFFECTS  
ON INVESTMENT
No. Paper Summary Quote
1. David S. Salkever and 
Thomas W. Bice, “The 
Impact of Certificate-of 
Need Controls on Hospital 
Investment,” The Milbank 
Memorial Fund Quarterly. 
Health and Society 54, no. 
2 (1976): 185–214.CON does not decrease invest -
ment but does change its com -
position.“CON did not reduce the total 
dollar volume of investment 
but altered its composition, 
retarding expansion in bed 
supplies but increasing in -
vestment in new services and 
equipment.”
26
palmettopromise.orgTABLE 5. STUDIES ASSESSING THE EFFECT OF CON ON THE AVAILABILITY OF AND 
ACCESS TO SERVICES
A. PAPERS FINDING CON LIMITS ACCESS TO CARE
No. Study Summary Quotes
1. Paul L. Joskow, “The 
Effects of Competition 
and Regulation on Hos -
pital Bed Supply and the 
Reservation Quality of the 
Hospital,” The Bell Jour -
nal of Economics  11, no. 2 
(1980): 421–47.He assesses the effects of reg -
ulations on bed supply and the 
probability that a hospital will 
turn away patients. He finds 
that CON reduces bed supply 
by about 6 percent and makes 
it more likely that a hospital will 
turn away patients. “For a hospital with an aver -
age daily census of 200, this 
implies that, on average, reg -
ulations of these types reduce 
the supply of beds by about 6 
percent, other things equal.”
2. Jon M. Ford and David 
L. Kaserman, “Certifi -
cate-of-Need Regulation 
and Entry: Evidence 
from the Dialysis In -
dustry,” Southern Eco -
nomic Journal 59, no. 4 
(1993): 783–91, https://doi.
org/10.2307/1059739 .They assess the effect of CON 
on the number of dialysis clinics 
and stations, finding that it has 
limited new firm entry and total 
capacity. “These results indicate that 
CON regulation has signifi -
cantly retarded new firm 
entry and total capacity 
expansion in this industry, 
thereby restricting supply and 
fostering increased levels of 
industry concentration”
3. Harrington et al., “The Ef -
fect of Certificate of Need 
and Moratoria Policy on 
Change in Nursing Home 
Beds in the United States.”In a two-stage least squares 
regression, they assess the effect 
of CON, and/or moratoria on the 
growth of nursing home beds 
and Medicaid nursing home re -
imbursement rates. They found: 
1. CON had no effect on 
Medicaid nursing home 
reimbursement rates.
2. CON reduced growth of beds.“States that had a certificate 
of need and/or moratorium 
did have significant reduc -
tions in the growth in nursing 
home beds but Medicaid 
nursing home reimburse -
ment rates were not related to 
change in bed stock.”
27
palmettopromise.org4. J. L. Robinson et al., “Cer -
tificate of Need and the 
Quality of Cardiac Sur -
gery,” American Journal of 
Medical Quality: The Offi -
cial Journal of the Amer -
ican College of Medical 
Quality  16, no. 5 (October 
2001): 155–60.They examined the effect of CON 
elimination in PA (comparing it 
with NJ, which maintained CON): 
1. On the number of open-
heart surgery programs, 
which increased 25 percent 
following elimination of CON;
2. The total volume of CABG 
surgeries which were 
unchanged following repeal,
3. Provider volume, which 
shifted from programs that 
had been established before 
CON repeal to programs that 
were established after CON 
repeal, and
4. Mortality rate, which was 
unchanged following repeal.“In the 3 years following 
the elimination of CON, the 
number of open-heart surgery 
programs increased 25%, yet 
there was no significant in -
crease in the number of CABG 
surgeries performed. Quality, 
as measured by mortality 
rate, was not impacted by the 
real-location of the relatively 
stable CABG volume.”
5. Iona Popescu, Mary S. 
Vaughan-Sarrazin, and 
Gary E. Rosenthal, “Certif -
icate of Need Regulations 
and Use of Coronary Re -
vascularization After Acute 
Myocardial Infarction,” 
The Journal of the Amer -
ican Medical Association 
295, no. 18 (May 10, 2006): 
2141–47.They studied access and quality 
outcomes in revascularization. 
They found that patients in CON 
states were: 
1. Less likely to be admitted 
to hospitals offering 
revascularization,
2. Less likely to undergo 
revascularization, and 
3. Had no difference in 30-day 
mortality rates relative to 
patients in no n-CON states. “The 624,421 patients in states 
with certificate of need reg -
ulations were less likely to be 
admitted to hospitals with 
coronary revascularization ser -
vices (321 573 [51.5%] vs 323 695 
[62.8%]; P<.001) or to undergo 
revascularization at the admit -
ting hospital (163 120 [26.1%] 
vs 163 877 [31.8%]; P<.001) than 
patients in states without 
certificates of need…. Patients 
with acute myocardial in -
farction were less likely to be 
admitted to hospitals offering 
coronary revascularization and 
to undergo early revasculariza -
tion in states with certificate 
of need regulations. However, 
differences in the availability 
and use of revascularization 
therapies were not associated 
with mortality.”
28
palmettopromise.org6. Vivian Ho et al., “Cardiac 
Certificate of Need Regu -
lations and the Availability 
and Use of Revasculariza -
tion Services,” American 
Heart Journal 154, no. 4 
(October 2007): 767–75.They study the association be -
tween cardiac CON regulations, 
availability of revascularization 
facilities, and revascularization 
rates, focusing on differences 
between the general population 
and the elderly and on differenc -
es between procedures (coro -
nary artery bypass graft surgery 
(CABG) or a percutaneous coro -
nary intervention (PCI)). 
They find that: 
1. CON is associated with fewer 
hospitals offering CABG and 
PCI,
2. CON has no effect on overall 
CABG utilization.
3. CON is associated with 19.2 
percent fewe r PCIs per 1,000 
elderly.“Each year, the per capita 
number of hospitals perform -
ing CABG and PCI was higher 
in states without CON (3.7 per 
100,000 elderly for CABG, 4.5 
for PCI in 2002), compared 
with CON states (2.5 for CABG, 
3.0 for PCI in 2002). Multivari -
ate regressions that adjusted 
for market and population 
characteristics found no 
difference in CABG utilization 
rates between states with and 
without CON (P = .7). Howev -
er, CON was associated with 
19.2% fewer PCIs per 1000 
elderly (P = .01), equivalent to 
322,526 fewer PCIs for 1989 
to 2002. Among most states 
that discontinued CON, the 
number of hospitals perform -
ing PCI rose in the mid 1990s, 
but there were no consistent 
trends in the number of hos -
pitals performing CABG or in 
PCIs or CABGs per capita.”
7. Marah N. Short, Thomas 
A. Aloia, and Vivian Ho, 
“Certificate of Need Regu -
lations and the Availability 
and Use of Cancer Resec -
tions,” Annals of Surgical 
Oncology  15, no. 7 (July 
2008): 1837–45. They studied Medicare data on 
beneficiaries treated with one 
of six cancer resections and an 
associated cancer diagnosis from 
1989 to 2002. 
They found: 
1. CON is assoc iated with 
fewer hospitals per cancer 
incident for colectomy, rectal 
resection, and pulmonary 
lobectomy;
2. CON has no effect on the 
number of procedures per 
cancer incident; 
3. CON was associated with 
greater hospital volu me.“The number of hospitals per 
cancer incident was lower in 
CON states versus non-CON 
states for colectomy (P = .022), 
rectal resection (P = .026), 
and pulmonary lobectomy (P 
= .032). Hospital volume was 
significantly higher in CON 
states versus non-CON states 
for colectomy (P = .006) and 
pulmonary lobectomy (P = 
.043). There were no differenc -
es between states with and 
without CON in the number of 
procedures per cancer inci -
dent.” 
29
palmettopromise.org8. Hellinger, “The Effect of 
Certificate-of-Need Laws 
on Hospital Beds and 
Healthcare Expenditures.”CON is associated with 10% fewer 
hospital beds,  which in turn is 
associated with slower growth in 
aggregate health expenditures 
per capita. But there is no direct 
relationship between CON and 
health expenditures per capita.“Certificate-of-need laws have 
reduced the
number of hospital beds 
by about 10%... Certifi -
cate-of-need programs did 
not have a direct effect on 
healthcare expenditures. . . . 
Certificate-of-need programs 
have limited the growth in the 
supply of hospital beds, and 
this has led to a slight reduc -
tion in the growth of health -
care expenditures.”
9. Jonathan T. Kolstad, 
“Essays on Information, 
Competition and Quality 
in Health Care Provider 
Markets” (Ph.D. Disserta -
tion, Boston, MA, Harvard 
University, 2009), https://
healthpolicy.fas.harvard.
edu/people/jonathan-kol -
stad.He examined how the 1996 repeal 
of CON legislation in Pennsylva -
nia affected the market for coro -
nary artery bypass graft (CABG) 
surgery in the state, finding: 
1. The num ber of CABG 
facilities increased 46 percent 
and 
2. Surgeries were more likely to 
be performed by high quality 
surgeon s. “Within a few years after the 
repeal of CON legislation, the 
number of CABG facilities 
increased 46 percent. Consis -
tent with theory, I show that 
entry led to a redistribution of 
surgeries from lower- to high -
er-quality surgeons. Under 
a reasonable set of assump -
tions, I find that the value of 
the improved outcomes due 
to this redistribution offset 
between 42 and 100 percent 
of the additional fixed costs 
incurred by new entrants.” 
… “about 11 additional pa -
tients per year survived CABG 
because of the share redistri -
bution following CON repeal.” 
The average CABG patient 
traveled 2.3 fewer miles fol -
lowing CON repeal.”
30
palmettopromise.org10. Vivian Ho, Meei-Hsiang 
Ku-Goto, and James G 
Jollis, “Certificate of Need 
(CON) for Cardiac Care: 
Controversy over the Con -
tributions of CON,” Health 
Services Research 44, no. 2 
Pt 1 (April 2009): 483–500, 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-
6773.2008.00933.x .They use differences-in-differenc -
es regression analysis to compare 
states that dropped CON during 
the sample period with states 
that kept the regulation. They fo -
cused on coronary artery bypass 
graft surgery (CABG) and percu -
taneous coronary interventions 
(PCI). They found that in states 
that dropped CON: 
1. The number of hospitals in 
the state performing CABG 
and PCI went up following 
repeal;
2. Statewide procedural volume 
for CABG and PCI were 
unchanged;
3. Mean hospital volume 
declined for both procedures, 
and 
4. Procedural CABG mortality 
declined after repeal, though 
the difference w as not 
permanent“States that dropped CON 
experienced lower CABG mor -
tality rates relative to states 
that kept CON, although the 
differential is not permanent. 
No such mortality difference 
is found for PCI. Dropping 
CON is associated with more 
providers statewide and lower 
mean hospital volume for 
both CABG and PCI. How -
ever, statewide procedure 
counts remain the same…. We 
find no evidence that CON 
regulations are associated 
with higher quality CABG or 
PCI. Future research should 
examine whether the greater 
number of
hospitals performing revascu -
larization after CON removal 
raises expenditures due to the 
building of more facilities, or 
lowers expenditures due to 
enhanced price competition.”
11. David M. Cutler, Robert S. 
Huckman, and Jonathan T. 
Kolstad, “Input Constraints 
and the Efficiency of En -
try: Lessons from Cardiac 
Surgery,” American Eco -
nomic Journal: Economic 
Policy 2, no. 1 (February 
2010): 51–76.They assess the 1996 repeal of 
CON in Pennsylvania on Coronary 
Artery Bypass Graft (CABG). They 
found: 
1. Repeal of CON reduced travel 
distanced by 9 percent;
2. There was no statistically 
significant effect on total 
volume following CON repeal; 
3. There were mixed results 
on scale; following CON 
repeal, fewer surgeries were 
performed by high-volume 
hospitals, but more were 
performed by high-volume 
surgeons.
4. CON repeal led to a shift 
from standard quality to   
surgeons; and
5. Incumbent hospital margins 
initially fell following repeal 
but these hospitals had 
regained profitability and 
were the most profitable by 
2002.Entry following CON repeal 
resulted in “a nine percent 
reduction in travel distance 
relative to the patient-weight -
ed average travel distance 
prior to entry of 27 miles.”   
31
palmettopromise.org12. Mary S. Vaughan Sar -
razin, Levent Bayman, 
and Peter Cram, “Trends 
during 1993-2004 in the 
Availability and Use of 
Revascularization after 
Acute Myocardial Infarc -
tion in Markets Affected 
by Certificate of Need 
Regulations,” Medical Care 
Research and Review: 
MCRR 67, no. 2 (April 2010): 
213–31, https://doi.
org/10.1177/
1077558709346565 .In a study design that exploits 
the fact that some markets cross 
boundaries between CON and 
non-CON states, they find: 
1. A gre ater increase in 
coronary artery bypass graft 
surgery programs in states 
that reduced CON regulation, 
and
2. No change in percutaneous 
coronary  intervention (PCI) in 
states that reduced CON.“There was a greater rise in 
the number of CABG pro -
grams in markets with sig -
nificant reduction in CON 
regulations during 1993-2004 
compared with other mar -
kets, but CON reduction was 
not related to growth of PCI 
programs.”
13. Melissa D.A. Carlson et 
al., “Geographic Access 
to Hospice in the United 
States,” Journal of Palli -
ative Medicine 13, no. 11 
(November 2010): 1331–38, 
https://doi.org/10.1089/
jpm.2010.0209 .This is a cross-sectional study of 
geographic access to U.S. hos -
pices using multivariate logistic 
regression to identify gaps in 
hospice availability (measured by 
distance to hospice facilities) by 
community characteristics. CON 
was associated with longer travel 
distance to hospice care. “Controlling for population 
density, the existence of CON 
policies was associated with 
more limited geographic ac -
cess to hospice.”
14. Traci L Eichmann and 
Rexford E Santerre, “Do 
Hospital Chief Executive 
Officers Extract Rents 
from Certificate of Need 
Laws,” Journal of Health 
Care Finance 37, no. 4 
(January 1, 2011): 1–14.They study the effects of CON on 
access and rents. They find CON 
is associated with 
1. 12 percent fewer beds per 
capita,
2. 48 percent fewer hospitals 
per capita, and
3. $91,000 more in urban 
hospital CEO pa y.“CON laws are shown to 
reduce the number of beds 
at the typical hospital by 12 
percent, on average, and 
the number of hospitals per 
100,000 persons by 48 per -
cent. These reductions ulti -
mately lead urban hospital 
CEOs in states with CON laws 
to extract economic rents of 
$91,000 annually.”
32
palmettopromise.org15. S. A. Lorch, P. Maheshwari, 
and O. Even-Shoshan, 
“The Impact of Certificate 
of Need Programs on 
Neonatal Intensive Care 
Units,” Journal of Perina -
tology: Official Journal of 
the California Perinatal As -
sociation 32, no. 1 (January 
2012): 39–44.They studied NICU CONs. They 
found: 
1. CON is associated with fewer 
units;
2. CON is associated with fewer 
beds; 
3. CON was unrelated to very 
low birth weight (VLBW) 
infant mortality and low 
birth weight (LBW) infant 
mortality. 
4. CON is associated with lower 
rates of all-infant mortality 
in states with a large 
metropolitan area.“Absence of such programs 
was associated with more 
hospitals with a NICU (Rate 
Ratio (RR) 2.06, 95% CI 1.74 to 
2.45) and NICU beds (RR 1.96, 
95% CI 1.89 to 2.03) compared 
with states with CON legisla -
tion, and increased all-infant 
mortality rates in states with a 
large metropolitan area…. Mor -
tality rates for VLBW or LBW 
infants were not significantly 
different between CON and 
non-CON states. However, for 
states with at least one large 
metropolitan area, states with 
CON legislation had signifi -
cantly lower all infant mortali -
ty rates compared with states 
without CON legislation (0.54 
fewer deaths/1000 births,
95% CI 0.02 to 1.06).”
33
palmettopromise.org16. Daniel Polsky et al., “The 
Effect of Entry Regulation 
in the Health Care Sector: 
The Case of Home Health,” 
Journal of Public Econom -
ics 110 (February 2014): 
1–14.hospital readmission 
rates, and health care ex -
penditures in states with 
and without Certificate of 
Need laws (CONThey assess the effect of CON on 
home health agencies, using a 
research design that focuses on 
markets that straddle CON and 
non-CON states. They find that: 
1. Medica re expenditures are 
not statistically significantly 
different between CON and 
non-CON states;
2. Non-CON states have roughly 
twice as many home health 
agencies per Medicare 
beneficiary, 
3. CON states have 13.7 
percent fewer home health 
admissions from hospitals;
4. 60 day (total) readmission 
rates are 5% higher in CON 
states than in non-CON 
states, but the effect is not 
sustained.
5. 60 day readmission rates are 
13 percent higher in CON 
states than in non-CON 
states, but the effect is not 
sustained. 
6. In CON states there are fewer 
home health visits, fewer 
visits per week, and a lower 
proportion of visits by skilled 
nurses, but the effects are 
small and not statistically 
significant; 
7. The Herfindahl Index in 
the home health market is 
approximately 1,000 points 
lower in non-CON states;“We find that CON states use 
home health less frequently, 
but system-wide rehospital -
ization rates, overall Medicare 
expenditures, and home 
health practice patterns are 
similar.” 
34
palmettopromise.org17. Thomas Stratmann and 
Jacob Russ, “Do Certifi -
cate-of-Need Laws In -
crease Indigent Care?,” 
Working Paper (Arlington, 
VA: Mercatus Center at 
George Mason University, 
July 2014), http://mercatus.
org/sites/default/files/Strat -
mann-Certificate-of-Need.
pdf.They study the effects of CON 
on the supply of services and 
provision of services to indigent 
populations. They find: 
1. CON prog rams are associated 
with 99 fewer hospitals per 
100,000 people
2. Bed-specific CONs are 
associated with 131 fewer 
beds per 100,000 people
3. There are 4.7 fewer beds per 
100,000 persons for each 
additional service covered by 
CON
4. CON programs reduce the 
number of hospitals with MRI 
machines by 1 to 2 hospitals 
per 500,000 people
5. CON programs that 
require charitable care 
are uncorrelated with 
uncompens ated care.“Our evidence is consistent 
with previous studies in 
showing that CON programs 
are effective at restricting the 
supply of regulated medical 
services. It appears, however, 
that CON programs do not 
induce cross-subsidization.
35
palmettopromise.org18. Suhui Li and Avi Dor, “How 
Do Hospitals Respond to 
Market Entry? Evidence 
from a Deregulated Mar -
ket for Cardiac Revascu -
larization,” Health Eco -
nomics 24, no. 8 (August 
2015): 990–1008, https://doi.
org/10.1002/hec.3079 .Removal of CON was associated 
with: 
1. A substantial increase in 
the number of hospitals 
performing cardiac 
revascularization procedures, 
2. An overall downward trend in 
CABG and an overall upward 
trend in the alternative 
procedure, PCI. 
3. Entry led to a significant 
increase in the likelihood 
of CABG, relative to trend, 
but it did not contribute 
to the increase in PCI after 
adjusting for patient traits, 
market characteristics, and 
area-specific trends. 
4. The probability of receiving 
PCI specifically at incumbent 
hospitals decreased with 
market entry, suggesting 
a volume shift from 
incumbents to entrants
5. Entry shifted a 
disproportionate volume of 
low-severity patients from 
incumbent hospitals to 
entrants.
6. Entry by new cardiac surgery 
centers tended to sort 
high-severity patients into 
the more invasive CABG 
procedure and low-severity 
patients into the less invasive 
PCI procedures, potentially 
improving quality of care.“In this paper, we empirically 
examine the demand-aug -
menting, demand-redistribu -
tion, and risk-allocation effects 
of hospital entry by studying 
the cardiac revascularization 
markets in Pennsylvania, a 
state in which dynamic mar -
ket entry occurred after repeal 
of CON in 1996. Results from 
interrupted time-series anal -
yses indicate demand-aug -
menting effects for coronary 
artery bypass graft (CABG) 
and business-stealing effects 
for percutaneous coronary 
intervention (PCI) procedures: 
high entrant market share 
mitigated the declining inci -
dence of CABG, but it had no 
significant effect on the rising 
trend in PCI use, among pa -
tients with coronary artery dis -
ease. We further find evidence 
that entry by new cardiac 
surgery centers tended to sort 
high-severity patients into the 
more invasive CABG proce -
dure and low-severity patients 
into the less invasive PCI 
procedures. These findings 
underscore the importance of 
considering market-level stra -
tegic responses by hospitals 
when regulatory barriers are 
rescinded.”
… “free entry improves the 
match between underlying 
medical risk and treatment 
intensity, potentially improv -
ing quality of care and hence 
being welfare enhancing.”
36
palmettopromise.org19. Thomas Stratmann and 
Christopher Koopman, 
“Entry Regulation and 
Rural Health Care: Cer -
tificate-of-Need Laws, 
Ambulatory Surgical 
Centers, and Community,” 
Working Paper (Arlington, 
VA: Mercatus Center at 
George Mason University, 
February 18, 2016), http://
mercatus.org/sites/default/
files/Stratmann-Rural-
Health-Care-v1.pdf .They study the effect of CON on 
overall supply of services as well 
as rural supply of services. In par -
ticular, they find:
1. CON programs are associated 
with 30 percent fewer 
hospitals per 100,000 
residents across the entire 
state. 
2. ASC-specific CONs are 
correlated with 14 percent 
fewer total ASCs per 100,000 
residents. 
3. CON programs are associated 
with 30 percent fewer rural 
hospitals per 100,000 rural 
residents. 
4. ASC-specific CONs are 
correlated with 13 percent 
fewer rural ASCs per 100,000 
rural residents. “We estimate that, when con -
trolling for demographics and 
year-specific effects, the pres -
ence of a CON program is as -
sociated with 30 percent few -
er total hospitals per 100,000 
state population…. Moreover, 
we find 14 percent fewer total 
ASCs per 100,000 state pop -
ulation…. In particular, when 
controlling for demographics 
and year-specific effects, the 
presence of a CON program is 
associated with 30 percent (1−
exp(−.36)) fewer rural hospitals 
per 100,000 rural population…. 
When controlling for demo -
graphics and year-specific 
effects, ASC-specific CON 
requirements are associated 
with 13 percent (1−exp(−.135)) 
fewer rural ASCs per 100,000 
rural population
20. Molly S. Myers and Kath -
leen M. Sheehan, “The 
Impact of Certificate of 
Need Laws on Emergency 
Department Wait Times,” 
Journal of Private En -
terprise  35, no. 1 (Spring 
2020): 59–75.They examine the effect of CON 
laws on wait times. They find 
CON programs: 
1. Increas e median wait times 
for medical examinations ;
2. Increase wait times for pain 
medication administration; 
3. Increase wait times for 
hospital admittance; and 
Increase wait times for 
hospital dischar ge.  “This paper empirically inves -
tigates how CON laws affect 
emergency department wait 
times and finds that CON laws 
have a statistically significant 
impact on increasing the 
median wait time for medical 
examination, pain medica -
tion administration, hospital 
admittance, and hospital 
discharge. These findings sup -
port the idea that movement 
toward a freer market for 
health care services through 
a reduction in CON laws could 
improve patient outcomes.”
37
palmettopromise.org21. Matthew Mitchell, Thom -
as Stratmann, and James 
Bailey, “Raising the Bar: 
ICU Beds and Certifi -
cates of Need” (Arlington, 
VA: Mercatus Center at 
George Mason Universi -
ty, April 29, 2020), https://
www.mercatus.org/
publications/covid-19-cri -
sis-response/raising-bar-
icu-beds-and-certificates-
need .4. They studied the relationship 
between CON and projected 
ICU bed shortages over 
the course of the COVID-19 
pandemic. They found 
that compared with non-
CON states, in CON states, 
expected shortages were 
more than twice as likely and 
the shortages were about 9 
times greater in per capita 
terms. “We find that those states 
that require a CON for hos -
pital beds are more than 
twice as likely to experience 
projected ICU bed shortages. 
On average, these states are 
expected to experience an ICU 
bed shortage of about 8,000 
beds (about 9 beds per 10,000 
residents). By contrast, states 
that do not require a CON 
for hospital beds are expect -
ed to experience an average 
shortage of about 114 ICU 
beds (about 1 bed per 10,000 
residents). We also find that 
the temporary suspension of 
CON has no statistically signif -
icant relationship to ICU bed 
shortages.”
22. James B. Bailey, Thanh Lu, 
and Patrick Vogt, “Certif -
icate of Need and Sub -
stance Use Treatment,” 
SSRN Scholarly Paper 
(Rochester, NY: Social 
Science Research Net -
work, December 29, 2020), 
https://doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.3757059 .They measure how CON affects 
the number of substance abuse 
facilities and beds per capita in 
a state, and the effect of CON 
on the forms of payment that 
treatment facilities accept. They 
find that CON reduces the accep -
tance of private insurance and 
Medicaid.“CON has no statistically sig -
nificant effect on the number 
of facilities, beds, or clients, 
and no significant effect on 
the acceptance of Medicare. 
However, it reduces the ac -
ceptance of private insurance 
by a statistically significant 
1.85%, and the acceptance 
of Medicaid by a statistically 
significant 3.49%.”
38
palmettopromise.org23. Susan L. Ettner et al., 
“Certificate of Need and 
the Cost of Competition in 
Home Healthcare Mar -
kets,” Home Health Care 
Services Quarterly 39, no. 
2 (June 2020): 51–64.They examine the effects of 
home health agency CONs and 
nursing home CONs on home 
health agencies. They find that in 
states with home health agency 
CONs there are: 
5. Lower pe r patient 
expenditures (they don’t 
know if this is due to 
skimping or to economies of 
scale);
6. Higher expenditures per 
agency,
7. Higher expenditures per 
resident,
8. Slightly fewer home health 
agencies per capita,
Higher caseloads (volume) within 
agencies (this is what drives the 
higher expenditures per agency. “We used 2010-16 Medi -
care Cost Reports for 10,737 
freestanding home health 
agencies (HHAs) to examine 
the impact of home health 
(HH) and nursing home (NH) 
certificate-of-need (CON) 
laws on HHA caseload, to -
tal and per-patient variable 
costs. After adjusting for 
other HHA characteristics, 
total costs were higher in 
states with only HH CON laws 
($2,975,698), only NH CON 
laws ($1,768,097), and both 
types of laws ($3,511,277), 
compared with no CON laws 
($1,538,536). Higher costs were 
driven by caseloads, as CON 
reduced per-patient costs. 
Additional research is needed 
to distinguish whether this is 
due to skimping on quality vs. 
economies of scale.”
24. Matthew C. Baker and 
Thomas Stratmann, 
“Barriers to Entry in the 
Healthcare Markets: 
Winners and Losers 
from Certificate-of-Need 
Laws,” Socio-Economic 
Planning Sciences, 2021, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
seps.2020.101007 .They examine the effect of med -
ical imaging CONs on medical 
imaging providers. They find: 
CON laws are associated with 20 
to 33 percent fewer providers;
Residents of CON states are 3.4 to 
5.3 percentage points more likely 
to travel out of state to obtain 
these services; 
CON laws are associated with 
27-53 percent fewer scans by 
nonhospital providers per ben -
eficiary, 23 to 70 percent fewer 
scans by new hospitals, and 6 to 
21 percent more scans by holder 
hospitals“Using Medicare claims data 
in 2013, we find that states 
with CON laws have 20 to 33% 
fewer providers, depending 
on the type of scanners to 
which the laws apply. As a 
result, residents of CON law 
states are 3.4–5.3 percentage 
points more likely to travel 
outside their home county to 
obtain imaging services than 
residents of non-CON states. 
In addition, there is a notable 
shift in the type of provider: 
CON laws are associated with 
27–53% fewer scans by non -
hospital providers per benefi -
ciary, 23 to 70% fewer by new 
hospitals, but 6 to 21% more 
scans in older hospitals.”
39
palmettopromise.org25. James Bailey and Eleanor 
Lewin, “Certificate of Need 
and Inpatient Psychiatric 
Services,” The Journal of 
Mental Health Policy and 
Economics 24, no. 4 (De -
cember 1, 2021): 117–24.They examine the effect of psy -
chiatric service CONs. They find 
that psychiatric service CONs: 
1. Reduce the n umber of 
psychiatric hospitals by 20 
percent;
2. Reduce the likelihood that a 
hospital will accept Medicare 
by 5.35 percentage points; 
and
3. Reduce the number of 
psychiatric clients by 56 
percent.“We find that CON laws tar -
geting psychiatric services are 
associated with a statistically 
significant 0.527 fewer psy -
chiatric hospitals per million 
residents (20% fewer) and 2.19 
fewer inpatient psychiatric 
clients per ten thousand resi -
dents (56% fewer). Psychiatric 
CON is also associated with 
psychiatric hospitals being 
5.35 percentage points less 
likely to accept Medicare.”
26. Matthew Mitchell and 
Thomas Stratmann, “The 
Economics of a Bed Short -
age: Certificate-of-Need 
Regulation and Hospital 
Bed Utilization during 
the COVID-19 Pandem -
ic,” Journal of Risk and 
Financial Management 
15, no. 1 (January 2022): 
10, https://doi.org/10.3390/
jrfm15010010 .They examine the effect of bed 
CON on statewide bed utilization 
rates and on individual hospital 
shortages. They find: 
1. States that require CONs for 
beds had 12 percent higher 
bed utilization rates;
2. And 58 percent more days 
with more than 70% of their 
beds in use.
3. Hospitals in these states were 
27% more likely to run out of 
beds.
4. States that relaxed these 
rules for COVID saw no 
difference in utilization rates 
or shortages.We compare statewide bed 
utilization rates and hospi -
tal-level bed utilization rates 
in bed CON and non-bed CON 
states during the COVID-19 
pandemic. Controlling for 
other possibly confounding 
factors, we find that states 
with bed CONs had 12 percent 
higher bed utilization rates 
and 58 percent more days 
in which more than 70 per -
cent of their beds were used. 
Individual hospitals in bed 
CON states were 27 percent 
more likely to utilize all of their 
beds. States that relaxed CON 
requirements to make it easier 
for hospitals to meet the surge 
in demand did not experience 
any statistically significant 
decreases in bed utilization 
or number of days above 70 
percent of capacity. Nor were 
hospitals in states that relaxed 
their CON requirements any 
less likely to use all their beds. 
Certificate-of-need laws seem 
to have exacerbated the risk 
of running out of beds during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. State 
efforts to relax these rules 
had little immediate effect on 
reducing this risk
40
palmettopromise.orgB. PAPERS FINDING CON HAS MIXED, INSIGNIFICANT, OR NEGLIGIBLE EFFECTS ON 
ACCESS TO CARE
No. Paper Summary Quotes
1. Shihyun Noh and Cath -
erine H. Brown, “Factors 
Associated with the Num -
ber of Substance Abuse 
Nonprofits in the U.S. 
States: Focusing on Medic -
aid Expansion, Certificate 
of Need, and Ownership,” 
Nonprofit Policy Forum  9, 
no. 2 (July 1, 2018), https://
doi.org/10.1515/npf-2017-
0010 .1. CON laws are negatively 
associated with the number 
of nonprofit substance abuse 
facilities;
2. But in states with both CON 
laws and Medicaid expansion, 
there were more nonprofit 
substance abuse  facilities“Certificate of Need (CON), 
that is, state regulation of new 
health services and facilities, 
can affect nonprofits’ respons -
es to increased demand for 
substance abuse services. 
This study provides evidence 
that the number of nonprofit 
substance abuse facilities is 
negatively associated with 
state decisions to expand 
Medicaid and state regulation 
of new health services and 
facilities. However, in states 
with both Medicaid expan -
sion and CON, the number of 
nonprofit substance abuse 
facilities tended to increase. 
In addition, evidence sug -
gests that both nonprofit and 
for-profit substance abuse 
facilities are negatively influ -
enced by Medicaid expansion 
and CON, but positively influ -
enced by the interaction of 
Medicaid expansion and CON, 
government spending, racial 
diversity, median income, and 
uninsured rates.”
2. Joshua N. Herb et al., 
“Travel Time to Radiation 
Oncology Facilities in the 
United States and the 
Influence of Certificate of 
Need Policies,” Interna -
tional Journal of Radiation 
Oncology, Biology, Phys -
ics 109, no. 2 (February 1, 
2021): 344–51.\\uc0\\u8221{} 
{\\i{}International Journal 
of Radiation Oncology, 
Biology, Physics} 109, no. 2 
(February 1, 2021They measure the effect of CON 
on travel time to radiation oncol -
ogy facilities, breaking down the 
effect by region. They find CON: 
1. Has no associ ation with 
prolonged travel in the West;
2. Is associated with lower odds 
of prolonged travel in both 
urban and rural tracts in the 
South;
3. Is associated with increased 
odds of prolonged travel in 
both urban and rural tracts in 
the Midwest and Northeast.“Presence of a CON law had 
no association with prolonged 
travel in the Western region, 
lower odds of prolonged travel 
in the Southern region for 
both rural and urban tracts, 
and higher likelihood of pro -
longed travel in the Midwest 
and Northeast Regions (Table 
3) for both rural and urban 
tracts.”
41
palmettopromise.orgTABLE 6. STUDIES ASSESSING THE EFFECT OF CON ON VOLUME
A. STUDIES FINDING CON IS ASSOCIATED WITH LIMITED VOLUME
No. Paper Summary Quotes
1. Iona Popescu, Mary 
S. Vaughan-Sarrazin, 
and Gary E. Rosenthal, 
“Certificate of Need 
Regulations and 
Use of Coronary 
Revascularization 
After Acute Myocardial 
Infarction,” The Journal 
of the American Medical 
Association 295, no. 18 
(May 10, 2006): 2141–47.They studied access and quality 
outcomes in revascularization. 
They found that patients in CON 
states were: 
1. Less likely to be admitted 
to hospitals offering 
revascularization,
2. Less likely to undergo 
revascularization, and
3. Had no difference in 30-day 
mortality rates relative to 
patients in non-CON s tates.“The 624,421 patients in 
states with certificate of need 
regulations were less likely to 
be admitted to hospitals with 
coronary revascularization 
services (321 573 [51.5%] vs 
323 695 [62.8%]; P<.001) or to 
undergo revascularization at 
the admitting hospital (163 120 
[26.1%] vs 163 877 [31.8%]; P<.001) 
than patients in states without 
certificates of need…. Patients 
with acute myocardial infarction 
were less likely to be admitted 
to hospitals offering coronary 
revascularization and to 
undergo early revascularization 
in states with certificate of 
need regulations. However, 
differences in the availability 
and use of revascularization 
therapies were not associated 
with mortality.”
2. Joseph S. Ross et 
al., “Certificate of 
Need Regulation and 
Cardiac Catheterization 
Appropriateness After 
Acute Myocardial 
Infarction,” Circulation 
115, no. 8 (February 27, 
2007): 1012–19.They examine the effect of 
CON on the volume of cardiac 
catheterization after admission 
for acute myocardial infarction. 
In particular, however, they 
were interested in procedural 
volume under different levels 
of appropriateness (strongly, 
equivocally, or weakly indicated). 
While CON did not seem to 
decrease the volume of strongly-
indicated catheterization, 
it did reduce the volume of 
equivocally and weakly indicated 
catheterization.
Because their interest is both 
overall volume and rates of 
catheterization when it is not 
warranted, I am categorizing 
this in both the volume and the 
quality sections.“After stratification by 
appropriateness, CON 
regulation was not associated 
with a significantly lower rate of 
catheterization among 63,823 
patients with strong indications 
(49.9% versus 50.3%; adjusted 
RR 0.94, 95% confidence 
interval 0.86 to 1.02, P0.17). 
However, CON regulation was 
associated with significantly 
lower rates of catheterization 
among 65,077 patients with 
equivocal indication (45.0% 
versus 46.0%; adjusted RR 0.88, 
95% confidence interval 0.78 to 
1.00, P0.05) and among 8,379 
patients with weak indications 
(19.8% versus 21.8%; adjusted 
RR 0.84, 95% confidence 
interval 0.71 to 0.98, P0.04). 
Associations were weakened 
substantially after adjustment 
for hospital coronary artery 
bypass graft surgery or cardiac 
catheterization capability.”
42
palmettopromise.org3. Daniel Polsky et al., 
“The Effect of Entry 
Regulation in the Health 
Care Sector: The Case of 
Home Health,” Journal 
of Public Economics  110 
(February 2014): 1–14.They assess the effect of CON on 
home health agencies, using a 
research design that focuses on 
markets that straddle CON and 
non-CON states. They find that: 
1. Medi care expenditures are 
not statistically significantly 
different between CON and 
non-CON states;
2. Non-CON states have roughly 
twice as many home health 
agencies per Medicare 
beneficiary, 
3. CON states have 13.7 
percent fewer home health 
admissions from hospitals;
4. 60 day (total) readmission 
rates are 5% higher in CON 
states than in non-CON 
states, but the effect is not 
sustained.
5. 60 day readmission rates are 
13 percent higher in CON 
states than in non-CON 
states, but the effect is not 
sustained. 
6. In CON states there are fewer 
home health visits, fewer 
visits per week, and a lower 
proportion of visits by skilled 
nurses, but the effects are 
small and not statistically 
significant; 
7. The Herfindahl Index in 
the home health market is 
approximately 1,000 points 
lower in non-CON s tates;“We find that CON states use 
home health less frequently, but 
system-wide rehospitalization 
rates, overall Medicare 
expenditures, and home health 
practice patterns are similar.” 
43
palmettopromise.org4. Aaron J. Casp et al., 
“Certificate-of-Need 
State Laws and Total 
Hip Arthroplasty,” The 
Journal of Arthroplasty 
34, no. 3 (March 2019): 
401–7.They study the effect of CON on 
total hip arthroplasty. They find: 
1. CON is associated with a 
lower volume of total hip 
arthroplasty. 
2. CON is associated with care 
in high-volume hospitals. 
3. No difference in 
postoperative compli cations. “The per capita incidence of 
THA was higher in non-CON 
states than CON states at each 
time period and overall (P < 
.0001). However, the rate of 
change in THA incidence over 
the time period was higher in 
CON states (1.0 per 10,000 per 
year) compared to non-CON 
states (0.68 per 10,000 per 
year) although not statistically 
significant. Length of stay was 
higher and a higher percentage 
of patients received care in 
high-volume hospitals in 
CON states (both P < .0001). 
No meaningful differences in 
postoperative complications 
were found.”
44
palmettopromise.org5. Olivia A. Schultz, Lewis 
Shi, and Michael Lee, 
“Assessing the Efficacy 
of Certificate of Need 
Laws Through Total 
Joint Arthroplasty,” 
Journal for Healthcare 
Quality: Official 
Publication of the 
National Association for 
Healthcare Quality  43, 
no. 1 (February 1, 2021): 
e1–7.They examined the effect of CON 
on total knee, hip, and shoulder 
arthroplasty, finding: 
4. CON has no effect on the cost 
per procedure, 
5. CON is associated with a 
lower volume of procedures, 
though it was not statistically 
significant in the case of hip 
arthroplasty, and
6. CON has no statistically 
significant effect on 
complications (deep vein 
thrombosis and pulmonary 
embo lism)“The rate of TKA in patients 
diagnosed with arthritis in the 
knee was 12.3% (8,984/73,139) 
in CON states and 13.8% in 
non-CON states (6,612/47,744). 
Access was significantly greater 
in non-CON states (p , .0001). 
For THA, the rate was lower in 
CON states when compared 
with non-CON states with rates 
of 21.4% (4,843/22,608) and 
21.9% (3,239/1,481), respectively; 
however, this difference was 
not statistically significant (p 
5 .250). Similarly, TSA occurred 
at a decreased rate of 2.8% 
(683/24,675) in CON states 
compared with a rate of 3.2% 
(523/16,436) in non-CON states. 
This difference was statistically
significant (p 5 .019)…. The 
apparent nonsuperiority of 
CON states in achieving their 
purported goals may call into 
question the effectiveness of 
additional bureaucracy and 
regulation, suggesting a need 
for further examination…. One-
year postoperatively, there 
were no significant differences 
in the rate of DVT [deep vein 
thrombosis] or PE [pulmonary 
embolism] after TKA, THA, or 
TSA in either study populations 
(p 5 .605, p 5 .713, p 5 .670).”
45
palmettopromise.org6. Cancienne et al., 
“Certificate-of-
Need Programs Are 
Associated with a 
Reduced Incidence, 
Expenditure, and 
Rate of Complications 
with Respect to Knee 
Arthroscopy in the 
Medicare Population.”They examine the effect of CON 
on knee arthroscopy, assessing 
its effect on: 
1. Charg es and 
reimbursements: in t-tests 
without controls they 
found that charges (which 
are the prices set before 
any negotiation) were 
lower in CON states, while 
reimbursements (which are 
actual reimbursements) were 
not statistically significantly 
different.
2. Total volume: total volume 
and growth in total volume 
was lower in CON states than 
in non-CON states.
3. Volume within facilities: 
CON is associated with the 
presence of more high-
volume facilities, and 
4. Quality: There were more 
ER visits within 30 days 
of operation and more 
infections within 6 months 
of operation in CON than in 
non-CON states; there were 
no differences in in-hospital 
deaths or readmissions 
within 30 days of the 
operation between CON and 
non-CON states.  “the incidence of knee 
arthroscopy was significantly 
lower in CON states compared 
with non-CON states (p < 
0.0001). In addition, the rate 
of decrease in the incidence 
of knee arthroscopy over the 
period studied was significantly 
greater in CON states compared 
with non-CON states (p < 
0.006).”
7. James Bailey and 
Eleanor Lewin, 
“Certificate of Need and 
Inpatient Psychiatric 
Services,” Social Science 
Research Network 
working paper, 2021.They examine the effect of 
psychiatric service CONs. They 
find that psychiatric service 
CONs: 
1. Red uce the number of 
psychiatric hospitals by 20 
percent, 
2. Reduce the likelihood that a 
hospital will accept Medicare 
by 5.35 percentage points; 
and 
3. Reduce the number of 
psychia tric clients by 56 
percent.“We find that CON laws 
targeting psychiatric services 
are associated with a 
statistically significant 0.527 
fewer psychiatric hospitals 
per million residents (20% 
fewer) and 2.19 fewer inpatient 
psychiatric clients per ten 
thousand residents (56% 
fewer). Psychiatric CON is also 
associated with psychiatric 
hospitals being 5.35 percentage 
points less likely to accept 
Medicare.”
46
palmettopromise.orgB. PAPERS FINDING CON HAS MIXED, INSIGNIFICANT, OR NEGLIGIBLE EFFECTS ON 
VOLUME OF CARE
No. Paper Summary Quotes
1. Cutler, Huckman, 
and Kolstad, “Input 
Constraints and 
the Efficiency of They assess the 1996 repeal of 
CON in Pennsylvania on Coronary 
Artery Bypass Graft (CABG). They 
found: 
1. Repeal of CON reduced travel 
distanced by 9 percent;
2. There was no statistically 
significant effect on total 
volume following CON repeal; 
3. There were mixed results 
on scale; following CON 
repeal, fewer surgeries were 
performed by high-volume 
hospitals, but more were 
performed by high-volume 
surgeons.
4. CON repeal led to a shift from 
standard quality to high-
quality surgeons; and
5. Incumbent hospital margins 
initially fell following repeal 
but these hospitals had 
regained profitability and 
were the most profitable by 
2002.“Relating CABG volume to 
a post-1996 indicator, state 
indicator variables, and a post-
1996 Pennsylvania-specific 
indicator yields a coefficient 
on the differential impact in 
Pennsylvania after 1996 of 
-417 (standard error=2,234). In 
addition to being statistically 
insignificant, the estimated 
value of this coefficient is 
actually negative suggesting, 
if anything, a slightly greater 
decline in total CABG volume 
following the repeal of CON.”
2. J. L. Robinson et al., 
“Certificate of Need and 
the Quality of Cardiac 
Surgery,” American 
Journal of Medical 
Quality: The Official 
Journal of the American 
College of Medical 
Quality  16, no. 5 (October 
2001): 155–60.They examined the effect of CON 
elimination in PA (comparing it 
with NJ, which maintained CON): 
1. On the num ber of open-
heart surgery programs, 
which increased 25 percent 
following elimination of CON;
2. The total volume of CABG 
surgeries which were 
unchanged following repeal,
3. Provider volume, which 
shifted from programs that 
had been established before 
CON repeal to programs that 
were established after CON 
repeal, and
4. Mortality rate, which was 
unchanged following repe al.“In the 3 years following the 
elimination of CON, the number 
of open-heart surgery programs 
increased 25%, yet there was 
no significant increase in the 
number of CABG surgeries 
performed. Quality, as measured 
by mortality rate, was not 
impacted by the real-location 
of the relatively stable CABG 
volume.”
47
palmettopromise.org3. Vivian Ho et al., “Cardiac 
Certificate of Need 
Regulations and the 
Availability and Use 
of Revascularization 
Services,” American 
Heart Journal 154, no. 4 
(October 2007): 767–75.They study the association 
between cardiac CON 
regulations, availability of 
revascularization facilities, and 
revascularization rates, focusing 
on differences between the 
general population and the 
elderly and on differences 
between procedures (coronary 
artery bypass graft surgery 
(CABG) or a percutaneous 
coronary intervention (PCI)). 
They find that: 
1. CON is  associated with fewer 
hospitals offering CABG and 
PCI,
2. CON has no effect on overall 
CABG utilization.
3. CON is associated with 19.2 
percent fewer PCIs per 1,000 
elderly .“Each year, the per capita 
number of hospitals performing 
CABG and PCI was higher in 
states without CON (3.7 per 
100,000 elderly for CABG, 4.5 
for PCI in 2002), compared with 
CON states (2.5 for CABG, 3.0 
for PCI in 2002). Multivariate 
regressions that adjusted 
for market and population 
characteristics found no 
difference in CABG utilization 
rates between states with and 
without CON (P = .7). However, 
CON was associated with 19.2% 
fewer PCIs per 1000 elderly (P = 
.01), equivalent to 322,526 fewer 
PCIs for 1989 to 2002. Among 
most states that discontinued 
CON, the number of hospitals 
performing PCI rose in the 
mid 1990s, but there were no 
consistent trends in the number 
of hospitals performing CABG or 
in PCIs or CABGs per capita.”
4. Marah N. Short, Thomas 
A. Aloia, and Vivian Ho, 
“Certificate of Need 
Regulations and the 
Availability and Use of 
Cancer Resections,” 
Annals of Surgical 
Oncology 15, no. 7 (July 
2008): 1837–45. They studied Medicare data on 
beneficiaries treated with one 
of six cancer resections and an 
associated cancer diagnosis from 
1989 to 2002. 
They found: 
1. CON is asso ciated with 
fewer hospitals per cancer 
incident for colectomy, rectal 
resection, and pulmonary 
lobectomy;
2. CON has no effect on the 
number of procedures per 
cancer incident; 
3. CON was associated with 
greater hospital volu me.“The number of hospitals per 
cancer incident was lower in 
CON states versus non-CON 
states for colectomy (P = .022), 
rectal resection (P = .026), 
and pulmonary lobectomy (P 
= .032). Hospital volume was 
significantly higher in CON 
states versus non-CON states 
for colectomy (P = .006) and 
pulmonary lobectomy (P = 
.043). There were no differences 
between states with and 
without CON in the number of 
procedures per cancer incident.” 
48
palmettopromise.org5. Ho, Ku-Goto, and Jollis, 
“Certificate of Need 
(CON) for Cardiac Care.”They use differences-in-
differences regression 
analysis to compare states 
that dropped CON during the 
sample period with states 
that kept the regulation. They 
focused on coronary artery 
bypass graft surgery (CABG) 
and percutaneous coronary 
interventions (PCI). They found 
that in states that dropped CON: 
1. The num ber of hospitals in 
the state performing CABG 
and PCI went up following 
repeal;
2. Statewide procedural volume 
for CABG and PCI were 
unchanged;
3. Mean hospital volume 
declined for both procedures, 
and 
4. Procedural CABG mortality 
declined after repeal, though 
the difference was not 
permanent“States that dropped CON 
experienced lower CABG 
mortality rates relative to states 
that kept CON, although the 
differential is not permanent. 
No such mortality difference is 
found for PCI. Dropping CON is 
associated with more providers 
statewide and lower mean 
hospital volume for both CABG 
and PCI. However, statewide 
procedure counts remain the 
same…. We find no evidence 
that CON regulations are 
associated with higher quality 
CABG or PCI. Future research 
should examine whether the 
greater number of
hospitals performing 
revascularization after CON 
removal raises expenditures due 
to the building of more facilities, 
or lowers expenditures due to 
enhanced price competition.”
6. Elana C. Fric-Shamji 
and Mohammed F. 
Shamji, “Effect of US 
State Certificate of 
Need Regulation of 
Operating Rooms 
on Surgical Resident 
Training,” Clinical and 
Investigative Medicine. 
Medecine Clinique Et 
Experimentale 33, no. 2 
(April 1, 2010): E78.They evaluate the mean per 
capita rates of 26 diverse 
surgical procedures in 21 
CON and 5 non-CON states 
between 2004 and 2006. The 
proportion of procedures 
performed in teaching facilities 
was also assessed. They found 
no significant difference in 
procedural rates between CON 
and non-CON states. “States with CON laws did not 
differ significantly in procedural 
rates for any of the investigated 
surgical procedures; however, 
such regulation was associated 
with different trends in teaching 
center caseload, depending on 
the type of procedure. Complex 
procedures, such as Whipple 
operations (p = 0.14) or resection 
of acoustic neuroma (p = 0.37), 
underwent no redistribution. 
Conversely, common procedures 
that might have previously been 
performed in private settings, 
such as total hip replacement 
(p = 0.003) or mastectomy (p = 
0.01), did occur more commonly 
in teaching facilities under CON 
regulation.” 
49
palmettopromise.org7. Browne et al., 
“Certificate-of-Need 
State Laws and Total 
Knee Arthroplasty.”They examined the effect of CON 
on total knee arthroplasty (TKA) 
by comparing states with and 
without CON programs. They 
looked at 4 factors: 
1. Average Me dicare 
reimbursements were 5% to 
10% lower in non-CON states,
2. CON was associated with 
lower TKA utilization per 
capita, but faster growth in 
utilization per capita. 
3. CON was associated with TKA 
in higher-volume hospitals, 
4. Examination of adverse 
events rates did not reveal 
any strong associations 
between any adverse 
outcome and CON status.“Although CON status was 
associated with lower per capita 
utilization of TKA, the annual 
incidence of TKA appears to 
have increased over time more 
rapidly in states with CON 
laws compared with non-CON 
states.”
8. Tarik K. Yuce et al., 
“Association of State 
Certificate of Need 
Regulation With 
Procedural Volume, 
Market Share, and 
Outcomes Among 
Medicare Beneficiaries,” 
JAMA 324, no. 20 
(November 24, 
2020): 2058, https://
doi.org/10.1001/
jama.2020.21115 .The assess the effect of CON 
on measures of volume and of 
quality. They found: 
1. No significant difference 
between CON and non-
CON states in county-level 
procedures per 10,000 
persons, 
2. No significant difference 
between CON and non-CON 
states for hospital procedural 
volume,
3. No difference in hospital 
market share,
4. No difference in risk-adjusted 
30-day postoperative 
mortality,
5. No difference in surgical cite 
infection, and 
6. No difference in readmission“there were no significant 
differences found between 
states without and with 
certificate of need regulation 
for overall hospital procedural 
volume; hospital market share; 
county-level procedures per 
10 000 persons; or risk-adjusted 
30-day postoperative mortality, 
surgical site infection, or 
readmission…. Policy makers 
should consider reevaluating 
whether the current approach 
to certificate of need regulation 
is achieving the intended 
objectives and whether those 
objectives should be updated.” 
50
palmettopromise.orgC. PAPERS THAT FIND CON IS ASSOCIATED WITH HIGHER VOLUME
No. Paper Summary Quotes
1. Abhinav Khanna et al., 
“Certificate of Need 
Programs, Intensity 
Modulated Radiation 
Therapy Use and the 
Cost of Prostate Cancer 
Care,” The Journal 
of Urology  189, no. 1 
(January 2013): 75–79.The authors focus on intensity 
modulated radiation therapy. 
They find that: 
1. CON was not assoc iated with 
any difference in cost growth
2. CON was associated with 
greater growth in intensity 
modulated radiation therapy“While the use of IMRT as a 
proportion of all
definitive treatments for 
localized prostate cancer (ie 
radical prostatectomy, IMRT, 
3D-CRT and
brachytherapy) increased 
dramatically during the study 
period in CON Yes (2.3% of all 
treatments in
2002, 46.4% in 2008 to 2009) 
and CON No (11.3% of all 
treatments in 2002, 41.7% in 
2008 to 2009) regions, greater 
growth of IMRT use was 
observed in
CON Yes (slope 0.403) vs CON 
No (slope 0.241)
regions in adjusted analyses 
(p  0.001)…. Certificate of need 
programs were not effective in 
limiting intensity modulated 
radiation therapy use or 
attenuating prostate cancer 
health care costs. There remains 
an unmet need to control the 
rapid adoption of new, more 
expensive therapies for prostate 
cancer that have limited cost 
and comparative effectiveness 
data.”
51
palmettopromise.org2. Ziino, Bala, and Cheng, 
“Utilization and 
Reimbursement Trends 
Based on Certificate of 
Need in Single-Level 
Cervical Discectomy.”They studied inpatient cervical 
discectomy in CON and non-CON 
states in inpatient and outpatient 
setting. It appears that they did 
not use any controls, however. 
Regarding reimbursements, they 
find:
1. In the inpatient setting, 
reimbursement was lower in 
non-CON states ($1,128.40) than 
in the CON states ($1,223.56). 
But reimbursements in the 
CON states were falling faster 
over time. 
2. In the outpatient setting 
reimbursement was higher 
in Non-CON states ($4,237.01) 
than in CON states ($3,859.31) 
and reimbursements were 
growing in the non-CON states 
but falling in the CON states.
Regarding access: 
3. In the inpatient setting, there 
were more patients in the 
CON setting than in the non-
CON setting (657 compared 
with 231) and utilization of 
the procedure was growing 
faster in CON than in non-
CON states but this does 
not appear to control for the 
larger population of CON 
states than non-CON states. 
4. Similarly, in the outpatient 
setting, there were more 
patients in the CON setting 
than in the non-CON setting 
(435 compared with 257) and 
utilization of the procedure 
was growing faster in CON 
than in non-CON states but 
again this does not appear 
to control for the larger 
population of CON states 
than non-CON states. We analyzed a private payer and 
Medicare database from 2007 
to 2015. All single-level cervical 
discectomies were selected 
then split into CON and non-
CON states. Each group was 
then further split into inpatient 
and outpatient. Utilization and 
reimbursement were analyzed 
using the compound annual 
growth rate (CAGR), with 
reimbursement adjusted by the 
US Bureau of Labor Statistics 
Consumer Price Index. Results: 
We identified 1,580 single level 
cervical decompressions in 
our study period: 888 were 
done in the inpatient setting, 
whereas 692 were done in the 
outpatient setting. Adjusted 
reimbursement only increased 
in the non-CON outpatient 
setting, with a CAGR of 
2.0%. All other settings had 
decreased reimbursement. 
Utilization increased across all 
four settings, with the highest 
growth seen in the CON 
outpatient setting, with a CAGR 
of 12.7%. The highest average 
reimbursement was in the 
non-CON outpatient setting at 
$4,237.
52
palmettopromise.orgTABLE 7. STUDIES ASSESSING THE EFFECT OF CON ON QUALITY OF CARE
A. PAPERS THAT FIND CON IS ASSOCIATED WITH LOWER QUALITY CARE
No. Paper Summary Quotes
1. S. M. Shortell and E. F. 
Hughes, “The Effects of 
Regulation, Competition, 
and Ownership on 
Mortality Rates Among 
Hospital Inpatients,” The 
New England Journal 
of Medicine 318, no. 17 
(April 28, 1988): 1100–1107, 
https://doi.org/10.1056/
NEJM198804283181705 .They examined the effect of CON 
(among other factors) on hospital 
quality, finding that the ratio of 
actual to predicted mortality rates 
among Medicare patients were 5 
to 6 percent higher in state with 
stringent CON regulation.“Hospitals in states with the most 
stringent procedures for reviewing 
applications for Certificate of Need 
had ratios of actual to predicted 
death rates that were 5 to 6 percent 
higher than those of hospitals with 
less stringent certificate-of-need 
procedures (p0.05).”
2. J. S. Zinn, “Market 
Competition and the 
Quality of Nursing Home 
Care,” Journal of Health 
Politics, Policy and Law 19, 
no. 3 (1994): 555–82.She examined the determinants of 
nursing home quality. One of her 
explanatory variables was nursing 
home construction moratoria. She 
found these to be associated with 
lower RN staffing ratios and greater 
use of physical restraint. “In markets where a moratorium 
on nursing home bed construction 
erects a barrier to new competitors, 
RN staffing tends to be lower 
and prevalence rates higher. The 
association is significant for the 
use of physical restraints and RN 
staffing level.”
3. Ho, Ku-Goto, and Jollis, 
“Certificate of Need (CON) 
for Cardiac Care.”They use difference-in-difference 
regression analysis to compare 
states that dropped CON during 
the sample period with states that 
kept the regulation. They focused 
on coronary artery bypass graft 
surgery (CABG) and percutaneous 
coronary interventions (PCI). They 
found that in states that dropped 
CON: 
1. The number of hospitals in the 
state performing CABG and PCI 
went up following repeal;
2. Statewide procedural volume for 
CABG and PCI were unchanged;
3. Mean hospital volume declined 
for both procedures, and 
4. Procedural CABG mortality 
declined after repeal, though the 
difference  was not permanent“States that dropped CON 
experienced lower CABG mortality 
rates relative to states that kept 
CON, although the differential is 
not permanent. No such mortality 
difference is found for PCI. 
Dropping CON is associated with 
more providers statewide and lower 
mean hospital volume for both 
CABG and PCI. However, statewide 
procedure counts remain the 
same…. We find no evidence that 
CON regulations are associated with 
higher quality CABG or PCI. Future 
research should examine whether 
the greater number of
hospitals performing 
revascularization after CON removal 
raises expenditures due to the 
building of more facilities, or lowers 
expenditures due to enhanced price 
competition.”
53
palmettopromise.org4. Kolstad, “Essays on 
Information, Competition 
and Quality in Health Care 
Provider Markets.”He examined how the 1996 repeal 
of CON legislation in Pennsylvania 
affected the market for coronary 
artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery 
in the state, finding: 
1. The number of CABG facilities 
increased 46 percent and 
2. Surgeries were more likely to 
be performed by high quality 
surgeons. “Within a few years after the 
repeal of CON legislation, the 
number of CABG facilities 
increased 46 percent. Consistent 
with theory, I show that entry led 
to a redistribution of surgeries 
from lower- to higher-quality 
surgeons. Under a reasonable set 
of assumptions, I find that the 
value of the improved outcomes 
due to this redistribution offset 
between 42 and 100 percent of the 
additional fixed costs incurred by 
new entrants.” … “about 11 additional 
patients per year survived CABG 
because of the share redistribution 
following CON repeal.” The average 
CABG patient traveled 2.3 fewer 
miles following CON repeal.”
5. Cutler, Huckman, and 
Kolstad, “Input Constraints 
and the Efficiency of 
Entry.”They assess the 1996 repeal of CON 
in Pennsylvania on Coronary Artery 
Bypass Graft (CABG). They found: 
1. Repeal of CON reduced travel 
distanced by 9 percent;
2. There was no statistically 
significant effect on total volume 
following CON repeal; 
3. There were mixed results on 
scale; following CON repeal, 
fewer surgeries were performed 
by high-volume hospitals, but 
more were performed by high-
volume surgeons.
4. CON repeal led to a shift from 
standard quality to high-quality 
surgeons; and
5. Incumbent hospital margins 
initially fell following repeal but 
these hospitals had regained 
profitability and were the most 
profitable by 2002.“The reallocation associated with 
entry is thus equivalent to a 53 
percent increase (relative to the 
mean) in share for high-quality 
surgeons in markets with positive 
entrant share less than 10 percent 
and a 44 percent increase for the 
same surgeons in markets with 
entrant share between 10 and 20 
percent.”
54
palmettopromise.org6. Aaron D. Falchook 
and Ronald C. Chen, 
“Association Between 
Certificate of Need 
Legislation and 
Radiation Therapy Use 
Among Elderly Patients 
With Early Cancers,” 
International Journal 
of Radiation Oncology, 
Biology, Physics 91, no. 2 
(February 1, 2015): 448–50, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijrobp.2014.10.033 .They examined utilization of 
radiation therapy when it is not 
warranted in CON and non-CON 
states, concluding that there is 
greater use of this treatment on 
elderly patients who may not need 
it in CON than in non-CON states. High quality cancer care includes 
reducing overtreatment, a well-
recognized problem for elderly 
patients with ductal carcinoma 
in situ (Stage 0) or Stage 1 breast 
cancer and low-risk prostate 
cancer. The federal Health Planning 
Resources Development Act of 
1974 led to implementation of 
CON programs in multiple states. 
The stated purpose of CON is 
to facilitate coordinated health 
care services to reduce overall 
medical costs. We examined 
whether CON is associated with 
less radiotherapy (RT) use in elderly 
patients with Stage 0-1 breast 
cancer, and low-risk prostate 
cancer.  Methods : We compared RT 
use in 6 Surveillance, Epidemiology 
and End Results (SEER) states 
with CON for radiotherapy vs. 6 
states without CON for 1) men 
65 years and older with low-risk 
prostate cancer, 2) women 70 
years and older with Stage 0-1 
breast cancer after lumpectomy. 
In both clinical scenarios, the use 
of RT is controversial. Patients 
diagnosed from 2004-2011 were 
included.  Results : 40,267 men 
and 24,385 women were included. 
Radiotherapy use was higher in 
CON states: prostate cancer (64.3 
vs. 56.0%, p<.001), and breast cancer 
(59.5% vs. 53.6%, p<.001) overall, and 
for each year studied (Table). RT 
use decreased from 2004 to 2011, 
but remains persistently higher 
in states with CON programs. On 
multivariate analysis controlling 
for age, race, stage and year, CON 
was associated with higher use 
in both prostate cancer (OR 1.46, 
p<.001) and breast cancer (OR 
1.35, p<.001).  Conclusions : There 
is more RT use in CON states for 
elderly patients who may not need 
this treatment for Stage 0-1 breast 
cancer and low-risk prostate cancer. 
This suggests that CON programs 
may not be effective in reducing 
overtreatment, an important quality 
of care issue in oncology.
55
palmettopromise.org7. Li and Dor, “How Do 
Hospitals Respond to 
Market Entry?”Removal of CON was associated 
with: 
1. A substantial increase in the 
number of hospitals performing 
cardiac revascularization 
procedures, 
2. An overall downward trend in 
CABG and an overall upward 
trend in the alternative 
procedure, PCI. 
3. Entry led to a significant increase 
in the likelihood of CABG, 
relative to trend, but it did not 
contribute to the increase in PCI 
after adjusting for patient traits, 
market characteristics, and area-
specific trends. 
4. The probability of receiving 
PCI specifically at incumbent 
hospitals decreased with market 
entry, suggesting a volume shift 
from incumbents to entrants
5. Entry shifted a disproportionate 
volume of low-severity patients 
from incumbent hospitals to 
entrants.
6. Entry by new cardiac surgery 
centers tended to sort high-
severity patients into the more 
invasive CABG procedure and 
low-severity patients into the 
less invasive PCI procedures, 
potentially improving quality of 
care.“In this paper, we empirically 
examine the demand-augmenting, 
demand-redistribution, and risk-
allocation effects of hospital 
entry by studying the cardiac 
revascularization markets in 
Pennsylvania, a state in which 
dynamic market entry occurred 
after repeal of CON in 1996. 
Results from interrupted time-
series analyses indicate demand-
augmenting effects for coronary 
artery bypass graft (CABG) and 
business-stealing effects for 
percutaneous coronary intervention 
(PCI) procedures: high entrant 
market share mitigated the 
declining incidence of CABG, but 
it had no significant effect on the 
rising trend in PCI use, among 
patients with coronary artery 
disease. We further find evidence 
that entry by new cardiac surgery 
centers tended to sort high-severity 
patients into the more invasive 
CABG procedure and low-severity 
patients into the less invasive 
PCI procedures. These findings 
underscore the importance of 
considering market-level strategic 
responses by hospitals when 
regulatory barriers are rescinded.”
… “free entry improves the match 
between underlying medical risk 
and treatment intensity, potentially 
improving quality of care and hence 
being welfare enhancing.”
56
palmettopromise.org8. Thomas Stratmann and 
David Wille, “Certificate of 
Need Laws and Hospital 
Quality,” Mercatus 
Working Paper (Arlington, 
VA: Mercatus Center at 
George Mason University, 
September 2016).The study the effect of CON 9 
measures of hospital quality:
1. Death among surgical 
inpatients with serious treatable 
complications 
2. Postoperative pulmonary 
embolism or deep vein 
thrombosis 
3. Percent of patients giving their 
hospital a 9 or 10 overall rating 
4. Pneumonia readmission rate 
5. Pneumonia mortality rate
6. Heart failure readmission rate
7. Heart failure mortality rate
8. Heart attack readmission rate 
9. Heart attack mortality rate
Hospitals in CON states performed 
worse than those in non-CON states 
in 8 of the 9 categories, the exception 
being postoperative pulmonary 
embolism.“Analyzing nine quality indicators 
and estimating the effect of CON 
laws on the basis of only how 
hospital quality varies within the 
same healthcare market, we find 
no evidence that CON laws increase 
the quality of care. Instead, we 
find evidence consistent with the 
hypothesis that limiting entry 
results in lower hospital quality.”
57
palmettopromise.org9. Robert L. Ohsfeldt and 
Pengxiang Li, “State Entry 
Regulation and Home 
Health Agency Quality 
Ratings,” Journal of 
Regulatory Economics 53, 
no. 1 (2018): 1–19.They examine the effect of CON on 
home health agency quality ratings 
from the Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services (CMS). They find 
that: 
1. HHAs in CON states were about 
58% less likely to be rated as High 
quality ( p < .01). 
2. HHAs in CON states also were 
about 30% more likely to be rated 
as “Medium” quality compared to 
HHAs in states without CON for 
HHAs. “We assessed the impact of state 
CON programs for HHAs, and 
for potential substitute service 
providers, on quality ratings for 
HHAs. HHA quality ratings were 
obtained from the Home Health 
Compare database developed 
by the Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services (CMS) for the last 
quarter of 2010 through the last 
quarter of 2013. The HHA-level data 
were augmented with county-level 
area characteristics for each HHA 
in the CMS database. An ordered 
logit model was used to estimate 
the association between state CON 
restrictions and Low, Medium, and 
High quality categories, adjusted for 
HHA and area characteristics. The 
results indicated that HHAs in states 
with CON for HHAs were less likely 
to have High quality rat- ings, and 
more likely to have Medium quality 
ratings, compared to agencies 
in states without CON for home 
health….
26.1% of HHAs in states without 
CON for HHAs were rated in the 
High quality category, compared to 
10.8% of HHAs in states with CON 
for HHAs. Thus, HHAs in CON states 
were about 58% less likely to be 
rated as High quality ( p < .01). HHAs 
in CON states also were about 30% 
more likely to be rated as “Medium” 
quality compared to HHAs in states 
without CON for HHAs. 
58
palmettopromise.org10. Stratmann and Baker, 
“Examining Certificate-of-
Need Laws in the Context 
of the Rural Health Crisis.”They examine the effect of CON 
on two measures of spending and 
two measures of quality (all four 
are indicators of “overutilization or 
waste”):  
1. Medicare spending per rural 
beneficiary (they found this was 
$295 higher in CON states than in 
non-CON states)
2. Ambulance spending per 
beneficiary ($2.54 higher in CON 
states)
3. Hospital readmission rates (1.2 
percentage points higher in CON 
states)
4. Emergency room visits per 
1,000 beneficiaries (35.1 more 
emergency department visits per 
1,000 beneficiaries in CON states),“To evaluate certificate-of-need 
(CON) laws in rural areas and 
their relationship with selected 
healthcare outcomes and with 
common measures of potentially 
avoidable spending, we regress 
county-level Medicare data and 
state-level all-patient spending 
and utilization data to compare 
healthcare outcomes and common 
measures of wasteful spending 
in rural states with and without 
CON laws. Results show that 
patients residing in counties 
restricted by CON laws spend 
more per Medicare beneficiary 
and have higher utilization rates 
in ambulance services, emergency 
departments, and readmissions, 
both before and after controlling 
for social risk factors such as race, 
education, and poverty status.”… “In 
the version of the model with full 
controls and all counties in rural 
states, CON is associated with $295 
higher spending, 1.2 percentage 
points higher readmission, 35.1 
more emergency department visits 
per 1,000 beneficiaries, and $2.54 
higher ambulance spending per 
beneficiary.” 
59
palmettopromise.org11. Bingxiao Wu et al., “Entry 
Regulation and the Effect 
of Public Reporting: 
Evidence from Home 
Health Compare,” Health 
Economics 28, no. 4 (April 
2019): 492–516.They assess the effect of CON 
regulation on several measures 
of quality, using a cross-border 
design to control for endogeneity. 
They find that CON is uniformly 
associated with worse outcomes 
including:
1. patients perform worse on 
functional improvement 
measures (bathing, ambulating, 
transferring to bed, managing 
oral medication, and less pain 
interfering with activity) and 
2. They are more likely to be 
admitted to the ER and 
3. More likely to be be admitted to 
an acute care hospital. “We find that home health agencies 
in non-CON states improved 
quality under public reporting 
significantly more than agencies 
in CON states. Because home 
health care is a labor-intensive 
and capital-light industry, the 
state CON law is a major barrier 
for new firms to enter…. Overall, 
quality improvement is more 
pronounced in non‐CON states 
than in CON states, and the 
results are robust across different 
specifications. The increase in the 
reported functional improvement 
score was 1.4 percentage points 
higher in non‐CON states than 
in CON states. This corresponds 
to a 2.9% further increase from 
the pre‐HHC average level of the 
functional status improvement rate 
(0.49). Similar effects are observed 
for the reduction of emergency 
department visit and hospitalization 
rate, as well as the increase in 
unreported functional improvement 
score.” 
12. Bichaka Fayissa et al., 
“Certificate-Of-Need 
Regulation and Healthcare 
Service Quality: Evidence 
from the Nursing Home 
Industry,” Healthcare 
(Basel, Switzerland) 8, no. 
4 (October 23, 2020): E423, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/
healthcare8040423 .In an IV study, they find that CON is 
associated with: 
1. 18 to 24 percent lower nursing 
home survey scores computed 
by healthcare professionals, and 
2. The substitution of lower-quality 
certified nursing assistance 
care for higher-quality licensed 
practical nurse care“Instrumental variables results 
indicate that health survey 
scores for nursing homes that 
are computed by healthcare 
professionals are about 18–24% 
lower, depending on the type of 
nursing home under consideration, 
in states with CON regulation. We 
also find that the presence of CON 
regulation leads to a substitution 
of lower-quality certified nursing 
assistant care for higher-quality 
licensed practical nurse care, 
regardless of the type of nursing 
home under consideration.”
60
palmettopromise.org13. Sriparna Ghosh, Agnitra 
Roy Choudhury, and Alicia 
Plemmons, “Certificate-of-
Need Laws and Healthcare 
Utilization During 
COVID-19 Pandemic,” 
SSRN Scholarly Paper 
(Rochester, NY: Social 
Science Research 
Network, July 29, 2020), 
https://doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.3663547They examined the relationship 
between CON and mortality 
associated with illnesses that 
require similar medical equipment 
as COVID. They find that: 
1. There are higher mortality rates 
in CON states than in non-CON 
states; and
2. States with high healthcare 
utilization that reformed their 
CON laws during the pandemic 
saw lower mortality rates 
resulting from natural death, 
septicemia, diabetes, chronic 
lower respiratory disease, 
influenza or pneumonia, 
Alzheimer’s, and COVID.“Our investigation primarily focuses 
on mortality caused by COVID and 
non-COVID related reasons, and 
in understanding how these laws 
affect access to healthcare for 
illnesses that might require similar 
medical equipment. Our baseline 
results suggest that mortality rates 
are higher in states with CON laws 
relative to that in states without 
any CON laws. Furthermore, states 
with high healthcare utilization 
due to COVID that reformed their 
CON laws during the pandemic 
saw a significant reduction in 
mortality resulting from natural 
death, Septicemia, Diabetes, 
Chronic Lower Respiratory Disease, 
Influenza or Pneumonia, and 
Alzheimer’s Disease in addition to 
reduction in COVID deaths.”
14. Kevin Chiu, “The Impact 
of Certificate of Need 
Laws on Heart Attack 
Mortality: Evidence from 
County Borders,” Journal 
of Health Economics , 2021, 
https://doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.3678714 .He uses a cross-border 
discontinuity design to study the 
effect of CON on heart attack 
mortality. He finds that it is 
associated with 6 to 10 percent 
higher mortality three years after 
enactment. “To estimate the net effect of 
CON regulations, I use a border 
discontinuity design to measure 
within-regional heart attack 
mortality spanning 1968 to 1982. 
I estimate that CON regulations 
led to an increase in heart attack 
deaths, by 6%-10%, three years after 
the policy was enacted.”
B. PAPERS FINDING CON HAS MIXED, INSIGNIFICANT, OR NEGLIGIBLE EFFECTS ON  
QUALITY OF CARE
No. Paper Summary Quotes
1. J. L. Robinson et al., 
“Certificate of Need and 
the Quality of Cardiac 
Surgery,” American 
Journal of Medical 
Quality: The Official 
Journal of the American 
College of Medical Quality  
16, no. 5 (October 2001): 
155–60.They examined the effect of CON 
elimination in PA (comparing it 
with NJ, which maintained CON): 
1. On the number of open-
heart surgery programs, which 
increased 25 percent following 
elimination of CON;
2. The total volume of CABG 
surgeries which were unchanged 
following repeal,
3. Provider volume, which shifted 
from programs that had been 
established before CON repeal to 
programs that were established 
after CON repeal, and
4. Mortality rate, which w as 
unchanged following repeal.“In the 3 years following the 
elimination of CON, the number 
of open-heart surgery programs 
increased 25%, yet there was no 
significant increase in the number 
of CABG surgeries performed. 
Quality, as measured by mortality 
rate, was not impacted by the 
real-location of the relatively stable 
CABG volume.”
61
palmettopromise.org2. Vivian Ho, “Certificate 
of Need, Volume, 
and Percutaneous 
Transluminal Coronary 
Angioplasty Outcomes,” 
American Heart Journal 
147, no. 3 (March 2004): 
442–48.She compares Florida, where 
there is a CON for percutaneous 
transluminal coronary angioplasty 
(PTCA) with California, where there 
is no such CON. She finds: s
1. CON is associated with higher 
in-hospital volume for PTCA
2. There is a positive relationship 
between PTCA volume and 
mortality outcomes (though note 
that she does not directly study 
the relationship between CON 
and PTCA mortality o utcomes).“Florida CON laws were associated 
with higher average PTCA volumes 
relative to California hospitals, 
where no such laws exist. Because a 
higher PTCA volume was associated 
with moderately better outcomes, 
CON may be marginally effective in 
improving outcomes for PTCA.”
3. Iona Popescu, Mary 
S. Vaughan-Sarrazin, 
and Gary E. Rosenthal, 
“Certificate of Need 
Regulations and 
Use of Coronary 
Revascularization 
After Acute Myocardial 
Infarction,” The Journal 
of the American Medical 
Association 295, no. 18 
(May 10, 2006): 2141–47.They studied access and quality 
outcomes in revascularization. They 
found that patients in CON states: 
3. Were less likely to be 
admitted to hospitals offering 
revascularization,
4. Were less likely to undergo 
revascularization, and 
5. Had no difference in 30-day 
mortality rates relative to patients 
in non-CON st ates.“The 624,421 patients in states with 
certificate of need regulations 
were less likely to be admitted 
to hospitals with coronary 
revascularization services (321 573 
[51.5%] vs 323 695 [62.8%]; P<.001) 
or to undergo revascularization 
at the admitting hospital (163 120 
[26.1%] vs 163 877 [31.8%]; P<.001) 
than patients in states without 
certificates of need…. Patients 
with acute myocardial infarction 
were less likely to be admitted 
to hospitals offering coronary 
revascularization and to undergo 
early revascularization in 
states with certificate of need 
regulations. However, differences 
in the availability and use of 
revascularization therapies were not 
associated with mortality.”
4. Verdi J. DiSesa et al., 
“Contemporary Impact 
of State Certificate-of-
Need Regulations for 
Cardiac Surgery: An 
Analysis Using the Society 
of Thoracic Surgeons’ 
National Cardiac Surgery 
Database,” Circulation 
114, no. 20 (November 14, 
2006): 2122–29.They study CON, volume, and 
mortality in coronary artery bypass 
grafting (CABG). They find: 
1. CON is positively associated with 
CABG volume within hospitals, 
and
2. There is no direct relationship 
betwe en CON and mortality.“CON states have significantly 
higher hospital CABG surgery 
volumes but similar mortality 
compared with non-CON states. 
CON regulation alone is not a 
sufficient mechanism to ensure 
quality of care for CABG surgery.”
62
palmettopromise.org5. Vivian Ho, “Does 
Certificate of Need Affect 
Cardiac Outcomes and 
Costs?,” International 
Journal of Health Care 
Finance and Economics 
6, no. 4 (March 6, 2007): 
300–324.The study assesses the effect 
of CON on cardiac costs and 
outcomes. She finds: 
1. While CON is associated with 
lower average costs per patient, 
it also seems to be associated 
with more procedures and this 
is enough to offset the savings 
from lower average costs;
2. CON is associated with greater 
volume within hospitals, 
3. CON does not seem to be related 
to inpati ent mortality. “This study compares mortality 
rates and costs for cardiac care in 
states with and without CON. CON 
appears to raise hospital procedure 
volume and lower the average cost 
of care. However, CON is associated 
with little reduction in inpatient 
mortality, and it may lead hospitals 
to operate on more patients than 
they would otherwise.” “However, 
the presence of minimum volume 
standards may lead hospitals 
in CON states to increase the 
number of procedures performed 
relative to states without CON. The 
predicted increases in the total 
number of procedures performed 
(41% for PTCA and 18% for CABG in 
the year 2000) are large enough 
to offset any potential savings 
resulting from lower average costs 
per patient treated as a result of 
CON regulation. These results are 
consistent with past research which 
has found CON regulations do not 
restrain expenditure growth.” 
6. S. A. Lorch, P. Maheshwari, 
and O. Even-Shoshan, 
“The Impact of Certificate 
of Need Programs on 
Neonatal Intensive 
Care Units,” Journal of 
Perinatology: Official 
Journal of the California 
Perinatal Association  32, 
no. 1 (January 2012): 39–44.They studied NICU CONs. They 
found: 
1. CON is associated with fewer 
units;
2. CON is associated with fewer 
beds; 
3. CON was unrelated to very low 
birth weight (VLBW) infant 
mortality and low birth weight 
(LBW) infant mortality. 
4. CON is associated with lower 
rates of all-infant mortality in 
states with a large metropolitan 
area.“Absence of such programs was 
associated with more hospitals with 
a NICU (Rate Ratio (RR) 2.06, 95% CI 
1.74 to 2.45) and NICU beds (RR 1.96, 
95% CI 1.89 to 2.03) compared with 
states with CON legislation, and 
increased all-infant mortality rates 
in states with a large metropolitan 
area…. Mortality rates for VLBW or 
LBW infants were not significantly 
different between CON and non-
CON states. However, for states 
with at least one large metropolitan 
area, states with CON legislation 
had significantly lower all infant 
mortality rates compared with 
states without CON legislation (0.54 
fewer deaths/1000 births,
95% CI 0.02 to 1.06).”
63
palmettopromise.org7. Daniel Polsky et al., “The 
Effect of Entry Regulation 
in the Health Care Sector: 
The Case of Home 
Health,” Journal of Public 
Economics  110 (February 
2014): 1–14.They assess the effect of CON on 
home health agencies, using a 
research design that focuses on 
markets that straddle CON and 
non-CON states. They find that: 
1. Medicare expenditures are not 
statistically significantly different 
between CON and non-CON 
states;
2. Non-CON states have roughly 
twice as many home health 
agencies per Medicare 
beneficiary, 
3. CON states have 13.7 percent 
fewer home health admissions 
from hospitals;
4. 60 day (total) readmission rates 
are 5% higher in CON states than 
in non-CON states, but the effect 
is not sustained.
5. 60 day readmission rates are 13 
percent higher in CON states 
than in non-CON states, but the 
effect is not sustained. 
6. In CON states there are fewer 
home health visits, fewer visits 
per week, and a lower proportion 
of visits by skilled nurses, but 
the effects are small and not 
statistically significant; 
7. The Herfindahl Index in 
the home health market is 
approximately 1,000 points lower 
in non-CON states;“We find that CON states use home 
health less frequently, but system-
wide rehospitalization rates, overall 
Medicare expenditures, and home 
health practice patterns are similar.” 
64
palmettopromise.org8. Browne et al., “Certificate-
of-Need State Laws and 
Total Knee Arthroplasty.”They examined the effect of CON 
on total knee arthroplasty (TKA) by 
comparing states with and without 
CON programs. They looked at 4 
factors: 
1. Average Medicare 
reimbursements were 5% to 10% 
lower in non-CON states,
2. CON was associated with lower 
TKA utilization per capita, but 
faster growth in utilization per 
capita. 
3. CON was associated with TKA in 
higher-volume hospitals, 
4. Examination of adverse events 
rates did not reveal any strong 
associations between any 
adverse outcome and CON 
status.“Examination of adverse events 
rates did not reveal any strong 
associations between any adverse 
outcome and CON status.”
9. James Bailey, “The Effect 
of Certificate of Need Laws 
on All‐Cause Mortality,” 
Health Services Research 
53, no. 1 (February 2018): 
49–62.He uses fixed‐ and random‐effects 
regressions to test how the 
scope of state Certificate of Need 
laws affects all‐cause mortality 
within US counties. Though 
he finds a positive relationship 
between CON laws and all-cause 
mortality, the results are not 
statistically significant. “Certificate of Need laws have no 
statistically significant effect on 
all‐cause mortality. Point estimates 
indicate that if they have any effect, 
they are more likely to increase 
mortality than decrease it.”
10. Aaron J. Casp et al., 
“Certificate-of-Need 
State Laws and Total Hip 
Arthroplasty,” The Journal 
of Arthroplasty  34, no. 3 
(March 2019): 401–7.They study the effect of CON on 
total hip arthroplasty. They find: 
1. CON is associated with a lower 
volume of total hip arthroplasty. 
2. CON is associated with care in 
high-volume hospitals. 
3. No difference in postoperative 
complications between CON and 
non-CON states . “The per capita incidence of THA 
was higher in non-CON states than 
CON states at each time period and 
overall (P < .0001). However, the 
rate of change in THA incidence 
over the time period was higher 
in CON states (1.0 per 10,000 per 
year) compared to non-CON states 
(0.68 per 10,000 per year) although 
not statistically significant. Length 
of stay was higher and a higher 
percentage of patients received 
care in high-volume hospitals 
in CON states (both P < .0001). 
No meaningful differences in 
postoperative complications were 
found.”
65
palmettopromise.org11. Yuce et al., “Association 
of State Certificate of 
Need Regulation With 
Procedural Volume, 
Market Share, and 
Outcomes Among 
Medicare Beneficiaries.”The assess the effect of CON on 
measures of volume and of quality. 
They found: 
1. No difference in county-level 
procedures per 10,000 persons, 
2. No significant difference 
between CON and non-CON 
states for hospital procedural 
volume,
3. No difference in hospital market 
share,
4. No difference in risk-adjusted 30-
day postoperative mortality,
5. No difference in surgical cite 
infection, and 
6. No difference in readmission“there were no significant 
differences found between states 
without and with certificate of 
need regulation for overall hospital 
procedural volume; hospital market 
share; county-level procedures per 
10 000 persons; or risk-adjusted 30-
day postoperative mortality, surgical 
site infection, or readmission…. 
Policy makers should consider 
reevaluating whether the current 
approach to certificate of need 
regulation is achieving the intended 
objectives and whether those 
objectives should be updated.” 
12. Olivia A. Schultz, Lewis 
Shi, and Michael Lee, 
“Assessing the Efficacy 
of Certificate of Need 
Laws Through Total Joint 
Arthroplasty,” Journal for 
Healthcare Quality: Official 
Publication of the National 
Association for Healthcare 
Quality 43, no. 1 (February 
1, 2021): e1–7.They examined the effect of CON 
on total knee, hip, and shoulder 
arthroplasty, finding: 
7. CON has no effect on the cost 
per procedure, 
8. CON is associated with a lower 
volume of procedures, though it 
was not statistically significant in 
the case of hip arthroplasty, and
9. CON has no statistically 
significant effect on 
complications (deep vein 
thrombosis and pulmonary 
embolis m)“The rate of TKA in patients 
diagnosed with arthritis in the 
knee was 12.3% (8,984/73,139) in 
CON states and 13.8% in non-CON 
states (6,612/47,744). Access was 
significantly greater in non-CON 
states (p , .0001). For THA, the rate 
was lower in CON states when 
compared with non-CON states 
with rates of 21.4% (4,843/22,608) 
and 21.9% (3,239/1,481), respectively; 
however, this difference was 
not statistically significant (p 5 
.250). Similarly, TSA occurred at a 
decreased rate of 2.8% (683/24,675) 
in CON states compared with a 
rate of 3.2% (523/16,436) in non-
CON states. This difference was 
statistically
significant (p 5 .019)…. The apparent 
nonsuperiority of CON states in 
achieving their purported goals may 
call into question the effectiveness 
of additional bureaucracy and 
regulation, suggesting a need for 
further examination…. One-year 
postoperatively, there were no 
significant differences in the rate 
of DVT [deep vein thrombosis] or 
PE [pulmonary embolism] after 
TKA, THA, or TSA in either study 
populations (p 5 .605, p 5 .713, p 5 
.670).”
66
palmettopromise.orgC. PAPERS FINDING CON IS ASSOCIATED WITH HIGHER QUALITY CARE
No. Paper Summary Quotes
1. Mary S. Vaughan-Sarrazin 
et al., “Mortality in 
Medicare Beneficiaries 
Following Coronary Artery 
Bypass Graft Surgery in 
States with and without 
Certificate of Need 
Regulation,” JAMA  288, 
no. 15 (October 16, 2002): 
1859-66. They assess the effect of CON 
on coronary artery bypass graft 
(CABG) surgery, finding:
1. Mean annual hospital volume is 
lower in states without CON.
2. More patients undergo CABG 
surgery in low-volume hospitals 
in states without CON, and
3. Mortality following CABG is 
higher in states without CON.“Unadjusted mortality was 5.1% 
in states without certificate of 
need regulation compared with 
4.4% in states with continuous 
regulation, and 4.3% in states 
with intermittent certificate 
of need regulation (P<.001 for 
each comparison). Adjusting for 
demographic and clinical factors, 
mortality remained higher in 
states without certificate of need 
regulation compared with states 
with continuous certificate of need 
regulation (odds ratio [OR], 1.22; 
95% confidence interval [CI], 1.15-
1.28; P<.001). Using the same groups 
for comparison, the mean annual 
hospital volume for CABG surgery 
was 84% lower in states without 
certificate of need regulation (104 
vs 191; P<.001) and more patients 
underwent CABG surgery in low-
volume hospitals (<100 procedures 
annually) (30% vs 10% for states 
with continuous certificate of 
need programs; P<.001). Following 
the repeal of certificate of need 
regulation in states categorized 
as intermittent, the percentage of 
patients undergoing CABG surgery 
in low-volume hospitals tripled.”
67
palmettopromise.org2. Joseph S. Ross et 
al., “Certificate of 
Need Regulation and 
Cardiac Catheterization 
Appropriateness After 
Acute Myocardial 
Infarction,” Circulation 115, 
no. 8 (February 27, 2007): 
1012–19.They examine the effect of 
CON on the volume of cardiac 
catheterization after admission for 
acute myocardial infarction. 
In particular, however, they 
were interested in procedural 
volume under different levels 
of appropriateness (strongly, 
equivocally, or weakly indicated). 
While CON did not seem to 
decrease the volume of strongly-
indicated catheterization, 
it did reduce the volume of 
equivocally and weakly indicated 
catheterization.
Because their interest is both 
overall volume and rates of 
catheterization when it is not 
warranted, I am categorizing this 
in both the volume and the quality 
sections.“After stratification by 
appropriateness, CON regulation 
was not associated with a 
significantly lower rate of 
catheterization among 63,823 
patients with strong indications 
(49.9% versus 50.3%; adjusted 
RR 0.94, 95% confidence interval 
0.86 to 1.02, P0.17). However, 
CON regulation was associated 
with significantly lower rates of 
catheterization among 65,077 
patients with equivocal indication 
(45.0% versus 46.0%; adjusted RR 
0.88, 95% confidence interval 0.78 
to 1.00, P0.05) and among 8,379 
patients with weak indications 
(19.8% versus 21.8%; adjusted RR 
0.84, 95% confidence interval 
0.71 to 0.98, P0.04). Associations 
were weakened substantially after 
adjustment for hospital coronary 
artery bypass graft surgery or 
cardiac catheterization capability.”
3. S. A. Lorch, P. Maheshwari, 
and O. Even-Shoshan, 
“The Impact of Certificate 
of Need Programs on 
Neonatal Intensive 
Care Units,” Journal of 
Perinatology: Official 
Journal of the California 
Perinatal Association  32, 
no. 1 (January 2012): 39–44.They studied NICU CONs. They 
found: 
1. CON is associated with fewer 
units;
2. CON is associated with fewer 
beds; 
3. CON was unrelated to very low 
birth weight (VLBW) infant 
mortality and low birth weight 
(LBW) infant mortality. 
4. CON is associated with lower 
rates of all-infant mortality in 
states with a large metropolitan 
area.“Absence of such programs was 
associated with more hospitals with 
a NICU (Rate Ratio (RR) 2.06, 95% CI 
1.74 to 2.45) and NICU beds (RR 1.96, 
95% CI 1.89 to 2.03) compared with 
states with CON legislation, and 
increased all-infant mortality rates 
in states with a large metropolitan 
area…. Mortality rates for VLBW or 
LBW infants were not significantly 
different between CON and non-
CON states. However, for states 
with at least one large metropolitan 
area, states with CON legislation 
had significantly lower all infant 
mortality rates compared with 
states without CON legislation (0.54 
fewer deaths/1000 births,
95% CI 0.02 to 1.06).”
68
palmettopromise.org4. Cancienne et al., “Certif -
icate-of-Need Programs 
Are Associated with a Re -
duced Incidence, Expen -
diture, and Rate of Com -
plications with Respect to 
Knee Arthroscopy in the 
Medicare Population.”They examine the effect of CON 
on knee arthroscopy, assessing its 
effect on: 
1. Charges and reimbursements: 
in t-tests without controls 
they found that charges 
(which are the prices set 
before any negotiation) were 
lower in CON states, while 
reimbursements (which are 
actual reimbursements) were not 
statistically significantly different.
2. Total volume: total volume and 
growth in total volume was lower 
in CON states than in non-CON 
states.
3. Volume within facilities: CON is 
associated with the presence of 
more high-volume facilities, and
4. Quality: There were more ER 
visits within 30 days of operation 
and more infections within 6 
months of operation in non-CON 
than in CON states; there were no 
differences in in-hospital deaths 
or readmissions within 30 days of 
the operation between CON and 
non- CON states.  “Finally, the incidence of ER visits 
within 30 days and infection within 
6 months of surgery was signifi -
cantly higher
in non-CON states than that in 
CON states (p < 0.001 and p = 0.005, 
respectively) (Table 1). There was 
no significant difference in the 
incidence of in-hospital deaths 
and readmissions within 30 days of 
surgery between CON and non-CON 
states.”
 
69
palmettopromise.orgEndnotes
1 South Carolina General Assembly Legislative Audit Council, “A Review of the S.C. Department Of Health And Envi -
ronmental Control Certificate Of Need Program” (Columbia, South Carolina, February 2022), 45.
2 South Carolina General Assembly Legislative Audit Council, 48.
3 South Carolina General Assembly Legislative Audit Council, 49.
4 South Carolina General Assembly Legislative Audit Council, 57–58.
5 South Carolina General Assembly Legislative Audit Council, 52.
6 South Carolina General Assembly Legislative Audit Council, 56.
7 In a forthcoming review of the literature, I intend to add more categories and more papers that look at the effects 
of CON on other factors such as hospital profitability and volume of care within hospitals. 
8 “National Health Planning and Resources Development Act of 1974,” Pub. L. No. 93–641, 88 U.S.C. 2225 (1975), 
https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/STATUTE-88/pdf/STATUTE-88-Pg2225.pdf.
9 Vivian Ho and Meei-Hsiang Ku-Goto, “State Deregulation and Medicare Costs for Acute Cardiac Care,” Medical 
Care Research and Review: MCRR 70, no. 2 (April 2013): 185–205, https://doi.org/10.1177/1077558712459681.
10 James Bailey, “Can Health Spending Be Reined In through Supply Constraints? An Evaluation of Certifi -
cate-of-Need Laws,” Mercatus Working Paper (Arlington, VA: Mercatus Center at George Mason University, August 
1, 2016), https://www.mercatus.org/publications/certificate-need/can-health-spending-be-reined-through-supply-
constraints-evaluation.
11 James A. Browne et al., “Certificate-of-Need State Laws and Total Knee Arthroplasty,” The Journal of Arthroplasty 
33, no. 7 (July 1, 2018): 2020–24.
12 Chason Ziino, Abiram Bala, and Ivan Cheng, “Does ACDF Utilization and Reimbursement Change Based 
on Certificate of Need Status?,” Clinical Spine Surgery 33, no. 3 (April 2020): E92, https://doi.org/10.1097/
BSD.0000000000000914.
13 Charlene Harrington et al., “The Effect of Certificate of Need and Moratoria Policy on Change in Nursing Home 
Beds in the United States,” Medical Care 35, no. 6 (1997): 574–88.  
14  David C. Grabowski, Robert L. Ohsfeldt, and Michael A. Morrisey, “The Effects of CON Repeal on Medicaid Nursing 
Home and Long-Term Care Expenditures,” Inquiry: A Journal of Medical Care Organization, Provision and Financing 
40, no. 2 (2003): 146–57.
15 Nancy A. Miller, Charlene Harrington, and Elizabeth Goldstein, “Access to Community-Based Long-Term Care: 
Medicaid’s Role,” Journal of Aging and Health 14, no. 1 (February 2002): 138–59.
16 Patrick A. Rivers, Myron D. Fottler, and Mustafa Zeedan Younis, “Does Certificate of Need Really Contain Hos -
pital Costs in the United States?,”  Health Education Journal  66, no. 3 (September 1, 2007): 229–44, https://doi.
org/10.1177/0017896907080127.
17 James Bailey, “Can Health Spending Be Reined in through Supply Restraints? An Evaluation of Certifi -
cate-of-Need Laws,” Journal of Public Health  27, no. 6 (December 1, 2019): 755–60, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10389-
018-0998-1.
18 Traci L. Eichmann and Rexford E. Santerre, “Do Hospital Chief Executive Officers Extract Rents from Certificate of 
Need Laws,” Journal of Health Care Finance  37, no. 4 (2011): 1–14; Thomas Stratmann and Jacob Russ, “Do Certifi -
cate-of-Need Laws Increase Indigent Care?” (Mercatus Working Paper, Mercatus Center at George Mason University, 
Arlington, VA, July 2014); Thomas Stratmann and Christopher Koopman, “Entry Regulation and Rural Health Care: 
Certificate-of-Need Laws, Ambulatory Surgical Centers, and Community” (Mercatus Working Paper, Mercatus Cen -
ter at George Mason University, Arlington, VA, February 2016).
19 Melissa D. A. Carlson et al., “Geographic Access to Hospice in the United States,” Journal of Palliative Medicine  13, 
no. 11 (2010): 1331–38.
20 Jon M. Ford and David L. Kaserman, “Certificate-of-Need Regulation and Entry: Evidence from the Dialysis Indus -
try,” Southern Economic Journal  59, no. 4 (1993): 783–91.
21 Marah N. Short, Thomas A. Aloia, and Vivian Ho, “Certificate of Need Regulations and the Availability and Use of 
Cancer Resections,” Annals of Surgical Oncology  15, no. 7 (July 2008): 1837–45.
22 Daniel Polsky et al., “The Effect of Entry Regulation in the Health Care Sector: The Case of Home Health,” Journal 
of Public Economics  110 (2014): 1–14; Susan L. Ettner et al., “Certificate of Need and the Cost of Competition in Home 
Healthcare Markets,” Home Health Care Services Quarterly 39, no. 2 (2020): 51–64.
70
palmettopromise.org23 James B. Bailey and Eleanor Lewin, “Certificate of Need and Inpatient Psychiatric Services,” Journal of Mental 
Health Policy and Economics 24, no. 4 (2021): 117–24.
24 James B. Bailey, Thanh Lu, and Patrick Vogt, “Certificate of Need and Substance Use Treatment” (working paper, 
December 29, 2020).
25 Jamie L. Robinson et al., “Certificate of Need and the Quality of Cardiac Surgery,” American Journal of Medical 
Quality  16, no. 5 (2001): 155–60.
26 Iona Popescu, Mary S. Vaughan-Sarrazin, and Gary E. Rosenthal, “Certificate of Need Regulations and Use of 
Coronary Revascularization after Acute Myocardial Infarction,” Journal of the American Medical Association  295, 
no. 18 (2006): 2141–47; Vivian Ho et al., “Cardiac Certificate of Need Regulations and the Availability and Use of 
Revascularization Services,” American Heart Journal  154, no. 4 (2007): 767–75; Vivian Ho, Meei-Hsiang Ku-Goto, and 
James G. Jollis, “Certificate of Need (CON) for Cardiac Care: Controversy over the Contributions of CON,” Health 
Services Research 44, no. 2 ( 2009): 483–500; Jonathan T. Kolstad, “Essays on Information, Competition and Quality 
in Health Care Provider Markets” (PhD diss., Harvard University, 2009), https://healthpolicy.fas.harvard.edu/people/
jonathan-kolstad; Mary S. Vaughan-Sarrazin, Levent Bayman, and Peter Cram, “Trends during 1993–2004 in the 
Availability and Use of Revascularization after Acute Myocardial Infarction in Markets Affected by Certificate of 
Need Regulations,” Medical Care Research and Review 67, no. 2 (2010): 213–31; David M. Cutler, Robert S. Huckman, 
and Jonathan T. Kolstad, “Input Constraints and the Efficiency of Entry: Lessons from Cardiac Surgery,” American 
Economic Journal: Economic Policy  2, no. 1 (2010): 51–76.
27 Ho et al., “Cardiac Certificate of Need Regulations.”
28 Paul L. Joskow, “The Effects of Competition and Regulation on Hospital Bed Supply and the Reservation Quality 
of the Hospital,” Bell Journal of Economics  11, no. 2 (1980): 421–47; Charlene Harrington et al., “The Effect of Certif -
icate of Need and Moratoria Policy on Change in Nursing Home Beds in the United States,” Medical Care 35, no. 
6 (1997): 574–88; Fred J. Hellinger, “The Effect of Certificate-of-Need Laws on Hospital Beds and Healthcare Ex -
penditures: An Empirical Analysis,” American Journal of Managed Care  15, no. 10 (2009): 737–44; Eichmann and 
Santerre, “Do Hospital Chief Executive Officers Extract Rents”; S. A. Lorch, P. Maheshwari, and O. Even-Shoshan, 
“The Impact of Certificate of Need Programs on Neonatal Intensive Care Units,” Journal of Perinatology: Official 
Journal of the California Perinatal Association  32, no. 1 (2012): 39–44; Stratmann and Russ, “Do Certificate-of-Need 
Laws Increase Indigent Care?”; Matthew D. Mitchell and Thomas Stratmann, “The Economics of a Bed Shortage: 
Certificate-of-Need Regulation and Hospital Bed Utilization during the COVID-19 Pandemic,” Journal of Risk and 
Financial Management  15, no. 1 (2022): 10.
29 Stratmann and Russ, “Do Certificate-of-Need Laws Increase Indigent Care?”; Matthew C. Baker and Thomas Strat -
mann, “Barriers to Entry in the Healthcare Markets: Winners and Losers from Certificate-of-Need Laws,” Socio-Eco -
nomic Planning Sciences  77 (2021): 101007.
30 Cutler, Huckman, and Kolstad, “Input Constraints and the Efficiency of Entry”; Carlson et al., “Geographic Access 
to Hospice in the United States.”
31 Baker and Stratmann, “Barriers to Entry in the Healthcare Markets.”
32 Molly S. Myers and Kathleen M. Sheehan, “The Impact of Certificate of Need Laws on Emergency Department 
Wait Times,” Journal of Private Enterprise 35, no. 1 (2020): 59–75.
33 Stratmann and Russ, “Do Certificate-of-Need Laws Increase Indigent Care?”
34 Joel C. Cantor et al., “Reducing Racial Disparities in Coronary Angiography,” Health Affairs  28, no. 5 (2009): 1521–31; 
Derek DeLia et al., “Effects of Regulation and Competition on Health Care Disparities: The Case of Cardiac Angiog -
raphy in New Jersey,” Journal of Health Politics, Policy, and Law  34, no. 1 (2009): 63–91.
35 Thomas Stratmann and David Wille, “Certificate of Need Laws and Hospital Quality” (Mercatus Working Paper, 
Mercatus Center at George Mason University, Arlington, VA, September 2016).
36 Polsky et al., “The Effect of Entry Regulation in the Health Care Sector”; Stratmann and Wille, “Certificate of Need 
Laws and Hospital Quality”; Thomas Stratmann and Matthew C. Baker, “Examining Certificate-of-Need Laws in the 
Context of the Rural Health Crisis” (Mercatus Working Paper, Mercatus Center at George Mason University, Arling -
ton, VA, July 2020).
37 Stratmann and Wille, “Certificate of Need Laws and Hospital Quality.”
38 Stratmann and Wille.
39 Bichaka Fayissa et al., “Certificate-Of-Need Regulation and Healthcare Service Quality: Evidence from the Nursing 
Home Industry,” Healthcare  8, no. 4 (2020): E423.
40 Jacqueline S. Zinn, “Market Competition and the Quality of Nursing Home Care,”  Journal of Health Politics, Poli -
cy, and Law  19, no. 3 (1994): 555–82.
41 Robert L. Ohsfeldt and Pengxiang Li, “State Entry Regulation and Home Health Agency Quality Ratings,” Journal 
of Regulatory Economics  53, no. 1 (2018): 1–19.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT D 
No. _________ TENTH  DISTRICT  
SUPREME COURT OF NORTH CAROLINA  
******************************************* 
JAY SINGLETON , D.O.  and 
SINGLETON VISION CENTER , PA, 
 
Plaintiff -Appellants,  
 
v 
 
NORTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT 
OF HEALTH AND HUMAN 
SERVICES; ROY COOPER , Governor of 
the State of North Carolina, in his 
official capacity; MANDY COHEN, 
North Carolina Secretary of Health and Human Services , in her official capacity; 
PHIL BERGER, President Pro Tempore 
of the North Carolina Senate, in his official capacity; and TIM MOORE, 
Speaker of the North Carolina House of Representatives, in his official capacity,  
                      Defendant-Appellees . 
 )
))
)
)))
)
))
 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) From Wake County  
No. COA21 -558 
************************************************ 
MOTION BY TREASURER DALE R.  
FOLWELL, CPA,  FOR LEAVE TO FILE   
A BRIEF AS AMICUS CURIAE  
 
************************************************  
 
 
- 2 - 
 
TO THE HONORABLE SUPREME COURT OF NORTH CAROLINA:  
 Treasurer Dale R. Folwell, CPA, respectfully seeks leave pursuant 
Rule 28(i)  of the North Carolina Rules of Appellate Procedure to file an 
amicus curiae  brief in support of Plaintiffs’ Petition for Discretionary 
Review . The proposed amicus curiae brief is attached as Exhibit A.  
NATURE OF APP LICANT’S INTEREST  
 As keeper of the public purse, Treasurer Folwell is  also a fiduciary 
for the North Carolina State Health Plan for Teachers and State 
Employees  (Plan) pursuant to N.C.G.S. §  135-48.2 (2021) . Consisting of 
almost  750,000 members,  including active and retired members,  the Plan 
is one of the largest purchaser s of healthcare in North Carolina. In the 
most recent fiscal year  ending in June of 2022 , the Plan had almost $4 
billion in expenditures , the vast majority of which are associated with 
medic al and pharmacy claims. Thus, as a fiduciary, Treasurer Folwell is 
concerned for the continued solvency of the Plan , which is funded in part 
by taxpayers. In addition, as chairman  of the Local Government 
Commission, Treasurer Folwell is often tasked with evaluating certain 
financing proposals for various healthcare entities.  
  
- 3 - 
 
WHY AN AMICUS  CURIAE  BRIEF IS DESIRABLE 
 In their complaint, Plaintiffs assert an as -applied challenge against 
the Certificate of Need (CON) law, N.C.G.S. § 131E -175, et seq . Such a 
challenge, by its nature, is limited to the factual circumstances of  this 
case. The proposed brief provides a view of the significant public interest 
in this case from Treasurer Folwell’s broader perspective.  
ISSUES OF LAW TO BE ADDRESSED  
 The proposed brief would address the following issue:  
 (1) Whether the subject matter of this appeal has significant public 
interest such that discretionary review is appropriate under N.C.G.S. 
§ 7A-31(c) (2021)?   
POSITION OF AMICU S CURIAE  
Treasurer Folwell  holds the  position that whether the CON law 
violates Article I, Sections 19, 32, and 34 of the North Carolina 
Constitution is an issue  of significant public interest. CON laws create 
insurmountable barriers to entry that shield existing institutional 
healthcare providers from competition . In turn, the accessibility, quality, 
and affordability of healthcare decreases while profits dramatically 
increase, to the detriment of North Carolinians.  This Court previously 
- 4 - 
 
recognized that the North Carolina Constitution protects North 
Carolinians ag ainst these harms. Whether it continues to do so is a n 
issue of significant public interest.    
CONCLUSION  
Treasurer Folwell respectfully requests this motion for leave be 
allowed and the proposed amicus  curiae  brief attached hereto be accepted 
for conside ration by the Supreme Court of North Carolina.  
 This, the 15 th day of August , 2022.  
DEPARTMENT OF THE STATE 
TREASURER 
 
/s/ J. Benjamin  Garner  
J. Benjamin Garner  
N.C. State Bar No. 41257  
General Counsel  
North Carolina Department of the 
     State Treasurer  
3200 Atlantic Avenue  
Raleigh, North Carolina 27604  
Telephone: (919) 814 -4000  
Facsimile: (919) 855-5805  
Ben.Garner@nctreasurer.com  
 
N.C. R. App. P. 33(b) Certification:            
I certify that the attorneys listed  
below have authorized me to list 
their names on this brief  as if 
they had personally signed it.  
 
       
- 5 - 
 
Aaron  D. Vodicka   
      N.C. State Bar No. 55199  
Assistant General Counsel  
North Carolina Department of the  
     State Treasurer  
      3200 Atlantic Avenue  
      Raleigh, North Carolina 27604  
      Telephone: (919) 836 -6522  
      Facsimile: (919) 855-5805  
      aaron.vodicka@nctreasurer.com  
 
Counsel for Amicus Curiae  
Treasurer Dale R. Folwell, CPA  
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE 
 I certify that today I served a copy of the attached motion  by 
electronic mail on  the following parties at the following addresses : 
Benton Grey Sawrey  Ryan Y. Park  
Narron Wenzel, P.A.  Nicholas S. Brod  
P.O. Box 1567  Derek L. Hunter  
Smithfield, N C 27577  John H. Schaeffer  
bsawrey@narronwenzel.com  N.C. Department of Justice  
 P.O. Box 629  
Joshua A. Windham  Raleigh, NC 27602  
Renée D. Flaherty  919-716-6900  
Institute for Justice  rpark@ncdoj.gov  
901 N. Glebe Road, Suite 900  nbrod@ncdoj.gov  
Arlington, VA 22203  dhunter@ncdoj.gov  
jwindham@ij.org  jschaeffer@ncdoj.gov  
rflaherty@ij.org   
 Counsel for Defendants  
Counsel for Plaintiffs   
 R. Daniel Gibson  
B. Tyler Brooks  Paul Stam  
P.O. Box 728  510 W. Williams Street  
Cary, NC 27512  Apex, NC 27502  
btb@btylerbrookslawyer.com  dan@stamlawfirm.com  
 paulstam@stamlawfirm.com  
Attorney for Amicus CON 
Scholars Thomas Stratmann, 
Matthew Mitchell, Anne Philpot, 
and Christopher Koopman   
Attorneys for Amicus the John 
Locke Foundation 
 Christina Sandefur  
 500 E. Coronado Road  
 Phoenix, AZ 85004  
 csandefur@goldwaterinstitute.org  
  
 Attorney for Amicus Goldwater 
Institute  
 
 
Kenneth L. Burgess  Marcus C. Hewitt  
Matthew A. Fisher  Troy D. Shelton  
Iain M. Stauffer  434 Fayetteville Street, Ste 2800  
Baker, Donelson, Bearman, 
Caldwell & Berkowitz, PC  Fox Rothschild LLP  
P.O. Box 27525  
2530 Meridian Parkway, Ste. 300  Raleigh, NC 27611  
Durham, NC 27713  mhewitt@foxrothschild.com  
kburgess@bakerdonelson.com  tshelton@foxrothschild.com  
mfisher@bakerdonelson.com  Attorneys for Amicus Bio -Medical 
Applications of North Carolina, 
Inc. istauffer@bakerdonelson.com  
 
Attorneys for Amicus NCHA, Inc. 
d/b/a the  North Carolina 
Healthcare Association, the North Carolina Health Care Facilities 
Association, the North Carolina 
Chapter of the American College 
of Radiology, Inc., and the North 
Carolina Senior Living 
Association   
Gary S. Qualls  
Susan K. Hackney  
Anderson M. Shackelford  
K&L Gates LLP  
430 Davis Drive, Suite 400  
Morrisville, NC 27560  
gary.qualls@klgates.com  
susan.hackney@klgates.com  
 anderson.shackelford@klgates.com  
Matthew W. Wolfe   
Attorneys for Amicus the 
Charlotte -Mecklenburg Hospital 
Authority, University Health 
Systems of Eastern Carolina, Inc., and Cumberland County Hospital 
System, Inc.  Robert A. Leandro  
Parker Poe Adams & Bernstein 
LLP 
301 Fayetteville Street, Suite 
1400  
P.O. Box 389  
Raleigh, NC 27602  
mwolfe@ parkerpoe .com  
robbleandro@parkerpoe.com  
 
Attorneys for Amicus the 
Association for Home and Hospice 
Care of North Carolina  
 
 
 
This the 15th  day of August, 20 22.  
/s/ J. Benjamin  Garner  
J. Benjamin Garner  
N.C. State Bar No. 41257  
General Counsel  
North Carolina Department of the 
     State Treasurer  
3200 Atlantic Avenue  
Raleigh, North Carolina 27604  
Telephone: (919) 814 -4000  
Facsimile: (919) 855-5805  
Ben.Garner@nctreasurer.com  
EXHIBIT A  
No. _________ TENTH  DISTRICT  
SUPREME COURT OF NORTH CAROLINA  
******************************************* 
JAY SINGLETON , D.O.  and 
SINGLETON VISION CENTER , PA, 
 
Plaintiff -Appellants,  
 
v 
 
NORTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT 
OF HEALTH AND HUMAN 
SERVICES; ROY COOPER , Governor of 
the State of North Carolina, in his 
official capacity; MANDY COHEN, 
North Carolina Secretary of Health and Human Services , in her official capacity; 
PHIL BERGER, President Pro Tempore 
of the North Carolina Senate, in his official capacity; and TIM MOORE, 
Speaker of the North Carolina House of Representatives, in his official capacity,  
                      Defendant-Appellees . 
 )
))
)
)))
)
))
 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) From Wake County  
No. COA21 -558 
************************************************ 
BRIEF OF AMICUS CURIAE TREASURER  
DALE R. FOLWELL, CPA  
 
************************************************  
 
  
ii 
 
INDE X  
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES ………………………….…………………… .. iii 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………… ... 2 
ARGUMENT …………………………………………………………………… 3 
CONCLUSION ……………………………………………………………….. 12  
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE 
iii 
 
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES  
CASES  
Cheryl Lloyd Humphrey Land Inv. Co., LLC v. Resco  
Prods., Inc. , 377 N.C. 384, 2021 -NCSC -56 …………………………. 3  
 
In re Certificate of Need for Aston Park Hosp., Inc. ,  
282 N.C. 542 (1973)  ………………………………………... .........  10, 11  
 
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS  
 
N.C. Const. art. I, §  19 …………………………………………………… 2 , 10 
 
N.C. Const. art. I, § 32 …………………………………………………… 2, 10 
 
N.C. Const. art. I, §  34 …………………………………………………… 2 , 10  
 
STATUTES  AND COURT RULES  
 
N.C.G.S. §  7A-31(c) (2021) … …………………………………………… . 3, 12 
 
N.C.G.S. § 131E -175, et seq.  (2021) ……………………………………… 3, 6 
 
N.C.G.S. §  135-48.2(a) (2021) ……………………………………………….. . 8 
 
PUBLIC AND SESSION LAWS  
 
National Health Planning and Resources Development Act  
of 1974, Pub. L. No. 93-641, 88 Stat. 2225 (1975)  
(codified at 42 U.S.C. §§ 300k -300n -5) ………………………………. 4 
 Pub. L. No. 99-660, § 701, 100 Stat. 3799 (1986)  …………………………. 4 
 
Act of July 27, 1971, ch. 1164, 1971 N.C. Sess. L. 1715 ……………… 3–4 
 
 
 
iv 
 
EXECUTIVE ORDERS  
 
Exec. Order. No. 130 (April 8, 2020)  ……………………………………….. 6 
 
OTHER AUTHORITIES  
 
Barak D. Richman, Concentration in Health Care Markets:  
Chronic Problems and Better Solutions,  
American Enter . Inst. (June 2012)  …………………………… …...… 6 
 
Christopher Rowland, The unintended consequences of the  
$178 billion bailout to keep hospitals and doctors afloat , 
Washington Post (June 22, 2022),  https://www.washingtonpost. 
com/business/2022/06/22/covid- hospital -relief -fund/  ……………… 7 
 
Matthew D. Mitchell, Certificate -of-Need Laws: Are They  
Achieving Their Goals? , Mercatus Center  
(April 2017)  ……………………………………………………...  3, 4, 5, 6 
 
Matthew D. Mitchell and Christopher Koopman, 40 Years  
of Certificate- of-Need Laws Across America ,  
Mercatus Center (Sep. 27, 2016), 
https://www.mercatus.org/publications/corporate -welfare  
/40-years -certificate -need -laws -across -america …………… ………. 5 
 
Maureen K. Ohlhausen, Certificate of Need Laws:  A Prescription  
for Higher Costs, 30 Antitrust 50 (2015)  ………………….. ……….. 3 
 
N.C. State Health Plan and Johns Hopkins Bloomberg Sch.  
of Pub . Health, N.C. Hosps .: Charity Care Report  
(Oct. 27, 2021)  ……………………………………………………… ... 7–8 
 
N.C. State Health Plan and Rice Univ . Baker Inst. for Pub .  
Pol’y, N.C. Nonprofit Hospitals Bill the  
Poor 1 (Jan. 26, 2022)  ………………………………………………… .. 8 
 Office of the State Controller, State of North Carolina: Annual 
Comprehensive Financial Report  (June 30, 2021)  ……… ……… …. 9 
v 
 
 
Patrick John McGinley, Reconsidering Certificate of Need  
Laws in a “Managed Competition” System , 23 Fla.  
St. U. L. Rev. 141  (1995)  …………………………………. …………… 4 
 Press Release, Federal Trade Commission and Department  
of Justice, Fed. Trade Comm ’n, Dep’t  
of Just . Issue Joint Statement on Certificate -of-Need  
Laws in Illinois (Sept. 12, 2008)  ………………………… ……….. . 4–5 
 
Steve Riley, Dale Folwell Battles the Health Care ‘Cartel’ , 
The Assembly (Feb. 3, 2022),  
https://www.theassemblync.com/long -form/dale-folwell  
-battles -the-health -care -cartel/  ……………………………………….. 7 
 
 
No. _________ TENTH DISTRICT  
SUPREME COURT OF NORTH CAROLINA  
******************************************* 
JAY SINGLETON, D.O. and 
SINGLETON VISION CENTER, PA,  
 
Plaintiff -Appellants,  
 
vs. 
 
NORTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT 
OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES; ROY COOPER, Governor of 
the State of North Carolina, in his 
official capacity; MANDY COHEN, 
North Carolina Secretary of Health and Human Services, in her official capacity; 
PHIL BERGER, President Pro Tempore 
of the North Carolina Senate, in his 
official capaci ty; and TIM MOORE, 
Speaker of the North Carolina House of Representatives, in his official capacity,  
                      Defendant-Appellees.  
 )
))
)
)))
)
))
 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) 
) From Wake County  
No. COA21 -558 
************************************************ 
BRIEF OF AMICUS CURIAE TREASURER   
DALE R. FOLWELL, CPA  
 
************************************************  
  
2 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 The issue at the heart of this case—whether North Carolina’s 
Certificate of Need  law violates Article I, Sections 19, 32, and 34  of the 
North Carolina Constitution —is of significant  public interest due to the 
harmful effects that illegal healthcare monopol ies enabled by this law  
inflict on North Carolinians . In theory, some argued, Certificate of Need 
laws would increase accessibility , quality, and affordability  of healthcare 
services. In practice, however , Certificate of Need laws erect 
insurmountable  regulatory  barriers wielded by existing institutional 
healthcare entities to exclude others from  entering the market.  
Thus, Certificate of Need laws contribute to the creation of highly 
consolidated healthcare monopolies . In turn, these mon opolies decrease 
the accessibility, quality , and a ffordability  of healthcare while 
dramatically increasing the ir prices and excess revenues , all at the 
expense of North Carolinians . Determining whether the Certificate of 
Need law  runs afoul of  the North Carolina Constitution’s  protect ions 
against  these types of harmful monopolies and special privileges is an 
issue of significant public interest justifying this Court’s review.1  
 
1 No pe rson or entity other than amicus curiae or amicus curiae’s counsel wrote any part of 
this brief or contributed any money to support the briefs preparation. See N.C. R. App. P. 28(i)(2).  
3 
 
ARGUMENT  
 Under  Section 7A-31(c), this Court may grant discretionary review 
when “[t]he subject matter of the appeal has significant public interest.” 
N.C.G.S. §  7A-31(c) (1) (2021). For the following reasons, the subject 
matter of this appeal is of significant interest to the public such t hat 
discretionary review is appropriate in this case. 2  
 When Medicare and Medicaid were  first implemented, the 
programs reimbursed medical providers for services based on actual cost, 
creating incentives for providers to increas e healthcare costs . Maureen 
K. Ohlhausen, Certificate of Need Laws: A Prescription for Higher Costs , 
30 Antitrust 50, 51 (2015);  R. at 17, ¶  44–48 .3 In an attempt to tamp down 
these costs, states started passing Certificate of Need (CON) law s, 
beginning with New York in 1964 . Matthew D. Mitchell, Certificate -of-
Need Laws: Are They Achieving Their Goals? , Mercatus Center 1 (April 
2017). In 1971, North Carolina  passed its own CON law,  now codified at 
N.C.G.S. § 131E -175, et seq . See Act of July 27, 1971, ch. 1164, 1971 N.C. 
 
2 This brief argues that the Supreme Court’s review of this case is proper under N.C.G.S. 
§ 7A-31(c)(1) (2021). This brief expresses no opinion, favorable or unfavorable, as to whether this Court 
should retain Plaintiffs’ notice of appeal based upon a substantial constitutional question or whether 
review is proper under N. C.G.S. § 7A -31(c)(2) –(3) (2021).  
3 Because  this case involves the  trial cour t’s grant of  Defendants’ motion to dismiss , this Court 
on review  takes the allegations of Plaintiffs’ complaint as true. See Cheryl Lloyd Humphrey Land Inv. 
Co., LLC v. Resco Prod s., Inc., 377 N.C. 384, 2021- NCSC -56, ¶  2.   
4 
 
Sess. L. 1715 . Believing CON laws would help control public health  
expenditures, Congress enacted the National Health Planning and 
Resources Development Act (NHPRDA)  of 1974  to mandate that states 
pass CON laws . Pub. L. No. 93 -641, 88 Stat. 2225 (1975) (codified at 42 
U.S.C. §§  300k -300n -5), repealed by Pub. L. No. 99 -660, §  701, 100 Stat. 
3799 (1986).  Apart from Louisiana, every state passed a CON law by the 
early 1980s.   Mitchell, supra , at 1.  
 In 1984, however, “Congress restructured the Medicare and 
Medicaid reimbursement system to a fee -for-service model,” thus 
eliminating the key rationale for CON laws. R. at 10, ¶  51. Congress then 
repealed the NHPRDA in 1986 because it “failed to reduce the nation ’s 
aggregate health care costs, and it was  beginning to produce detrimental 
effects  in local communities .” Patrick John McGinley,  Reconsidering 
Certificate of Need Laws in a “Managed Competition” System , 23 Fla. St. 
U. L. Rev. 141,  157 (1995). In 2008, the Federal Trade Commission and 
the United States Department of Justice stated that CON laws “undercut 
consumer choice, stifle innovation and weaken markets’ ability to contain 
health care costs.” Press Release, Federal Trade Commission and 
Department of Justice, Fed . Trade Comm ’n, Dep ’t of Just . Issue Joint 
5 
 
Statement on Certificate -of-Need Laws in Illinois (Sept. 12, 2008) . Since 
the repeal of the NHPRDA , fifteen states have repealed  their CON laws  
due to “higher  healthcare prices and higher overall healthcare spending. ” 
Matthew D. Mitchell and Christopher Koopman, 40 Years of Certificate -
of-Need Laws Across America , Mercatus Center  (Sep. 27, 2016) , 
https://www.mercatus.org/publications/corporate -welfare/40 -years -
certificate -need -laws -across -america .  
Research show s that “by limiting supply and undermining 
competition, CON laws may undercut” the aims originally  used  by 
legislators  to justify the  laws . Matthew D. Mitchell, Certificate -of-Need 
Laws: Are They Achieving Their Goals? , Mercatus Center 1 –2 (April 
2017) . Notably,  “[t]he process for obtaining a CON can take years and 
tens or even hundreds of thousands of dollars .” Id. at 2. These high costs 
are generally a barrier to market entry , including  for ambulatory surgical 
centers such as Plaintiff Singleton Vision Center  (Center) . Id. Because 
existing providers are shielded from competition, the availability of 
healthcare resources  is restricted —states with CON laws “have about 99 
fewer hospital beds per 100,000 people than states without these 
regulations.” Moreover, states with CON laws have “[thirty] percent 
6 
 
fewer rural hospitals per 100,000 residents compared with non -CON 
states.” Id. To maintain this barrier, existing healthcare institutions are 
willing to  
inflict economic harm by spending heavily to sustain 
current monopoly barriers. .  . . This is especially true for 
health care monopolists because so many are 
maintai ned with legal and regulatory barriers  [such as] 
certificate of need laws  . . . . Thus, health care 
monopolists are willing to spend heavily .  . . on legal and 
political resources that impede competition.  This 
contrasts starkly with the narrative in which we reward 
monopolies (with monopoly profits) for their investing in the ‘superior skill, foresight, and industry’ that creates social value.  
Barak  D. Richman, Concentration in Health Care Markets: Chronic 
Problems and Better Solutions , American Enter . Inst. 6 (June 2012 ) 
(footnote omitted) .  
 Despite Congress’ repeal of the NHPRDA and these negative 
effects , North Carolina’s CON law remains in force to the detriment of 
North Carolinians. See N.C.G.S. § 131E -175, et seq . (2021) . Our state’s 
lack of hospital capacity was a contributing factor to  Governor Cooper ’s 
decision to suspend the CON  law during the COVID -19 pandemic. See 
Exec. Order. No. 130 (April 8, 2020) . Moreover, t he CON law is 
contributing to a rapid consolidation of our state’s major hospital 
7 
 
systems.  See Steve Riley, Dale Folwell Battles the Health Care ‘Cartel ’, 
The Assembly (Feb. 3, 2022) , https://www.theassemblync.com/long -
form/dale-folwell -battles -the-health -care -cartel/  (“In the past decade in 
North Carolina, Atrium Health acquired Carolinas Medical Center and 
Wake Forest Baptist. Novant purchased  New Hanover Regional Medical 
Center. And HCA bought Mission Hospital in Asheville.”).  
While receiving tax breaks worth hundreds of millions of dollars, 
these consolidat ing entities are reaping incredible excess revenues . UNC 
Hospitals had $516 million  in excess revenue during  the most recent 
fiscal year. Riley, supra . Duke University Health System had $450 
million in excess revenues in 2018 and $430 million in 2019, both at a 
margin  of greater than ten percent.  Id.  In 2020, Atrium Health, 
headquartered in Charlotte , had excess revenues of more than $1 billion,  
see id ., while receiving $617 million in federal COVID -19 relief funds , see 
Christopher Rowland, The unintended c onsequences of the $178 billion 
bailout to keep hospitals and doctors afloat, Washington Post ( June 22, 
2022) , https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2022/06/22/covid -
hospital -relief -fund/ . North Carolina hospitals  have been “more than 
three times more profitable than the national average .” N.C. State 
8 
 
Health Plan and Johns Hopkins Bloomberg Sch . of Pub . Health, N.C. 
Hosps .: Charity Care Report  (Oct. 27, 2021).   
 While gaining these excess revenues , these consolidating  entities 
are also able to engage in practices that harm North Carolinians. Despite 
their tax -exempt status, large reserves, and significant profits, many of 
our state’s institutional hospital s fail to provide sufficient levels of 
charity care. Id . at 3.  Instead, t hese hospitals charge patients who 
qualify for charity care amounts they cannot afford.  N.C. State Health 
Plan  and Rice Univ . Baker Ins t. for Pub . Pol’y, N.C. Nonprofit Hosps . Bill 
the Poor 1 (Jan. 26, 2022) . In effort s to collect this money, institutional 
hospitals “have sued patients , garnished their tax returns, damage d their  
credit  and encourage d them to open medical credit cards  charging 
interest rates as high as 11.25% after the first year .” Id. at 3.   
 In addition, rising healthcare costs due in part to the CON law also 
impact  state employees , along with  taxpayers , through  the North 
Carolina State Health Plan for Teachers and S tate Employees (Plan). 
Pursuant to statute, “[t]he State Treasurer .  . . shall carry out [his] duties 
and responsibilities as [a] fiduciar[y] for the Plan.” N.C.G.S. § 135-48.2(a)  
(2021) . The Plan consists of almost 750,000 members, including active 
9 
 
and re tired teachers and state employees, along with their dependents . 
In the 2012 –2013 fiscal year, the Plan’s expenditures were approximately 
$2.7 billion dollars , the vast majority of which are associated with 
medical and pharmacy claims . In the most recent fiscal year, ending June 
30, 2022, the Plan incurred almost $4 billion in expenditures . Thus, over 
the past decade, the Plan’s annual expenditures have grown by 
approximately $1.3 billion.  
Rising healthcare costs  thus pose a challenge to maintainin g the 
solvency of the Plan  and are a liability to taxpayers, who support the Plan 
through appropriations from the General Assembly.  These 
appropriations grow at approximately four percent per year, but  the 
Plan’s  costs continue to grow at approximately seven percent per year. 
Moreover, the Plan face s a $33.5 billion liability for retiree healthcare 
costs, with only $2.6 billion set aside from the General Assembly to cover  
that liability . See Office of the State Controller, State of North Carolina: 
Annual Comprehensive Financial Report  235 (June 30, 2021).  Thus, the 
healthcare monopol ies maintained in part by the CON law are  harming 
North Carolinians as consumers of healthcare and also as taxpayers.  
10 
 
 Understanding that the CON law contributes to harmful 
monopolies, this Court previously  held that the CON law  violates the 
North Carolina Constitution. See In re Certificate of Need for Aston Park 
Hosp., Inc. , 282 N.C. 542, 551 (1973) . In Aston Park , a private company  
was precluded from building a new hospital with “the sole reason for such 
prohibition being that, in the opinion of the [ Medical Care] Commission, 
there are now in the area hospitals with bed capacity sufficient to meet the needs of the population.” Id. at 548. This Court found no “reasonable 
relation between the denial of the right of a person, association  or 
corporation to construct and operate upon his or its own property, with 
his or its own funds, an adequately staffed and equipped hospital and the 
promotion of the public health. ” Id. at 5 51.  
Thus, this Court held that the CON law  was “a deprivation of 
liberty without due process of law, in violation” of  Article I, Section 19 of 
the North Carolina Constitution. Id . at 55 1. In addition, this Court held 
that “[s]uch requirement establishes a monopoly in the existing hospitals 
contrary to the provisions of Article I , [Section] 34 . . . and is a grant to 
them  of exclusive privileges forbidden by Article I, [Section] 32.” Id. In so 
holding, the Court noted that the North Carolina Constitution does  not 
11 
 
“permit the legislature to grant to the Medical Care Commission 
authority to exclude [the new hospital] from th is field of service in order 
to protect existing hospitals from competition otherwise legitimate.” Id. 
at 552.  
 This Court’s concerns in Aston Park  are evident in this case  as well . 
Plaintiff Dr. Singleton desires to perform operations at the Center , which 
meets the licensure requirements to do so. R . at 12, ¶  11; 15, ¶  27–30 . 
Under the current CON law, however, Dr. Singleton may only perform 
an “incidental” number of surgeries at the Center . R. at 12, ¶  11; 15, ¶  31. 
For example, Dr. Singleton charges $1,800  to patients  whose cataract 
surgeries  are performed at the Center . R. at 14, ¶  23. The remainder of 
Dr. Singleton’s surgeries must be performed at the nearby hospital, 
CarolinaEast, which charges $6,000 for the facility fee alone. Id. 
Obtaining a CON allowing Dr. Singleton to perform surgeries at the 
Center may take years and cost him hundreds of thousands of dollars. R. 
at 22–23, ¶  73–74; 24, ¶  87. Adding to the difficulty, CarolinaEast, with 
its operating budget of more than $1 billion , R. at 27, ¶  101, has stated 
they will oppose Dr. Singleton’s request for a CON , R. at 30, ¶  118. Thus, 
Dr. Singleton is precluded from performing surgeries at the Center, for 
12 
 
no reason other than the State has determined , through the CON 
regulatory scheme,  that patients d o not “need” those surgeries.  
CONCLUSION  
 CON laws contribute to consolidated healthcare monopolies in 
North Carolina by distorting market power in favor of large institutional 
hospitals. This illegal distortion of market power then results in higher 
prices, lower quality, and less availability of healthcare services . In turn, 
large institutional hospitals create  incredible excess revenue  while 
failing to earn their tax -exempt status through the provision of charity 
care and engage in business practices harmful to North Carolinians . This 
Court has previously determined that the North Carolina Co nstitution 
protects North Carolinians against  these harms. Whether the North 
Carolina Constitution continues to do so is a matter of significant public interest. Accordingly, discretionary review is proper in this case under 
Section 7A-31(c) and this Court should grant Plaintiffs’ petition.  
DEPARTME NT OF THE STATE 
TREASURER 
 
/s/ J. Benjamin  Garner  
J. Benjamin Garner  
N.C. State Bar No. 41257  
General Counsel  
North Carolina Department of the 
13 
 
     State Treasurer  
3200 Atlantic Avenue  
Raleigh, North Carolina 27604  
Telephone: (919) 814 -4000  
Facsimile: (919) 855-5805  
Ben.Garner@nctreasurer.com  
 
N.C. R. App. P. 33(b) Certification:            
I certify that the attorneys listed  
below have authorized me to list 
their names on this brief  as if 
they had personally signed it.  
 
      Aaron  D. Vodicka   
      N.C. State Bar No. 55199  
Assistant General Counsel  
North Carolina Department of the  
     State Treasurer  
      3200 Atlantic Avenue  
      Raleigh, North Carolina 27604  
      Telephone: (919) 836 -6522  
      Facsimile: (919) 855-5805  
      aaron.vodicka@nctreasurer.com  
 
Counsel for Amicus Curiae  
Treasurer Dale R. Folwell , CPA 
 
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE 
 I certify that today I served a copy of the attached motion by 
electronic mail on  the following parties at the following addresses : 
Benton Grey Sawrey  Ryan Y. Park  
Narron Wenzel, P.A.  Nicholas S. Brod  
P.O. Box 1567  Derek L. Hunter  
Smithfield, NC 27577  John H. Schaeffer  
bsawrey@narronwenzel.com  N.C. Department of Justice  
 P.O. Box 629  
Joshua A. Windham  Raleigh, NC 27602  
Renée D. Flaherty  919-716-6900  
Institute for Justice  rpark@ncdoj.gov  
901 N. Glebe Road, Suite 900  nbrod@ncdoj.gov  
Arlington, VA 22203  dhunter@ncdoj.gov  
jwindham@ij.org  jschaeffer@ncdoj.gov  
rflaherty@ij.org   
 Counsel for Defendants  
Counsel for Plaintiffs   
 R. Daniel Gibson  
B. Tyler Brooks  Paul Stam  
P.O. Box 728  510 W. Williams Street  
Cary, NC 27512  Apex, NC 27502  
btb@btylerbrookslawyer.com  dan@stamlawfirm.com  
 paulstam@stamlawfirm.com  
Attorney for Amicus CON 
Scholars Thomas Stratmann, 
Matthew Mitchell, Anne Philpot, 
and Christopher Koopman   
Attorneys for Amicus the John 
Locke Foundation  
 Christina Sandefur  
 500 E. Coronado Road  
 Phoenix, AZ 85004  
 csandefur@goldwaterinstitute.org  
  
 Attorney for Amicus Goldwater 
Institute  
 
 
Kenneth L. Burgess  Marcus C. Hewitt  
Matthew A. Fisher  Troy D. Shelton  
Iain M. Stauffer  434 Fayetteville Street, Ste 2800  
Baker, Donelson, Bearman, 
Caldwell & Berkowitz, PC  Fox Rothschild LLP  
P.O. Box 27525  
2530 Meridian Parkway, Ste. 300  Raleigh, NC 27611  
Durham, NC 27713  mhewitt@foxrothschild.com  
kburgess@bakerdonelson.com  tshelton@foxrothschild.com  
mfisher@bakerdonelson.com  Attorneys for Amicus Bio -Medical 
Applications of North Carolina, 
Inc. istauffer@bakerdonelson.com  
 
Attorneys for Amicus NCHA, Inc. 
d/b/a the North Carolina Healthcare Association, the North Carolina Health Care Facilities 
Association, the North Carolina 
Chapter of the American College 
of Radiology, Inc., and the North 
Carolina Senior Living 
Association   
Gary S. Qualls  
Susan K. Hackney  
Anderson M. Shackelford  
K&L Gates LLP  
430 Davis Drive, Suite 400  
Morrisville, NC 27560  
gary.qualls@klgates.com  
susan.hackney@klgates.com  
 anderson.shackelford@klgates.com  
Matthew W. Wolfe   
Attorneys for Amicus the 
Charlotte -Mecklenburg Hospital 
Authority, University Health 
Systems of Eastern Carolina, Inc., 
and Cumberland County Hospital 
System, Inc.  Robert A. Leandro  
Parker Poe Adams & Bernstein 
LLP 
301 Fayetteville Street, Suite 
1400  
P.O. Box 389  
Raleigh, NC 27602  
mwolfe@parkerpoe.com  
robbleandro@parkerpoe.com  
 
Attorneys for Amicus the 
Association for Home and Hospice 
Care of North Carolina  
 
 
 
This the 15th  day of August, 20 22.  
/s/ J. Benjamin  Garner  
J. Benjamin Garner  
N.C. State Bar No. 41257  
General Counsel  
North Carolina Department of the 
     State Treasurer  
3200 Atlantic Avenue  
Raleigh, North Carolina 27604  
Telephone: (919) 814 -4000  
Facsimile: (919) 855-5805  
Ben.Garner@nctreasurer.com  
 
