 
Testimony of Katie Fullam Harris 
MaineHealth 
in Opposition to LD 1554 
“An Act to Repeal Certificate of Need Requirements for Health Care 
Providers” 
April 27, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services, my name is Katie 
Fullam Harris of MaineHealth, and I am here to testify in opposition to LD 1554 that would 
repeal Maine’s Certificate of Need statute for MaineHealth is an integrated non-profit 
health care system that provides a continuum of health care services to communities 
throughout major health care expenditures, new facilities and expansions of inpatient 
capacity in Maine.  
MaineHealth supports high quality health care, academic medicine and research in 11 
counties in Maine  and one in New Hampshire. Every day, our over 22,000 care team 
members support our vision of “Working Together so Our Communities are the Healthiest 
in America” by providing a range of services from primary and specialty physician services 
to a continuum of behavioral health care services, community and tertiary hospital care, 
home health care and a lab. Our academic mission includes training programs for RNs, 
CNAs and other specialty service providers, plus our Tufts/Maine Medical Center 
MaineTrack program, over 200 residency and fellowship spots, and the MaineHealth 
Institute for Research.  
MaineHealth’s ability to be nimble and meet the evolving needs of our communities relies 
upon the infrastructure that we have built as an integrated health care system. Maine’s 
 
Certificate of Need law (CON) plays an important role in ensuring that the state has a 
strong and cost-effective care delivery system to meet the needs of our communities. The 
pandemic proved that system highly effective, as Maine’s hospitals and health care 
organizations successfully met the needs of our population, even during a very trying time. 
Per Title 22, Sub. 2, Chapter 103-A , the Maine statute’s declaration of findings and 
purpose, the CON law “helps to prevent the unnecessary construction or modification to 
health care facilities or duplication of health services that are substantial factors in the 
cost of health care while ensuring that the public can obtain necessary medical services. . . 
.”  
Specifically, the CON review process is used to promote effective health planning, ensure 
access to cost effective services, and support the reasonable availability of choices in 
health care services. The process also plays an important role in preventing excessive and 
unnecessary duplication of services which can lead to increased and unnecessary health 
care costs. It is important to note that CON requirements do not block change, but rather 
they provide a necessary evaluation of proposed projects. 
The Maine Legislature has updated the CON law several times over the years, most 
recently in 2011.  The result of an extensive stakeholder process led by the Department of 
Health and Human Services, the most recent changes amended the scope and process 
through which the law is now implemented. Key thresholds were changed, they are to be 
indexed to reflect inflation, and the CON now only covers major transactions, such as: 
1. Capital expenditures of $13, 919, 209 or more 
2. New health care facilities of $3,000,000 or more 
3. Major medical equipment of $4,175,763 or more 
These are not small investments, and the CON ensures that the return on these 
investments – which would come from health policy holders – meets a community need 
and will not create unintended consequences.  
The 2011 effort resulted in consensus that only those projects that are of significant 
magnitude, as identified above, should be subject to the CON process. Though we do not 
always agree with the Department’s interpretation of CON, we do believe strongly that the 
 
law is necessary to protect the fragile ecosystem of Maine’s health care delivery 
landscape.   
Finally, CON provides a stablizing force which allows existing providers to embrace new 
payment models that move away from reliance on fee for service and create incentives for 
providers to take financial risk, such as the MaineCare Accountable Communities Initiative. 
The development of a full continuum of integrated care is the objective of these care 
delivery and payment models. In most parts of Maine, there is sufficient availability and 
capacity of health care delivery services to support new models of care without allowing 
unchecked proliferation of new services and facilities. In fact, repealing Maine’s CON law 
under currently evolving payment models would result in fragmentation rather than 
promoting the integration of care. It is also important to consider what impact eliminating 
CON oversight might have on the ability of our state’s nonprofit health care providers to 
provide essential access to health care for Maine’s most vulnerable residents, to rural 
communities, and to those who lack adequate insurance coverage.  
As we often say, “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it.”  And it ain’t broke. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
