HEALTHCARE 
PURCHASER 
ALLIANCE 
OF MAINE 
Testimony of Peter Hayes 
to the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1554, An Act to Repeal Certificate of Need Requirements for Health Care Providers 
April 27, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services. 
My name is Peter Hayes. I'm the President and CEO of the Healthcare Purchaser Alliance of Maine and I'm here today 
to testify neither for nor against LD 1554. The HPA is a nonprofit that represents the purchasers of healthcare in 
Maine. Our mission is to advance healthcare value and to support and incentivize high-quality, affordable care. We 
have over 60 members, including some of the largest public and private employers and health trusts in Maine. 
Collectively, our members spend over a billion dollars annually providing health care for nearly one quarter of the 
commercially insured population in the state. 
We often come before the committee in support of policies and processes designed to improve affordability for all 
Mainers_ And while we know that Maine's CON process was originally enacted to guard against unnecessary cost 
increases, we are concerned that the process has not delivered on that promise. Instead, we fear that Maine's CON 
process has the potential to increase costs, a conclusion that is consistent with a number of national studies} 
including one that concluded that "CON laws act as barriers to entry for nonhospital providers and favor hospitals 
over other providers/'2 which can potentially reduce competition and access to affordable care? And in fact, as of 
2021, 12 states have fully repealed their CON programs or allowed the program to expire, including New Hampshire, 
which repealed its CON program in 2016.4 
1 Maureen K. Ohlhausen, "Certiﬁcate of Need Laws: A Prescription for Higher Costs,” AntiTrust, Vol. 30, No. 1, Fall 2015. Available 
at: https:1/www.ftc.gov@ystem/ ﬁles/documents[public statements/896453/1512fall15-ohlhausencpdf Also, American Medical 
Association, “Certiﬁcate of Need: Evidence for repeal," AMA Advocacy Resource Center, 2015. 
2 Thomas Stratmann and Matthew C. Baker, "Are Certiﬁcate-of-Need Laws Barriers to Entry? How they Affect Access to MRI, CT, 
and PET Scans," Mercatus Working Paper, Mercatus Center, George Mason University, January 2016. Available at: 
httpszl/www.mercatusorg/research/working;papers/are-certi ﬁcate-need-Iaws-barriers-entry-how-they-affect-access-mri-ct- 
and#:~:text=CON%20laws%20act%20as%20barriers,of%20state%20or%20in%20hospitals. 
3 
Patrick A Rivers, Myron D Fottler, and Mustafa Zeedan Younis, "Does certiﬁcate of need really contain hospital costs in the 
United States?" Sage journals, Volume 66, Issue 3, September 2007. Available at: 
ht-tps:[[journals.saggpub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/OO17896907080127?iournalCode=heig. 
4 National Conference of State Legislatures, "Certiﬁcate of Need State Laws,” January 1, 2023. Available at: 
https:[/www.ncsl.org/health/certificate-of~need~state-laws. 
Healthcare Purchaser Alliance of Maine | 11 Bowdoin Mill Island, Suite 260, Topsham, ME 04086 
P: (207) 844-8106 | E: info@purchaseralliance.org | www.purchaseralliance.org
HEALTHCARE 
PURCHASER 
ALLlANCE 
OF MAINE 
Today, 35 states have CON laws,5 and when they were ﬁrst established around 50 years ago, those laws were based 
at least partly on the premise that rising healthcare costs were associated with over-capacity, which drove up 
utilization and cost. But today, research has shown that it's rising prices—not utilization —that are driving the 
increase in costs.“ In fact, studies show that regions with competition —which sometimes means extra capacity —have 
lower prices.7 So, when Maine's CON process stops new providers from entering a region—because there are already 
sufﬁcient resources in that region— that decision could end up preserving a highly consolidated regional market, and 
the higher prices that may go along with it. 
Oversight of Maine's healthcare market is critical, particularly when it comes to the potential for further mergers and 
acquisitions in our already consolidated system. But the process and criteria in our current CON law may end up 
stiﬂing the very competition we need to make health care in Maine more affordable. For that reason, we believe that 
it is time to review the state's CON process to evaluate how it is impacting competition and prices in Maine's 
healthcare market, and to determine whether there might be a better process that would focus on improving 
competition and affordability. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our feedback on LD 1554. I'd be happy to answer any questions and will be 
available for the work session. 
5 
Ibid. 
6 
Health Care Cost Institute, 2021 Health Care Cost and Utilization Report, April 2023. Available at: 
https:1/healthcostinstituteorg/images[pdfs/HCCI 2021 Health Care Cost and Utilization Reportpdf. 
7 
Zack Cooper, Stuart Craig, Martin Gaynor & John Van Reenen, The Price Ain't Right? Hospital Prices and Health Spending on the 
Privately lnsured, 134 QJ. ECON. 51 (2019). Available at: 
https:1/healthcarepricingproiectorg/sites/default/ ﬁles/Updated the price aint right qje.pdf. 
Healthcare Purchaser Alliance of Maine | 11 Bowdoin Mill lsland, Suite 260, Topsham, ME 04086 
P: (207)844-8106 | E: info@purchaseraIliance.org I www.purchaseralliance.org
