  
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office for Family Independence  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel.: (207) 624-4168 ; Toll-Free: (800) 442 -6003  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay) ; Fax: (207)  287-3455 
  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 18 , 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 333 – An Act to Protect the Homes of Individuals Placed in Long -term Care by 
Excluding the Individual’s Primary Residences in Eligibility Considerations  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representativ e Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide you with information that might be helpful to you  in your deliberations 
regarding LD  333. The p roposed legislation prohibits the  Department of Hea lth and Human 
Services from considering an individual’s primary residence in the determination of eligibility for 
long-term care for th at individual’s child if the primary residence is excluded for the individual’s 
spouse.    
 
The Department offers the foll owing information on how Medicaid currently considers  a primary 
residence  in eligibility determinations .   
 
Medicaid defines a primary residence as the home, in which an individual has an ownership 
interest, and serves as the principal place of residence  for that individual . In most instances, i t is 
excluded  from eligibility determinations unless the individual leaves the home and does not 
intend to return or the property is located out of state.  Only one property may be excluded as a 
primary residence  for one individual . 
 
Applicants for long -term care may also exempt their primary residence if they indicate an intent 
to return home while in a facility (e.g., nursing facility, PNMI, hospital). Fac tors such as the 
individual’s age or physical condition are not considered when determining the exclusion based 
on the intent to return.  
 
The primary residence for long -term care applicants cannot be excluded if the individual’s equity 
interest in their pr imary residence  exceeds $750,000. This rule does not apply if the spouse of the 
individual, or dependent, or disabled child of the individual is lawfully residing in the home.  
 
LD 333 does not define children, but the Department notes that most children un der the age of 21 
do not have an asset test.  
 
 
 
 
 We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you  consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Anthony Pelotte, Director  
Office for Family Independence  
 

