i ./. -r 
. ' -_‘/>~A II 
1- "\. ~.- . ’§ lo‘ I _," 
._t_ ' ;.,..‘!| 
.=}§:>1 ?+Fia 
James Libby, Ph.D. THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 22 131st Legmamre Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator James D. Libby 
Sponsor of LD 333 
"An Act to Protect the Homes of Individuals Placed in Long-term Care by Excluding the 
Individuals ‘ Primary Residences in Eligibility Considerations" 
Public Hearing, Tuesday, April 18, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, 
My name is Jim Libby, and I am a State Senator representing Senate District # 22, comprised of the 
towns of Naples, Sebago, Baldwin, and Standish in Cumberland County; Hiram and Porter in Oxford 
County; and, Limington, Limerick, Comish, Parsonsﬁeld, Newﬁeld, Acton, and Shapleigh, in the 
County of York. 
It is my honor to bring to your attention the contents of LD 333, "An Act to Protect the Homes of 
Individuals Placed in Long-term Care by Excluding t-he Individuals ‘ Primary Residences in Eligibility 
Considerations" 
Committee members, I’d like to begin by discussing the purpose for bringing you a challenging bill of 
this nature. We need to talk about long term care. 
There are many people who have lived wonderful lives in their homestead, establishing careers, and 
raising families. Years pass and goals change, but for many thousands in my district, retiring 
comfortably and spending quality time with grown children and grandchildren has been achieved. As 
you know, with age, an ever-growing number of people face speciﬁc diseases. Alzheimer ’s is a disease 
in many homesteads, for example. 
The fact is that a ﬁnal living parent often has spent retirement funds. For example, it’s incredibly 
ironic that the government imposes mandatory withdrawals from IRA’s starting at age 72, with the 
minimum withdrawal calculated based on factors such as age expectancy. To make a long story short, 
elders in my rural district often (not sometimes) have few assets left besides the value of their home. 
The money is gone, but the equity in the home does remain. 
Then along comes the way that government treats family estates differently when the parent needs long 
tenn care. 
According to Maine law, and documented nicely by “Consumers for Affordable HealthCare, ” if you 
have Mair1eCare and you are not in a nursing home, in assisted living, or receiving home care services,
estate recovery does not apply to you. So, as you know, children sometimes leave their jobs to take 
care of the parent in their home. We even have programs that help these sons and daughters do just 
that. Respite-for-ME is a program that comes to mind. That’s great. 
But in November 2021 when Maine changed who estate recovery applies to, the law perhaps 
unintentionally exposed long-term care. Estate recovery only pertains to Long-Term Care Services 
covered by MaineCare, such as nursing home care, memory care, assisted living, or certain home care 
services. Hospital and prescription drug services related to these long-term care services can still be 
recovered.i 
Therein lies the problem. 
MaineCare recovers the cost incurred for long-term care. So, perhaps a child stayed with the parent as 
long as they could. But a disease such as Alzheimer ’s advanced to the stage where it was impossible to 
keep the parent at home. Perhaps they became angry, violent, or worse. The parent needs to entera 
nursing home. 
Here is what happens: 
If MaineCare spent $25,000 per month for long-term care and the estate is worth $250,000, MaineCare 
will seeks to recover all of the money from the estate. At $25,000 per month, that is the entire value of 
the estate, gone in exactly 10 months! 
To be speciﬁc, MaineCare seeks recovery when the Mair1eCare member has: 
' Long-Term Care MaineCare and was age 55 or older 
- no surviving spouse 
- no children under age 21 
~ no disabled children of any age 
That describes thousands of families in my senate district alone. 
Property that can be recovered includes: 
- A house or land 
- Automobiles of signiﬁcant value 
' Recreational vehicles (boats, campers, snowmobiles, All Terrain Vehicles (ATVs), 
motorhomes, etc.) 
~ Liquid assets such as bank accounts, stocks, bonds, and annuities (except like I said earlier, 
that it often already spent). 
According to the Alzheimer ’s Association International, a research study found that from 1999 to 2019, the 
mortality rate from Alzheimer ’s in the overall population nearly doubled, from 16 to 30 deaths per 
l00,000, an 88% increase. Let’s combine this data with the fact that according to Forbes, almost 22 
percent of Maine’s residents are aged 65 or older, the largest percentage of any state (even Florida). 
So Maine is the oldest state in the nation, Alzheimer ’s has already doubled, and global dementia cases 
are forecasted to triple by 2050 (Alzheimer ’s Association International). And here we are, busy sucking the 
entire value of homes away from these families in a few short months, with long-term care needs and 
costs escalating through the roof. We are giving family members a couple thousand dollars through 
programs like Respite-for-ME to stay in the home with their family and then when long-term care 
comes along, that $2000 seems luck chump change. The home is gone. It was sold by the children 
because it had to be. The children who thought maybe the grandchildren could live in the home 
suddenly discover it was nothing but a pipe dream.
My bill isn’t the solution, I admit it. But we need a Blue-Ribbon Commission to look into long-term 
care ﬁnancing, and We need it coming out of the 131st. I realize that some of the estate recovery 
problem is the result of federal law. The ﬁve-year lookback, claw back provisions, etc., etc. 
Committee members, please do the math and help Mainers to look at this problem differently. 
Thank you, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Services. I appreciate your time and am willing to respond to questions if 
necessary.
