  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso , on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence  
In OPPOSITION  to  
LD 1809 : “An Act to Prohibit Health Care Services Without Parental Consent”  and 
LD 1410: “An Act to Hold School Employees Civilly Liable for Failure to Notify Parents 
Regarding Medical Issues of Students Under 18 Years of Age  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
Friday , May 5 , 202 3 
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary , I am writing o n behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic 
Violence (MCEDV)1 to raise significant concerns as you consider LD 1809  and LD 1410.  These 
proposal s will crea te barriers to teens accessing the services they need to be healthy and 
safe.  
 
The domestic violence resource centers across Maine  provide inclusive services to  
victims of domestic abuse and violence across the lifespan , and these services help support 
people experiencing abuse from dating partners,  intimate partners and also  other  kinds of 
family  and household  members. The sad reality  that we urge lawmakers to keep in mind  is 
not all parents have their child’s best inter ests at heart , and some are even the perpetrators 
of egregious acts of abuse and violence upon their children , to include sexual abuse.   
 
Teen dating violence is prevalent in Maine’s high school population. More than 8% of 
Maine high schoolers have repor ted that someone they were dating physically hurt them 
within the last year – and that is just physical violence.  More than half of all high schoolers 
across the nation report that they have a friend who is experiencing dating abuse. These 
teen s need to know that there are safe and supportive adults in our communities from 
whom they can seek  information,  support , connections to resources,  and, in some cases, 
access to health care , without that resulting in a report to their parents  and without 
requiring p rior consent . Some teens experiencing dating violence  will not seek the help or 
support of a school counselor , social worker , or health care worker  for what is happening to 
them  if it means that their parent will need to be notified.  This means the teen is  not getting 
any support to help them navigate their path to safety, and likely means the abuse 
 
1 MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than  12,000 victims of domestic 
violence in Maine last year . 
MCEDV   Page 2 of 2 
continues. We note that, i n many cases, even when teens reach out to educators, health 
care providers or even advocates seeking  confidential support, eventually  they get to a 
place where they are ready to, and supported with, telling their parents what is happening. 
But removing a teen’s choice around parent notification will work to eliminate these trusted 
adults as being seen as trusted options for support , and often the most accurate 
information, in the first place.  
 
 We also can’t ignore the fact that sometimes there is a very real risk that parent 
notification will , for some teens,  result in further abuse of the teen  by their parent , who may 
be the perpetrator of the abuse for which  the teen is seeking help . In other circumstances, 
parents may not be committing physical violence , but they may still not be acting with their 
children’s best interests at heart; LGBTQ+ youth in our state are 120% more  likely than their 
peers to experience homelessness ;2 they  are either made to leave or determine that home is  
simply  less safe than trying to live  elsewhere.  
 
Trusted adults in our communities need to have the flexibility to hear what is 
happening from the teen who has sought them out, get an understanding of their 
circumstances, and provide the information, services an d supports that are going to best 
attend to the teen’s overall wellbeing.  And they need to be able to hear the teen, offer 
information, support and services without fear that they will be sued for trying to help. 
There are good reasons that our laws provi de this kind of flexibility. Without it, teens don’t 
reach out for the services and support that they need – whether that be contraception, 
testing for sexually transmitted diseases, a forensic examination in response to a sexual 
assault, emotional support and counseling or even an abortion. We enact barriers at  the 
detriment of the health and wellbeing of that child.  
 
At a time when suicide rates are of continued concern, with 18.5% of Maine’s high 
school students reporting that they have serious ly considered attempting suicide in the past 
12 months , teens need us to create more accessible pathways to support, not disincentives 
and barriers.  Thank you for the opportunity to share our concerns.  
 
 
Contact Information:    
Andrea Mancuso, Esq.    
Publi c Policy Director   
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)   
Ph: (207) 430 -8334 
Email:  andrea@mcedv.org    
 
2 Preble Street. “ 10 Things to Know About Youth Homelessness i n Maine. ” 
https://www.preblestreet.org/2022/11/15/10 -things -to-know -about -youth -homelessness -in-maine/  
