 
  
 Daniel W. Walker 
 dwalker@preti.com 
  
 
  
 
20444933.1 
TESTIMONY OF 
ON BEHALF OF MAINE ASSOCIATION OF INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS 
 
In opposition to 
 
LD 1410, An Act to Hold School Employees Civilly Liable for Failure to Notify Parents 
Regarding Medical Issues of Students Under 18 Years of Age 
 
and 
 
LD 1809, An Act to Prohibit Health Care Services Without Parental Consent 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
 
May 5, 2023 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee, my name is 
Daniel Walker, and I am an attorney with Preti Flaherty, and I am here today on behalf of Maine 
Association of Independent Schools (MAIS) to testify in opposition to LD 1410 and LD 1809.   
 
MAIS’s 23 members are a diverse group of educational institutions, including Maine’s earliest 
secondary school (Berwick Academy) dating to the 18th century with charters signed by Governor 
John Hancock, as well as much newer schools, schools with varied missions, schools which serve 
primarily public-tuition students, and some sectarian schools.  MAIS schools educate 9000 
students in pre-K through Grade 12, with 4600 publicly funded and 4400 privately funded.   All 
MAIS schools are accredited by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges. 
 
Schools play a crucial role in the health and well-being of our children from both a physical and 
mental health perspective.  School nurses and counselors are on the front lines with our children 
and provide a number of services, including behavioral and mental health services, management 
of chronic and complex health issues, basic first aid, and medication administration (working 
with a  child’s phsysican).   
 
In certain situations in school settings, children may want to discuss physical or mental health 
issues with school medical staff and counselors and existing law protects these interactions.  For 
example, children may have privileged communications with school counselors and social 
workers, may give consent to treatment for substance use disorders or for psychological issues, 
and may receive family planning services without the consent of parents. 
 
These bills would create liability risks for healthcare practitioners and other school staff, who are 
looking out for the best interests and safety of our children under existing law, especially in 
situations where the children are not comfortable raising these issues with their parents. 
 
 
PRETI FLAHERTY 
Page 2 
 
20444933.1 Please vote this bill ought not to pass. 
    
### 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAIS MEMBERSHIP 
 
The Bay School, Blue Hill Berwick Academy, South Berwick 
Bridgton Academy, North Bridgton Carrabassett Valley Academy, 
Carrabassett Valley 
Cheverus High School, Portland Chewonki Foundation, Wiscasset 
Erskine Academy, South China John Bapst Memorial HS, Bangor 
Fryeburg Academy, Fryeburg Foxcroft Academy, Dover-Foxcroft 
Gould Academy, Bethel George Stevens Academy, Blue Hill 
Hyde School, Bath Hebron Academy, Hebron 
Lee Academy, Lee Kents Hill School, Kents Hill 
Maine Central Institute, Pittsfield Lincoln Academy, Newcastle 
North Yarmouth Academy, 
Yarmouth Maine Coast Waldorf School, 
Freeport 
Washington Academy, East Machias Thornton Academy, Saco 
 
PRETI FLAHERTY 
Page 3 
 
20444933.1 Waynflete School, Portland  
 
 
