 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, 
FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Alyssa Goodwin, MD  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward**  
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, 
PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Rep s 
**Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS Ed  
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207- 480- 4185 
 
www.maineaap.org    
Testimony in  Opposition to LD 1410: ‘ An Act to Hold School Employees Civilly 
Liable for Failure to Notify Parents Regarding Medical Issues of Students Under 18 
Years of Ag e’ 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Judiciary Committee , my 
name is D r. Deborah Hagler. I am a resident of Brun swick and the immediate past president of the 
Maine Chapter of the AAP.  
 
Not all of my teen patients want their parents to leave when I invite them to do so - and that is fine 
they are not ready for that step but I often see a slight release of shoulder tension or the more obvious head shaking of yes , yes, yes when I look at tee n and parent and ask  if the teen would be 
comfortable with some time alone with the doctor. They have been waiting for this time with a 
trusted adult to ask a question or  bring up a concern. They know  that I will journey with them into 
some uncomfortab le territory - I am a knowledgeable guide that won’t judge -  ground rules though 
are if I am worried about their safety or someone else’s we will figure out how to bring your parents 
into the conversation.  
 When you are a teen,  you want to  be safe, you want good information, you want guidance, but you 
may not want it from your parents. That is why it is critical for teens to have the ability to have 
relationships with trusted adults. They are most likely to form these in the school setting. I am 
grateful to  all of the adults that  offered their caring hearts and ears to my own children.  
  There is a vast amount of literature that supports the importance of these relationships. Youth that 
have them have better health, social, and academic outcomes.
1 As parent s we should all hope our 
children are able to form these relationships. Additionally, there are teens that  do not feel safe going 
to a parent at home with issues especially regarding  sexuality/ mental health or substance use. They 
deeply fear for their ow n safety.  LD 1410 threatens  the ability of teens to form relationships with 
trusted adults.  It instills a real threat to those  who may mentor or listen to our youth as they 
navigate the complexities of growing up in our supercharged, overly connected, polarized  world. 
The threat of civil litigation may make adults in the school setting less likely to mentor youth/ coach 
teams,  be the sponsor of a club or just be a sympathetic ear if  they feel they could be imperiled by 
potential litigation if  a young ster discloses something,  and a parent learns about this disclosure after  
the fact. Adults will begin to police interactions with teens. Additionally, limiting these interactions 
may have the unintended consequence of further limiting access to adults who may be able to 
identify youth who indeed may need referral  to professionals for services.  
 
It is laudable that parents desire to know what is going on with their kids. School personnel are 
already mandated to report if youth are a threat to themselves o r to someone in the larger 
community. This legislation will stifle relationships that have been demonstrated to protect youth from harm. We are at a time when most are aware that many leading organizations that work with 
youth have declared a national ment al health emergency in children and adolescents.
2   
 
Please do not pass legislation that threatens to damage, reduce or remove one of the strongest 
protective factors we can offer our youth - the relationships they have with school staff.  
 
References:  
 
1.Sieving RE, McRee AL, McMorris BJ, Shlafer RJ, Gower AL, Kapa HM, Beckman KJ, Doty JL, Plowman SL, Resnick MD. 
Youth -Adult Connectedness:  A Key Protective Factor for Adolescent Health. Am J Prev Med. 2017 Mar;52(3 Suppl 
3):S275- S278. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2016.07.037. P MID: 28215380; PMCID: PMC5559097.  
 
2.AAP Child and Adolescent Mental Health Emergency  
 
 
