Testimony of  Emily Albee	Distinguished members of  the Judiciary Committee. My name is Emily Albee. I am a resident of  Orono and the 2022 Penobscot County Teacher of  the Year. I am an educator and a proud member of  the Maine Education Association. Please accept my written testimony against LD 1410. This bill is dangerous and will negatively impact students and education professionals in Maine. I urge the Committee to unanimously vote ought not to pass.  	 This bill is rooted in fear, ignorance, and transphobia. LD 1410 is avoiding using the term transgender in its title and instead names medical issues are to be reported to parents for students under 18. The medical issues not explicitly stated in the bill are when students seek out school professionals to conﬁde in about their sexuality , preferred pronouns, preferred names, and their gender afﬁrmation/identity . Students who do not feel safe to be their true selves in their homes or do not have safe adults in their lives to conﬁde in, search for this safety with the trained and supportive professionals in our Maine schools. If  that safety is taken away , the lives of  our LGBTQ+ Maine students are literally at risk. According to the Trevor Project’s 2022 National Survey on LGBTQ Youth Mental Health (https://www.thetrevorproject.org/survey-2022/#intro): 1 in 5 transgender and nonbinary youth attempted suicide and LGBTQ youth of  color reported higher rates than their white peers, LGBTQ youth who found their school to be LGBTQ-afﬁrming reported lower rates of  attempting suicide, and fewer than 1 in 3 transgender and nonbinary youth found their home to be gender-afﬁrming. For students who do not feel safe or gender afﬁrmed at home, school personnel serve as a place of  safety and connection they can turn to for support and protection. As an educator, I am expected to make data driven decisions. I implore this Committee to make data driven decisions based on the overwhelming evidence that our LGBTQ+ youth who do not feel safe and supported to be their true selves overwhelmingly have or will seriously consider suicide (https://www.npr.org/2022/05/05/1096920693/lgbtq-youth-thoughts-of-suicide-trevor-project-survey). Please do not take away a vital life saving outlet for our Maine LGBTQ+ students.  	 This bill sets a legal precedent to allow the continuation of  the hateful and vitriolic targeting campaign some of  our communities in Maine are experiencing against school professionals who support all students. If  our LGBTQ+ students are aware that turning to a trusted school ofﬁcial for support will trigger required notiﬁcation of  their families, their fear of  the very real consequences will discourage them from reaching out for help and support. LD 1410 puts school professionals into an impossible ethical position of  choosing what is best practice and safe for students or caving to the reality that unsupportive parents may ﬁle a civil lawsuit against them. LD 1410 aims to create a culture of  fear in our Maine schools and advocates for school professionals to violate the sacred trust and welfare of  our students. This bill allows for the unrealistic extension of  parental control as some parents attempt to force their children to conform to who they want them to be instead of  allowing their children to live their lives as they are. LD 1410 places an unethical and unrealistic burden on school professionals who at great personal sacriﬁce would rather choose to maintain the trust and conﬁdentiality of  LGBTQ+ students and potentially save their life. I urge the Committee to unanimously vote ought not to pass on LD 1410.  
Emily  Albee
Orono
LD 1410
Distinguished members of the Judiciary Committee. My name is Emily Albee. I am 
a resident of Orono and the 2022 Penobscot County Teacher of the Year. I am an 
educator and a proud member of the Maine Education Association. Please accept my 
written testimony against LD 1410. This bill is dangerous and will negatively impact 
students and education professionals in Maine. I urge the Committee to unanimously 
vote ought not to pass. 
This bill is rooted in fear, ignorance, and transphobia. LD 1410 is avoiding using 
the term transgender in its title and instead names medical issues are to be reported to 
parents for students under 18. The medical issues not explicitly stated in the bill are 
when students seek out school professionals to confide in about their sexuality, 
preferred pronouns, preferred names, and their gender affirmation/identity. Students 
who do not feel safe to be their true selves in their homes or do not have safe adults in
their lives to confide in, search for this safety with the trained and supportive 
professionals in our Maine schools. If that safety is taken away, the lives of our 
LGBTQ+ Maine students are literally at risk. According to the Trevor Project’s 2022 
National Survey on LGBTQ Youth Mental Health 
(https://www.thetrevorproject.org/survey-2022/#intro): 1 in 5 transgender and 
nonbinary youth attempted suicide and LGBTQ youth of color reported higher rates 
than their white peers, LGBTQ youth who found their school to be LGBTQ-affirming
reported lower rates of attempting suicide, and fewer than 1 in 3 transgender and 
nonbinary youth found their home to be gender-affirming. For students who do not 
feel safe or gender affirmed at home, school personnel serve as a place of safety and 
connection they can turn to for support and protection. As an educator, I am expected 
to make data driven decisions. I implore this Committee to make data driven 
decisions based on the overwhelming evidence that our LGBTQ+ youth who do not 
feel safe and supported to be their true selves overwhelmingly have or will seriously 
consider suicide 
(https://www.npr.org/2022/05/05/1096920693/lgbtq-youth-thoughts-of-suicide-trevor
-project-survey). Please do not take away a vital life saving outlet for our Maine 
LGBTQ+ students. 
This bill sets a legal precedent to allow the continuation of the hateful and vitriolic 
targeting campaign some of our communities in Maine are experiencing against 
school professionals who support all students. If our LGBTQ+ students are aware that
turning to a trusted school official for support will trigger required notification of their
families, their fear of the very real consequences will discourage them from reaching 
out for help and support. LD 1410 puts school professionals into an impossible ethical
position of choosing what is best practice and safe for students or caving to the reality
that unsupportive parents may file a civil lawsuit against them. LD 1410 aims to 
create a culture of fear in our Maine schools and advocates for school professionals to
violate the sacred trust and welfare of our students. This bill allows for the unrealistic 
extension of parental control as some parents attempt to force their children to 
conform to who they want them to be instead of allowing their children to live their 
lives as they are. LD 1410 places an unethical and unrealistic burden on school 
professionals who at great personal sacrifice would rather choose to maintain the trust
and confidentiality of LGBTQ+ students and potentially save their life. I urge the 
Committee to unanimously vote ought not to pass on LD 1410. 

