 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 
Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
May 5, 2023  
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Judiciary , my name is Joe Anderson.  I am a resident of Portland, a 
pediatrician  in Lewiston , and I s erve  on the board of the Maine Chapter of the 
American Academy of Pediatrics.  I am writing today to expres s our strong 
opposition  to two pieces of legislation that  threaten and impede the provision of 
safe, evidence -based health care to adolescents :  
• LD 1 410, An Act to Hold School Employees Civilly Liable for Failure to 
Notify Parents Regarding Medical Issues of Students Under 18 Years of Age  
• LD 1809 , An Act to Prohibit Health Care Services Without Parental Consent  
We ask that you vote Ought  Not to Pass on th ese two bills . 
 
Medical ethics surrounding the provision of health care of adolescents over the 
past several decades are clear: confidentiality and independent consent  for 
sensitive care  are important component s of adolescent health care.  A rich 
evidence base demonstrate s that adolescents are more likely to seek health care 
for potentially sensitive issues such as sexuality, mental health, and drug use if 
they can provide their own consent and be confident their health information is 
private.1  They are less likely to see k out prescription contraceptives, receive 
screening and treatment for STDs, or disclose substance use to their providers if 
confidentiality is not assured.2  Moreover, they may choose to withhold 
information from their healthcare provider, impeding safe a nd optimal care.  
 
During the adolescent years, we hope our young children make the transition to 
beco me independent, responsible adults.   Part of that transition is supported by 
healthcare providers allowing, when appropriate, autonomy in healthcare 
decisi on making.  By ensuring confidentiality for certain healthcare concerns, we 
help to foster healthy decision -making skills while maintaining our ethical 
obligation to ensure our patient’s well -being.  In fact, it is the standard of care for 
pediatricians  to begin having confidential conversations with our patients starting 
at 12 or 13 years old at each well visit, to allow them the time to become 
comfortable discussing their health concerns with their doctor.   During these 
visits, we offer confidentiality (w ith certain caveats) while also encouraging them 
to involve their parents when they have questions or disclose experiences with 
drugs, sex, or mental health concerns.  We strategize with them on ways to have 
those difficult conversations with their parents , and to help guide them in making 
safe and healthy decisions if they are not yet comfortable having those 
discussions.  Ultimately, our ethical obligation is to our patient and what is best 
for them.  
 
Of course, in any scenario where an adolescent seeks  care without their parents , 
we have a discussion with them about  their individual situation and  encourage 
them to keep their parents informed of their healthcare decisions.  However, 
there are times  where an adolescent may not feel comfortable sharing this 
 
information with their parents or  may fear that doing so would threaten their 
safety , mental health, or have other unwanted consequences .  In such cases, 
maintaining confidentiality is a means of minimizi ng harm, especially if the teen 
patient would otherwise not seek out medical guidance or treatment if they knew 
their parents would be notified.  
 
The AAP report titled Informed Consent in Decision -Making in Pediatric Practice  
states the following:  “Parent al decision -making should primarily be understood as 
parents’ responsibility to support the interests of their child and to preserve 
family relationships, rather than being focused on their rights to express their own 
autonomous choices.”3  In viewing the parent -child relationship in this manner, it 
becomes clear that doing what is right in terms of the adolescent’s health is of the 
utmost importance.  
 
Although there is a true patchwork of state regulations regarding privacy and 
consent for adolescents seek ing health care, a s of 2021, all 50 states allow most 
minors to consent independently for sexually transmitted infection (STI)  testing 
and treatment .1  Maine would stand alone in ignoring public health and pediatric 
best practices if this bill were to pass , and the results could be disastrous, with  
increasing rates of adolescent STIs and teen pregnancies , as well as worsening 
mental health outcomes .  We urge you to support the health of Maine 
adolescents and vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 1410  and 1 809. 
 
Respectfully,  
 
Joe Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Co-Chair, Advocacy Committee  
Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1Marianne Sharko, Rachael Jameson, Jessica S. Ancker, Lisa Krams, Emily C. Webber, S. Trent 
Rosenbloom; State -by-State Variability in Adolescent Privacy Laws.  Pediatrics  June 2022; 149 (6): 
e2021053458. 10.1542/peds.2021 -053458  
 
2Sofya Maslyanskaya, Elizabeth M. Alderman; Confidentiality and Consent in the Care of the 
Adolescent Patient.  Pediatr Rev  October 2019; 40 (10): 508 –516.  
 
3Aviva L. Katz, Sally A. Webb, COMMITTEE ON BIOETHICS, Robert C. Macauley, Mark R. Mercurio, 
Margaret R. Moon, Alexander L. Okun, Douglas J. Opel, Mindy B. Statter; Informed Consent in 
Decision -Making in Pediatric Practice . Pediatrics  August 2016; 138 (2): e20161485. 
10.1542/peds.2016 -1485 
  

