March  6, 2023  
 
Senator  Donna  Bailey,  Senate  Chair  
Representative  Anne  Perry,  House  Chair  
Committee  on Health  Coverage,  Insurance  and Financial  Services  
 
Dear  Senator  Bailey  and Representative  Perry:   
 
We, the undersigned  Maine  patient  advocates,  are coming  together  to express  our 
support  for LD 759, “An Act to Reduc e Out-of-pocket  Prescription  Drug  Expenses  for 
Coinsurance.”   
 
By limiting  patient  out-of-pocket  costs,  this bill will help thousands  of Main ers better  
access  and afford  their medicines  and provide  patients  with immediate  relief  from rising  
out-of-pocket  costs.   
 
The patients  we serve  live with chronic,  often  disabling,  or life-threatening  conditions.  
Under  the current  health  insurance  system , they are required  to shoulder  a 
disproportionate  share  of the cost-sharing  burden  and must  constantly  struggle  to keep  
pace  with rising  health  care costs.  We, in effect,  ask our most  vulnerable  Mainers  to 
shoulder  the largest  financial  costs.  This is not how insurance  is supposed  to work.  LD 
759, when  enacted,  will help to correct  this unfairness  by ensuring  that more  Mainers  
will have  their out-of-pocket  costs  capped  for prescription  medicines.  Maine  currently  
caps  out-of-pocket  expenses  for certain  plans with coinsurance  benefits  at $3,500.   
LD 759 will cap costs  at the IRS minimum  deductible,  which  is currently  $1,500  for 
an individual  and $3,000  for a family  in 2023.  By doing  so, the cap will be lowered  and 
ensure  compliance  with IRS guidelines  for high deductible  health  plans.   
 
By capping  out-of-pocket  costs,  LD 759 will also help to ensure  that patients  adhere  to 
their prescribed  treatment.  When  patients  cannot  afford  their medicines,  they often  fail 
to fill their prescriptions  or ration  medicines  to make  them  last longer.  This can lead to 
tragic  health  complications  for patients,  including  emergency  room  visits  and 
hospitalizations,  driving  up overall  health  care costs.  
 
Finally,  we want  to thank  the sponsor  and cosponsors  of LD 759 - Senator  Baldacci,  
Senator  Bailey,  Senator  Rafferty,  Senator  Tipping,  Representative  Madigan  and 
Representative  Shagoury.  We greatly  appreciate  their efforts  to help lower  out-of-pocket  
costs  and ease  the financial  burden  felt by many  in the patient  community.   
 
Thank  you for your consideration,  
 
ALS Association, Northern New England chapter  
Frannie Peabody Canter  
Free ME from Lung Cancer  
HEAL - Health Equity Alliance of Maine  
Hemophilia Alliance of Maine  
Lupus Foundation of New England  
NAMI Maine  
New England Hemophilia Association  
New England Bleeding Disorders Advocacy Coalition  
Purple Iris Foundation  
The Iris Network  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
