March 6, 2023 
The Honorable Senator Donna Bailey
The Honorable Representative Anne Perry 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services
 
Re: Support for LD 759 An Act to Reduce Out-of-pocket Prescription Drug Expenses for 
Coinsurance.
Dear, Chairwoman Bailey, Chairwoman Perry and members of the committee. On behalf of all ALS 
patients, including the 33 patients we serve in Maine, I respectfully request your support for LD 759, 
which will help reduce the out-of-pocket healthcare costs for our community.  
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), or ‘Lou Gehrig’s, is a fatal progressive neurodegenerative disease 
that slowly robs a person’s ability to walk, talk, eat, and eventually breathe. The cost of care for someone 
living with ALS is astronomical, with annual out-of-pocket expenses reaching over $80,000 per year. As 
with many people living with complex medical conditions, those with ALS must take various drugs to 
maintain their health. The out-of-pocket costs associated with prescription drugs significantly add to this 
crushing financial burden.  
As ALS progresses, most people lose their ability to work and can be terminated from their jobs due to 
their inability to perform to perform tasks. If the person with ALS is the primary working in the family - 
who provides health care coverage for their spouse and children, everyone in the family is left without a 
health insurance plan. While the person with ALS may be able to get Medicare if they are eligible for 
Social Security Disability, what they receive is not sufficient, and they still need to purchase Medicare 
supplemental coverage and pay for any out of pockets costs for Medicare.
If there is a working spouse, that person can often become a working caregiver or may have to quit their 
job to provide the care services.  Family members must hope they can get coverage through the ACA 
health exchanges or go on Medicaid. While losing insurance may be one of the first financial burdens a 
person with ALS faces following their diagnosis, it is certainly not the last. Patients may lose their ability 
to pay for their house, food, and medical cost coverage – all of which impacts their families. 
Currently, Maine caps out-of-pocket expenses for certain plans with coinsurance benefits at $3,500. LD 
759 will cap costs at the IRS minimum deductible, which is currently $1,500 for an individual and $3,000 
for a family in 2023. Once enacted, LD 759 will help ensure that more Mainers will have their out-of-
pocket costs capped for prescription medicines, which will help prevent unnecessary financial hardship 
due to medical bills for patients who are already faced with a difficult and stressful diagnosis. 
The ALS Association supports the reduction of out-of-pocket prescription drug expenses for coinsurance 
in an effort to reduce the financial toll ALS takes on patients. 
Thank you for your time and your consideration of this critical legislation. For all these reasons, we 
respectfully request your support for LD 759. 
Sincerely, 
Danielle Adams, MPH
Managing Director, Advocacy, New England
ALS Association 
