Consumers for P-0 BOX 149° 
i@+ Augusta, ME 04338 
eo 
g 1/ Telephone: 1-800 965 7476 
HEa|th cafﬂ Fax: 1-ass-214-5233 
www.ma|necahc org 
Advocating the right to quality, affordable 
heakh care for 3" Mainem consumerhealth@ma|necahc org 
Testimony In Support Of 
LD 759, An Act to Reduce Out-of-pocket Prescription Drug Expenses for Coinsurance 
Tuesday, March 7, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services. Thank you for the opportunity to submit 
these comments in support of LD 759, An Act to Reduce Out-of-pocket Prescription Drug 
Expenses for Coinsurance.i 
My name is Kate Ende and l am the Policy Director at Consumers for Affordable Health Care 
(CAHC), a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization that advocates for Maine people to be heard, 
respected, and well-served in a health system that provides coverage, access and quality, 
affordable care to all. 
CAHC is designated by Maine's Attorney General and Bureau of lnsurance as Maine's Health 
Insurance Consumer Assistance Program (CAP). The CAP program provides toll-free and in- 
person access to certiﬁed application counselors and trained individuals who help Mainers 
understand their health coverage options and apply and enroll in private health insurance. The 
program also provides assistance to Mainers in appealing inappropriate health insurance 
denials and connects people to safety net programs when necessary, to meet health care and 
other basic needs. CAHC also serves as the Ombudsman program for Maine's Medicaid 
program, MaineCare, and helps people with applying for and navigating the enrollment process 
for MaineCare coverage. lt is from our experience assisting Mainers in navigating health care 
systems and coverage programs that we offer the following comments. 
We often hear from people who have difficulties accessing the prescription drugs they need. In 
fact, we will be releasing data from a recent survey that shows more than half of Maine adults 
are concerned about not being able to afford a prescription drug they need. More than half of 
Mainers with commercial insurance reported that they would be more likely to geta 
recommended medical service or prescription drug if they didn't have such high deductibles or 
out-of-pocket costs. 
This bill will reduce the maximum out-of-pocket limit from $3,500 to $1,500 for prescription 
drugs subject to coinsurance in certain plans - plans that do not include prescription drugs 
subject to coinsurance under the total out-of-pocket limit for all benefits provided under the 
plan. We support this reduction, however, it is worth noting that the majority of plans utilize a 
single out-of-pocket maximum limit for all covered benefits, including prescription drugs as 
well as all health care services. Those plans would not be subject to proposed $1,500 limiton
prescription drug out-of-pocket costs. Consumers in health plans with a single combined out- 
of-pocket limit may have an out~of-pocket maximum as high as $9,100 in 2023. This amount has 
been proposed to increase to $9,450 in 2024. These rising out-of-pocket costs are not 
sustainable for consumers, who already face affordability challenges accessing the prescription 
drugs and care they need. 
The goal of this bill is to reduce out-of-pocket costs for prescription drugs for Maine people. To 
further this goal, we suggest the Committee consider taking additional steps, such as exempting 
prescription drugs from being subject to a deductible or capping prescription drug cost-sharing 
in all plans, whether those costs are due to coinsurance, a deductible, or copay. For example, in 
California, the copayment, coinsurance, or any other form of cost sharing (except fora 
deductible) for a 30-day supply of a covered outpatient prescription drug is capped at $250 for 
most plans, or $500 in most bronze plans. The annual deductible for outpatient drugs, if any, 
cannot not exceed $500 in most plans, or $1,000 in most bronze plans? 
More needs to be done to reign in the underlying cost drivers of high prescription drug costs. 
However, in the meantime, it is important that we take steps to ensure all Mainers can access 
the drugs they need at a cost they can afford. 
Thank you. 
1 
Cal. lns. Code §§ 10123193 & 1342.71
