 
 
Testimony in opposition  to 
 
LD 759 , An Act to Reduce Out -of-pocket Prescription Drug Expenses for Coinsurance  
With Proposed Sponsor Amendment  
 
Kimberly Cook, Esq.  
March 14, 2023  
 
As Maine’s only nonprofit CO -OP health insurance company, we exist for the benefit of our Members and our 
mission which is to provide affordable, high quality benefits that promote health and wellbeing. Our goal is to 
create plans that are easy to understa nd so our members know exactly what the costs are and how to monitor 
their costs throughout the plan year.  As I indicated during the public hearing, we had no position on this bill as 
originally drafted .  However, after reviewing  Senator Baldacci’s propos ed amendment, we are submitting this 
testimony to explain our opposition to the bill as amended .   
Insurance can be confusing with the various terminology used for the costs associated with each plan . Co-
insurance, copayment, and maximum out -of-pocket  (OOP)  are just a few terms used to describe various types 
of cost sharing that the member may encounter .  The amount  of cost -sharing between the enrollee and the 
health insurance carrier is also referred to as the  actuarial value  (AV)  of the plan.  Under the Affordable Care 
Act (ACA), the concept of “me tal level” is used as a shorthand  way to describe the AV  (or amount of cost -
sharing)  of plans.  Attached to our testimony we have provided information  from HealthCare.gov  that explains 
the available metal levels and  their actuarial  values  that health plan are required to meet . 
 
Plan Category  The insurance company pays  You pay  
Bronze  60%  40%  
Silver  70%  30%  
Gold  80%  20%  
Platinum  90%  10%  
 
Source: https://www.healthcare.gov/choose -a-plan/plans -categories/  
 
Currently , our plans offer a  single  maximum out -of-pocket limit for our members.   This maximum out -of-
pocket is inclusive of all services including prescription drug costs.   The sponsor’s suggested  amendment 
would prohibit health plans from utilizing a straight -forward, single maximum OOP  and instead require plans 
to use a more complicated system of havin g a maximum OOP for prescription drugs within the overall 
maximum OOP  for all covered health care .  LD 759 would  create additional complexity for our Members and 
additional administrative difficulty and expenses for our plan operations .   
 
 
 
By creating a m aximum out of pocket specific to drug costs , LD 759  does no thing to address the actual cost 
of prescription drug prices .  Instead , LD 759 would add complexity and require additional of administrative 
accounting that will likely re sult in  increases in monthly premiums.  In addition to increasing  administrative 
costs, LD 759  would shift costs from those with higher prescription drug expenses to those  whose prescription 
expenses are below the cap proposed by this bill.  In other words, this b ill would serve to shift the ever 
increasing costs of prescription drugs  onto those who use few of these drugs , but may well have high OOP 
costs  for other health care needs .  These consumers  would not only be paying just as much in OOP costs but  
have  to pa y increased premiums  (resulting from the cost shift and administrative costs) .  We ask the 
Committee to carefully consider whether this cost shift would accomplish the goal of keeping health insurance 
premiums as affordable as possible.  
 
We appreciate the opportunity to share these comments . We agree that high prescription drug costs merit 
immediate attention. We encourage this Committee to address the issue in a more direct manner rather than 
adopting an approach that shifts costs and risks burden ing Mainers with higher monthly premiums.  
  
 
 
Attachment  
Source: https://w ww.healthcare.gov/choose -a-plan/plans -categories/  
The health plan categories: Bronze, Silver, Gold & Platinum  
Plans in the Marketplace are presented in 4 health plan categories: Bronze, Silver, Gold, and 
Platinum. ( “Catastrophic” plans  are also available to some people.)  
 
FYI: Health plan categories are based on how you and your plan split the costs of your health 
care. They have nothing to do with quality of care.  
 
How you and your insurance plan split costs  
Estimated averages for a typical population. Your costs will vary.  
Plan Category  The insurance company pays  You pay  
Bronze  60%  40%  
Silver  70%  30%  
Gold  80%  20%  
Platinum  90%  10%  
 
Which health plan category is right for you?  
Bronze  
• Lowest  monthly premium  
• Highest  costs when you need care  
• Bronze plan deductibles — the amount of medical costs you pay yourself before your 
insurance plan starts to pay — can be thousands of dollars a year.  
• Good choice if:  You want a low -cost way to protect yourself from worst -case medical 
scenarios, like serious sickness or injury. Your monthly premium will be low, but you’ll 
have to pay for most routine care yoursel f. 
Silver  
• Moderate  monthly premium  
• Moderate  costs when you need care  
• Silver deductibles — the costs you pay yourself before your plan pays anything — are 
usually lower than those of Bronze plans.  
 
 
Getting extra savings with a Silver plan  
• If you qualify for  cost -sharing  reductions : You must  pick a Silver plan to get the extra 
savings . You can save hundreds or even thousands of dollars per year if you go to the 
doctor a lot. (Silver plans may also be available if you’re eligible for a premium tax credit 
and can enroll through a Special E nrollment Period based on estimated household 
income.)  
• If you’re enrolled in a Silver plan and lose your cost -sharing reductions:  You’ll qualify 
for a Special Enrollment Period. If you want to change plans, you can enroll in a Bronze, 
Silver or Gold plan t hat meets your needs and fits your budget.  
• Good choice if:  You qualify for “extra savings” — or, if not, if you’re willing to pay a slightly 
higher monthly premium than Bronze to have more of your routine care covered.  
Gold  
• High  monthly premium  
• Low  costs when you need care  
• Deductibles — the amount of medical costs you pay yourself before your plan pays — are 
usually low.  
• Good choice if:  You’re willing to pay more each month to have more costs covered when 
you get medical treatment. If you use a lot of care, a Gold plan could be a good value.  
 
Platinum  
• Highest  monthly premium  
• Lowest  costs when you get care  
• Deductibles are very low, meaning your plan starts paying its share earlier than for other 
categories of plans.  
• Good choice if:  You usually use a lot of care and are willing to pay a high monthly 
premium, knowing nearly all other costs will be covered.  
 
 
Find out how to use total costs of care to pick a category and plan that w ork for you.  
Note:  Plans in all categories provide free preventive care, and some offer selected free 
or discounted services before you meet your deductible.  
 
 
 
Your premium can be lower, based on your income  
No matter which health plan category you choose, you can save a lot of money on your 
monthly premium based on your income.  
When you fill out a Marketplace insurance application, you’ll find out if you qualify  for 
these savings.  Learn how you can save on your monthly insurance bill with a premium 
tax credit . 
You can do a  quick check now to see if your income’s in the range to qualify . 
 
 
