Maine State Legislature  – Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
 
Testimony of Laura Hoch,  
Senior Manager , Advocacy, National Multiple Sclerosis Society  
LD 759 – An Act to Reduce Out -of-pocket Prescription Drug Expenses for Coinsurance  
 
 
Chair Bailey, Chair Perry  and Members of the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and 
Financial Services , thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on our support of LD 
759, An Act to Reduce Out -of-pocket Prescription Drug Expense s for Coinsurance and how it 
may affect those who live with multiple sclerosis (MS).  
 
Multiple sclerosis is an unpredictable disease of the central nervous system. Currently there is 
no cure. Symptoms vary from person to person and may include disabling f atigue, mobility 
challenges, cognitive changes and vision issues. An estimated 1 million people live with MS in 
the United States. Early diagnosis and treatment are critical to minimize disability. Significant 
progress is being made to achieve a world free  of MS.   
 
When someone is diagnosed with MS, their clinician will typically prescribe a medication 
referred to as a disease -modifying therapy (DMT). DMTs are used to modify the disease course, 
treat relapses, and manage symptoms. Growing evidence indicates  that early and ongoing 
treatment with DMTs is the best way to prevent the accumulation of disability and protect the 
brain from permanent damage due to MS. According to “The Use of Disease -Modifying 
Therapies in Multiple Sclerosis: Principles and Current Evidence,” a consensus paper by the 
Multiple Sclerosis Coalition, evidence supports the initiation of treatment with an FDA -
approved disease -modifying t herapy (DMT)  as soon as possible following a diagnosis of 
relapsing MS.  It can take years f ollowing an MS diagnosis to find the most effective course of 
treatment and  when a patient does, they should remain on that drug uninterrupted.   
 
Living with MS is costly. While treatments exist, they are often out of reach financially. Despite 
more than 2 0 disease -modifying treatments (DMTs) on the market for relapsing MS, including 
some generics, the prices of DMTs continue to rise1. The price of MS treatments has 
dramatically risen since the first DMT was approved in 1993 and entered the market at 
appro ximately $11,500. In 2013, the average price of MS DMTs was around $60,000 per year; in 
2018 the median price of brand DMTs increased to $80,000; and just four years later in 2022, 
the brand median price was over  $94,000. Six of the DMTs have increased in price by more than 
200% since they came on the market, with nine now priced at more than $100,000 per year. In 
addition to high list prices, DMTs are also often placed on specialty tiers with a coinsurance 
rather than a copay . In a 2019 survey conducted by  the National MS Society, 40% of 
respondents reported that they have altered the use of their DMTs due to cost by skipping or 
delaying treatment, taking less than prescribed, or even stopping their treatment altogether. 
 
1 https://www.nationalmssociety.org/getmedia/89a02802 -d4d7 -4df7 -beb4 -dc57ea028938/2022 -MS-DMT -Trends -
in-annual -price -1997 -2022 -wlogo.pdf   
Because of the financial burden plac ed on people living with MS, many are forced to delay 
retirement or are less able to save and create a financial safety net for themselves as they age.  
 
Lowering the out -of-pocket limit for drugs with a coinsurance from $3,500 to $1,500 could be 
life-changing for someone living with MS. Many people on  DMTs reach  their out -of-pocket 
limits in the first month of coverage due to high drug costs. Most Americans do not have $3,500 
on han d to pay in January every year. This extra $2,000 annually could mean additional bills 
paid, groceries purchased, or even better adherence to DMT regim ens. MS is already such a 
costly disease,  and it is critical that we relieve that burden whenever possible.  
 
The National MS Society urges this committee – and the larger legislative body – to pass LD 759 
this session. Lowering out -of-pocket costs for patients is a win for everyone, the state included . 
Help ensure that people living with MS in Maine can afford the care they need.  
 
Please contact me if I can be of further assistance: laura.hoch@nmss.org  or (860) 913 -2550 
X52521.  
 
