P 
Scott D. Sevigny 
P.O. Box 311 
Fort Kent, ME 04743-0311 
Mobile Telephone: 2067-316-6460 
scottsevigny@sacl27.org 
03 February 2023
P 
Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Attention: Senator Michael Tipping, Senate Chair 
Representative Amy Roeder, House Chair 
Cross Building, Room 202 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Dear Members of the ]oint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing: 
My name is Scott Sevigny and I am submitting this letter in support of L.D. 185, An Act to Reduce the 
Benefit Penalty Imposed on Career Educators Who Retire After 35 Years of Service. I kindly asked 
the Honorable Senate President Troy D. Jackson to submit this bill and I am thankful for his effort in 
sponsoring this important piece oflegislation. l firmly believe it will impact all career educators 
from the Piscataqua River Bridge, to the western Maine mountains, east to West Quoddy Head, and 
north to the St. John Valley. 
l am currently halfway through my thirty~first year of teaching. l love teaching and I look forward to 
interacting with my students each day of the school year. After graduating from the University of 
Maine at Farmington in 1992, I have had the privilege ofteaching students in grades nine through 
twelve for thirty years in Maine School Administrative District No. 27 at Fort Kent Community High 
School and l also taught one year in Maine School Administrative District No. 61 at Lake Region High 
School in Naples. 
There have always been great demands placed upon teachers. Whether a professional is a first year 
teacher or a veteran educator, we have always endured budgetary issues, new teaching initiatives 
and training standards, and local, state, and federal policies that directly impact the classroom. 
Since March, 2020, the pandemic has brought about a multitude ofmeasures to insure a safe 
learning environment for everyone in Maine public schools. Teachers across Maine also realized 
that it was imperative to deliver high quality lessons each day during the pandemic. The demands 
and stressors on educators have increased a lot in my thirty-one years ofteaching and the pay has 
remained steady. For example, during the Great Recession, it was common for my teaching 
colleagues around Maine to negotiate collective bargaining agreements that froze steps to maintain 
the line on local budgets.G 
K1 
ll’
When I started teaching in August, 1992, I was twenty-two years old and I knew what the 
expectations were ofme as a professional. I am also a “cliff employee ” because I did not have ten 
years ofservice when the law was changed in 1993 to help balance the state budget. I believe that 
L.D. 185 will reward educators who have taught our children in Maine schools by allowing them to 
retire after thirty-five years of creditable service and to reduce the retirement benefits by 2% for 
each year before reaching the age of 60. Under the current statutes, early retirement would costa 
career educator like myselfa 6% reduction in retirement benefits per year before the age of 
sixty-two. As l look at my colleagues who entered the profession in the early 2000's, their 
retirement age was bumped up to the age ofsixty-five. The solution proposed in L.D. 185 seems fair 
and reasonable for those who have dedicated thirty-five years of their life to educating future 
generations ofchildren in the great State of Maine. Thirty-five years of service in any one profession 
speaks volumes of the dedication, commitment, and conviction of that individual. 
I fully understand that there are many concerns about L.D. 185, specifically the funding liability and 
the fact that it is difficult for superintendents to hire and keep highly qualified educators in Maine 
classrooms. Ifa veteran educator wants to retire under the provisions in this bill, then they may do 
so in a dignified way. The proposed bill allows a veteran educator to retire and return to the 
classroom ifthey so wish and to do so in conjunction with the statutes that are currently in place. In 
addition, I believe L.D. 185 will entice young professionals to make a career out of teaching knowing 
that they have this option. 
I would like to sincerely thank the members ofthe Joint Committee on Labor and Housing for 
reading this letter and for giving careful consideration to L.D. 185. I would also like to thank the 
Honorable Senate President Troy D. Jackson for submitting this bill on behalf ofall career educators 
in the State of Maine. 
Sincerely, 
Scott D. Sevigny 
Social Studies Teacher 
Fort Kent Community High School
