Testimony of 
DANA A. DORAN 
Executive Director 
Professional Logging Contractors of Maine 
Before the Committee on Taxation in Support of LD 1894 — An Act To Establish a 
Home Heating Income Tax Deduction 
Wednesday, May 18, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation, my name is Dana Doran, and I am the Executive Director of the Professional Logging 
Contractors of Maine. The Professional Logging Contractors of Maine (PLC) is the voice of 
logging and associated trucking contractors throughout the state of Maine. The PLC was formed 
in 1995 to represent independent contractors in a rapidly changing forest industry. 
As of 2021, logging and trucking contractors in Maine employed over 3,000 people directly and 
were indirectly responsible for the creation of an additional 2,500 jobs. This employment and 
the investments that contractors make contributed $582 million to the state’s economy. Our 
membership, which includes 200 contractor members and an additional 120 associate 
members, employs more than 75% of the individuals who work in this industry and is also 
responsible for 80% of Maine’s annual timber harvest. 
Thank you for providing me the opportunity to testify on behalf of our membership in support of 
LD 1894 - An Act To Establish a Home Heating Income Tax Deduction. We appreciate the 
creativity of the bill sponsor and would like to see this Committee support this type of out of the 
box thinking to help Mainers heat their homes and invest in the well-being of their families and 
communities. We also feel strongly that a policy change like this will help industries like ours by 
keeping more of Mainers income circulating in the Maine economy and providing local jobs to 
folks in our industry. 
As all of us know, over the last three years, Covid 19 has wreaked havoc across the globe 
with inﬂation and job loss. At a more granular level, the pandemic ’s impacted the logging 
industry severely by reducing wood markets and passing along inﬂation of nearly 50% in 
this industry, which has put a majority of timber harvesting businesses in the red. Asa 
result, there has been a 30% reduction in harvesting capacity and the layoff of nearly 1,000 
people in harvesting and hauling in just the last three years. 
Additionally, as a further impact of the pandemic, heating costs became more variable and 
increased at a moment’s notice. The Governor and the Legislature took swift action to help 
Mainers offset these price spikes and heat their homes with $450 checks this past winter.
That said, more must be done to help with high energy costs so issues like this don’t happen 
again in the future. At the same time, we should also think about how we protect ourselves 
from these spikes by making investments in homegrown technology and fuel sources which 
would have a double impact with the creation of new markets for low value wood. Heating 
our homes is an investment in the well-being of all Mainers and it should be seen from this 
point of view. 
As it relates to wood for energy production — electricity, heating and combined heat and 
power — is a critical part of Maine’s forest economy. In 2010, 3.7 million tons of wood for the 
energy market were produced from Maine timber harvests, representing 25 percent of all 
timber volume. By 2016, the harvest of biomass had shrunk to 2.5 million tons and in 2023, 
it is now down to an all-time low of 1.5 million tons. 
These lost markets have impacted the entire forest industry supply chain. Landowners have 
lost a market for low-grade stems and harvest residues (e.g., tops and branches). In 2010, 
Maine landowners received an estimated $11.9 million in stumpage payments for biomass; 
by 2016 this figure had declined by two-thirds, to $3.8 million and today it is less than $2 
million. 
Loggers and truckers have suffered even more from the erosion of this market. In 2010 there 
was $90.5 million in economic activity associated with logging and trucking of biomass fuel; 
in 2016 this had shrunk to $48.2 million and today it is less than $30 million. 
I stand before you today to demonstrate that the need for this bill has never been greater. The 
woods business is teetering on the edge and the need for homegrown energy that will keep our 
energy dollars circulating in the Maine economy is at a critical stage. 
This bill will ensure that an incentive is put in place to help Mainers offset high heating costs, 
similar to income tax offsets already provided for investments in efﬁciency upgrades in your 
home or for property taxes paid on your home. We believe that it will motivate the installation 
of new modern wood energy applications in residential spaces and the purchase of more fuel 
that is required to operate them. 0 ' 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide the opinion of our membership before you today andI 
would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
