1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: May 18, 2023 
  
LD 1894 – “An Act to Establish a Home Heating Income Tax Deduction” 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
providing testimony at the request of the Administration Against LD 1894, “An Act 
to Establish a Home Heating Income Tax Deduction.” 
For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2023, the bill proposes an 
income subtraction modification from federal adjusted gross income for costs 
incurred for electricity, oil, wood, or other fuel used to heat the taxpayer’s primary 
residence located in Maine.   
Currently, State law does not allow a deduction from taxable income for 
home heating costs.  To the extent used for business purposes, heating expenses 
may be deductible for federal and State tax purposes.  For federal tax purposes, 
there are income tax credits and other benefits (e.g., the Energy Star Program) 
available for certain taxpayers that make their homes more energy efficient.  
Additionally, beginning January 2023, the Maine Winter Energy Relief 
Program provided one-time payments of $450 ($900 if married filing jointly) to 
eligible Maine individuals to help ease the burden of increased energy costs.  
Additionally, the Maine Housing Authority administers the Heating Energy 
Assistance Program (HEAP) and both Maine Housing Authority and Efficiency 
2 
 Maine administer winterization and heating programs to provide assistance to 
eligible Maine residents. 
 The Department respectfully notes that this bill will add another 
modification to an already long list, with the added compliance burden of 
documentation to qualify, and would not help lower-income households that have 
no individual income tax liability.  If further aid is warranted, another option for 
the Committee’s consideration is augmenting existing programs offered by Maine 
Housing Authority and Efficiency Maine. 
The Administration notes the following technical concerns: 
• Although the bill requires that the taxpayer’s primary residence be 
located in Maine, the bill should, in order to remove ambiguity, clarify 
that the deduction applies only to expenses incurred by a taxpayer during 
the period of time the taxpayer is a Maine resident or part-year resident 
of Maine for income tax purposes. 
• The bill does not provide a method for determining the amount of an 
electric bill that relates to heating costs.  
• The bill does not provide a limit on the amount of the expense that is 
eligible for the subtraction modification, allowing, for example, one to 
accelerate the benefit by stockpiling wood and, for taxpayers owning 
larger homes, to receive a greater benefit.   
• The bill does not exclude costs associated with the portion of a home 
used for business purposes; which may already be deductible. 
• The bill does not require that the costs be paid by the taxpayer in order to 
claim the subtraction modification.  
3 
 • The bill should be amended to clarify application of the subtraction 
modification for married taxpayers filing separate returns and for head of 
household filers sharing a primary residence. 
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is not currently available. 
The estimated administrative costs are being reviewed to determine the 
extent of required computer programming changes and additional staff required to 
process and audit affected returns.  There are more than 700,000 resident and part-
year resident individual income tax returns that could potentially qualify for the 
proposed subtraction modification, which would require additional staffing at 
MRS. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
