, 
'31,, 
’ §AM-ILA 
, V.“ V» 
., V, M., 
SAM-ILA 
205 Church Hill Road, Augusta, ME 04330 
David Trahan, Executive Director 
david@samofmai,ne.org 
www.samila.org 
Testimony in Support 
LD 1285, An Act to Extend Funding for the Land for Maine’s Future Program 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Presented by David Trahan, Executive Director of the SAM-Institute for Legislative Action 
Monday, April 10, 2023 
Senator lngwersen, Representative Pleucker, members of the Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry Committee, my name is David Trahan and I am testifying 
in support of LD 1285, An Act to Extend Funding for the Land for Maine 3' Future 
Program. 
First, I would like to thank Senator Black for sponsoring LD 1285 SAM-ILA’s 
behalf and our partners in this effort that will follow me. Purchasing and conserving 
public land can be and is often a lengthy and complicated process. Land transactions 
can take years to complete and when relying on publicly approved bonds, sales to the 
State can be a risky business. We all know the Land for Maine’s Future (LMF) 
Program has followed a very rocky path over the last decade, we are trying to end this 
unnecessary turmoil by establishing funding for the last two years of the Mills’
administration and more excitingly, for the next decade. Jeff Romano, from Maine 
Coast Heritage Trust, will give more details on that collaborative effort in a moment. 
This bill establishes a place holder of $10 million a year for the Land for Maine’s 
Future Program in the baseline of the next biennial budget. After discussions with the 
administration and key members of the Legislature we ask the committee to amend 
this bill, instead, to place this $10 million request over two years in the budget 
cascade, a similar funding process as used in the last biennial budget negotiation. 
The SAM-ILA, in partnership with a coalition of groups, helped to negotiate a four— 
year, $40 million dollar appropriation to LMF, in addition, the same group changed 
the LMF Program to prioritize the purchase and management of deer wintering areas 
that beneﬁt over 50 wildlife species and the critical wildlife habitat necessary to 
sustain them. One of the ﬁrst land purchases exceeded 6,000 acres andl am aware of 
several much larger under discussion. Conservation projects of this size take years to 
negotiate, fund and complete. In order to bring stability and conﬁdence for large 
landowners, to create complex conservation projects, long term funding is essential. 
This bill is a bridge to the future for this important and popular program. Thank you.
