MAINEQ AUDUBON 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
% Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
April 10, 2023 
RE: LD 1285, An Act to Extend Funding for the Land fbr Maineiv Future Program 
Dear Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and Members of the Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry Committee: 
My name is Francesca Gundrum and I am Maine Audubon’s Policy Advocate. Maine 
Audubon is a wildlife conservation non-proﬁt - we fulﬁll our mission to “conserve Maine’s wildlife 
and wildlife habitat” by engaging people of all ages in nature through a scienceebased approach to 
education, conservation, and advocacy. On behalf of Maine Audubon and our 30,000 members and 
supporters, thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD 1285, An Act to 
Extend Funding fbr the Lezndfor Maine’: Future Pragmm. 
Established in 1987, the Land for Maine’s Future (LMF) program is Maine’s most successful 
land conservation program. LMF is responsible for protecting more than 600,000 acres across all of 
Maine’s 16 counties, including more than 325,000 acres of working farms, forests, and waterfronts, 
miles and miles of recreational trails, and critical wildlife habitat. Time and time again, LMF has 
demonstrated that it is worthy of our investment. This essential conservation program deserves 
consistent, predictable funding and we believe that this bill — with the amended language that includes 
adjusted funding timeframes - serves as a vehicle to help address this need. 
LMF tackles the number one direct driver of s ecies extinction: chan es in land use. The P 8 
program provides funding to purchase lands in fee or to secure conservation easements that ensure that 
the land is conserved in perpetuity. These lands are open for the public to enjoy, provide community 
beneﬁts, and contribute to the local econom .Workin lands under LMF, articularl workin forests, Y Z P Y8 
strike a good balance between supporting this vital economic sector and conserving important habitat. 
Maine Audubon’s Forest for Maine Birds ro ram, which is bein im lemented across the state, 1')’ P 3 8P 
demonstrates that bird conservation can be integrated in active forest management. While LMF 
projects cannot stem all threats to wildlife, they provide an important part of the puzzle that ensures 
20 Gilsland Farm Road, Falmouth, Maine 04105 ' (207) 781-2330 ' maineaudub0n.org
MAINEQ AUDUBON the full suite ofMaine’s wildlife and habitats are conserved into the future, providing a permanent 
home for wildlife, opportunities for nature-based tourism, and places for spiritual renewal. 
Without such conservation eﬁtorts, new development will creep across the landscape. 
Residential and commercial development, including roads and other human activity, not only destroy 
habitat, but can alter when, where, and how animals move between habitats. LMF and other land 
conservation efforts are an antidote to the unintended consequences of development and one of 
Maine’s best bets to stem the tide of habitat loss and degradation, as well as species decline and 
extinction. While Maine Audubon would never advocate for a single conservation strategy, LMF 
employs multiple strategies and is a top priority. 
Whether you’re a hunter, hiker, biker, birder, power-sporter or power walker, the Land for 
Maine’s Future program has had tremendous impacts on Mainers far and wide — with positive ripple 
effects that have and will continue to last for generations. For the beneﬁt of all Maine people and our 
wildlife heritage, we urge the Committee to support LD 1285. Thank you for your consideration. 
Sincerely, 
€w~»@&>>~l\» 
Francesca “Ches” Gundrum 
Policy Advocate 
20 Gilsland Farm Road, Falmouth, Maine 04105 ' 
(Z07) 781-2330 o maineauduboimorg
