April 10, 2023 
, T11@Nature 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director COl'1S6I'V €lI1Cy 
The Nature Conservancy in i\/laine Mame l<aitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org 
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
RE: LD 1285 - An Act to Exter J Funding for the Land for Maine's Future Program 
Senator ingwersen, Representative Piuecker, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo andl 
am the Government Relations Director for The Nature Conservancy in i\/laine. I_ 
appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of LD 1285 - An Act to Extend 
Funding for the Land for Maine's Future Program. We appreciate Senator Black's .~ 
efforts to bring this ideaforward. ‘l 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on-the—ground solutions to our world's toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners. The Nature 
Conservancy has been leading conservation in i\/laine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres. We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our changing climate. 
The Land for Maine's Future Program (LMF) has been an effective tool in protecting 
some of Maine's most spectacular places and supporting our natural resource/ 
economy for over 30 years. During this time, the program has protected a wide variety 
of i\/laine resources including conserving landscapes for recreation and trails, 
protecting access to working waterfronts for fishermen, providing public water access 
to lakes and rivers, and supporting working farmland projects. 
Each LMF project brings together a unique blend of the same formula — a state agency- 
sponsor, a willing landowner ready to sell or indefinitely give up development rights, 
community stakeholders, and clear public benefits. LMF funding support also brings 
federal and/or private dollars to the table to complete these priority projects. 
As you might imagine, bringing these pieces together requires patience and 
persistence. The best thing we can do to support the success of these efforts is build 
predictability and stability into the process. Long term funding for the Land for Maine's 
Future program allows landowners the time they need to make decisions, allows state 
agency partners to plan further in advance and prioritize projects as they become 
ready, and allows community and conservation partners more time to pursue match 
funding.i 
At the federal level, Congress recently passed the Great American Outdoors Act. 
Signed by former President Trump, GAOA secured the Land and Water Conservation 
14 Maine St., Suite 401 Brunswick, i\/laine 04011 natureorggmaine
Fund with permanent, dedicated funding. LWCF funds are similar to LMF and often 
used as match or support funding. Congress recognized the need to provide 
landowners and state agencies the security of knowing that these funds will be 
available to support projects on an annual basis. Long term funding allows all the 
parties involved to take their time and achieve the best possible outcomes. 
According to survey of l\/laine voters TNC commissioned in January 2023 with FM3 
Research (Democratic Polling Firm) and New Bridge Strategy (Republican Polling Firm), 
nearly all Mainers say that clean water, natural areas, and wildlife are important to 
their quality of life. 94% said these attributes were extremely or very important - and 
this opinion is shared overwhelmingly by every demographic group of Maine voters. In 
the same survey, nearly 7 in 10 voters see "great need / some need” for additional 
funding to protect air, water and land.The-LMF program consistently enjoys broad 
public support and has been approved by Maine voters each of the six times it has 
been on the ballot.‘ 
The Nature Conservancy strongly supports additional, long term funding for the Land 
for Maine's Future program. We urge this committee to pass LD 1285. Please do not 
hesitate to be in touch if our organization can provide additional information or 
support.
l
