 
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 1285,  
An Act to Extend Funding for the Land for Maine's Future Program  
April 10, 2023  
 
Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry , I am Melanie Sturm, the Forests and Wildlife Director at the 
Natural Resources Council of Maine ( NRCM ). I appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony in 
support o f LD 12 85. 
 
The Land for Maine’s Future ( LMF ) program is Maine’s most effective land conservation program. Over 
the past three decades, the program has helped fund more than 300 projects and protect more than 
600,000 acres spanning all 16 Maine counties. L MF supports conservation and recreation projects for 
activities ranging from biking to birding, fly casting to cross -country skiing, and snowmobiling to 
swimming. LMF also provides one of the few funding options available for land conservation, often in 
the form of conservation easements, to conserve working farmland, working forests , and working 
waterfronts. LMF projects are diverse and benefit all Mainers, as well as many businesses. Maine people 
have consistently shown their strong support for land conse rvation at the ballot box, passing six ballot 
measures to fund LMF since 1987.  
 
In 2021, the Legislature passed a budget with  $40 million for the LMF program over four years. Those 
appropriations were badly needed and are already being spent on meaningful  projects , large and small,  
across the state.  While that boost of funding was critical, as the program had essentially  run out of  
money, those appropriations expire in 2024. W ithout continued additional funding, many important 
conservation opportunities will be lost that would help protect fish and wildlife habitat and natural 
resources, sequester and store carbon, enhance and expan d recreational access, and provide economic 
benefits to communities both from tourism and from lands managed for timber, agriculture, and marine 
resources.  This bill would provide $10 million to the LMF program in FY24 -25 and FY25 -26. We are 
aware of the p roposed amendment to adjust  the funding years  in the bill , and we support that 
change . 
 
Funding LMF is a smart investment for the state. Virtually every significant land conservation project in 
recent decades has required funding from multiple sources, inc luding state, federal, and private funds. 
LMF funding plays a critical role in leveraging federal and private funds that can make land conservation 
projects possible. Every $1 spent by the State of Maine using LMF funds is matched, approximately, by 
$3 of private and federal funds.  
 
Although  the State and cooperating entities have made a great deal of progress on land conservation in 
recent years, there is much left to do as demand continues to increase for Maine real estate, pressures 
mount on natural resou rce-based businesses in the state, and climate change among other threats tests 
the resilience of our ecosystems .  
 
I respectfully urge the Committee to vote Ought to Pass on LD 1285  to extend available funding for this 
important and effective program . Thank you for yo ur time and consideration of this issue, and I would 
be glad to answer any questions you may have.  
