MAINE 
Testimony of Shelley Megquier, Policy and Research Director, Maine Farmland Trust, before 
the 131"‘ Legislature's Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
April 10,2022 
Good morning Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry. My name is Shelley Megquier and I am 
testifying today on behalf of Maine Farmland Trust (MFT) in support ofthe LD 1285 — An Act to 
Extend Funding for the Land for Maine's Future Program. 
MFT is a member-powered statewide organization that works to protect farmland, support 
farmers, and advance the future of farming. Since our founding in 1999, MFT has helped to 
permanently protect more than 330 farms and keep nearly 60,000 acres of farmland in farming. 
in 2022 alone, MFT supported 48 farm businesses with workshops, technical assistance, and 
grants — delivering over 680 hours of technical assistance and $309,000 in business and seed 
grants to help businesses grow their profitability. Our main program areas are Farmland 
Protection, Farmland Access, Stewardship, Farm Business Planning, PFAS Support, Climate 
Resilience, and Policy and Research. 
Protecting farmland in, Maine is a principal part of our mission because we believe it is vital for 
ensuring that agriculture remains a key component of Maine's way of life, with farms feeding 
our economy, stewarding our natural resources, and nourishing our communities. In fact, 
agriculture in Maine contributes over $3.6 billion in economic impact and supports over 27,000 
jobs statewide according to an analysis by Farm Credit East.1 Unfortunately, farmland —the 
foundation of ourfarm businesses — is a precious and limited resource. Between 2012 and 
2017, Maine lost 10% of its farmland — that is over 145,000 acres of pastureland, cropland, 
woodland and other agricultural land that is no longer being used by Maine farms? Access to 
farmland, whether to buy or lease, is becoming increasingly difficult for Maine farmers due to 
dramatic increases in land prices, a growing interest in farmland from non-farming buyers, the 
rapid pace of solar development on agricultural land across the state, and the PFAS (per- and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances) contamination of farmland. 
Protecting farmland is a critical tool not only for ensuring that we have the land base to support 
our farm economy, but for both increasing the financial security of farmers and increasing 
farmer access to land. Compensating farmers for protecting their land allows them to use the 
funds they receive to reinvest in the farm, pay off debt, or obtain some savings before passing 
1 
Farm Credit East, "Northeast Economic Engine: Agriculture, Forest Products and 
Commercial Fishing, ” (2020), available at: https://wwwfarmcrediteast.com/knowledge 
exchange/Renorts/20209620Northeast%20Economic%20Engine. 
2 
In 2012, Maine had 1,454,104 acres in farmland, but by 2017 that number had dropped to 1,307,566 acres -a 
loss of 146,491 acres or 10% of Maine's farmland. United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), National 
Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS), U.$. Census ofAgriculture for 201 7, Maine, 
https://www.nass.usda.gov/Publications/AgCensus/2017/Full_Report/Volume_1,_Chapter __1_State_Level/Maine/ 
mev1.pdf. 
97 Main Street, Belfast, 1\/[E 04915 ~ 207.338.6575 mainefarmlandttustorg
the farm along to the next generation. And once land is protected, it can be sold at its 
agricultural value, making the farmland much more affordable for other farmers to purchase. 
Protecting farmland is also important for preserving the many state and community benefits 
that farms provide. The state's climate action plan recognizes farmland conservation as a key 
natural climate solution by avoiding the greater emissions associated with developed land, by 
ensuring there is the land needed to create greater food security for our state, and by 
preserving the climate benefits that can result from farmers using climate smart practices on 
the land. Farms also provide many important benefits to the communities and regions in which 
they are located, including the availability of local food and farm products; pastoral beauty; 
recreational access for walking, hunting, fishing, swimming, sledding, and snowmobiling; as well 
as other environmental and educational benefits? 
In order for farms to continue to provide these important benefits, we must ensure there is 
sufficient farmland to support and grow Maine's food and agricultural economy. The Land for 
Maine's Future (LMF) Program is an important source of public funding for protecting Maine's 
forests, farmlands, and working waterfronts. Since its creation in 1987, LMF has protected over 
600,000 acres, including 42 farms. Although MFT is grateful for the financial support LMF has 
provided to protect almost 10,000 acres of farmland within the state, we are not keeping pace 
with state-funded farmland protection efforts in other states in our region. According to 
American Farmland Trust's most recent Status of State PACE Programs report,‘ Maine ranks 
second lowest in the Northeasts in terms of the number of farmland acres protected with state 
funding. Only Rhode lsland is lower than Maine with 8,131 acres protected compared to our 
9,752, but Maine has roughly 1.3 million acres of farmland and Rhode island has only about 
60,000 acres total.5 ln comparison, Vermont, which has a similar amount of farmland to Maine 
with 1.2 million acres, has protected 796 farms and 168,407 acres of farmland with their state 
program, which started at the same time as the LMF Program.7 
MFT supports LD 1285 which provides robust, ongoing funding for the Department of 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry, Land for Maine's Future program. This ongoing funding 
would increase the amount of funding available to support farmland conservation within Maine 
and could also be used to leverage important federal and private support to protect farmland 
and secure this critical resource for the people of Maine. In fact, every dollar of LMF funding is 
matched by other funds, historically attracting more than $3 in matching funds for every dollar 
invested by the state. Regular and predictable funding through a multiyear allocation from the 
General Fund would provide farmland owners with increased certainty that public support will 
be there to successfully complete projects in a timely fashion, ensuring that the most important 
projects are completed. 
3Bunker, Amanda, et al. (2011). Cultivating Maine's Agricultural Future: A Guide for Towns, 
Land Trusts, and Farm Supporters. Maine Farmland Trust, American Farmland Trust& 
Mainewatch Institute. Retrieved 
from: http_:_[/www.farmlandinfo.org/sites/defauIt/files/MainePlanningforAg 2011 1.pdf. 
4 See American Farmland Trust (AFT), Status of State Pace Programs (January 2022), available at 
htips://farmlanclinfoorg/Qub%i<:ations/status-of-stataperchase-of-agriculturai-conservation-easement-programs/. 
5 l am defining the Northeast region as New England plus New York and New Jersey. 
6 Status of State Pace Programs (2022). 
7 Status of State Pace Programs (2022)
2
Although MFT believes that increased state funding for farmland conservation is imperative, we 
also note that the efficient administration of farmland protection funding through the LMF 
Program will also be critical for supporting the viability of farm businesses while ensuring that 
the land stays in farming. 
For all of these reasons, MFT hopes that you will support LD 1285 so that the LMF Program can 
provide the same robust support as other state land conservation programs in our region, and 
ensure that farmers have the land they need to continue to feed Maine's economy and people 
for generations to come.
3
