Maine  Education  Association  
Grace  Leavitt  President  | Jesse Hargrove  Vice President  | Beth  French Treasurer  
Rebecca  Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle  Bristol  Executive  Director  
35 Community  Drive,  Augusta,  ME 04330  | 1349 Broadway,  Bangor,  ME 04401  
7 Hatch  Drive,  Suite  220, Caribou,  ME 04736  | 29 Christopher  Toppi  Drive,  South  Portland  ME 04106  
207-622-5866  | 207-888-2070  fax | www.maineea.org   
  
 
Testimony 
In Support  
LD 489: An Act to Provide  Equal  Educational  Opportunity  by Adopting Rules  Ensuring  
Nondiscrimination  on the Basis  of Protected  Class  Status  in Educational  Institutions 
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association  
Before  the Education  and Cultural  Affairs  Committee 
March 23, 2023  
Senator  Rafferty,  Representative Brennan  and other  esteemed  members  of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee,  
 
My name is John Kosinski  (he/him)  and I  am proud to serve as the Director  of Government  Relations  for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA). The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including  teachers  and other professionals  in nearly  every  public  school  in the state and faculty  and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems. 
 
I submit this testimony on behalf of the MEA in support of LD 489: An Act to Provide Equal  
Educational  Opportunity  by Adopting Rules  Ensuring Nondiscrimination  on the Basis  of Protected  Class 
Status in Educational Institutions.  
 
It has been over 20 years since the Maine Human Rights Commission and the Maine Department of 
Education have updated their joint rules related to dis crimination in public schools and certainly a lot has 
changed in the past 20 years.  We appreciate the spirit of LD 489, which pushes the Commission and the Department of Education to update this important rule.    We believe public schools have an obligat ion to be inclusive for all students, including students of all 
races, sexual orientations and gender identities.  I hope we all share the goal that our schools should encourage students to be their authentic selves, and we know students will struggle to l earn and grown in 
environments where they “otherized.”  Inclusive education practices are intended to help schools meet the needs of all children.  
   While public schools go to great lengths to help all students, clear rules, guidance and guidelines to protect against discrimination against any families protected under the Maine Human Rights Act will only 
help schools provide the school environment students need and deserve.  We know schools are doing their 
best, yet  we have more work to do to reach all students where they are.  Clear guidance and clear rules to 
ensure nondiscrimination is welcomed and necessary for educators, school board members and parents.    Thank you for your time and attention and I will do my best to answer any questions you may have .  
 
