Janet T_ Mms f A Maine Department ofHealtg and Human Segpfces 
Governor g‘ ommrssroner s ice 
-‘lid ll State House Station 
I 109 Capitol Street 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D. 
Cgmmiggigngr j Augusta, 1\’l2l[l8 Q4333-0011 
IWQIW Tel: (207) 287-3707; F3342 (207) 28'/—300§ 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay) 
March 21, 2023 
Senator Joe Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0100 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services: 
This letter is written to provide the Committee with information as it relates to LD 821 — Resolve, to 
Improve Access to Neurobehavioral Services. The Department is opposed to this bill as written as it 
would fundamentally alter the planned work currently underway to address the gaps in providing 
evaluation, rehabilitation, and transitional support for individuals with an acquired brain injury and 
accompanying behavioral and complex medical support needs in Maine. 
The Department is supportive of having specialized evidence-based rehabilitation in the domains of 
cognitive, physical or behavioral supports for individuals with identiﬁed neurobehavioral needs who 
receive those supports in out-of-state placements. In February of this year, there were 21 individuals 
placed out of state in community-based facilities and 23 individuals placed in out of state nursing 
facilities. The Department monitors progress for each of those individuals and works towards 
returning those individuals into community or institutional facilities appropriate to their needs, goals 
and choice of community living. 
The Department is invested in addressing the lack of this critical home and community based 
rehabilitative services in Maine through its current innovation project included in the HCBS 
Improvement Plan. This project includes collaboration with Maine stakeholders and impacted 
members to develop specialized neurobehavioral services. This work could result in either adding 
speciﬁc services to existing MaineCare policies or the creation of a new MaineCare section of policy. 
The overall goal of this project is to bring out-of-state Mainers back and reduce the likelihood that 
MaineCare members would need out-of-state neurobehavioral services in the future. 
We believe this bill and the Department ’s current innovation project share a goal of developing 
neurobehavioral treatment in Maine, but the expansive target populations in the bill concem us. As 
currently Written, the bill would present signiﬁcant operational challenges for providers, given the 
specialized needs of each of the named groups. If the Committee were to move this bill forward, we 
would recommend limiting the target population to individuals with an acquired brain injury. 
The Department looks forward to improving the rehabilitation infrastructure in Maine with support of 
stakeholders, such as the Maine Acquired Brain Injury Advisory Council and impacted members. The 
Department is eager to work with this committee to enhance the system of rehabilitative care for
individuals with acquired brain injury to fulﬁll a commitment to services and supports for Mainers 
here in Maine. 
We are happy to provide additional information at the Work session. 
Sincerely, 
Paul Saucier, Director 
Ofﬁce of Aging and Disability Services
