 
 
 
160 Capitol Street, Suite 4, Aug usta, ME 04330  
207.626.2774 • 1.800.452.1948 • Fax: 207.621.1419 • drme.org  
 
MAINE’S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES  
 
March 21, 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Cross Office Building, Room 209  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
 Re: L. D. 821,  Resolve, To Improve Access to Neurobehavioral Services  
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee;  
My name is Sara Squires and I am the Public Policy Director for Disability Ri ghts Maine (DRM), 
Maine’s designated protection and advocacy agency for people with disabilities.  On behalf of 
DRM, I want to thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony in opposition to LD 82 1, 
Resolve, To Improve Access to Neurobehavior al Services .   
In its decision in Olmstead v. L.C.,  the United States Supreme Court wrote, “institutional 
placement of persons who can handle and benefit from community settings perpetuates 
unwarranted assumptions that persons so isolated are incapable of or unworthy of 
participating in community life…[and] confinement in an institution severely diminishes the 
everyday life activities of individuals, including family relations, social contacts, work options, 
economic independence, educational advancement, a nd cultural enrichment."1 
Maine currently administers five Home and Community -Based Services (HCBS) Waivers  that 
serve individuals with intellectual disabilities and autism spectrum disorder, adults with brain 
injury , adults with other related conditions, and elderly and adults with disabilities.  The 
purpose of these waivers is to offer an array of services and supports that enable individuals 
with disabilities to live in their communities  and not be for ced into institutions.  Even with these 
services in place, we know that individuals’ need for support in their homes and communities 
far exceed s the capacity of our service system.  Across all waiver programs , individuals  must 
contend with long waits for services, in large part due to a professional work shortage being 
                                                            
1 https://archive.ada.gov/olmstead/olmstead_about.htm  
experienced throughout Maine.  We also recognize that there are those whose need s cannot be 
met by the current systems.  
Despite the foregoing , DRM is concerned by any proposal that direct s public money toward the 
development of institutions as a response to challenges currently faced in the brain injury and 
developmental services systems.  At a time when eligible recipients are not able to access the 
services they need, Maine must be innovative and forward -thinking; a brick and mortar 
response cannot be viewed as a solution to the current crisis in our service system.   Individuals 
have a ri ght to be served in the least restrictive setting, even when they may have a higher level 
of need.  If short -term, enhanced services would benefit individuals, we should look to how 
these can be provided under the existing waivers.   
While the “evaluation and short -term” provision in this bill envisions a stay of no longer than 
one year, there are unanswered questions about how we can ensure this will be adhered to.  
What is the enforcement mechanism that will compel facilit ies to plan for eventual discha rge?  
If the current system is unable to serve people now, what assurances do we have that when the 
12 months are up, individuals will not be forced to remain in the facility because no community 
options are available or, worse yet, be forcibly discharged with no services and supports in 
place?  
DRM strongly supports the efforts to develop and implement of Home and Community -Based 
service system .  Unfortunately, the promises offered by these waivers have not been realized 
and the need only grows ; however, t he answer to these problems lie s not within the creation of 
new facilities.  In fact, doing so is counter to  both Olmstead and Maine’s long -standing 
commitment to community integration for people with disabilit ies.  This proposal would put us 
on a slippery  slope to undoing several decades  of progress.   For these reasons, we respectfully 
request that this Committee vote ought not to pass on LD 821 . 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Sara R. Squires  
Public Policy Director   

