TESTIMONY OF 
JOHN SAGASER, TAX POLICY COUNSEL, MAINE REVENUE SERVICES 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: May 1], 2023 
LD 1804 — “An Act to Provide Transparency and Accountability for Corporate Tax 
Expenditures ” 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is John Sagaser, Tax Policy Counsel for the 
Office of Tax Policy, Maine Revenue Services. I am testifying at the request of the 
Administration Against LD I 804, “An Act to Provide Transparency and 
Accountability for Corporate Tax Expenditures. ” 
This testimony is limited to the bill as it affects Maine Revenue Services. 
The bill requires the State Tax Assessor to annually submit reports to the joint 
standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over taxation matters 
(“TAX”) containing certain information on (l) the Business Equipment Tax 
Exemption (“BETE”) Program; (2) the Business Equipment Tax Reimbursement 
(“BETR”) Program; and (3) the Shipbuilding Facility tax credit. The annual report 
on the BETE program must also be submitted to the joint standing committee of 
the Legislature having jurisdiction over economic development matters. The bill 
also requires the Commissioner of the Department of Economic and Community 
Development (“DECD”) to submit an annual report regarding Employment Tax 
Increment Financing (“ETIF”) beneﬁts to TAX. Each annual report must include 
the location and nature of the applicants, eligible equipment, or business property, 
whether certain program applicant and certiﬁcation documentation is available for 
public review, certain company information (including parent companies), the
1
program beneﬁt amounts claimed, the projected and actual amounts of capital 
investment achieved through the program, and how to obtain data about the 
program. 
The State Tax Assessor is currently required to annually report to the 
Taxation Committee the revenue loss attributable to each taxpayer claiming the 
Shipbuilding Facility credit (36 M.R.S. §§ l9l(2)(GGG) and 5219-RR(9)(C)) 
(most recent report attached). Additionally, the State Tax Assessor may publicly 
disclose the names and reimbursement amount of persons receiving beneﬁts under 
the BETR program (36 M.R.S. § 6660). The biennial BETR report can be found 
at: https://WWw.maine.gov/revenue/sites/maine.gov.revenue/ ﬁles/inline- 
fi1es/Business%20Equipment%20Tax%20Reimbursement%2C%202021%20%28P 
DF%29.pdf. 
This proposal would expand such reporting and disclosure requirements, 
causing MRS to conduct additional research, auditing, veriﬁcation, and 
compilation. In order to satisfy the increased requirements of this bill, MRS would 
need to hire an additional Revenue Agent and the Office of Tax Policy an 
additional Economist. 
The Administration also notes the following technical concerns: 
0 The bill should be amended to include an application date and the timing for 
when the annual reports must be submitted to the Legislature. 
0 The bill should be amended to include exceptions to Maine’s conﬁdentiality 
provisions under 36 M.R.S. § 191(2) to allow MRS to divulge the required 
taxpayer information to the Legislative committees, to make the information 
available for public review, and, for purposes of Section 4 of the bill, to 
provide ETIF reimbursement information to DECD.
2
0 Section 5 of the bill should be amended to reﬂect the current Maine 
Shipbuilding Facility Investment Credit under 36 M.R.S. § 5219-RR(9). 
The Shipbuilding Facility Credit affected by 36 M.R.S. § 6854 ended 
December 31, 2018. 
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is revenue neutral. 
The estimated administrative costs are between $260,000 and $360,000 
beginning in the ﬁscal year during which the tax year begins for which the bill ﬁrst 
applies. The costs include the addition of 9 lines to tax forms, an additional 
Economist to comply with the increased reporting requirements, and an additional 
Revenue Agent to audit and clarify information on the approximately 15,000 
BETR and BETE accounts and to produce the annual report. Relative to the 
reporting requirement for the Shipbuilding Facility credit, the estimated 
administrative costs are nominal and can be absorbed by the Bureau. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
3
Revenue loss to the State from the tax credit for Maine shipbuilding 
facility investment 
A Report Prepared for the: 
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services 
Maine Revenue Services 
December 31, 2022
I. Introduction 
Maine Revenue Services (“MRS”) is providing this report in compliance with Maine Revised 
Statutes Title 36, section 5219-RR, subsection 9, paragraph C, which requires MRS to provide 
annual reports to the Joint Standing Cormnittee on Taxation of the revenue loss to the State asa 
result of the income tax credit for Maine shipbuilding facility investment for each taxpayer 
claiming the credit. This report follows the annual report on the credit issued by the Department 
of Economic and Community Development pursuant to Title 36, section 5219-RR, subsection 9, 
paragraph B. 
II. Description of Beneﬁts 
A nonrefundable income tax credit is available to shipbuilders who meet employment and 
investment thresholds and are certiﬁed by the Commissioner of the Department of Economic and 
Community Development to receive the credit. 
Certiﬁcation requires, among other things, that the applicant owns and operates or proposes to 
construct a Maine shipbuilding facility, employs at least 5,000 qualiﬁed workers, has madea 
qualiﬁed investment of at least $100,000,000 at its Maine shipbuilding facility, and does not 
receive Pine Tree Zone or Employment Ta.x Incremental Financing beneﬁts. 
The credit is equal to $3,000,000 per year and can be increased up to $3,500,000 if the applicant 
satisﬁes certain employment and investment criteria. The credit is reduced if qualiﬁed 
employment falls below 5,500, and taxpayers with qualiﬁed employment below 4,000 cannot 
claim the credit. Unused credits cannot be carried forward. 
Taxpayers may claim the credit for l0 consecutive tax years. This limitation is extended to l5 
consecutive tax years if the taxpayer makes an additional $100,000,000 qualiﬁed investment at its 
Maine shipbuilding facility. 
HI. General Fund Revenue Loss for Report Year 2021 
MRS is required to report the revenue loss during the report year as a result of this credit for each 
taxpayer claiming the credit. For purposes of the report, "revenue loss" means the credit claimed 
by the taxpayer and allowed pursuant to Title 36, section 5219-RR. “Report year” means the tax 
year ending during the immediately preceding calendar year. 
For report year 2021, only one taxpayer with a tax year ending in 2021 claimed the credit. The 
revenue loss to the State for this taxpayer was $3,250,000, represented in the table below: 
Report Year Number of Taxpayers Claiming the Credit l Total Revenue Logs 
2021 l ($3,250,000) 
2020 1 l ($3,000,000)1 
1 
This represents the previously reported revenue loss in report year 2020 and is included for historical reference 
only.
