\.-;>' 
~ ‘" 
Richard A. Bennett ,:§»§,; 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 18 Augusta, Maine 04333' 
THE MAINE SENATE 
l3 lst Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Richard Bennett 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
LD 1804, “An Act to Provide Transparency and Accountability for Corporate Tax 
Expenditures ” 
May 11, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation: I am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and I have the honor of serving 14 
communities in Western Maine in the State Senate. I am pleased to sponsor LD 1804, “An Act 
to Provide Transparency and Accountability for Corporate Tax Expenditures. ” 
In order to ensure that our tax laws are working best for the State and the taxpayers, and that we 
are getting the most bang for our buck, we need to have a data collection system that 
demonstrates the success and fallbacks of our policies. We need to be able to understand the 
actual effect that certain tax cuts have on relevant industries if we are to determine if the systems 
should be expanded, tweaked, or eliminated. 
There is no way to connect Maine’s tax break programs and their intended purpose or to see 
what the state and taxpayers get for this money. In 2015, the Legislature set up a review process 
to solve this problem. The Ofﬁce of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability 
(OPEGA) reviews of Maine’s tax cut programs, reporting to this committee and the Government 
Oversight Committee. This tax expenditure review process has been identiﬁed as one of the 
strongest in the nation. 
In its reviews of multiple business tax cut programs, OPEGA has repeatedly come to alarming 
conclusions, including: 
~ Program data to measure outcomes is often either not collected, inaccessible, or 
unreliable; 
- Program goals often do not align with program design or implementation, are vaguely 
deﬁned, or are not deﬁned at all; and 
~ Administrative oversight is challenging. 
These need to be rectiﬁed to ensure that Maine is getting the greatest value out of its tax 
programs. 
In the past, OPEGA’s ﬁndings have led state agencies and the legislature to clarify program 
goals, identify new data needed to evaluate the outcomes of programs, and shore up data 
collection procedures for some programs. But there is still work to be done to ensure accurate 
data is collected and accessible across Maine’s tax programs and outcomes are worth the cost. 
Fax: (207) 287-1527 * TTY (207) 287-1583 * Message Service 1-800-423-6900 * Web Site." legislature.maine.g0v/senate
It can be difﬁcult to accurately evaluate the outcomes and impacts attained through tax breaks. 
Data can be hard to access because many programs do not require transparency of how much 
money individual businesses receive in tax giveaways when they are created. For those programs 
that do require data collection, inconsistent data collection or outdated collection systems has 
sometimes been an issue. 
The state used to require businesses receiving tax breaks to report information to the Department 
of Economic and Community Development, but this requirement was repealed in 2009. This 
resulted in to a patchwork of data that is collected across programs and state agencies today. 
Some programs have reporting requirements embedded in their statutes, but this is not consistent 
across programs. As a result, data is often inaccessible, unavailable, or unreliable. 
LD 1804 seeks to ﬁll in some of the data gaps so that We can be more informed in our 
policymaking. It requires the Commissioner of Economic and Community Development to 
submit annual reports on Pine Tree Development Zones and the employment tax increment 
ﬁnancing credit and the State Tax Assessor to submit annual reports on the business equipment 
tax exemption, the shipbuilding facility credit and the business equipment tax reimbursement. 
The commissioner and the assessor are required to make these reports to this committee. 
We owe it to the people of Maine to spend their tax money wisely. Without proper data 
collection, we cannot know if this is happening. 
Thank you. I would be happy to answer any questions.
