 
 
 
 
 
 
LD 1235, An Act to Provide Compensation to and to Limit Work Hours of Jail Employees  
 
April 19, 2023 
 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety, my name is Stephen Gorden and in addition to serving as a member of the board of 
commissioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy 
committee of the Maine County Commissioners Association. We appreciate the opportunity to provide 
testimony to the Committee in opposition  to LD 1235. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta, represents all of Maine’s 16 counties, and is governed by a board 
with representation from each participating county.  
 
Discussion.  Under LD 1235, beginning January 1, 2024, a jail employee would be prohibited from working 
more than 18 hours in a 24-hour period except in exceptional circumstances or when the Governor has declared 
a state of emergency. 
 
Presumably, this provision is intended to protect employees from overworking, which is a laudable goal. That 
said, however well-intentioned the bill, we believe it will work a disservice to the public and to jail employees.   
First, jail employees are members of labor unions who collectively bargain for their terms of work, and were this 
bill to pass, it would constrain the ability of employers and employees to establish the terms of employment.   
 
Second, many jail employees welcome the opportunity to work overtime and collect time and a half pay, or 
more, and if this bill were to be adopted, the flexibility of employees to voluntarily take on overtime shifts 
would be constrained. 
 
Third, while this bill includes an exception in “exceptional circumstances,” it is unclear what warrants 
exceptional circumstances under the bill. If enacted, this bill would potentially constrain jail employees from 
working additional hours in situations where it may be required in order to protect the public, jail inmates, or 
other employees. For the above stated reasons, we write to oppose LD 1235.  
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Stephen Gorden 
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, President, MCCA 
 James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legislative Counsel  
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2 Augusta, ME 04330, 207-623-4697 
www.mainecounties.org 
 
