 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
April 25, 2023
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health  and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1558 – An Act to Prohibit the Sale of Tobacco Products in Pharmacies and Retail 
Establishments Containing Pharmacies  
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee:  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide input and express the support of the Maine Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention for  LD 1558, An Act to Prohibit the Sale of Tobacco Products in 
Pharmacies and Retail Es tablishments Containing Pharmacies . 
 
LD 1558 provides that pharmacies and retail establishments containing a pharmacy are ineligible 
for a retail tobacco license and provides that a pharmacy or retail establishment containing a 
pharmacy that engages in ret ail sales of tobacco products commits a civil violation.  
 
Nationwide, commercial tobacco use remains the single most preventable cause of disease, 
disability, and death. There is no safe level of secondhand tobacco smoke exposure. Smoking 
harms the user an d everybody else who is exposed, especially children. Presently in Maine, 
17.6% of adults (18+) currently smoke (BRFSS, 2019), and 2,400 die annually from smoking 
(Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids, 2020). The smoking rate among Maine high school  
students con tinued to decrease steadily in 2019 with 7.1% reporting current use, although 28.7% 
reported use of e -cigarettes (MIYHS, 2019), a concerning trend that is mirrored in the national 
data (32.7%) (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2019). In Maine, s moking is related to 
22.4% of all cancer cases and 30.1% of all cancer deaths (American Cancer Society - Cancer 
Action Network, 2017). As a result, Maine’s annual health care costs caused by smoking are 
$811 million, while productivity losses total $647 mi llion (Campaign for Tobacco -Free Kids,  
2020). Although large successes have been achieved at both federal and state levels since the 
first Surgeon General’s Report in 1964, the burden of smoking -attributable disease, premature 
death, suffering, and high co sts will continue  to go on unless tobacco use is prevented, and 
treatment is provided to those who are trying to quit tobacco use.   
 
According to data published by the US CDC in the American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 
two-thirds of American adults believe pharmacies should not be allowed to sell tobacco.  The 
same research also found that nearly half of cigarette smokers, as well as nearly half of tobacco 
 
 users who don’t sm oke cigarettes, support such a policy  (US CDC -American Journal of 
Preventative Medicine, 2016) .  
 
By eliminating tobacco products from pharmacy shelves, it allows the pharmacy to fulfill their 
primary mission  of health promotion and  sends a clear message t o customers that their health and 
well-being are a top priority.  
 
According to the Center  for Public Health Systems Science, higher tobacco retail density is 
associated with greater tobacco use among adolescents and decreased quit attempts for adult 
cigarette smokers who want to quit. It also contributes to racial and socioeconomic disparities  in 
tobacco use. Reducing the number of retailers that sell tobacco products in an area may prevent 
youth initiation and increase quit attempts.  Removing tobacco products  from re tail pharmacies 
would mean youth no longer see tobacco products behind the dru g store counter, and  tobacco 
users who are trying to quit can avoid the visual triggers that result in cravings to continue using 
tobacco . 
 
The Maine CDC  Health Inspection Program (HIP) issues retail tobacco licenses to vendors  that 
sell tobacco products. Walgreens currently has retail tobacco licenses for 73 of their pharmacy 
locations in Maine . In addition, there are 15 Shaw’s supermarkets with pharmacies and ten Wal-
marts with pharmacies that currently have retail tobacco lic enses.  If enacted as written, fewer  
retail tobacco licenses  will be issued  by the HIP resulting in  a minimal annual loss of less than 
$10,000  in licensing revenue  which can be absorbed by the  program . 
 
In August 2008, San Francisco, CA  became the first U.S. city to adopt a tobacco -free pharmacy 
law. Boston, MA also adopted a similar law, which eventually resulted in the entire State of 
Massachusetts passing a law that requires all pharmacies to be tobacco -free. In 2014, CVS 
Health  announced that th ey would stop selling tobacco products  at their retail pharmacies . 
Studies have shown  that, in the two -year period following the removal of tobacco sales from 
CVS Health, smokers who lived in areas with a high density of CVS pharmacies had increased 
their number of quit attempts . This  study suggest s that the removal of tobacco from retail 
pharmacies  may support tobacco cessation efforts  among adults who are attempting to quit . 
 
In summary, the Maine CDC  supports LD 1558  and respectfully recommends this bill  ough t to 
pass.  This position  is consistent  with the majority of Americans who believ e pharmacies should 
not carry tobacco products  and with Maine’s public health goal of reducing the negative impacts 
of tobacco use.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 

