Testimony of Jamie Brooks 
In favor of LD 1229, 
“An Act to Support Peer Mentors for Parents Involved in the Child Protective System” 
To The Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Friday, April 21, 2023 
Good morning Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee. My name is Jamie Brooks, and I’rn speaking today in favor of LD I229. 
l am a parent with lived experience in child welfare; many years ago, I had a child protection case, and 
my children were in foster care. I am one of many parents who have successfully navigated the child 
welfare system in Maine and reunifred our families. We hear a lot on the news and in policy discussions 
about parents who are the most dangerous to their children. What often isn’t heard is about the other 50 
percent of parents who have a crisis point in their life and CPS intervenes. They are able to make the 
changes needed, and go on to live their lives and raise their children. 
In my case, I was able to break the cycles that have existed in my family for generations. I was able to 
learn a different way to live and developed a safe support system that included my son’s foster parents. I 
never became reinvolved. That’s what parents can do when they have the right support and are engaged. 
After my family reunitied, I went on to provide peer support for other parents as a Parent Partner in 
Maine’s former program for ten years. I am currently a Parent Facilitator for CPS I01 and am alsoa 
Family Consultant for the Capacity Building Center for States. The Center for States is an initiative of the 
Federal Children ’s Bureau aimed at helping child welfare agencies and professionals build the capacity to 
strengthen effective child welfare practice and achieve better outcomes. Since peer support for parents isa 
national best practice standard in child welfare, the Center provides technical assistance to jurisdictions in 
building these programs. I am one of the Family Consultants who works on these projects. 
As a peer support provider here in Maine, I have been able to support other parents in their child 
protection cases as they break their own generational cycles. There is so much that parents don’t know or 
understand about how the system works, or what’s expected of them. Providing this basic information and 
support can make a huge diﬁ°erence in how parents experience their child welfare case. Peer support also 
changes the people who are providing support. Serving in these positions creates a sense of self-worth and 
an opportunity to give back. 
Peer support providers also partner with the systems that work with families. Just as one person can break 
a generational cycle, every single child protection worker touches so many people. I have worked 
alongside caseworkers who were trying their best to engage with parents but didn’t understand what 
families needed from them. The caseworkers and supervisors who had strong relationships with the 
Parent Partners changed the way they worked with families and improved their ability to engage parents 
in their cases. When they worked with parents who were reluctant to engage, they called us for help. 
CPS 101 is a new initiative that was started just as the Parent Partner program was ending. lt is currently 
the only peer support program in the state for parents navigating the child welfare system. This project 
uses very few resources - Parent Facilitators are only funded for a few hours a week - but we have served 
70 parents and 660 providers across the state. The current mechanism for funding this program will end in 
September 2023; without this bill, there will be no funding for this program, and no peer support for 
parents navigating the complex child welfare system in Maine.
ln my experience, peer support for parents in the child welfare system is a powerful tool. It provides 
parents with critical information and the support of another person who understands their experience, as 
they work through the issues that led to their child protection case. 
If we want better outcomes for children and families, we need to invest in parents having support at this 
critical time, to help them make the changes that could impact their family for generations. This bill is an 
opportunity to do that, and I hope you will join me in supporting it. 
Thank you for considering my testimony. 
Jamie Brooks 
Saco,ME
