 
Testimony of Kelly M. Dell’Aquila  
In support of  
LD 1229:  An Act to Support Peer Mentors for Parents Involved in the Child Protective Services System  
April 21, 2023  
 
 
Good Morning  Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee : 
My name is Kelly Dell’Aquila . I work for The Opportunity Alliance, a community action agency in 
Cumberland County that provides advocacy, leadership,  and support to help individuals, families,  and 
communities in Maine . I serve as a Family Education and Support Coordinator providing Family Centered 
Coaching, Parenting Education and Coordinator of Child Protective Services 101:  For Parents, By 
Parents.  
Today, I am offering support for LD 1229 : An Act to Support Peer Mentors for Parents Involved in the 
Child Protective Services System which i ncludes  continuation and expansion of CPS 101 informational 
sessions.  
In the Fall of 2021, The Opportunity Alliance, in collaboration with the Maine Justice for Children Task 
Force , developed free, virtual informational session s for parents involved in Maine’s Child Protective 
Courts .  CPS 101  provides : 
● An introduction to Child Protective Service professionals including a caseworker, parent 
attorney, guardian ad litem, assistant attorney general and judge . 
● Explanation of the court process . 
● Tips for how to successfully engage in the process . 
● Contact information for helpful resources . 
The goal of CPS 1 01 is to engage parents by providing helpful information as facilitated by parents who 
have experienced child protective services or navigated multiple complex systems.  
CPS 101 is modeled , in part , after Dependency 101 of Children’s Home Society of Washin gton (CHSW) in 
Washington State . CPS 101  staff consulted with CHSW for technical assistance with the implementation 
of the virtual parent informational sessions . Consultation has included such things as training, 
curriculum enhancement, evaluation tools and delivery of a virtual platform . 
The mod el of CPS 101  compliments feedback from parent surveys administered in 2019 and 2021  by the 
Maine Child Welfare Advisory Panel . In both survey results, parents have identified needing more 
communication, knowledge of their rights and clarity with ex pectations  about the child protective 
process.  
CPS 101  outcomes (from pre and post survey data ) from seventy  parent  participants  reflects an increase 
in understanding  of how the child protective system works, an understanding of who is on the child  
 
protective team and what they each do, an increased understanding of what a parent needs to do to 
reunify with their family and an increased feeling of hope . 
Additional parent feedback focuses on three ma jor themes that parents identified as helpful after 
participating in the CPS 101  informational sessions .  
• Learning about the process   
• Understanding the roles of providers  
• Hearing stories from other parents  
An unexpected need surfaced at the earliest stages of offering CPS 101  from  providers who also wanted 
to learn about the process of Child Protective Services  and how to best support parents and families 
through their experience . To date, parent facilit ators ha ve served  a total of 660 providers  including OCFS 
staff , community service pr ofessionals  and judicial branch members.  
The additional funding in this bill , based on feedback from parents  and providers  would include 
expan ded outreach to parents and providers , development of monthly parent workshops and 1:1 peer 
parent support . 
In closing, I would  like to thank the Maine Justice for Children Task Force, the Courts and the Office of 
Child and Family Services for their partnership with developing informational videos for parents 
explaining  their roles in the reunification process with families .  
Humbly,  I thank the parent facilitators of Child  Protective  Services  101: For Parents, By Parents  for 
sharing their lived expertise with  the design, development,  and delivery of CPS 101  and for sharing their 
personal experiences and examples of hope for other parents throughout the State of Maine . 
Thank you for your review and  consideration of this important legislation . I would  like to leave you with 
this quote that a parent shared  about what they learned after attending CPS 101 : “Being able to 
understand the process and what everyone is doing . Even if I am  in the dark , there are resources who 
can shed light through , just as this class has .” 
Respectfully Submitted,  
Kelly M. Dell’Aquila  
Family Education and Support Coordinator  
Kelly. Dellaquila@opportunityalliance.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
