‘fl aw 
'1» -= 
-:7 _,,’I~ -‘I 
.‘.:"r- Q-'3' 
' “"' 
ll
l 
|"*;\—_;*->;>~ _» 
i ’" 
V15-itéit 
Eﬁc Brakey 131*‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
L.D. 1147, An Act to Exempt Gold and Silver 
Coins and Bullion from the State Income Tax 
‘ 
Before the Maine Legislature ’s Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Thursday, April 13, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation, l am Senator Eric Brakey, representing the people of Auburn, New Gloucester, Poland, 
and Durham. Today, l am here to present L.D. 1147, "An Act to Exempt Gold and Silver Coins 
and Bullion from the State income Tax." 
ln a time when monetary policy was still the focus of heated political debate, Frank Baum’s 
advice to America was to “follow the yellow brick road." I want to thank the committee for taking 
a step down that road with your recent majority vote to endorse one of the companion bills for 
this legislation, exempting gold and silver from the state sales and use tax. (I will also report to 
you, yesterday the Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Sen/ices Committee 
recommended, by a vote of 10 to 2, passage of another companion bill that would restore the 
status of gold and silver as legal tender here in Maine.) 
ln the public hearing on the sales tax bill before this committee, l outlined the history of gold and 
silver for use as money across human civilization (including the 99% decline in value of our 
dollar since the end of the Gold Standard), as well as the economic danger our constituents 
face in this inflationary environment (driven by massive expansions of the money supply and the 
breakdown of international agreements that boosted demand for the U.S. dollar). Unless there 
are questions on these topics, l don’t need to repeat what has already been said. 
In that hearing, we discussed the double tax on gold and silver — subject to the sales tax (likea 
commodity) and to the income tax for capital gains (like an investment). By eliminating sales tax 
alone, this legislature would effectively put gold and silver in the same category as stocks and 
bonds. Treating these precious metals like an investment - unlocking access to their function 
as a store of value — is a remarkable improvement over the status quo. If that is all we do, 
many Maine people (including myself) will be grateful to this committee for your endorsement of 
the change. 
At the same time, this would still leave the job half done, so l bring you this legislation today. 
Like stocks and bonds, gold and silver can be bought and sold as a store of value, but they are 
capable of more. These precious metals emerged across the world as mediums of exchange for 
their unique convergence of qualities, including divisibility, portability, durability, uniform quality, 
and stable intrinsic value.
Current law requires Maine people to assess capital gains for income taxes whenever they 
conduct an exchange with gold or silver. l do not anticipate this generates significant revenue for 
the state. Like the sales tax exemption bill, l expect a very small ﬁscal note. What this 
requirement does, however, is erect a barrier to the use of gold and silver as money. 
imagine going to a local farmer’s market. A merchant agrees to accept three silver 1 oz. coins in 
exchange for produce (which they would have othenivise sold for $90 USD). That means you 
sold each coin for $30. But what price did you buy them for? lf you are lucky, you bought all of 
them together at the same price and you have the records at home. But maybe you bought 
those individual coins in three different transactions at slightly different prices ranging from $27 
to $31. To be honest on your taxes, you have to calculate for each individual one the difference 
between what you bought it for and what you sold it for. At a certain point, as you consider the 
headache involved in compliance, you grumble to yourself and hand the merchant four green 
Jacksons and a Hamilton from your wallet, take your produce and go home. 
While l wasn’t able to be here for the work session, l’m told this committee recently decided to 
recommend against my proposal for a gas tax fairness credit for Maine Turnpike drivers 
because (at least in part) the proposed formula would have involved too much calculation and 
complication for taxpayers. l appreciate and respect that rationale. l would also suggest that 
assessing capital gains and losses on physical gold and silver coinage and bullion involves too 
much calculation and complication for taxpayers. The current policy’s primary function is 
obstructing the use of these precious metals as a medium of exchange. 
From the perspective of state revenues, l will also note that exempting gold and silver from the 
income tax not only means no reporting of capital gains, but also no claiming of capital losses. lf 
the value were to decline from the purchase date relative to the dollar, owners of gold and silver 
would no longer be able to reduce their income tax burden accordingly. So this cuts both ways. 
ln recent years, legislation to remove capital gains taxes assessed on the sale of the monetary 
metals progressed through several state legislatures - Wyoming and Arizona were the last two 
states to remove income taxes from constitutional money. Alabama, West Virginia, South 
Carolina, and Kansas are currently considering similar legislation. Earlier this month, lowa’s 
House Ways and Means committee recommended passage of a bill similar to L.D. 1147. 
Yesterday, a Missouri House committee voted ovenivhelmingly to end capital gains taxes on, 
and reaffirm gold and silver as legal tender. 
Finally, I will point out that a capital gains tax on monetary metals is often a tax on imaginary 
gains. Has the value of a gold coin increased in real value just because its nominal value has 
increased relative to an inﬂationary ﬁat currency? As l mentioned in previous testimony, an 
ounce of gold could buy you a well-tailored toga in the Roman Republic. Two millennia later, that 
ounce of gold can buy you a well-tailored suit in the American Republic. 
As inﬂation hits the savings and paychecks of the Maine people, it is worth noting that even the 
Consumer Price Index is a manipulated statistic, substituting in goods of lesser quality over time 
to mask the true degree of the dollar’s devaluation. Relative to gold, the dollar has lost 99% of 
its value over the last 90 years. Rather than taxing people for capital gains when the 
dollar-denominated value of gold increases, a more honest system of taxation would allow 
people to claim capital losses when the value of their dollar savings diminishes relative to gold. 
L.D. 1147 is a much more modest proposal. lf we can recognize gold and silver as money, let's 
build a tax code that treats them like money. As inﬂation looms, let‘s remove barriers that block 
Maine people from engaging in commerce with inﬂation-resistant mediums of exchange.
