TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: April 13, 2023 
LD 1147 —— “An Act to Exempt Gold and Silver Coins and Bullion ﬂom the State 
Income Tax” 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 1147, “An Act to Exempt 
Gold and Silver Coins and Bullion ﬁom the State Income Tax.” 
For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2023, this bill proposes an 
income subtraction modiﬁcation equal to the total of capital gains and ordinary 
income resulting from the sale or transfer of gold or silver coins or bullion to the 
extent included in federal adjusted gross income. The bill applies to the individual 
and ﬁduciary income taxes. 
Currently, capital gains resulting from the sale or transfer of gold or silver 
coins or bullion are subject to both federal and Maine income tax. For federal tax 
purposes, capital gains on the sale of collectibles held for more than a year, 
including gold and silver coins or bullion, are subject to the 28% long-term capital 
gains tax rate; short term capital gains are taxed as ordinary income at the 
taxpayer ’s marginal tax rate except that the ordinary long-term capital gains tax 
rates apply in the case of gains from investments made in a fund that invests in 
gold or silver coins or bullion on behalf of the investor and does not own physical 
gold, silver, or bullion.
1
Also, IRC § 408(m)(3) allows an individual retirement account (IRA) to 
invest in gold and silver coins and bullion (as well as other types of metal and 
bullion) to the extent the coins or bullion meet speciﬁc requirements set forth in 31 
USC § 5112. The permitted investments are income tax-deferred until distribution 
from the IRA and are subject to the taxpayer ’s marginal income tax rate. 
However, an IRA investment not meeting the conditions of IRC § 408(m)(3) is 
considered a distribution from the IRA subject to both federal and Maine income 
tax in the year of investment. 
Next, Maine conforms to the federal calculation of capital gains on the sale 
of these assets as included in federal adjusted gross income for individual income 
taxes and taxable income for fiduciary income taxes. For Maine tax purposes, the 
income included in federal adjusted gross income (for individual income taxes), or 
taxable income (for ﬁduciary income taxes), is subject to tax at the taxpayer ’s 
marginal Maine income tax rate regardless of whether it is reported as a capital 
gain or ordinary income on the respective federal income tax return. This bill 
decouples Maine’s conformity to the federal calculation of gains on the sale of 
such assets, thereby losing the advantages that federal Internal Revenue Code 
conformity brings to Maine through reduced compliance burdens on taxpayers and 
administrative burdens on the MRS. 
The Administration notes that if the intent of the bill is to allow the 
modiﬁcation for IRA distributions resulting from qualifying investments in gold or 
silver coins or bullion, complexity will be added for fund administrators and 
taxpayers in determining the amount of distribution attributable to the qualifying 
investment that is eligible for the modiﬁcation. 
The Administration also notes the following technical concerns:
2
¢ The bill does not provide an income addition modiﬁcation in the case of 
a net loss resulting from the sale of gold or silver coins or bullion. 
0 For clariﬁcation, the bill should deﬁne the terms “gold,” “silver,” and 
“bullion, ” and whether these terms include coins or bullion containing 
any amount of gold or silver._ 
0 The bill should clarify whether an IRA beneﬁciary qualiﬁes for the 
income subtraction modiﬁcation when the distribution represents, in part 
or in whole, capital gains or ordinary income resulting from both 
qualifying and non-qualifying investments in gold or silver coins or 
bullion. . 
Q As written, the bill would allow an income subtraction modiﬁcation for 
certain “pass-through ” taxpayers engaged in the business of buying and 
selling gold and silver coins and bullion. 
The preliminary estimated revenue impact of the bill is not available at this 
time. 
The preliminary estimated administrative costs are $115,918 in ﬁscal year 
2024 and $123,845 in ﬁscal year 2025, with additional annual ongoing costs after 
2025. A new Tax Examiner position, effective October 1, 2023, is required to 
audit a portion of the affected returns to verify eligibility for, and the amount of, 
the deductions claimed. Computer programming costs are included to add new 
modiﬁcation lines to the individual and ﬁduciary income tax returns, update check 
stub messages and notices, make federal tape changes, and perform system testing.
The Administration looks forward to Working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
