MAINE AFL-CIO  
A Union of Unions Standing for Maine Workers 
21 Gabriel Drive, Augusta, Maine 04330 
Tel. (207) 622-9          
(207) 622-9675 
Visit our website: www.maineaflcio.org  
 
President 
Cynthia Phinney Vice President 
Pat Carleton Secretary Treasurer 
Doug Born 
 
 Testimony of Adam Goode, Maine AFL-CIO Legislative & Political Director, In Support of LD 1230 
"Resolve, Directing the Maine Public Employees Retirement System to Study the Creation of an 
Interstate Compact Concerning the Windfall Elimination Provision and Government Pension Offset" 
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor & Housing, 
my name is Adam Goode. I am the Legislative & Political Director of the Maine AFL-CIO. We represent 
40,000 working men and women in the state of Maine. We work to improve the lives and working conditions of 
our members and all working people. We testify in support of LD 1230. 
 
The Windfall Elimination Provision (WEP) and Government Pension Offset (GPO) are two unjust penalties that 
a broad swath of working people constantly identify as a top issue of concern. The Government Pension Offset 
(GPO) reduces public employees Social Security spousal or survivor benefits by two-thirds of their public 
pension, often eliminating it. The Windfall Elimination Provision (WEP) reduces the earned Social Security 
benefits of an individual who worked a job during which they paid into Social Security, but also receives a 
public pension from a job not covered by Social Security.  
 
One of the most gut-wrenching aspects of these policies is that the GPO affects people who worked as federal, 
state, or local government employees, including educators, police officers, and firefighters through their own 
retirement and that of their spouse. If a GPO impacted spouse has earned their own retirement benefits from a 
public agency that does not contribute to Social Security, their right to their spousal or survivor benefits is 
reduced by an amount equal to two-thirds their public agency pension. This provision can eliminate all Spousal 
or Survivor benefits.  
 
The WEP affects people who worked in jobs not covered by Social Security and in jobs in which they earned 
Social Security benefits – such as educators who do not earn Social Security in the public schools, but who 
worked part-time or during the summer in jobs covered by Social Security. The WEP also affects people who 
moved from a job in which they earned Social Security to a job in which they did not pay into Social Security.  
 
Of these two policies, the GPO is particularly harmful to women as women tend to live longer than their spouse. 
That is the reality of life expectancy. As a result, it is estimated that 91% of all people impacted by the GPO are 
women.  
 
This resolve directs the Maine Public Employees Retirement System to study the creation of an interstate 
compact with other states affected by the WEP and the GPO. We know that interstate compacts can be tricky 
policy solutions for complicated problems. Despite widespread acknowledgement that these policies are major 
burdens for working class people who serve the public, the political will to solve these problems at the federal 
level is lacking, making an interstate compact a potential way to get at these issues. There are some potential 
recommendations that a compact could make that we would be opposed to, including recommending 
eliminating the pension plan in WEP and GPO states. Despite this risk, we think this is an avenue worth 
pursuing. 
 
Printed In House with Union Labor

This is a national problem, with people affected in all states as people move from state to state after retirement, 
resulting in affected individuals living everywhere. If an interstate compact provides a potential solution where 
working people have more retirement income to spend then we should explore it.  
 
 
 
 
 
