1 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement of Support to L.D. 1230,  
Resolve, Directing the Maine Public Employees Retirement System to 
Study the Creation of an Interstate Compact Concerning the 
Windfall Elimination Provision and Government Pension Offset 
April 4, 2023
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and distinguished Committee on 
Labor and Housing. My name is Charles Rumsey, and I am the Chief of the 
Cumberland Police Department. I am submitting testimony on behalf of the 
Maine Chiefs of Police Association in support of LD 1230.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action 
in law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code 
of Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the bill summary,  
This resolve directs the Maine Public Employees Retirement System to 
study the creation of an interstate compact with other states affected by the 
windfall elimination provision and the government pension offset. The 
Maine Public Employees Retirement System must submit a report with its 
recommendations, including any suggested legislation, to the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing no later than December 6, 2023. The 
committee may report out a bill based upon the report and 
recommendations. 
We support LD 1230 because this is an issue that effects law enforcement 
officers.  If an officer chooses to work for an employer who does not collect 
Social Security for a certain number of years, then the regulations for Social 
Security subjects them to the Windfall Elimination Provision (WEP) which 
severely reduces the officer’s Social Security benefit.  
Because many law enforcement pensions are either 20 or 25 years, retired 
officers are able to work in other careers prior to, or following a police career. 
During these other years, we pay more than our 40 quarters of Social Security, 
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President  
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
2 and many of those quarters are at high levels of income. The fact that many 
members of our profession – and their employers - pay large sums of money 
into the Social Security system with no hope or expectation of reaping the 
benefit of this retirement safety net is unfair, and un-American. 
Many Chiefs consider this to be a recruitment and retention issue – officers may 
choose to leave employment with an agency who does not pay into Social 
Security for one that does, out of concern for losing out on this benefit after 
retirement.    
WEP and the Government Pension Offset (GPO) need to be eliminated so that 
our officers can enjoy their hard-earned retirement. We are in support of any 
option that brings light to this important issue.  
On behalf of the Maine Chief of Police Association, we want to thank the 
Committee members for their work on this Committee. And we would urge you to 
vote ought to pass on LD 1230.  
