Diane Bailey
Maine Assoc. of Retirees
LD 1230
April 3, 2023
Senator Michael Tipping, Chair
Representative Amy Roeder, Chair
Committee on Labor and Housing
c/o Legislative Information Office
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
RE:  LD 1230, Resolve, Directing the Maine Public Employees Retirement System to 
Study the Creation of an Interstate Compact Concerning the Windfall Elimination 
Provision and Government Pension Offset
Dear Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and Members of the Committee on 
Labor and Housing:
The Maine Association of Retirees (MAR), which represents Maine’s retired teachers,
municipal employees, state workers, legislators, and others, is pleased to offer its 
support for the enactment of LD 1230 and urges this Committee to vote ought to pass.
MAR strongly supports the elimination of the WEP and GPO, which along with State 
and Federal tax rules, serve to disadvantage MainePERS retirees in comparison to 
Social Security recipients. While MAR is unsure that an interstate compact will 
necessarily advance the cause intended by this Resolve, it does create a new tool to 
lobby Congress which is currently the only obstacle to achieving the elimination of 
these unfair penalties that affect many public service retirees.
Currently, pending federal legislation H.R. 82, would eliminate the WEP and GPO 
and President Biden’s budget has already called for the same. However, the bill in the 
U.S. House of Representatives would require 290 cosponsors in order to force 
Committee action.  There are currently only about 207 cosponsors. Therefore, it is 
essential that the State continues to advocate for federal legislation until the threshold 
for action is achieved. In requiring MainePERS to advance an interstate compact and 
consult with other interested entities, there is some chance this more formalized 
alliance would contribute to the eventual elimination of the WEP and GPO. Certainly,
no progress will be made unless this issue remains front and center with ongoing 
advocacy from the affected states. Upon information and belief, there are still 13 
affected states that would theoretically have an interest in joining the proposed 
interstate compact. 
For the foregoing reasons, MAR urges the Committee to vote “ought to pass” on LD 
1230.
Sincerely,
 
William H. Laubenstein, III
President
Leading the Way for Maine Retirees
280 Maine Avenue, Farmingdale, ME  04344William H. Laubenstein III – 
President
Telephone Number: (207) 582-1960Diane M. Bailey– Executive Director
       1-800-535-6555email:  MAR@MaineRetirees.org
       (207) 707-1722 FAXwww.maineretirees.org          

