Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
Testimony 
In Support 
LD 1240: Resolve, Directing the Maine Public Employees Retirement System to Study the 
Creation of an interstate Compact Concerning the Windfall Elimination Provision and 
Government Pension Offset 
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association 
Before the Labor and Housing Committee 
April 4, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and esteemed members of the Labor and Housing Committee, 
My name is John Kosinski (he/him) and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA). The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly every public school in the state and faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Cormnunity College Systems. 
I am here to testify on behalf of the MEA in support of LD 1230, Resolve, Directing the Maine Public 
Employees Retirement System to Study the Creation of an Interstate Compact Concerning the Windfall 
Elimination Provision and Government Pension Offset. 
As you have already heard this session, there are many ways public employees in Maine are 
disadvantaged in retirement, but the intractable and unjust Social Security Offsets are among the most 
damaging for retirees. 
The Windfall Elimination Provision (WEP), with its most odious name, penalizes teachers who earned 
Social Security beneﬁts from private sectors jobs either before or after teaching. Some work in the 
private sector during teaching, either through afterschool jobs or summer jobs. For some, working other 
jobs is necessary due to the low pay. Maine is seeing tremendous workforce shortages right now. We 
will need more teachers and ed techs to enter the profession and will likely need these educators to come 
from the private sector, meaning the WEP problem will only compound over the coming decades as 
more educators face this penalty whenever they try to retire. 
The Government Pension Offset (GPO) is also painful for retirees, especially since it impacts the 
beneﬁts of widows/widowers. These phone calls from retired teachers are unbelievably sad. Not only is 
someone coping with the loss of a loved one, but then they leam they cannot expect the full beneﬁts of 
the departed spouse or partner. The sadness of losing a loved one combined with the ﬁnancial 
uncertainty is just too much for some. Most grow frustrated by their govermnent and the decisions of 
previous elected ofﬁcials in Washington, DC. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207—622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I Www.maineea.org
E 
Ha 1t; stitmt‘ -an :t§,_§<~tt;teit=n Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Trea 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive D‘ 
The MEA, and our national 0 
for literally decad 
our se S U F8 I" 
ll'8CtO I’ 
rganizat' 
es, to no' 
natorsa 
fro 1011, the National Education Association, have worked on this' 
avail. Several times a year, MEA members go to Washington and 
nd representatives in the nation’s capital, and this is always on the 
in other states — both those directly impacted by GPO/WEP and th 
talk about this with their representatives and senators Th 
impacted states, like Maine, often sponsor or 
time a bill gets close to movingf 
The problem is not a 1 1S 
talk W' 
agenda 
ose les' 
. e repre 
co-spon 
orward 
ack of 
Too m sue 
1th 
. NEA 
s impact 
sentativ 
sor leg'' 
, some ac' 
trying. T 
uch of th' 
Th memb 
ed — als 
es ands 
1s1at1on b 
tron fro 
he probl 
e drscu 
e focus er 
0 regulal 
enators fr 
, ut likeL 
m Con 
em is th 
ssion in 
of polio 
lifting TY 
om the most 
ucy and the football, each 
gress sends us back to the drawing board. 
e focus in Washington. 
the nation’s capital is focused on cutting retirement security for seniors. 
ymakers in Washington over the past few decades has been about cutting beneﬁts, 
retirement ages, and overall curtailing spending on seniors. Much like Maine, there has been 
plenty of appetite for tax cuts in Washington, DC, but little appetite to provide seniors with dignity and 
ﬁnancial stability in their ﬁnal years. 
But we support LD 1230 because we will continue to support any effort to make progress on this issue. 
To be honest, the task seems Sisyphean. Sisyphus is the subject of a Greek myth. He spent his life of 
punishment pushing a giant boulder up a mountain, only to ﬁnd the boulder fall back just as he reached 
the top. It’s a tale of the futility of meaningless labor. We will continue to push that boulder up the 
mountain, with the hope that one day we make it to the top and these offsets are repealed. 
One consideration for this bill. We have come to respect and appreciate MainePERS but I am unsure if 
this legislation is the correct role for them. Given the situation with the offsets, we will likely need/want 
the organization or agency leading this effort to advocate for the full repeal of both the GPO and the 
WEP. Given that, and given the neutral, non-partisan and non-advocacy role the staff and leaders at 
MainePERS have played over the years, we suggest tasking the Dept of Labor or the Department of 
Administration and Financial Services (DAF S) to lead this effort instead. 
We stand ready and willing to help in any way we can. Both MEA and NEA have resources we are 
willing to dedicate to this problem. We appreciate the sponsor bringing this novel approach fo 
look forward to answering any questions you may have. rward. I 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME [M330 I 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME [M401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207—622»5866 I 207-888~2070 fax I www.maineea.orgS
