1 
20362799.1 MAINE CHIEFS OF POLICE  
ASSOCIATION 
P.O. Box 2431 • South Portland, Maine 04116-2431 
Chief Edward J. Tolan (ret.), Executive Director, Tel: (207) 838-6583 
email: mcopa@maine.rr.com Web site: www.mainechiefs.com
Statement of Support to L.D. 550,  
An Act to Increase Correctional Officer Salary and Benefit
May 9, 2023
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the 
distinguished Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. My name is 
Charles Rumsey. I am the Chief of the Cumberland Police Department, and the 
President of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association. I am submitting testimony 
on behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association in support to LD 550.  
The Mission of the Maine Chiefs of Police is to secure a closer official and 
personal relationship among Maine Police Officials; to secure a unity of action 
in law enforcement matters; to enhance the standards of police personnel, police 
training and police professionalism generally; to devise ways and means for 
equality of law enforcement throughout the state of Maine; to advance the 
prevention and detection of crime; to prescribe to the Law Enforcement Code 
of Ethics; and to promote the profession of law enforcement as an integral and 
dedicated force in today's society sworn to the protection of life and property. 
According to the concept draft bill summary,  
proposes to increase the base salary and benefits provided to correctional 
officers in order to aid efforts to recruit and retain correctional officers. 
Although we have not seen the final language of the bill, the Maine Chiefs are 
generally in support to LD 1290 and all efforts that would recruit and retain all 
public safety employees including correctional officers.  We believe that robust 
staffing at correctional facilities supports not just the workers but also the residents 
of the facilities.  Facilities that are understaffed can lead to unsafe conditions for all 
involved and the State should be doing everything it can to encourage correctional 
officers to join and stay in the job.  
Over the past several years, many areas of the state have experienced critical 
staffing shortages in county jails. These shortages have resulted in jails restricting 
the types of arrests that they will accept. These restrictions negatively impact the 
safety and quality of life in the communities we are sworn to protect. We consider 
the staffing shortages being experienced in corrections across the state to be a 
critical public safety crisis. 
For these reasons, we would ask you to support LD 1290 and vote ought to pass on 
this bill. On behalf of the Maine Chiefs of Police Association, we want to thank the 
committee members for your work on this Committee. 
OFFICERS 
President
Chief Charles Rumsey 
Cumberland Police Dept. 
1st Vice President  
Chief Glenn Moshier 
Ellsworth  Police Dept. 
2nd Vice President  
Chief Jason Moen 
Auburn  Police Dept. 
Sergeant-at-Arms 
Chief Scott Stewart  
Brunswick Police Dept.
Treasurer 
Chief John Kilbride 
Falmouth Police Dept.
Secretary 
Chief Michael Tracy 
Oakland Police Dept. 
Parliamentarian
Director Brian MacMaster 
Office of Attorney General 
Immediate Past President 
Chief Jared Mills       
Augusta Police Dept.
Chaplain 
Father Gregory Dube
Diocese of Portland
