     Testimony of  DANA A. DORAN Executive Director Professional Logging Contractors of Maine  Before the Committee on Transportation regarding LD 1025 – An Act to Improve Maine’s Economy by Changing the Hours of Operation for Oversize Loads   Thursday, March 30, 2023  Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the Committee on Transportation, my name is Dana Doran, and I am the Executive Director of the Professional Logging Contractors of Maine. The Professional Logging Contractors of Maine (PLC) is the voice of Maine’s logging and trucking industry. The PLC was formed in 1995 to represent independent contractors in a rapidly changing forest industry.   As of 2021, logging and trucking contractors in Maine employed over 3,000 people directly and were indirectly responsible for the creation of an additional 2,500 jobs.  This employment and the investments that contractors make contributed $582 million to the state’s economy.  Our membership, which includes 200 contractor members and an additional 120 associate members, employs more than 75% of the individuals who work in this industry and is also responsible for 80% of Maine’s annual timber harvest.   The logging industry in Maine was in the midst of a reinvention process until the onset of COVID 19 and the digestor explosion at the Jay mill in April 2020.  As a result of mill closures, curtailments and inflation created by the response to COVID 19, we are estimating that Maine has lost 30% of its harvesting capacity and the layoff of nearly 1,000 people in harvesting and hauling since 2020. In just four years, the industry has shrunk from an annual economic impact of $620 million to $582 million and total jobs have been reduced from 9,000 to 5,500.  Our members simply need public policy changes that create efficiencies that will help them save money and increase profitability.    Thank you for providing me the opportunity to testify on behalf of our membership regarding LD 1025, An Act to Improve Maine’s Economy by Changing the Hours of Operation for Oversize Loads.  We would like to thank Representative Underwood for bringing this legislation before the committee to start a conversation.  That said, in order for legislation to be practical, responsive and safe, we would like to request that the bill be amended or redirected if it is going to move forward.  I have spoken with the bill sponsor about this idea and he understands our perspective.    In November of 2016, the Maine Bureau of Motor Vehicles (BMV), Department of Transportation (DOT), Maine State Police (MSP) and the PLC entered into a pilot project in Aroostook County that allowed the movement of certain over-limit equipment trailers 

between November 1 and April 1 from 2016 to 2018.  The concern raised by our membership that was addressed by this pilot project was that during the winter, when the days are shorter and weather conditions are variable, trucking companies run out of daylight very quickly.  Frozen roads are also not guaranteed when the sun is shining.  They need flexibility with respect to moving their empty trailers to and from their home base of operations safely.  Without flexibility, it puts their business at risk.    The pilot project allowed empty equipment trailers, up to 10 feet in width, to be moved to/from the jobsite and their home base of operations at night between November 1st and April 1st for the 2016-17 and 2017-18 seasons.  The moves were made under special conditions added to the permit issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles.    One of the conditions of the project was that the logging companies report any incidents or crashes to the MSP and the MDOT even if they do not reach the threshold of a reportable crash.  I am pleased to report that during the pilot, there were no reportable incidents.  This coincided with the same feedback of the Maine State Police, MDOT and BMV.  The pilot was so successful that the three agencies agreed to renew the pilot through April 1, 2019 and also recommended that this pilot program become permanent with a proposed rule change.  Copies of the letters from the DOT Commissioner authorizing the pilot programs are attached to my testimony.    In March of 2019, the Bureau of Motor Vehicles (BMV) conducted a rulemaking process to make this pilot program permanent in Chapter 157, Administration of Overdimension and Overweight Permits.  We submitted comments to the BMV as part of this rulemaking process, as did two of our members.  Our impression and correspondence with the Secretary of State’s office was that there was no opposition to making the rulemaking final, later in 2019.  After checking with the BMV in 2021, we learned that unfortunately, “the rule fell through the cracks and then COVID happened”.  The timeframe for implementing the rule lapsed and now, four years later, there is no rule and no permanent process in place.    We would propose to this Committee that this legislation could be amended to formalize this rule in statute or direct BMV to conduct rulemaking as soon as possible.  We would also like to see it expanded beyond Aroostook County for statewide application.  We are of the mindset based upon what we believe is seven years of successful implementation in Aroostook County that empty low beds that are moved at night, during specific times of the year, with appropriate signage and lighting can be done safely and will not impact the public.  In fact, there is likely to be a lower preponderance of interaction at night when fewer cars are on the road.      Thank you for your time and attention to this legislation and I would be happy to answer any questions you might have.   




