 
 
 
Testimony of David Dauphinee 
On 
LD 1025  
Act to Improve Maine’s Economy by Changing the Hours of Operation for Oversize Loads 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the Transportation 
Committee.  My name is David Dauphinee and I am Operations Manager at Showcase Homes of 
Maine.  Showcase Homes of Maine is a family-owned business in Brewer with 22 employees 
and we are the largest volume retailer of manufactured and modular homes in the state of Maine, 
selling approximately 320 homes in the last two years.   
 
I am here today to testify in favor of LD 1025, and I would like to offer additional information to 
the committee about the positive impact that it would have on our business, our fellow retailers, 
the subcontractors we work with, and transportation companies.   
 
The seat of the manufactured housing industry for the northeast is Pennsylvania.  Much like 
towns in Michigan with auto factories, Pennsylvania has towns with several home manufacturing 
facilities.  One of the mounting challenges manufactured home retailers in Maine face is the cost 
of transportation.  Certainly, the geographical distance alone is a large factor.  There are also 
tolls, high fuel cost, and expensive permits to contend with.  We, in Maine, have little control 
over these concerns.  One condition we can improve is the time factor.  When Maine puts a stop 
to oversize loads with the loss of daylight, it prevents a driver from making a single-day delivery.  
If a delivery driver could haul after dark, they could reach retailers in Maine, get checked in, 
deliver the home, and head back to Pennsylvania the next morning.  The situation that we 
encounter is that a driver gets to the Maine border, runs out of daylight, and has to spend the 
night.  They then drive to the retailer the next morning, go through the delivery process, and head 
home, unable to return to their home office that same day.  It takes a two day turn and makes it 
into a three day turn.  This means haulers from Pennsylvania can only make one trip per week to 
Maine and spend the rest of their week doing local hauls.  It makes it much harder to get homes 
to the retailers in Maine in a timely fashion and it means the haulers charge us that much more 
because they are losing one day of hauling each week.  If LD 1025 passes and grants the ability 
to haul oversize loads after dark, we can reduce our freight costs and pass those savings on to 
customers, making housing in Maine more affordable during a time of high inflation and high 
interest rates.  We also create an opportunity to get more homes to Maine more quickly.   
 
It's no secret that seasonable weather can be in short supply in the state of Maine.  For those of us 
in the construction and retail home sales business, it can be an especially painful and challenging 
fact.  In the spring time, we have to wait out “mud season,” posted roads, and soggy house lots 
before any real work can begin.  The reality for us is that it is late May or early June at best 
before we can even think about starting to deliver homes and we don’t start with full weeks of 
steady deliveries until July.  That gives us 3-4 months before we are impacted by fall rain, then 
lack of daylight, and snow.  It doesn’t leave a lot of time to deliver, set, and finish 160 homes.  
At Showcase Homes, we try to deliver a minimum of 6 homes each week in the peak of the 
season and we like to deliver 10 or more.  Everything has to be perfectly orchestrated for this to 
718 Wilson Street – Brewer, ME 04412
(207)989-2337 Phone ~ (207)989-2632 Fax
www.ShowcaseHomesofMaine.com
 
occur:  site visits and prep, getting materials in place, coordinating delivery and set crews, 
coordinating dumpsters and portable toilets, coordinating cranes for modular sets, and getting the 
home from the factory to Maine in a timely fashion.  These schedules must be built weeks in 
advance.  We can plan all of these things perfectly and then be completely derailed by Mother 
Nature.  A day of hard rain, high winds, or snow can put a wrench into a schedule very quickly.  
Sometimes we have several days in a row of bad weather.  In other states, like Pennsylvania and 
Massachusetts, transportation companies are allowed to haul oversize loads on Saturdays.  If 
retailers in Maine were to have this ability, it would allow us to make up for days or weeks 
where we are getting shut out by bad weather.  Rather than pushing back a customer’s delivery, 
delaying their move-in date, and potentially risking their interest rate lock, we could utilize a 
Saturday to help get caught up.  In weeks without bad weather, we could use Saturdays to get 
ahead.  This would be of great benefit to all retailers in Maine, our customers, the subcontractors 
we work with (and their employees), and the transportation companies.   
 
I would urge the Committee to vote favorably on LD 1025 would happily answer any questions 
you may have. 
 
 
 
David Dauphinee 
Operations Manager 
Showcase Homes of Maine 
dave@showcasehomesofmaine.com  
 
 
Joseph Underwood
Presque Isle, Maine
LD 1025
J
