Mmua Assocmnom OF Rarmcés 
£55 
TO: Senator Michael Tipping 
Representative Amy Roeder 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing DATE: March 9, 2023 
FROM: William H. Laubenstein, III 
President, Maine Association of Retirees 
SUBJECT: LD 591: An Act to Require the State to Pay Medicare Premiums for Certain Retired State 
Employees. 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing. My name is William H. Laubenstein, III. I am President of the Maine Association of Retirees 
(MAR) whose membership includes retired State employees, retired teachers and other public service 
retirees. 
MAR is neither for nor against LD 591, An Act to Require the State to Pay Medicare Premiums for 
Certain Retired State Employees. The requirement under" LD 591 is for the State to pay 100% of certain 
retirees share of the premium for Medicare Part B. Unlike LD lll, which would require the State to pay 
a part of the Part B premium for State and teacher retirees, LD 591 would only apply to State retirees not 
eligible for Social Security beneﬁts. MAR does not believe that Social Security beneﬁts is a fair basis 
upon which to distinguish one group of retirees from another. 
MAR assumes that the basis for beneﬁcial treatment of State retirees not eligible for Social Security is 
that the Part B premium for retirees receiving Social Security beneﬁts is taken ﬁom their beneﬁt while 
State retirees not eligible for such beneﬁts must pay the premium from their State pension or from some 
other source of income. Whether the Part B premium comes out of a Social Security beneﬁt or out ofa 
State pension, the adverse impact on a retiree’s ﬁnancial well-being, State or teacher, is the same. In 
2023 that impact comes to $164.90 a month, $1978.80 for the year. 
It is important to bear in mind, too, that the State already pays the Part B premium, plus a 10% penalty for 
each year an affected retiree was over age 65, for approximately 600 State retirees enrolled in the retiree 
Aetna Medicare Advantage Plan under an agreement with the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
(CMMS. Absent this agreement, these retirees would have remained on the State plan for active 
employees. Moving these retirees from the active to the retiree Advantage Plan saves the State thousands 
of dollars even with the 10% penalty because Medicare coverage is primary and contributory. In addition, 
the State pays the Part B premium for retirees on Medicaid. 
MAR thanks Senator Hickman for bring the Part B premium to the attention of the Committee, but as 
noted above. his proposal falls short because the Part B premium imposes a burden on all state and 
teacher retirees, not just those retirees ineligible for Social Security. The ﬁnancial challenges facing
retirees are without number. MAR believes that addressing the issue of the Part B problem is the best 
approach to help public service retirees. Unlike changes to the cost-of-living adjustment, legislation 
requiring the State to share the burden of the Part B premium, as set forth in LD 111, does not implicate 
the unfunded actuarial liability and the Maine Constitution. 
MAR urges the Committee to continue to explore ways to help Maine Public Service Retirees enjoya 
ﬁnancial secure retirement, and believes that LD l ll is the best vehicle to achieve that result. 
Leading the Way for Maine Retirees 
280 Maine Avenue, Farmingdale, ME 04344 William H. Laubenstein Ill — President 
Telephone Number: (207) 582-1960 Diane M. Bailey — Executive Director 
1-800-535-6555 email: l\/IAR@MaineRetirees.org 
(207) 707-1722 FAX www.maineretirees.0rg
