Department of the Secretary of State 
Bureau of Corporatzons, El€Cll0I’IS and Commlsszons 
_ _.,..,..~ . 
‘U. 
'\"17?(vii 
Shenna Bellows 
Secrelaiy of State 
Julie L, Flynn 
Deputy Secretary of S tale 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON VETERANS AND LEGAL AFFAIRS 
Testimony of Shenna Bellows, Secretary of State 
Department of the Secretary of State 
March 22, 2023 
Testifying In Support of 
L.D. 922, “An Act to Clarify Required Disclosure of Personally Identifying Information for Certain 
Nominating Petitions" 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs, my name is Shenna Bellows and I am the Secretary of State and the chief elections 
ofﬁcer. I am speaking today in support of L.D. 922. 
The bill would remove a federal candidate ’s home address from 3 documents — primary petitions, 
nonparty nomination petitions, and candidate consent forms. These documents would still contain the 
municipality where the candidate lives so voters who are being asked to sign these petitions can see 
where the candidate is from. In an environment where federal candidates have been targeted with 
threats, we think this is a reasonable privacy measure that does not adversely impact the voter’s 
accessibility to information about candidates on the ballot. 
This bill does not seek to change the forms for state-level candidates, as there is a requirement that 
candidates and elected officials live in the district they are running for or represent. In municipalities 
with more than one district, a street address is required to conﬁrm that, and we believe that is 
something voters should be able to review as they consider signing nominating petitions. 
This change would not be a logistical burden on our office so if this bill passes, we could easily 
implement. 
This concludes my testimony. Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions that the 
committee may have. 
101 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 0433 3 -01 01 
www.Maine.gov/sos/cec; tel. 207-624-7736
