Senator Pierce , Representative Gere , and Distinguished Members of the Joint 
Committee on Housing : 
My name is Anne Gass and I’m writing to oppose LD 611, an Act to Create the Whole Home 
Repairs Program .  
First, let me state that I ’m wholeheartedly in support of a home repair program for Maine, 
because low- and moderate -income homeowners are the least served by existing  housi ng 
program s. Furthermore, low -income homeowners often struggle to get affordable loans for 
necessary home improvements from  private lenders. We absolutely do need a program focused 
on their needs.  
However, I do not support using scarce public subs idies to provide grants or forgivable  loans to 
the lucky few who are able to obtain them . Instead, I would like to see the legislature resurrect 
the Housing Preservation Loan Pro gram (HPLP) . HPLP  was a  secondary market for home 
improvement loans  which I helped launch  when I worked at MaineHousing from 199 0 to 199 3. 
We creat ed a network of nonprofit lenders statewide  and provided them with grants of loan 
capital which they used to originate loans . MaineHousing then used a combination of bonds,  
subsidized with federal HOME funds, to purchase the loan s from the nonprofit lenders. This is 
roughly the same model as their first -time homebuyer program.  
The loans were fixed and typically had interest  rates from 0% to 4% , with repayment lengths of 
five to fifteen years . They were carefully underwritten to be affordable  to the borrower.  
The nonprofit lenders , chiefly community action agencies, initially predicted HPLP would  be 
unpopular . They said p eople wanted grants , not loans . What astonished almost everyone 
involved was the extent to which low-income homeowners were happy to repay l oans made on 
terms they could afford. They weren ’t looking for handouts, they just needed a little hel p.  
Another  interesting outcome was that , because clients were paying for the loan, it changed 
their relationship with the nonprofit lenders. Of particula r note was that the lenders, who had 
nearly all managed home improvement grant programs in the past, re alized that they had to 
improve  their per formance because they were now dealing with paying clients  rather than 
recipients of charity . It tran sformed the lenders ’ sense of how they could  and should  do 
business.  
With the cost o f repairs inc reasing  muc h more quickly  than  the availability  of public subsidy , I 
would prefer  to see Maine re -establish the HPLP program . Over the years HPLP  was in existence  
Maine Housing purchased millions of dollars of loan s, helping thousands of homeowners all over 
the state, and  the default rate was much lower  than com parable loans made in the private 
banking sector , well under 5%. Taxpayers would get a much bigger bang for our collective buck if 
we used public funds to buy down the inter est rate of the l oans an d/or used them with in the 
bonds as credit enhancement.  
I would be happy to discuss my experience with HPLP further , although my involv ement with 
the program ended in 1992 so I might not be the be st informant.  MaineHo using would be more 
likely to have information about t he number of loans made.  
Thanks for considering an alternative to LD 611 as proposed.  
