' - P.O. BOX 2438, A gust , Maine 04338 
Mdlnig Indwr Ail‘? Telephone: 207 /Z26-8115 
Cguin/Cd Fax: 207/6260015 
E—Mail= 
‘ Web: www.mai11eindo0rair.org 
Maine indoor Air Quality Council Testimony in Support of LD 611: An Act to Create the Home Repair 
Program_ 
The Maine Indoor Air Quality Council (”MIAQC” or the ”Council") is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization 
dedicated to creating healthy, productive and environmentally sustainable indoor environments in 
Maine. Our efforts focus on the development of education, communications, and advocacy for safe and 
healthy indoor environments where Maine citizens live, work, play and learn. 
Dear Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Housing: 
The Council assumes it is not the intent of the bill sponsor to replace existing Weatherization programs 
in Maine. Rather, this bill would support repair of pre-existing conditions that make it difficult to 
weatherize a home without risking damage to the structure or the health of the home's occupants. 
Assuming our assumptions are correct, the Maine indoor Air Quality Council supports LD 611: An Act to 
Create the Home Repair Program. 
Weatherization changes how moisture, air, and heat all flow in a building. Air sealing and insulation 
practices can trap pollutants such as moisture and radon indoors, as well as reduce the availability of 
fresh air for building occupants. A home repair program that focuses on addressing moisture, 
ventilation, and radon issues before weatherization makes it much more likely that the home, once 
weatherized, will use less energy, will be more sustainable, and most importantly, will be a healthier 
place to live. 
A copy of our policy statement on Energy Efficiency & indoor Air Quality is shown on the back side of 
this testimony. 
The Maine Indoor Air Quality Council can be available for the work session to answer any questions or 
provide further comment. 
Respectfully submitted by: 
Ciwlsyasass 
Christine G. Crocker, Executive Director 
Maine Indoor Air Quality Council 
Telephom-11207-626-8115; E-mailr ..<;§3ifl§.l;jt£i§3.iiE$_@§i.@.§ii25;%?i§iEf.;2Zl ‘:5Ig 
April 28, 2023
>l<**>l<**>l<* 
MIAQC Policy Statement on Energy Efficiency and indoor Air Quality 
Adopted by MIAQC Board of Directors in 2003, Revised in 2009 and 2017. 
~ The Maine Indoor Air Quality Council supports efforts to increase energy efficiency in the 
operation and maintenance of buildings. 
- Energy efficiency and indoor air quality are not mutually exclusive goals. You can have both. 
- Energy conservation efforts can compromise both the quality of indoor environments as well as 
the mechanical systems and building structure, leading to the risk of adverse health effects and 
reduced productivity. 
- Energy efficiency efforts must take the following into consideration: 
~ Pre-project evaluation of the building for conditions that could negatively impact indoor 
air quality, specifically moisture, radon, and ventilation 
- Sufficient ventilation for fresh air and dilution of pollutants to maintain health and 
safety of occupants 
o Moisture control to prevent water intrusion or excessive humidity 
o Technical ability of energy contractors to address both indoor air quality and energy 
efficiency 
~ Technical ability of building operators to maintain the systems 
~ A proper balance between energy efficiency and indoor air quality can be achieved if designers, 
contractors, building owners and facility managers make well-reasoned decisions based on existing best practice guidance, specifically ASHRAE 90.1 (Energy Standard for Buildings) and ASHRAE 62.1 (Ventilation for Acceptable indoor Air Quality) And ASHRAE 62.2 (Ventilation for 
Acceptable indoor Air Quality in Low-Rise Residential Buildings)
