. $4t 
§'!‘=3§~=%z<=. 
MaineI-Iousing % ~\jié, MAINE STATE HOUSlNG AUTHORITY 
Testimony of 
Erik C. Jorgensen 
Senior Director of Government Relations & Communications 
Maine State Housing Authority 
Before 
The ]oint Select Committee on Housing 
In Support of 
LD 611 "An Act to Create the Whole Home Repairs Program" 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the ]oint Select Committee on Housing, I am 
Erik jorgensen Senior Director of Government Relations and Communications at the Maine State 
Housing Authority (MaineHousing) and I am submitting this testimony in support of LD 611: "An Act 
to Create the Whole Home Repairs Program"S 
MaineHousing has been helping Maine people own, rent, repair, and heat their homes since 1969. 
We are an independent state authority (not a state agency) created to address the problems of 
unsafe, unsuitable, overcrowded, and unaffordable housing. We are authorized to issue bonds to 
finance single family mortgages for ﬁrst time homebuyers and for affordable multi-family housing. 
We are also authorized to administer a number of state and federal programs, including rental 
subsidies, Weatherization, fuel assistance, two housing block grants, the low-income housing tax 
credit program, and homeless grant programs. We receive state general fund revenue for homeless 
programs and receive a dedicated portion of the real estate transfer tax for the Housing 
Opportunities for Maine (HOME) Fund. 
The Whole Home Repaus program meets a need that We know is acute, and We appreciate 
Representative Malon’s willingness to strengthen and expand this neW program. His proposal 
provides additional funding for work that we have recently piloted, dealing With the problem of 
Weatherization readiness. 
Over the years of running our federally-funded Weatherization program, We have found many cases 
in which a homeowner meets the income limits for Weatherization services, and has demonstrable 
need for Weatherization, and yet the condition of their home precludes us from doing the work. The 
simple fact is that you can’t successfully Weatherize a home With major roof leaks or inadequate 
Windows. The problem is that our federal program will not pay for structural or home repairs, and if 
the homeowner can’t afford those the project slides into a state of suspended animation: it can’t be 
Weatherized because it can’t be repaired.
1
This funding will help with those cases where weatherization projects have been deferred. If this bill 
moves to the funding stage, the funds provided will be combined with available federal funding and 
other funds from MaineHousing in order to help the program continue. 
There are a few concerns that we would like to have the committee take into consideration: 
First, the bill speciﬁes that We supplement and not supplant funding from other sources, including the 
HOME Fund. We currently provide our pilot Weatherization readiness funds from both federal 
resources and the HOME fund, but that is a source that has been overextended and there is no way to 
predict whether that source will remain available for this purpose. Just this past year, we had to redirect 
some Weatherization readiness funding to central heating replacement, because the need was acute and 
there were not additional HOME fund resources available. As I have told this committee on other 
occasions, MaineHousing can’t support programs that require new and ongoing commitments of 
HOME fund resources. We may be able to use some HOME fund resources for this purpose as we did 
last year, but there is no guarantee that it can happen in the future. So we would ask that the HOME fund be eliminated as a named funding source for this bill. 
Secondly, we would simply request that this program’s specifics, if they are to be included in this bill, be 
designed to match our existing program’s income limits and project speciﬁcations. We need to be able 
to assure that this this program, once the details are spelled out, will allow us to use funding consistently, 
even if it comes from several different sources. 
We just saw the proposed sponsor amendment yesterday, and so have not had a chance to fully discuss 
it With him or with members of our energy and housing services department, but We will be happy to 
work with Representative Malon and the committee staff to work out any details. 
This bill meets a very important need in a state with high homeownership rates, aging housing stock and 
high levels of poverty. We urge you to support it.
2
