 19 Community Drive ∙ Augusta, Maine 04330 ∙ (207) 622-7501 ∙ Fax: (207) 623-3590  
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS®    
 Testimony in Support of LD 611 (“An Act to Create the Whole Home Repairs Program”)   J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  April 28, 2023  Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations. We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.   The Maine Association of REALTORS® supports the concept of LD 611 though we do not have a position on the substance of the sponsor’s amendment due to the timing of its release. We support the concept that weatherization improvements would be strengthened when other home repairs are made concurrently. For example, leaking windows, roofs, and foundations, can diminish the benefits provided by weatherization by undermining the integrity of the house itself. By expanding the scope of improvements that may be made under this program, improvements from weatherization efforts would be more efficient overall.   However, it is critical that this fund be provided through separate appropriations rather than by taking from the HOME fund. Those funds must be prioritized to building more homes to address our housing shortage. New funding for the efforts outlined in LD 611 are welcomed and would strengthen Maine’s housing stock by providing more people with improved and more efficient homes.   For these reasons, we support LD 611 and respectfully urge you to vote Ought to Pass. Thank you for your time and consideration.      
