We are Deb and Ken LaVoie, owners of Southern Angel Properties which was founded 
in 2009 and has owned and operated as many as fifty-two residential rental units in 
Waterville & Winslow, Maine. My wife and I have been landlords in this community since 
2009 and are the “unofficial” preferred rental agency for two local universities and enjoy 
one of the more favorable reputations of housing providers in this area. I believe these 
“credentials”, albeit subjective, lend above-average credibility to our opinions & 
perspective and I thank you in advance for your consideration.  
 
The purpose of this piece is to give what I hope is fair, reasonable and balanced 
perspective and context to the recent legislative efforts in regards to regulating the 
housing industry; in particular LDs 1490, 1574 & 1904. Rather than create separate 
testimony for each LD, I’ll address actual issues that these LDs were created to address.  
 
Even as a conservative voting, capitalism loving businessman, I recognize the need for 
some regulation. Let’s face it: As landlords, we’re asking our “customers” (The residents 
of our buildings) to fork over about a third of their income in exchange for putting a roof 
over their head. That cannot be ignored, yet we cannot regulate away every compelling 
story or complaint. Additionally, land lording has many unique stresses and risks that set 
it apart from other industries. It can be lucrative but the stress, unpredictability, hard 
work and dealing with the (hopefully occasional) unsavory character is such that a 
government is advised to help make the barrier to entry and continued ownership easier, 
not harder.  We do understand that housing is currently scarce. And many out of state 
landlords have purchased and mis-managed properties here. In fact even some 
landlords who have been life-long residents offer what many would consider to be 
unlivable dwellings. 
 
Unfortunately, landlords are at the helm in an industry where a good percentage of their 
prospective customers lie to them to become customers. Often they’ve been evicted 
from another place, leaving thousands of dollars in cleaning and other damages. In fact, 
we ourselves are owed more than $55,000 spread over forty tenants, consisting of 
unpaid rent, cleaning, painting, smoke and pet-urine mitigation, and other damages.  
 
I recently had a conversation with Representative Bruce White from Waterville and he 
cited a couple of examples that gave me food for thought. In particular, he spoke of a 
disabled (deaf) Waterville woman, living in a small apartment building for more than a 
decade who was issued a thirty day notice to vacate so that the new owners could 
renovate. He also mentioned a situation where a landlord doubled the tenant’s rent 
solely for the purpose of being able to pay off the mortgage earlier to accommodate an 
early retirement timeline. That tenant was now faced with relocating within thirty days or 
staying and facing an unaffordable rent.  These examples make it seem very reasonable 
to give people more time to relocate, especially those with disabilities, limited income or 
in markets like today where housing is scarce in some areas. Example like this amplify 
the necessity for landlords to behave in a balanced, reasonable and fair manner.   
 
When hearing these stories, one has to ask, “Are these problems that need a legislative 
solution, or are they isolated incidents which are unfortunately unavoidable as long as 
there are some unscrupulous (or just ignorant) property investors in our industry? I 
believe that landlords are already at a disadvantage when they encounter a tenant who 
fails to pay rent or causes other problems. This is the problem with passing legislation 
on an industry that varies so much from area to area or style to style. Most units in 
Maine are owned by “Mom and Pop” types that may own anything from a single home to 
a handful of 2-4 units. Then there are 100 unit complexes owned by syndicates and 
publicly traded corporations or REITs. Landlording & property investment in Portland is 
so alien to how things are in Waterville that they might as well be different industries 
altogether. A new law extending the 30 day notice to 90 days might have little to no 
effect on an out of state business like Keystone Property Management could force a 
mom and pop outfit with twelve units to close within a year.  
 
Despite the existence of tools like a 7 and 30 day notice to quit (or terminate a lease), it 
can take 3-5 times that long to extricate a problem tenant if the tenant decides to 
“hunker down”. Imagine telling a local grocery store that they have to keep giving a 
person food, day after day, without payment, until the store owner can successfully bring 
the “thief” to court? Or that you have to keep letting them come into your place of 
business even though they’re being disruptive and driving other customers out. That 
wouldn’t pass the straight face test in any arena, yet we landlords endure this sort of 
problem on a daily basis.  We understand there are some differences between housing 
and groceries, but there’s enough similarity to make the analogy relevant. I don’t think 
many lawmakers understand that a thirty-day notice doesn’t mean that a tenant is going 
to be out in thirty days. A thirty-day notice can easily be turned into two to four months. 
An eviction for non-payment of rent, which begins with a seven day notice, often takes 
two months. This has become even more relevant since the COVID pandemic. Court 
staff shortages and mandated video call mediation has extended the eviction process to 
the point where the terms “7 day” and “30 day” are just the beginning of the process. Of 
course this is the challenge when lawmakers who’ve never been landlords are creating 
these laws. I’m sure most of you are under the very understandable impression that 
terms like 7-day and 30-day indicate the number of days a tenant has to be out! Nothing 
could be farther from the truth, I’m afraid. In other words, if you think 60-90 days would 
be more fair, then leave the laws the way they are...because that’s how long it often 
takes under those laws.  
 
And regarding the thirty day notice: The most frequent utilization of a thirty-day notice is 
a tool to “stop doing business” with someone who is not a good fit. A tenant who 
continues to smoke in their unit, has loud parties, is combative or aggressive with other 
tenants. There is a slew of behaviors that is certainly troubling enough to ask someone 
to leave, but not concrete or “provable” enough to drag him to court or ask other tenants 
to testify. The thirty day notice is the only tool in our box in this situation, and removing it 
would be an egregious violation of basic property rights. I should mention that I’m 
addressing the thirty-day notice in particular because the recurring theme I see with 
many pieces of tenant-landlord legislation is an underlying effort to eliminate this tool. 
And it would be an egregious error; eliminating or extending the thirty-day “no reason / 
any reason” termination of lease or notice-to-quit would single handedly make residential 
rental property ownership a precarious and undesirable business to be in.  
 
The dangers of placing limits on rent increase & move-in costs: (i.e. proposing that 
landlords cannot increase rent more than 10%, or a certain percentage more than the 
CPI, for example): Many of us small landlords who value long-term tenants have 
deliberately foregone rent increases for multiple years. Additionally, any savvy property 
investor will tell you that it’s wise to budget approximately 8% per year for vacancy, to 
account for move-outs, vacancies or evictions. When a resident stays put for a decade, 
they’ve (potentially) saved us 8% per year for 10 years. Our response (assuming the 
tenant is desirable otherwise) is to return part of that savings to the tenant by foregoing 
(at least some) rent increases.  We often go 5-7 years without increasing rent of good, 
stable, tenants who pay on time. We have a nice couple who’ve lived with us in 3 
different apartments over a decade. They’re paying $765 per month for their 2-bedroom 
apartment in a building where we just rented a similar apartment for $1,200. If we were 
to catch wind of an annual limit on rent increases, I can promise you that the first thing 
we’d do is to immediately raise the aforementioned couple’s rent by at least $200 per 
month, so that we aren’t potentially caught in a situation where are hands are tied in 
bringing that unit up to market rent.  
 
As for limiting the funds a landlord can collect upfront, one must bear in mind that up-
front collections are a profoundly necessary risk mitigation strategy. Again, landlords 
have very few tools at their disposal to offset the risk of a non-paying, bothersome or 
destructive tenant. Here in Central Maine, I don’t think it’s an exaggeration to say that 1 
out of 3-4 applicants are high risk (i.e. insufficient income or financial history, record of 
judgements, unpaid debt, criminal history, etc.) That’s a 25%-33% of applicants. Our two 
tools for mitigating those risks are relatively quick evictions, the ability to craft our own 
leases with adaptive language, and the “paying down” of that risk by up-front collections 
of at least 3x the monthly rent. We ourselves collect first month’s rent, then a security 
deposit equal to about 1.5 month’s rent. This amount of security allows us to mitigate a 
full month’s unpaid rent as well as cleaning and touch-up painting or repairs. Many 
landlords collect first, last and security. Frankly I don’t think that’s enough in many 
cases.  
 
I do understand the issue of sudden large rent increases that sometimes happen when 
buildings are sold to more “business minded” landlords, especially absentee out of state 
landlords. I have to ask whether or not this is a widespread problem that justifies 
legislation which potentially single handedly eliminates the desirability of owning rental 
property. I don’t make such a statement lightly.   
 
The first thing that happens when any law is passed that poses a threat to profits is that 
the owners of that business raise rates to mitigate the damage done by the regulation. 
Laws are to society what medications are to the human body: They are designed to fix a 
problem but often create two or three other problems as a result. 
 
LD 1904 - An Act to Enact the Maine Fair Chance Housing Act. I found the verbiage 
a bit unclear, but my basic understanding is that we cannot use past criminal history as a 
criteria on suitability until the applicant has passed on all other fronts (for example, the 
applicant makes enough income, sufficient credit history, etc.)  I don’t believe the typical 
high school educated landlord will be able to properly translate the current wording into a 
clear and trackable best practice, but more concerning is that it appears to remove a 
very reasonable and effective risk management strategy from our toolbox. First, I’m very 
keen to the fact that many people make mistakes, have their brush with the legal 
system, and then go on to lead very productive lives. But there’s an old saying, “History 
doesn’t always repeat itself, but it tends to rhyme!” People don’t generally commit and 
become convicted of a felony or handful of misdemeanors by chance. There’s generally 
a pattern of behavior that’s well established and doesn’t go away. Additionally, that 
history usually contains a dozen or so incidents that were overlooked or missed. People 
can change; they usually don’t. To tell a property owner that they have to do business 
with someone who has a history of violence, theft or other legal trouble is 
unconscionable. It forces uncomfortable--even unsafe--situations on people that they 
didn’t sign up for.  
 
I thank you all for reading my testimony. I would be honored and happy to be consulted 
in the future in any advisory capacity.  
 
Sincerely 
 
Ken & Deb LaVoie 
Owners, Southern Angel Properties LLC 
manager@sangelproperties.com 
(207) 873-9321 
www.sangelproperties.com 
 
 
