I am opposed to LD 1904. 
My business provides rental housing in the greater Waterville area. There are many reasons why
my business may choose not to rent to those with a criminal history. We make these choices not only to 
protect the welfare of the business and its employees, but also the welfare of the tenants.
My best friend is a tenant living in a multi-family in Veazie (to be clear, she does not rent from 
my business). She has two children ages 3 and 9. She frequently complained of pot smoke from the 
tenants in her neighboring unit and saw them smoking outside. She also once overheard a loud 
argument in which one tenant accused the other of “leaving drugs out where the children can get it.” 
Eventually, Child Protective Services removed the neighboring tenants’ children due to parental 
substance abuse. I would argue that this was not a safe environment for my friend’s children due to the 
proximity of the other tenants. In my business, I would not place someone with a criminal background 
of drug dealing in a multi-family dwelling in order to protect the other tenants. Tenants are powerless to
choose other tenants; it is the responsibility of my business to select the best tenants. I would similarly 
never rent to a convicted sex offender in order to protect the other tenants, nor anyone with a significant
history of assault, theft or vandalism that I felt may endanger others. Why should my business wait 
until the end of the rental application process to check criminal history when clearly certain criminal 
histories can be non-negotiable reasons for denying a tenant? Why does the state believe that the rights 
of criminals are more important than the rights of law-abiding citizens to safe housing? What will the 
liability of my business be if we knowingly place dangerous criminals in our rentals, and something 
terrible does happen? What will be the liability of the state? 
There have been times in this business when I have feared for my husband. My husband deals 
with tenants directly face to face. We have had, very, very aggressive tenants who are quick to verbally 
escalate any and all misunderstandings. These people did not have a criminal record. Does the state 
expect us to house criminals with a significant history of assault, and then have my husband deal with 
their behaviors? 
Forcing landlords to wait until the end of the application process to check criminal history only 
creates processing delays and delays the placement of desirable tenants. Processing a rental application 
takes multiple hours in order to review the background check, the credit check, the rental history, 
review income, and to call references. My business does not bother proceed with the entire application 
if the criminal history suggests harm may come to others. Delays cost money, as rentals go un-rented 
and landlords have to either spend more time themselves or pay their property managers for additional 
hours processing applications. This leads to more costly rents as lost time loses the business money.  
Vote no on this bill; it endangers both landlords and tenants and will ultimately increase the 
costs of renting in Maine.
Jamie Nickerson
Fairfield, ME 
