5/13/2023  
RE: LD 1904  - An Act to Enact the Maine Fair Chance Housing Act   
 
Committee on Judiciary , 
I’m opposed to LD 1904.  This bill will be difficult for small housing providers to navigate . I also think it 
could lead to dangerous situations with housing providers and existing tenants in the building who 
would be living with a dangerous criminal. This will inevitably increase the percentage of corporate 
owned units in our state. I really think  locals owning our rental units leads to better outcomes  for our 
communities.  
I understand the intent behind  this bill. For example, someone who stole  a candy bar f rom a store when 
they were 18  years old, which was 20 years ago,  should probably not have th at used against them when 
searching for housing. What about a lifelong sex offender in a multi -family home with kids ? How long 
will those families stay there  after they  learn that person is moving in ? The optics of the whole situation 
are bad for business . Why does this bill make such a blanket ban on asking about all criminal history at 
the start of the screening process ? Why is it treating misdemeanors  the same as felonies?  
It’s interesting that  the state  is willing to cause expensive legal issues for sm all housing providers who 
cannot afford the costs  but exempts public housing providers from being fined  and sued for damages . 
This seems like hypocrisy to me. Are you concerned that public housing providers won’t be able to 
maintain compliance with this la w? Why can a public housing provider discriminate  without any financial 
risk when they are large firms that can have a compliance specialist  but the small housing providers have 
to be legal experts  or face the Human Rights Commission ? 
Another issue is  all the time this bill will waste for both the applicant with a criminal history and housing 
provider. For example, consider a  dangerous sex offender is applying and the re is no way a housing 
provider is going to allow them into the unit. The applicant is going to have to pay the fees for their 
credit and background check , complete a full application , send in proof of income and their photo ID. 
The housing provider is going  to need to spend hours checking references. Assuming all of that comes 
back meeting the screening criteria and they are given a conditional offer;  the provider can now consider 
the applicant’s criminal  background and now the tenant needs to be refused. Th is process can take 1 -7 
days and wastes time and will keep units vacant  for longer periods of time, which will have a negative 
effect on the housing supply  and the ability of the housing provider to make a living.  
Another issue is housing providers gather a lot of information during the screening process. For example, 
we learn a lot when talking with references  as people over share.  What i f a reference  says John is a good 
worker , but he has a dangerous past before he was in prison. The housing provider did not ask about 
criminal history, but the information was offered during the call. Should the housing provider unhear 
what was just said ? Are they  not in compliance with this law just because they heard that statement  
without even asking?  Should they  pretend  they did not hear anything, give conditional acceptance, just 
to run the criminal report that they already know the results of?  
Is this bill going to protect housing providers from the liability of taking criminals? For example, if we 
take someone with a  violent past and they hurt one of their neighbors, from my understanding we could 
be sued for allowing them to live there. Without such a  blanket  liability protection from The State, I 
cannot imagine many housing providers will take the risk.  
Furthermore , I’d like to r emind the legislature that the are very few laws protecting housing providers 
from tenants. Many housing providers in  our area have been harassed by tenants . There are instances of 
elder abuse when the housing provider is older. Instances of  sexual harassment usually when the 
housing provider is female. I fear this bill will only increase violence against housing providers. Violence 
is frequently threatened against housing providers  by tenants in Maine. Nationwide both housing 
providers and p olice ha ve been killed by tenants serving eviction notices. It would also be nice to give us 
some legal protection  against such harassment.  For example, if a tenant harasses a housing provider, it 
should be codified that could be an automatic 7 -day notice.    
What does the following statement even mean? “The commission also shall conduct periodic reviews 
with private housing providers to assess compliance with that chapter.” Does this mean the commission 
will start conducting random audits to make housing pr ovider’s lives even more difficult ? That is just too 
much stress and red tape especially for small mom and pop operations. Red tape like this is going to 
force them to sell. The red tape is just not worth it if you only have a couple of units.  
It interesti ng it’s the government who gives criminals their convictions  and criminal history . Perhaps the 
government should have a better process of expunging criminal records that it deems unimportant 
instead of adding more red tape to housing providers’  plates. Perhaps it’s the government and the 
judicial system that need an overhaul to help reform criminals rather  than  shifting that burden on to 
mom and pop landlords who are going to struggle to navigate this bill.  
In short, this law should not pass. It will create tricky situations for housing providers, extend  the time 
units are vacant and I don’t see how it will get past convicts into housing. I don’t support turning 
convicted criminals into a protected class.   
 
Regards,  
Justin Giroux  
Manager, Habitat For ME LLC  
Fairfield, ME  
