February 21, 2023 
Testimony of Erin Courtney, Maine Turnpike Authority 
Before the 131*‘ Legislature, Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
In Opposition of LD 85 
Resolve, Directing the Maine Turnpike Authority to Study Adding Exits off the Maine 
Turnpike to Aid Economic Development 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and distinguished members of Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, my name is Erin Courtney and l am the Public Outreach Manager and 
Legislative Liaison for the Maine Turnpike Authority (MTA). MTA respectfully submits this testimony 
today in opposition to LD 85. 
Maine Turnpike Authority currently has an interchange policy by which any municipality can 
request that MTA undertake preliminary studies of a new interchange or modifications to an existing 
one. This policy is publicly available on our website and outlines the process by which municipalities 
can initiate such discussions. The municipality must start by submitting basic information to MTA 
including the purpose and demonstrated need for the project, a statement that the interchange 
would be consistent with local comprehensive plans, an outline of the basic project objectives, and 
current and anticipated traffic volumes. The policy provides MTA with discretion regarding whether 
projects will be advanced for further study based on a broad range of important considerations, such 
as available funding, ensuring the project would not adversely affect the operation of the existing 
Turnpike system and that is consistent with state transportation plans and polices. lf it is determined 
a project should move forward for further study, there are provisions related to participation to which 
the municipality must commit. 
A recent example of this is the $50 million Exit 35 interchange project in Saco. A $42 million 
construction contract for this project was just awarded by Maine Turnpike Authority in December 
2022. This project emerged from the 2019 transportation study that MTA, MaineDOT and the City of 
Saco participated in which focused on how to address regional traffic issues by improving 
connections to and from the Turnpike. This study produced a number of recommendations, 
including this project. Construction just started this month and the new Exit 35 is anticipated to be 
operational by the end of 2025. 
There have been a number of studies over the years evaluating new interchange locations up 
and down the Turnpike. Based on my discussions with Senator Libby pertaining to this bill, it is my 
Safe Y1 
Reliable Sustainable 
kltnlng Ti lI'f\f\H//L A» rfhrvﬂu - nourx r‘~,\-mm.-,~ 1:»,-me _ tlrsv-I)/'\r\ri Mt.I‘
understanding that the areas of Ogunquit, Cumberland and Route 302 in the vicinity of Forest Ave in 
Portland may be of specific interest. All three of these areas have been evaluated as part of past studies. The studies concluded additional interchanges were not preferred. For instance, adding an interchange in the vicinity of Forest Avenue would have significant impacts to existing homes and businesses. 
One item to keep in mind is that adding interchanges to the Turnpike, particularly when they are close to other Exits, reduces the operational efficiency of the mainline and could necessitate the addition of extra lanes or collectordistributor roadways to keep traffic flowing safely and smoothly. MTA is mindful of this in its consideration while also responding to economic development needs. Since 1981, along its 109-mile stretch, MTA has built five new interchanges, including Exit 36 in 
Saco, Exit 42 in Scarborough, the Jetport Exit (Exit 46) in Portland, Exit 47 in Westbrook, and Exit 86 in Sabattus. We have also reconstructed five other interchanges and are nearing completion of the Exit 45 reconstruction in South Portland. We have spent over $100 million on the completed work at 
these interchanges. 
ln our current 10-year plan we have an additional $237 million worth of interchange 
reconstruction that is in the design or planning phase at nine different locations. This work is in 
addition to many other important projects that are necessary to support the safe and efficient 
movement of people and goods along the Maine Turnpike. 
The Authority ’s mission is to maintain the 109-mile highway from Kitteiy to Augusta. In 
support of that mission we are continuously evaluating the safety and capacity of the road. This 
process of continual evaluation and assessment has been a major driver of the significant volume of 
interchange work that we’ve completed, and that remains ahead of us. 
Lastly, MTA is not an economic planning agency and we would prefer to leave such planning 
to the local councils of government and the state--and instead be a resource if and when the need for additional capacity is wanted and warranted. 
For these reasons, we believe the overall goals of this bill are being achieved in what we already do and therefore find the bill unnecessary. l look forward to working with you during your deliberation and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have at this time. 
Sole Reliable Sustainable 
an" I\I\ '1‘ vf\\Pv:|:P\ /\. |.m-:». . “mm ,\_.____.._ 93-~.-v l‘\....U.4.-_: 1»F\
