Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
April 28, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1448, An Act to Change the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program Requirements 
by Reducing Benefits Commensurate with a Recipient's Salary, Reducing the Special Housing 
Allowance and Limiting Eligibility for 2 -parent Families  
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services:  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide input on LD 1448, An Act to Change the Temporary 
Assistance for Needy Families Program Requirements by Reducing Benefits Commensurate with a 
Recipient's Salary, Reducing the Special Housing Allowance and Limiting Eligibility for 2 -parent 
Families . OFI is opposed to this bill.  
 
This bill seeks to make change s to the current TANF and ASPIRE programs , specifically pertaining to 
eligibility of certain families, housing costs, and income disregards . The changes this proposed 
legislation suggests, if enacted, would be contrary to the purposes of the federal TANF block grant as 
outlined in federal regulation , and would have a negative impact on Maine families and the State as a 
whole.   
 
Title IV, Part A, Section 401 of the Social Security Act states the four purposes of the TANF block grant 
are as follows:   
1. provide assistance to needy families so that children may be cared for in their own homes or in 
the homes of relatives;  
2. end the dependence of needy parents on government benefits by promoting job preparation, 
work, and marriage;  
3. prevent and reduce the inci dence of out -of-wedlock pregnancies and establish annual numerical 
goals for preventing and reducing the incidence of these pregnancies; and  
4. encourage the formation and maintenance of two -parent families.   
 
The proposed bill would eliminate eligibility for  a significant number of families , barring families with 
two parents present  in the household  from participating in assistance and workforce development unless 
one of the adult household members is physically or mentally incapacitated.   This is directly co ntrary to 
the first, second, and espe cially the fourth purpose s of the TANF program, and penalizes households 
seeking to maintain the presence of both parents.   
 
In addition, t he number of t wo-parent households  in the ASPIRE program has recently increased, due to 
changing demographics in our State . These households are able to transition to self -sustainability but 
need assistance navigating certain challenges , such as language skills and familiarity with cultura l 
 
 norms. Eliminating the ability of these families to participate in assistance that is designed to quickly 
transition  them into the workforce  is short -sighted , as it extends the time they rely on other assistance 
programs and delays their entry into the job market. As we seek to recover economically, Maine 
businesses are fervently seeking staff. It is our responsibility to ensure we are doing what we can to 
assist Mainers in accessing employment opportunities, not eliminate that assistance and sit idly by.    
 
Further, t he housing crisis in Maine has received national attention . Increased housing costs have made 
it difficult to find housing for Mainers of all income levels, but low -income populations have been 
disproportionately affected . Employment and self -sustainability are not possible when a household is 
experiencing severe instability on a daily basis and exacerbating these challenges through decreasing the 
TANF -funded special needs housing allowance, as this bill proposes, would ha ve a detrimental impact 
on efforts  to address both homelessness and the workforce shortage.   
 
Lastly, there has been significant focus on reducing the  “benefit-cliff” that discourages transitioning 
from public assistance to household sustainability. As written, the bill significantly reduce s the ability of 
those working to access career advancement assistance through ASPIRE  and eliminates eligibility for 
those households that are often the most successful in achieving long -term sustainability  following 
public assistance .    
 
It is for these reasons that the Office for Family Independence opposes the passage of this bill.   
 
Sincerely,  
 
Anthony Pelotte  
Director  
Office for Family Independence  
 
 

