“'51-. 
-*" 5, f- ,..'
. 
‘ ‘ti; “~- .5); 
Eric Brakey 131'“ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Senator Eric Brakey 
Presenting L.D. 1448, “An Act to Change the Temporary Assistance for Needy 
Families Program Requirements by Reducing Benefits Commensurate witha 
Recipient ’s Salary, Reducing the Special Housing Allowance and Limiting 
Eligibility for 2-parent Families ” 
Before the Health and Human Services Committee 
Friday, April 28, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing - 
Committee on Health and Human Services, this is the written testimony of Senator Eric 
Brakey, representing the people of Auburn, New Gloucester, Poland, and Durham. Due 
to travel, l apologize that l cannot be present today. That being the case, l appreciate 
Representative Javner standing in my place to present L.D. 1448. 
The Maine Legislature has often found consensus around at least one area of 
welfare reform —— the need to address welfare cliffs that trap people in poverty. 
When a work-capable person is offered a raise at work or a betterjob, we want them to 
take that step forward in life -—- not get stuck behind a welfare cliff, worrying about lost 
benefits. Who would take one step fon/vard just to fall three steps backward? 
According to Benefits.gov, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program (TANF) is 
“ﬁnancial assistance to keep children in their homes while the family is temporarily 
unable to support themselves. While receiving assistance, parents or caretaker relatives 
work on an employment plan to become self-supporting." To qualify, you must be an 
unemployed (or underemployed) head of household, with a child aged 18 or younger, 
and low (or very low) income. 
As noted, the stated goal of TANF is to help people become self-supporting. But that 
goal is frustrated when the program financially penalizes you for becoming 
self-supporting. That’s why this legislation seeks to reform TANF welfare cliffs into 
welfare slopes, with beneﬁts tapering down over time when someone rises above 
income thresholds, rather than cutting out all at once. 
To begin with the substance, please disregard Sections 1 and 2 of the bill (which are 
also points 1 and 2 in the summary and are referenced in the title).
This is an oversight l should have caught in drafting. These sections were not part of my 
original submission. Unless the analyst sees any statutory reason they are inextricably 
connected to the core purpose of the bill, Sections 1 and 2 can be eliminated. 
Under Section 3 of the bill, in determining benefit levels, TANF recipients who are 
employed part-time or full-time (meeting work participation requirements provided in 
federal regulations) would qualify for three tiers of time-based income disregards. 
0 Tier l - For the first two months of consecutive employment, 100% of gross 
income will be disregarded. 
0 Tier ll - For the next six months consecutive months of employment, 75% of 
gross income will be disregarded. 
O Tier lll - For every month thereafter, 50% of gross income will be disregarded. 
The effect of these changes should be a more gentle phase out of benefits for someone 
whose earned income is rising, turning the welfare cliff into a welfare slope. 
Section 8 of the bill would establish that the beneficiary can qualify for a 100% income 
disregard only once in a 12-month period. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. Ordinarily, I would be glad to take any 
questions. Since I am not present today, however, l would gladly respond in writing to 
any questions you have about this legislation. 
Thank you to Representative Javner for communicating my testimony.
