Kate Manahan
Kennebunk
LD 1448
Testimony to HHS on April 28, 2023
LD 1488
Sponsor: Rep. Laurie Osher
LD 1488 “An Act Concerning Testing for and Disclosure of PFAS Contamination of 
Residential Drinking Water Wells.”
My name is Kate Manahan.  I am a clinical social worker and the host of a radio 
show/podcast on toxics.  I am here to testify in favor of LD 1488 “An Act Concerning
Testing for and Disclosure of PFAS Contamination of Residential Drinking Water 
Wells.”
Government is good, we can do things for the whole of the population that promote 
better health for all, like seatbelts, and food labeling laws.  This body understands 
that’s why we have laws that regulate necessities like our drinking water.  At the 
municipal level, we test and filter water, to protect our citizens, but in rural  and often 
underserved places, citizens are on their own to test and remediate—both expensive, 
and not that easy.  
In Maine, with our current equation, we leave more than half of our citizens out of 
protection to clean water—generally our rural citizens—who are regularly exposed to 
naturally occurring toxins like arsenic and radon and man-made “toxics” like the class
of chemicals we call PFAS in their residential wells.  These exposures can profoundly
impact the health of residents. (Loss of IQ, cancers, immunity)
Two years ago this body passed a law that insured that landlords would have to test 
and disclose the presence of the toxin arsenic in water.  Yay!  That simple act has 
likely protected Mainers already.  Since that time “Forever Chemicals” have come 
into our consciousness and this bill simply adds PFAS and other contaminants such as
lead, radon and uranium to the list of contaminants landlords test for.  How many 
tenants (or future tenants) would even think to look for these hazards?  This is 
something best addressed at the public health level, through this body.  
Doesn’t it makes sense for someone to be checking the water of the supply of 29% of 
all renters who depend on residential wells for their drinking water?  
And of course, it is not enough to test.  Landlords also must be required to share those
results with tenants, within 10 days—prospective tenants, too.  This bill doesn’t 
require remediation—just sharing the results of the tests that would let people know if
their water was safe to drink or not.  
If we don’t test, we won’t find these hazards.  People’s health will be squandered on 
completely preventable exposures.  LD 1488 is a commonsense measure, a social 
justice action that would give people access to information that could profoundly 
change their lives.  
Please vote in support of LD 1488.
Thank you.
