Ill 
Maine Equaljusticc Augusta, Maine 04330-6822 Kathy Ki"-ain de| Rio 
TN/Voice: (207) 632'9438 People PO|iCy Solutions Director of Advocacy and Programs 
www.malneequal]ust|ce.org kathy@mejp'o|.g 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1448, An Act to Change the Temporary Assistance for 
Needy Families Program Requirements by Reducing Benefits Commensurate witha 
Recipient's Salary, Reducing the Special Housing Allowance and Limiting Eligibility for 2- 
Parent Families 
April 28, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Kathy Kilrain del Rio, l use shelher 
pronouns, and l am the Advocacy and Programs Director at Maine Equal Justice, a nonprofit 
legal aid provider working to increase economic security, opportunity, and equity for people in 
Maine. We are testifying in opposition to LD 1448. 
Recent data‘ shows that 35,000 children in Maine - 14% of kids - are living in deep poverty, 
meaning their families live on an average of less than $12,000 per year. The impacts of child 
poverty are far-reaching, including low academic achievement and trauma, and can affect 
physical, social, emotional, and behavioral development. Yet, in 2020, DHHS reported that only 
one in five children in povertyz was getting monthly income support through TANF. Even for 
that one child in every five, their family is receiving one of the lowest levels of TANF benefits in 
New England? which means even families that do access TANF are struggling to meet the 
costs of inflation, rent, childcare, and more. 
This bill would cut families who need help out of the program and hurt families who are in the 
program. It would move Maine backwards when we need to move forward to meet the urgent 
need of our housing crisis and end child poverty in our state. For those reasons, MEJ urges the 
Committee to vote ought not to pass. 
Maine Cannot Return to the Outdated Deprivation Rule 
This bill would bring back an outdated eligibility rule that cut almost all two-parent families, and 
many single-parent families, out of the TANF program. lf enacted, a child living in poverty would 
1 https://datacenter.aecforqldata/tables/43-children-in- 
poverty?loc=21&loct=2#detailedl2/21/false/37.871,870.573,869.36,868,867.133,38/anvI321,322 
2 https1//www.cbp_p.org/research/income-seourlty/increases-in-tanf-cash-benefit-levels-are-critical-to-helg; 
families-meet-0 
3 https://www.cbgp.orq/research/income-securitv/increases-in-tanf-cash-benefit~levels-are-critical-to-helg; 
families-meet-0i
be denied TANF if they have the support of two parents-even if those parents’ income is very 
low—un|ess one parent has a disability. ln 2017, Maine followed the vast majority of states that 
have abandoned this so-called deprivation rule4 because it discourages the formation of two- 
parent families and cooperation between separated parents who are raising children. (P.L. 
2017, c. 256) According to the Urban lnstitutef ’ 45 states including Maine have eliminated this 
rule because the legislature decided that we should adopt policies that encourage families to 
stay together if they want to. 
The testimony from TANF participants, legal aid providers, and other advocates on that bill in 
2017 also pointed out how difficult this rule was to administer and how families across Maine 
faced unfair results because eligibility workers used different interpretations of what it means for 
a child to be “deprived ” of a parent’s care. A single mother from Whitefield testified:° 
I have my son a majority of the time and have since I divorced 5 years ago. I have split 
custody with my ex-husband and primary residence is with me. I support my son having 
a healthy relationship with his father which consists of his father having his son 6 daysa 
month. For the past 4 years I have received no financial support from my ex-husband 
and have managed to keep a roof over our heads and food on our table and I’ve always 
felt very good about that. In August of last yearl became ill and was out of work on 
FMLA for 10 weeks. . . . I realized we could not make it long enough for me to get well 
without some assistance. . . . I applied for beneﬁts, including TANF. The worker thatl 
spoke to at the time questioned me about the relationship between my son and his 
father. I explained that he did not provide for him ﬁnancially but he did have him 6 daysa 
month. The worker asked me “If your son fell down the stairs, what would your ex- 
husband do?” and I stated that he would take care of our son. The worker stated thatI 
was not eligible for TANF beneﬁts because that proved that my son was not deprived by 
his father. 
This committee made the right decision to end the outdated deprivation rule in 2017. Maine 
families cannot afford to move backwards. 
Maine Families Need Support for High Housing Costs Now More than Ever 
This bill would cap the Special Need Housing Allowance at $200 and tighten eligibility so that 
only families whose housing expenses are 75% of their income could qualify. This change 
would hurt thousands of families across the state already struggling to pay their rent and 
mortgages amidst a housing crisis. Data shows Maine’s renters are severely cost burdened 
and our state has a shortage of 21 ,758 affordable and available rental units’ to meet our need.
4 
httr>s:IIwrd.urban.orqIwrdIData!databooksl2020%20\Neifare%20Rules%20Databook%20(fina!%2002%20 
23%202022}.pdf (See Table L2) 
5 lbid. 
6 
httpzilwww.mainelegislature.orgileqis/billsIoetTestimonvDoc.aso?id=78725 
7 https:Iiniihc.orq1_qgpIstateIme
First, according to HUD, renter households spending more than 30% of their income on housing 
costs and utilities are cost burdened while those spending more than 50% of their income on 
housing are severely cost burdened. Families facing such high housing costs have very little 
left over forthe essentials including medical expenses, clothing, diapers, food, and more. They 
are more likely to be evicted and to experience homelessness. Increasing the threshold for the 
housing allowance to 75% of a family’s income is completely arbitrary, and more importantly, 
would hurt families by cutting off critical support to renters who need it. If any changes were 
made to this provision, the Special Need Housing Allowance should target households who 
spend more than 30% of their income on housing costs to expand this support to more families 
who are cost-burdened by housing, not fewer. 
Second, reducing the Special Need Housing Allowance to $200 will jeopardize the housing 
stability of families who rely on it. Currently, the allowance is $300/month, and it still provides 
families barely enough support to pay fair market rent anywhere in Maine. Take the example of 
a family of 3 receiving TANF. Their maximum TANF grant is $665. lf they qualify for the 
Special Need Housing Allowance ($300), their monthly income will be $995 to cover all their 
basic expenses from rent and utilities to gas and clothing. Even with a $300 Special Need 
Housing Allowance, this monthly grant leaves families unable to reasonably afford fair market 
rent for a 2-bedroom apartment anywhere in Maine according to 2023 HUD data: 
Metropolitan Area Fair Market Rent for 2 Bedroom 
Bangor, ME HUD Metro FMR Area $1,166 
Cumberland County, ME (part) HUD Metro FMR Area $1,478 
Lewiston-Auburn, ME MSA $1,060 
Penobscot County, ME (part) HUD Metro FMR Area $983 
Portland, ME HUD Metro FMR Area $1,859 
Sagadahoc County, ME HUD Metro FMR Area $1,236 
York County, ME (part) HUD Metro FMR Area $1,372 
York-Kittery-South Berwick, MIE HUD Metro FMR Area $1,642 
This bill is out of touch with the current housing crisis Maine’s low-income families are facing. If 
this committee takes any action to amend the Special Need Housing Allowance, it should only 
be to provide more support to more families to help meet the urgent need—by lowering the 
eligibility threshold and increasing the allowance amount. 
Maine Should Support Working Families 
This bill would eliminate the Earned Income Disregard that currently makes more working 
families eligible for TANF. This change would cut many working families with low wages outof
the program, cutting off income, childcare, transportation, and other critical supports that can 
help them on their paths towards economic independence. 
Families can only qualify for TANF if their monthly income is below the “Standard of Need" 
based on their family size For a family of 3, the Standard of Need is $800. To make more 
working families with low wages eligible for the support of the TANF program, the Legislature 
has required DHHS to disregard some of their monthly earnings from employment usinga 
formula that subtracts some income, disregards a percentage of the remainder, and then 
assesses whether a family’s remaining income is below the Standard of Need. (22 M.R.S. s. 
3762(3)(B)(7-C)) When working families qualify for TANF, in addition to receiving critical 
income support to supplement their low wages, they can also access support for childcare 
costs, for gas money to and from work, for car repairs and insurance, and other sen/ices that 
help them keep theirjobs and work towards greater stability and independence. The TANF 
program supports Maine’s workforce and economy. Cutting these families out of the program 
would only increase insecurity and poverty for Maine children. 
Conclusion 
For Maine’s kids, communities, and economy to reach their potential, we must invest more in 
families. When families succeed, it has ripple effects in our schools, governments, and 
downtowns. Parents who have enough food in the fridge and a safe place to call home, and are 
able to meet the needs of their kids—providing clothing, shoes, school supplies, and more—can 
put more focus on theirjobs, training, education, and the future. LD 1448 would increase child 
poverty in Maine rather than reduce it. The Committee should vote ought not to pass on this 
bill and instead focus on providing families with the support they need to grow, thrive, and 
succeed. 
Thank you for your consideration. l’m happy to answer any questions you may have.
