Eric S. Henderson, FSA, MAAA  
President  
 
Nationwide Annuity  
Phone  614-249-8329  
 
 
Eric Henderson, President Nationwide Annuity  
One Nationwide Plaza, 1 -08-101 
Columbus, Ohio  43215 -2220  
www.nationwide.com    
 
May 10, 2023  
 
 
Maine Taxation Committee  
 
Re: In Support of LD 1720 to Phase Out  Annuity Premium Tax  (May 11, 2023, Public 
Hearing)  
 
Dear Members of the Maine Tax ation  Committee : 
 
I am writing you on behalf of Nationwide Life Insurance Company.  Nationwide protects 
over 3,240 Main e annuity contract owners , with a total of $396,325,172  of annuity assets . 
 
Nationwide whole -hearted ly support s LD 1270 , which is designed to phase out  Maine’s 
premium tax on annuities .   
 
For most people, Social Security payments and individual savings are not enough to 
support them through retirement. Annuities, the only financial product in the marketplace 
that can guarantee lifetime income, are an increasingly popular solution to the retirement 
shortfall so many see looming. As baby boomers reach retirement age and life 
expectancies extend, the trend over time has been to repeal annuity taxes. P hasing out the 
state’s annuity tax will help ease Mainers’ fears about paying for their retirement years.  
 
• The existing annuity tax makes it harder for people in Maine to protect their 
families' financial futures and safeguard their savings.  
 
• Maine’s annui ty tax places the greatest burden on small business owners, the self -
employed, and workers without employer -sponsored retirement plans. These 
annuities are funded with after -tax dollars. Unlike retirement plan contributions, 
an annuity tax subjects these t ypes of retirement plans to a second tax that is not 
imposed on employer -sponsored plans funded with pre -tax dollars.  
 
• Annuities are the only retirement product that guarantees a paycheck for life, 
competing against non -taxed products that cannot offer thi s protection. Maine’s 
annuity tax discourages and punishes those who want to guarantee to protect their 
families and retirement. Phasing out the annuity tax will make annuities more 
affordable, encouraging people to secure their retirement savings.  
 
 Eric Henderson, President Nationwide Annuity  
One Nationwide Plaza, 1 -08-101 
Columbus, Ohio  43215 -2220  
www.nationwide.com   
 • With L D 1720, Maine proposes to leave the small minority of states that tax 
annuities and join with nearly all other states in promoting retirement security. 
Only 7 states (California, Colorado, Florida, Maine, Nevada, South Dakota and 
Wyoming) continue to impos e this burden on their retirees.  
 
 
Nationwide respectfully urges you to enact this important law . 
 
Sincerely,  
 
/s 
 
Eric S. Henderson  
President  
Nationwide Annuity  
 
