TESTIMONY OF 
JOHN SAGASER, TAX POLICY COUNSEL, MAINE REVENUE SERVICES 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: May I 1, 2023 
LD I 720 — “An Act to Phase Out the Insurance Premium Tax on Annuities ” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee -— good afternoon, my name is John Sagaser, Tax Policy Counsel for the 
Office of Tax Policy, Maine Revenue Services. I am providing testimony at the 
request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against LD J 720, “An Act to Phase 
Out the Insurance Premium T ax on Annuities. ” 
For tax years beginning on or after January l, 2024, and over a ten-year 
period, this bill proposes to phase-out the insurance premiums tax on annuity 
considerations by reducing the current tax rate of 2% by 0.2 of a percentage point 
per year, to the extent that the insurer credits the savings from the reduced rates to 
annuity holders. The tax is fully phased out for tax years beginning on or after 
January 1, 2033. During the phase-out period, the retaliatory tax, under 36 M.R.S. 
§ 2519, on non-Maine insurance companies does not apply to annuity 
considerations and deductions related to annuity considerations may be deducted 
only from annuity considerations. 
In lieu of income taxes, Maine imposes a tax on insurance companies at the 
rate of 2% of taxable premiums, including annuity premiums. In the case of 
deferred annuities, the consumer makes payments into an investment fund overa 
period of time (referred to as the “accumulation phase”). Upon annuitization, the 
consumer begins receiving periodic payments of the amounts contributed and any
1
earnings in the account. The insurer is subject to tax on the amounts contributed in 
the year the contributions are made. Taxable contributions may be reduced by the 
amount of contributions refunded to the consumer in the year of the return to the 
extent the tax was already paid on those contributions. Although the tax is 
imposed on the insurer, the cost of the tax is generally passed on to consumers in 
the form of fees. Annuity premiums that are part of a qualiﬁed retirement plan are 
exempt from the tax. 
Maine is one of a handful of states that tax annuities in this manner. The bill 
would bring Maine into alignment with most other states. The Governor ’s Office, 
as well as MRS, have received several complaints over the years regarding 
premium tax fees passed on to consumers in relation to deferred annuities. In 
addition, bills proposing to end Maine’s tax on annuity have been a recurring issue 
before the Legislature over the past decade, many of which took the approach 
proposed by this LD l720. It has been a long-standing issue for taxpayers that use 
amuities as a source of retirement income. 
On a technical note, the beneﬁt of the return premiums deduction could be 
diminished during the phase-out period. A return of annuity premiums that were 
subject to tax in a previous year at 2% could be subtracted from annuity premiums 
now subject to tax at a lower rate in the current year. 
The estimated ﬁscal impact is not currently available. 
Estimated administrative costs are $33,000 during ﬁscal year 2024-2025 for 
one-time computer programing costs to adjust the premium tax return to reﬂect 
updated rates for annuity premiums.
2
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the C0mmittee ’s questions.
