American Council of Life Insurers   |  101 Constitution Ave, NW, Suite 700   |  Washington, DC 20001 -2133  
 
 
 
acli.com  Michelle Carroll Foster  
Regional Vice President, State Relations  
202-624-2457 t  
michellefoster@acli.com   
 
American Council of Life lnsurers Testimony in Support of LD 1 720, An Act to Phase out the 
Insurance Premium Tax on Annuities  
 
May 11 , 202 3 
 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committe e, my name is 
Michelle Carroll Foster . l am Regional Vice President of State Relations at the American Council for 
Life Insurers (ACLI), based in Washington, D.C.  l am writing  in support of LD 1 720, An Act to 
Phase out the Insurance Premium Tax on  Annuities.  
 
The American Council of Life Insurers (ACLI) is the leading trade association driving public policy 
and advocacy on behalf of the life insurance industry. 90 million American families rely on the life 
insurance industry for financial protection and retirem ent security. ACLI’s member companies are 
dedicated to protecting consumers’ financial wellbeing through life insurance, annuities, retirement 
plans, long -term care insurance, disability income insurance, reinsurance, and dental, vision and 
other supplemen tal benefits. ACLI’s 280 member companies represent 94 percent of industry 
assets in the United States. There are 2 10 ACLI member companies licensed to do business in 
Maine, accounting for 9 7 percent  of all life and annuity payments.  
 
Annuities Are an Imp ortant Product for Retirement Security  
Annuities are a secure investment. They are an increasingly popular way to supplement a pension 
plan or to create retirement income for those without a pension plan - and as we know, fewer and 
fewer employees have pension plans these days.  
 
Recognizing the  need to encourage private retirement savings, the federal government defers 
taxing the income earned on an annuity until it is paid out. Under current Maine law, a premium tax 
of 2% is applied to the purchase of annuities considerations. This premium tax ultimately increases 
the cost to the purchaser, making it more difficult for Mainers to provide for and fund their own 
secure retirements.  
 
Maine’s annuity tax takes $20 from every $1000 of Mainers retirement savings with the greatest 
burden of this tax fa lling on workers without employer -sponsored retirement plans, small business 
owners and the self -employed. These annuities are funded with after -tax dollars, unlike retirement  
plan contributions; an annuity tax subjects them to a second tax that is not im posed on employer -
sponsored plans funded with pre -tax dollars.1 
 
Life insurers doing business in Maine are in a very competitive market and are at a disadvantage 
with respect to the sale of annuity products when those products are competing with other 
retirement products offered by other financial institutions.  
 
 
 

  
Maine is in the Minority of States that Tax Annuities   
All but seven states fully exempt annuities from premium taxes in order to encourage their citizens 
to purchase annuities to save for retirem ent. Maine's 2.0% tax rate is exceeded only by California 
(2.35% on non -qualified annuities) and Nevada (3.5%). The other states that tax annuity 
considerations are Colorado (2.0% - non-qualified only), Florida (1.0%), South Dakota (1.25%) and 
Wyoming (1.0 %). 
 
Additionally, unlike Maine, Florida, Nevada, South Dakota, and Wyoming have no income tax, and 
necessarily rely more on other types of revenue like a tax on annuity considerations. Maine has an 
income tax, so the same logic does not apply. Maine is al so the only state in New England to 
impose a tax on annuity considerations, making it an outlier.  
 
Other States Have Repealed Taxes on Annuities  
 
Over the last thirty or so years, the trend has been for states to repeal their taxes on annuity 
consideratio n. Those states include Alabama, the District of Columbia, Kansas, Kentucky, 
Mississippi, North Carolina and Pennsylvania. West Virginia is the most recent state to successfully 
pass a repeal bill.  
 
Maine is now the only state other than California with a tax on annuity considerations that also has 
an income tax. In California, the tax on annuity considerations is embedded in the constitution, and 
it would take a 2/3 vote to repeal, which is largely why California has not been able to repeal its 
tax.  
 
Conc lusion  
 
Maine can align itself with the tax policy of the other New England states, provide a significant 
boost to Mainers who are trying to provide for their own retirement security, and level the playing 
field for the annuities investment market in Maine  by supporting the passage of LD 1720 . We 
appreciate the opportunity to provide comments in support of this legislation, and we urge the 
Committee to report out the bill as Ought to Pass.  
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
 
Michelle Carroll Foster  
 
 

