   
 
 
Phone: (207)  287-3282    Fax: (207) 287 -2671  
www.maine.gov /dafs/o cp/  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
April 24, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1691  – An Act to Provide Parity in State Energy Rate Relief Payments and Tax 
Exemptions for Maine Cannabis Businesses  
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica , Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans 
and Legal Affairs:  
 
I am John Hudak, Director of the Office of Cannabis Policy (OCP) and I am writing on  behalf of 
our office  to submit the following remarks  neither for nor against LD 1691.   We are providing 
the following information to assist the committee in contextualizing the issues raised in this bill, 
and to provide some preliminary information regard ing the costs associated with the initiatives 
contemplated in LD 1691.  
 
Since the beginning of the Adult Use Cannabis Program (AUCP) , our office has received 
feedback from licensees regarding disparate tax treatment incurred by adult use cannabis 
businesse s as a result of the federal prohibition on the cannabis economy.  At present , there are a 
number of initiatives to provide tax relief to cannabis businesses, including extension of business 
expense deductions (commonly referred to as “280E” deductions in reference to the federal tax 
code , 26 U.S.C. § 280E ) to adult use cannabis businesses1 (they have been available to medical 
cannabis businesses under state tax law since 20182) and a reduction in the excise tax on adult 
use cannabis3.  Adult use cannabis licensees point to the lack of 280E deductions as a major 
disadvantage of participati ng in the adult use program compared to the medical program.  
 
Additionally, the Maine Medical Use of Cannabis Program (MMCP) saw over 1350 caregivers 
exit the program from the end of 2020 to the end of January 2023. The impacts of this exodus —a 
net loss of 770 caregivers —have been felt by the remaining caregivers and resulted in a number 
 
1 See LD 1063, An Act to Provide Equitable T ax Treatment to State -licensed Cannabis Businesses , Sponsored by 
Senator Teresa Pierce  
2 36 M.R.S. §§ 5122, sub -§2, ¶PP and 5200 -A, sub -§2, ¶BB.  
3 See LD 1384, An Act to Promote Fairness in the Taxation of Adult Use Cannabis by Basing the Excise Tax on the 
Tier of a Cultivation Fa cility , Sponsored by Senator Benjamin Chipman  
LD 1392, An Act to Change How the Adult Use Cannabis Excise Tax Is Calculated , Sponsored by Senator Teresa 
Pierce  
LD 1382, An Act to Establish the Guiding Public Health Principles of Focused Protection for Pandemics of a Highly 
Infectious Respiratory Disease , Sponsored by Senator Brakey  
LD 1405, An Act to Change How Adult Use Cannabis Excise Tax Is Calculated , Sponsored by Representative 
Boyer  
 STATE OF MAINE  
OFFICE OF CANNABIS  POLICY  
162 STATE HOUSE STATION  
19 UNION  STREET  
FIRST  FLOOR  
AUGUSTA, MAINE   0433 3-0162 
JANET T. MILLS  
GOVERNOR  
ADMINISTRATIVE & FINANCIAL SERVICES  
 
KIRSTEN LC FIGUEROA  
COMMISSIONER  
 
OFFICE OF CANNABIS  POLICY   
 
JOHN HUDAK  
DIRECTOR  
   
 
 
Phone: (207)  287-3282    Fax: (207) 287 -2671  
www.maine.gov /dafs/o cp/ of theories  about why this trend has emerged and why caregivers are continuing to leave the 
program. Rather than relying on anecdota l evidence, in early 2023, the Office of Cannabis Policy 
(OCP) surveyed former caregivers to gain a better understanding of why so many registrants 
exited the program . The results show that business and market conditions were the central 
drivers  of program  exits rather than other narratives, such as state regulations being too arduous 
and costly for most caregivers to operate.   Chief among the business and market conditions cited 
by former caregivers who were surveyed were energy costs and market over satur ation4.  A 
report  detailing  our findings from that survey is forthcoming .   
 
Turning to the specific text of the bill,  we have a few concerns regarding Section 1 that we want 
to highlight for the committee.  First , the standard outlined in Section 1, which would be used to 
determine whether a registrant is required to pay an annual renewal fee, is vague and 
unenforceable.   OCP regularly provides technical assistance during inspections to assist 
registrants in coming into compliance with the statute.  It is rare that a registrant is found to be 
fully compliant with program requirements  when they are inspected , so it would b e challenging 
to ascertain which registrants would be eligible for this waiver.  
 
Next, Section 1 of this bill also contemplates the annual inspection of caregivers in order to 
qualify for the above -referenced waiver of renewal fees.   We have shared with th is committee in 
the past that at current capacity, with 12 full time field investigators and 2 field investigator 
supervisors, we are only able to inspect caregivers once every three years.  In order to inspect all 
existing caregivers on an annual basis, O CP would need to add to our staff 24 more field 
investigators and 4 more field investigator supervisors .  The cost for adding these 28 new 
positions would be in excess of $3 million in the first year.  We can provide a more detailed 
breakdown of the expens es for these positions upon request, but we want to be clear about the 
limitations of our existing staff capacity.   
 
In addition  to the concerns raised above regarding the standard for determining whether a 
registrant must pay the annual renewal fee, we w ant to hig hlight  the economic challenge 
presented by Section 2 in light of the fee waivers contemplated in Section 1.  At present, the 
Maine Medical  Use of  Cannabis Fund is funded exclusively from annual registration fees paid by 
caregivers, dispensaries,  and their employees.  Depending on how the fee waiver in Section 1 is 
implemented, it is likely that the Fund will become rapidly depleted through the issuance of 
relief payments under Section 2,  ultimately resulting in fa r fewer resources, funded primarily by 
registered dispensaries and medical cannabis business employee registration fees, to provide the 
relief payments contemplated in this bill .   
 
Furthermore, there does not appear to be any discernable limit on the kind s of future relief 
payments that might be availabl e to our program participants in the future.   We expect that you 
will also hear from our colleagues at Maine Revenue Services  or the Office of the State 
 
4 “…the medical cannabis market in Maine has been active for over ten years, making the 6:1 ratio an anomaly to 
trends observed in other st ates. Typically, as states progress in their timeline post market legalization for medical or 
adult -use, the demand -to-supply ratio decreases as efficiencies are met.” Maine Office of Cannabis Policy, Cannabis 
Markets & Associated Outcomes - Survey Finding s and Implications, Medical Supply Estimates, pp. 22 - 28, 
available at: https://www.maine.gov/dafs/ocp/sites/maine.gov.dafs.oc p/files/inline -
files/Maine%20OCP%20AHP%20Report%2006 -22.pdf , published Spring 2022.  
 
   
 
 
Phone: (207)  287-3282    Fax: (207) 287 -2671  
www.maine.gov /dafs/o cp/ Controller  regarding the difficulty of determining wh ich individuals and businesses are eligible 
for these payments, since taxpayers do not indicate what particular kind of business they are 
engaged i n on their tax returns.   
 
We thank the committee for the opportunity to provide this information and  we’ll d o our best to 
answer any questions you may have  at the work session.     
