 
Senator Ingwersen,  Senator Black, Senator Hall, and m embers of the Committee:  
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD403.  
My name is Christine Ohman. I own Field View Farm located at 1608 Alfred Rd in Lyman . My farm has been home to a  
small Standardbred  racing stable since 2015. My partner, Scott Farley, grew up in the harness racing world in Presque 
Isle. As a lifelong horsewoman, I encouraged him to follow his lifelong dream of owning and training his own horses. We 
purchased several cheap claimers and race  them successfully in Maine and Massachusetts.  
In addition to racing his own stable, Mr. Farley trained  for a large local Standardbred  breeder/trainer w ho is  heavily 
invested in the Maine Sire Stakes Program. This stable has achieved significant success,  winning many year- end awards , 
setting several new track records , and taking home a significant portion  of the pur se money  every year . It’s very exciting 
to see a home town stable achieve such success so w hen we retired our mare s from racing , we began exploring the 
opportunity to breed  them to “build our own ” stakes horses. My family raised thoroughbred race horses in Kentucky 
where I learned the critical importance of properly researching and matching mares with sires  to produce a quality 
animal.  
As a small operation, we are finding it extremely difficult to match our t wo mares with registered stallions in Maine who 
are good genetic matches. At just 14 stallions to choose from, Maine ’s pool is simply too small. Our best chance of 
success is with stallions outside of Maine, which is not allowable under the current registration rules. This forces us to 
make a dec ision between supporting our industry in Maine (which will likely produce a non -competitive animal) or 
choosing to breed to a better genetic match to produce a horse that can compete in other markets. Breeding is an 
enormous financial and emotional investm ent. We have decided to refrain from breeding this season until we know 
which direction the Maine Harness Racing Commission will be permitted to operate.   
We are writing in full support of LD403. LD403 will ensure that the Maine Harness Racing Commission has the ability 
to make timely rule changes to encourage and promote high quality breeding of Standardbred horses in the state of 
Maine.   
The Maine Sire Stakes Program was developed by the Maine Harness Racing industry in 1972 with the go als to:  
1) improve the quality of the Standardbred race horse;  
2) ensure that Maine has a consistent, high quality supply of competitive race horses capable of filling overnight 
races beyond their 2 and 3 year old Stakes years, and;  
3) to help preserve Maine’s rural economy and open farmland.  
The program, as it is being operated today, is failing at its goals as evidenced by the sharp decline in the number of 
mares bred, number of registered stallions, number of eligible offspring, and number of Maine -bred horses still racing in 
the state and in other markets.  
Sadly, and most alarmingly, many of Maine Sire Stakes progeny reach the end of their racing careers at the 3 Year Old 
Stakes Finals when owners and trainers cash out by selling their horses directly t o the Amish because they are not 
viewed as capable of competing in the harness racing industry in Maine or elsewhere. In other words –  many of these 
horses become worthless in the eyes of the harness racing world  and are relegated to pounding the roads for the Amish 
community until they are no longer capable .  
 
 
 
If the true intention of the Maine Sire Stakes  Program is to “encourage the breeding and racing of a Maine brand of 
Standardbred horses that demonstrates superior traits and supports Maine’s harness racing industry for years beyond 
the stakes eligibility”  – it is failing miserably.  The Maine H arness Racing Commission  must have the flexibility to adapt 
our industry to support modern, more successful, breeding practices that produce viable, competitive horses that 
remain in the industry they were intentionally bred for  beyond the stakes program .  
Supporting LD403 will ensure that the Commission has the ability to encourage Maine Standardbred breeders to access 
the best genetic matches to our existing broodmares and encourage existing and new owners to buy better quality 
broodmares. This will allow the program to meet its stated mission and goals not just in the state of Maine, but on the 
national stage. Allowing access to a b roader pool of genetic matches, and encouraging owners to buy better bred mares, 
will help increase the value of the animals our industry produces, and provide a greater return on our breeding and 
racing investments. Improving our financial viability direc tly impacts our ability to support our racing stables and farming 
operations, contribute to Maine’s rural economy, and ensure that rural farmlands remain  open space in our 
communities.   
The Maine Sire Stakes program, as it stands today, benefits only a few large breeders/owners. Several breeders openly 
acknowledged this at the recent annual MSBOA board meeting. They are ve hemently  opposed to any  changes to the 
existing program  – especially if it levels the playing field for small players. They do not want more competition. They do 
not want more horses in the program, especially if it d ilutes the purses. In order to improve the financial viability and 
long term sustainability of our entire industry, level the playing field for ALL stables, and encourage new breeders to 
enter the business, it is imperative that the Maine Harness Racing Commission has the ability to make timely rule changes to actively promote and encourage high quality  breeding in our state.   
For many  harness horsemen and women  in our industry , especially us small players, our horses become valued 
members of our extended family. We spend every waking moment caring for and training them to the best of our ability. We make tough decisions every day about what is in the highest and best interests of the animals in our care. This includes when to race, and when to retire them. Field View is home to several of our retired racehorses who have 
successfully transitioned to children’s riding horses at a Maine summer camp. A s a small stable, the decision to breed 
our mares is not taken lightly. We’ve spent hundreds of hours agonizing over finding the best genetic matches possible 
to produce a high quality, sound, sane, competitive racehorse that is capable of having a long, s uccessful career. Our 
goal is to create the best athletes we can to build our racing team from within rather than buying older horses from 
other markets. But this is extremely difficult to do under the current registration rules.  
Your support of LD403 will help t he Maine Harness Racing Commission generate the tools our industry needs to 
create a breeding program of excellence that we can all be proud of.  
Thank you for your consideration and work on behalf of our industry.  
Respectfully , 
Christine  Ohman, Owner/Groom  
Scott Farley. Owner/Trainer  
 Christine Ohman and Scott Farley  
Field View Farm/Farley Racing Stable  
1608 Alfred Rd  
Lyman, ME  04002 
