Good morning, Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker and distinguished members of the 
Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry Committee. My name is Debbie Patterson. l'm from Sidney andl 
am the current executive director of the Maine Harness Horsemen's Association. I'm speaking to you 
today in favor of LD 403, a bill to repeal statute 281-A of MRS Title 8 Chapter 11. 
With the passage of LD 403 it would allow the race commission, along with the shareholders of the 
industry, the ability to make rule changes to the Breeders Stakes program in a much faster capacity 
than through a legislative process. l understand the instinct to protect the program as it is but looking at 
the bigger picture change is necessary. 
In 2012 there was an impact study done by the Maine Standardbred Breeders and Owners Association. 
At a time when there were 36 stallions standing in the state and 153 mares had been breed that year. it 
came back that in fact the association felt it was in relatively good health. They felt with a good 
economy and increased purses it should reflect an increase in horse numbers and growth. They were 
warned however and l quote ” we cannot continue to operate in the status quo and significant changes 
need to be formulated" . The breeders program did not see the growth they were looking for so in 2016 
an ad hoc committee was formed. This committee was focused on ways to get more mares bred and 
more owners for the program. They come up with 6 priorities. 1 was implemented and continues to be 
reinforced by the race commission. To date there still has not been the growth that everyone had hoped 
for. 
Currently right now there is a rule in place that mirrors the language of statue 281-A. lt is section 2 of 
chapter 9 in the race commissions rule book that lays out eligibility criteria. Even with the repeal, the 
breeders ’ stakes program stays as it is right now until rule making is done. Hypothetically, If LD403 
passes and rule making was done later this year on chapter 9 for the 2024 breeding season the fruits of 
that would not be seen on the track until 2027. LD403 needs to be passed so that if and when the 
industry feels it is time to move forward to enhance the breeders ’ stakes program through rule making, 
it has the ability to do so. 
Debbie Patterson 
Executive Director Maine Harness Horsemen's Association 
info@mainehha.com/207-485-2446
