Hood, MaggieI 
From: Jay Burns <hjayburns@gmail.com> 
Sent: Tuesday, February 21, 2023 7:39 PM 
To: lngwersen, Henry; Pluecker, Bill; Black, Russell; Hickman, Craig; Costain, Dan; Cray, Dean; 
Guerrette, Timothy; Hall, Randall; Hepler, Allison; Jackson, Caldwell; Jauch, Rebecca; 
Osher, Laurie; Kathleen.Shaw@legislature.maine.go 
Cc:H 
Russo, Michael; Nadeau, Karen; ACF 
Subject: A statement in support of L.D. 403 from someone with long ties to Maine racing 
Follow Up Flag: Follow up 
Flag Status: Completed 
This message originates from outside the Maine Legislature. 
Hello. I hope I'm emailing members of the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry. If not, please forward. 
I Write in support of L.D. 403, “An Act to Improve Harness Racing in Maine by Repealing the Law Governing 
Standardbred Horses Eligible for Registration. ” I have been involved in Maine harness racing since I petted the 
nose of Kandy Royal, the dam of multiple Maine-bred harness horses, when I was growing up in Waterford in 
the 1970s and she was stabled at Harold Springer ’s farm in East Waterford. Actively involved in Maine harness 
racing since then, I have been a fan and bettor, a harness racing columnist for the Portland Newspapers, anda 
horse owner, including one Maine-bred horse.- 
It has been well articulated that one of the end goals of L.D. 403 is to give the Maine State Harness Racing 
Commission the capacity to assess and perhaps make changes to the struggling Maine Sire Stakes program, 
which now bestows millions of dollars on few participants, is uncompetitive, and produces few horses due toa 
supply chain issue that is unlikely to resolve itself: There are very few sires in Maine. But the need for reform of 
the sire stakes program, which has been well documented by experts and however self-evident, is not what has 
prompted my comments.T 
Instead, I write because I believe strongly that the Maine Harness Racing Commission is today well suited to 
take a positive and active role in improving the sport that we love and, despite challenges, contributes ina 
positive way to how we deﬁne Maine as a state. L.D. 403 is a step toward giving the commission the capacity to 
do good work — work that it is charged with doing. You have an executive director who is energetic and 
purposeful with outstanding experience and a network of connections inside and outside Maine. You have aI 
commission with a potent mix of members steeped in Maine harness racing history and experience and who 
have a professional background to effect changes. They are both loyal to the sport and also aware of the changes 
that it needs." 
I have full faith in the MSHRC to engage in rule-making efforts to improve our sport —— and improvement is 
desperately needed. While the resiliency of the Maine harness racing community is well known, also -well 
known is its resistance to needed change. Yet ironically, most people within the industry understand that some 
change is needed. When the current executive director was hired, he was charged with “developing and 
implementing policies intended to ensure the long-term economic viability of harness racing.” Please let the 
MSHRC do that very job, and support L.D. 403 as a key ﬁrst step._ 
Thank you. 
Jay Burns
1
