l'm Lynn-Marie Plouffe, the owner of Dupuis Farm, Saco, Maine. My farm consists 
of 300 acres of pristine farmland, 3 miles from the center of the City of Saco. My 
farm is the largest Standardbred Horse breeding facility in the state. l'm alsoa 
third generation farmer with my farm being in the family for well over 100 years. 
My husband Bruce and I have been farming and raising horse for the Maine 
Breeders stakes program for 42 years. We are a standardbred nursery. We have 
breeding stallions, broodmares and yearlings on our farm. 
In 1972, the State of Maine legislators established a Breeders Stakes program to 
encourage and develop a Maine breed of standardbred and to help preserve 
Maine's rural economy and open farmland. It protects Maine's family farm and 
its way of life. These stake horses are race at Maine fairs and 2 commercial 
tracks. 
LD 403 
is looking to change the statue of our Maine stakes program. For the last 50 
years, The statue states that the program was established to encourage and 
develop a Maine bred standardbred. Requirement was that the stallion had to 
stand a full season in Maine for his resulting foals to be eligible to the Breeders 
program. My passing LD #403, this will remove this requirement and allow any 
stallion standing in North American to have foals eligible to our stakes program. 
They would not have to contribute to our state economy, as eligible horses could 
ship in to our state on race day. The idea of preserving our farms and open space 
and contributing to our state's economy would probably be minimal. Our Maine 
Stakes money would leave our state by the truck loads. 
The stallions that we currently have in our state program are rated as B level 
stallions (stud fee are $2500-$1000) and with this change, our resulting offspring 
would have to compete against performers sired by the top level stallions in 
North America (stud fees $30,000-$10,000.). Our home bred horses probably will 
not have much of a fighting chance and our hard earned money will leave our 
state with no benefit to our people. 
My farm stands 5 stallions that are paid up in the Maine stakes. The service fees 
that we receive through breeding these horses makes up a large portion of our
farm income. We currently care for 30 broodmares, 12 yearlings and several 
newborn foals, which is another large portion of our income. We have5 
employees plus Bruce and I. We are a large contributor to the state economy. 
We pay payroll and property taxes, we buy supplies like sawdust, grain, farm 
equipment, cleaning supplies, trucks, trailers. We use the services of 
veterinarians and blacksmiths. Our first priority is to do business with |\/laine 
venders. 
We belong to the l\/laine Standardbred Breeders and Owners Association 
(I\/ISBOA). For the record, the MSBOA is opposed to this statue change. This 
group is comprised of breeders and owners that invest in breeding stock 
and raising these foals to become future race horses for the lvlaine stakes 
program. It is estimated that most owners have approximately $25,000.- 
$35,000. invested in each potential offspring. From breeding the mare, 
waiting 11 months for a foal, raising that foal to training age (approx. 18 
months), training for approx.. 8 months, hoping that all things go well and 
your young horse will be ready for the Maine races, it's a long term 
investment! And this group also makes large contributions to the state 
economy. 
The number of horses participating in our program have been decreasing in the 
past years but so have the numbers nationally. For us, in the State of 
Maine, the closing of Scarborough Downs was a big hit , followed by the 
pandemic. The Maine Breeders formed an Ad Hoc committee. The 
committee met several times to investigate ways to improve participation. 
The top priority of the committee was to increase the portion of money in 
the weekly stakes races and decrease the money in the finals. This was 
finally put into place this past year in August and I have had a positive 
feedback from my clients here at the farm. Going into this year's breeding 
season, I have 15 signed breeding contracts to date(2/26/23), with 8 mares 
belonging to new owners in the breeding business. I have been breeding 
horses for this program for 40 plus year and I have never had any inquiries 
until mid march, let alone signed contracts. I'm expecting a 20% increase. 
My farm has made significant investments into this program as well as many 
people that participate at a smaller level. We love keeping our land open
and pristine, as well as supporting our local economy and keeping people 
employed etc. Horses need open farm land to grow and thrive. Please vote 
to defeat this bill and keep our l\/laine Standardbred stakes program as it 
was originally written 50 years ago. This program has helped keep our land 
open, helped protect our family farms and its way of life. 
If this bill is not defeated, there is nothing good for my farm, the Ivlaine Stakes 
program or the State of Maine. Everyone loses! As l stated earlier, our 
Maine Stakes money will leave our state by the truck loads, without 
benefitting our economy, our farms or the people of the State of I\/laine. |\/ly 
farm stands to loose a large portion of income and will probably struggle to 
survive, if it can. 
Give some thought to. . . How will changing this statue benefit l\/laine and its 
people? 
Sincerely, 
Lynn-l\/larie Plouffe 
Dupuis Farm www.dupuisfarm.com
