Good morning, Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker and distinguished 
members of the Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry Committee. My name is Michael 
Cushing. l’m from Farmington. I'm a third-generation horsemen whose family roots go 
back to the inception of the Maine Breeders Stakes program. The program continues to 
be an integral part of the public stable I've operated out of Farmington since 1987. 
Along with the responsibilities go with training a stable of twenty horses, I'm also sen/ing 
my third term as President of the Maine Harness Horsemen ’s Association. I am 
testifying today in that capacity to support the passage of LD 403. 
The MHHA board voted 8-O to support LD 403 at our December board of directors 
meeting. The board agrees with the Maine Harness Racing Commission's Executive 
Director Shane Bacon, that the racing commission needs to have the ability to make 
rule changes in the Breeders Stakes program, should it be necessary. Mr. Bacon has 
explained to us that the Attorney General’s office feels that any substantive change 
would require the legislative route under current law. That is a process that could take 
years to come to fruition, a luxury the industry may not have should the circumstances 
call for it. Should LD 403 pass, complicated decisions that could provide stability for the 
Maine Breeders Stakes program well into the future, would now be in the hands of the 
l\/laine Racing Commission. 
Such complicated decisions would be put in the hands of gubernatorial appointed 
individuals with an arrays of harness racing knowledge and experience, that have been 
entrusted to guide the industry to be the best it can be. Should such responsibilities be 
put in the hands of the commission, all industry participants and organizations will have 
ample opportunities to present their ideas to the commission. We feel the passage of 
LD 403 would allow one of the most vital components of the industry be placed in the 
hands of the right body. 
Michael Cushing 
President Maine Harness Horsemen ’s Association 
cushingstable@gmai|.com / 207-320-3266
