My name is Peg Tardif, my husband and I have participated in harness racing in Maine for 25 years, and 
have been breeding Maine Sire stakes horses for 10 of those years.  We have continued to  increase the 
amount of Broodmares that we bred each year, we are on target to breed 8 mares this year.  As 
business owners we have invested yearly in bettering our business. Upgrading our mares and reinvesting 
our winnings We are proud to participate in the Maine Sire stakes program.  
You are going to hear that this bill is brought before you,  to improve the Maine Sire stakes program.   
That it is needed, because the number of mares bred has dropped from previous years. 
 I would like to address this first.   As breeders when we make the decision to breed a mare, we are 
making a 3–4-year investment.  Knowing that we will have invested 20,000-25,0000 per horse  before 
this horse makes the races.  In previous years, the atmosphere has been volatile .volatile.  The 
uncertainty of Scarborough downs each year. Deterring a large number of individuals from breeding. 
The closing of Scarborough, and the excitement of First tracks was short lived, when the pandemic 
struck.  The uncertainty of the pandemic deterring breeders once again from making that 3–4-year 
investment Some breeders choosing to breed less some not at all. 
 This last year the pandemic is over, purses are up, and people are excited about participating in the 
program again  New sires have been registered , new mares purchased and breeders are feeling more 
secure about making that large  investment.  
Repealing this statue not only gives the ability for a decision to made to breed to outside Mares or 
Stallions,  thus  taking  money out of Maine and out of the pockets of Maine people.   Creating a 
hardship for Maine breeders.  It would also give the ability  to make any changes to the program that 
they may see fit.   Once again creating that level of uncertainty that continues to hinder new 
participation in the program,  
In Business if you want to change the direction of a corporation the first step is to create a new business 
plan.  There is no plan here or at least one that they are willing to share.  If this is such a good idea, why 
are they not repealing this and replacing it with a new  well thought out plan?  Repealing this means that 
any future changes will no longer need to come before you the Ag committee.   These changes will now 
be in the hands of the Racing commission a commission made up of  5 people  Led by Shane Bacon,  who 
is new to both his position and to our state.  The commission would need only   3 of the 5 
commissioners to carry a vote.   This scares me.   As the Ag commission you are neutral when current 
ideas or changes are brought before you.  There is no agenda.  You listen to the facts and how the 
changes will effect yours constitutes.  Please ask yourselves why this is so dire now. In a year that people 
are finally excited again about participating. A year that breeding contracts are up and new sires are 
registered and ready to start breeding.  This bill is not bipartisan. It is  broughtis brought to you by Shane 
Bacon and the MHHA , it is not supported by the MSOBA  or their membership.  Most importantly the 
breeders  that have hung in and continued to breed through all the above uncertainty  have voiced that 
they will not continue to breed if this bill is passed. That the uncertainty would. finallyfinally, be too 
great.
