STATE or MAINE 
,» 
if DEPARTMENT or AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION & FOREsTRY 
‘ OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER 
22 STATE HoUsE STATIoN 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 .\. 
JANET T. MILLs AMANDA E- BEAL 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 403 
An Act to Improve Harness Racing in Maine by Repealing the Law Governing 
Standardbred Horses Eligible for Registration 
February 27, 2023 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Shane Bacon, and I am the Executive 
Director of the Maine State Harness Racing Commission (HRC). I am speaking on behalf of the 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry in support of LD 403, An Act to Improve 
Harness Racing in Maine by Repealing the Law Governing Standardbred Horses Eligible for 
Registration. 
The HRC licenses harness racing participants, Maine’s harness racing tracks (which currently 
number nine), and off-track betting facilities. We award race dates to racetracks and fairs, and we 
promote every aspect of the sport. We make and enforce the rules of hamess racing, including 
rules pertaining to barmed substances and the breeding of animals. In short, we are responsible 
for the health of harness racing in the State of Maine. Not insigniﬁcantly, we see the health of the 
sport as intimately connected to the health of the animal athletes who compete in our sport. The 
Commission meets approximately monthly. 
MRSA Title 8, Chapter ll, §28l empowers the Commission to deﬁne what constitutes a Maine 
Standardbred, and we have indeed done so in Chapter 9 of our rulebook. Statute 281-A, 
however, then overrides §281’s conveyance of that power and sets out a statutory deﬁnition ofa 
Maine Standardbred. LD 403 would repeal §28 1-A, and We believe that is the right course of 
action. 
Deﬁnitions of a Maine Standardbred racehorse exist in both rule and statute - even though those 
deﬁnitions are currently identical - which complicates the governance of hamess racing and 
makes it vulnerable. This vulnerability is more than hypothetical. Maine’s current breeding 
program is producing record-low numbers of horses that can compete in our sport. Maine may 
need to follow suit with several other states and redeﬁne eligibility, and we may need to move 
HARLOW BUILDING e PHONE: (207) 287-3200 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 8; Fnregtry WEB: WWW.MAINE.GOV/DACF
quickly to do so. We believe the Commission is best situated to understand and respond to 
conditions on the ground as they impact the spoit. If, for example, one or more breeding fanns in 
the State of Maine were to go out of business (not a far-fetched possibility), the Commission 
would be powerless to amend the deﬁnition of an eligible horse for the Stakes program. That 
would require an act of the Legislature, likely leading to an interruption of the breeding program 
in the State of Maine and possibly an interruption to racing. 
The Legislature has entrusted the Maine State Harness Racing Commission with making and 
enforcing rules to keep harness racing healthy. Repealing §281-A would afﬁrm that, by allowing 
the Commission to deﬁne eligibility for the sport through our rulebook. We urge you to vote 
Ought to Pass on LD 403. 
Thank you for your consideration of the Department ’s position. I’m happy to answer any 
questions now or at the work session.
