Dominick Morrison
Portland Maine
LD 1779
Dominick Morrison
Portland, Maine
 Apr 30, 2023
Re: L.D. 1779, An Act to Develop a Continuum of Care for Youth Involved in the 
Justice System and to Develop Alternatives for Juveniles Incarcerated in Long Creek 
Youth Development Center
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Members of the 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety:
My name is Dominick Morrison and I am a youth steering committee with Maine 
Youth Justice. I reside in Portland, Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to provide 
testimony in support of LD 1779.
I have experience at Long Creek and in the juvenile justice system. I was sentenced to
long creek when I was 15. I was on probation at 14. The system has caused me harm 
in many ways from being institutionalized to having to immediately adjust to society 
after being locked in a metal cell all alone. Knowing first hand, I want to shine light 
upon all the trauma that happens within LCYDC. I want people to see that locking up 
our youth doesn’t actually teach them anything, it doesn't get to the root of their 
suffering. We’re dealing with young teens that have been hurt by the adults in their 
lives and they need more love and understanding not incarceration with no answers. 
Any type of locked cell does not provide rehabilitation. It's traumatizing the minute 
you walk into Long Creek, your childhood is gone. There is no bigger punishment 
other than going to Long Creek as a juvenile.
What I needed instead of Longcreek and long before I was sent there is I needed 
someone to understand why I was so angry and to ask me how I was feeling. I needed 
more learning opportunities with my hands, not just the standard learning with 
textbooks. What I needed was someone who listened to me and actually heard me. 
What I got instead was being tossed around in foster care, to grow up in hospital beds 
and crisis beds and then thrown into Long Creek. I experienced prone restraint & 
hundreds of hours of pod time, observation & being handcuffed and shackled and 
dragged out of the unit at 15. I was being wrestled down by grown adult guards all 
because I didn’t want to remain in lock down. 
Maine doesnt need more incarceration for youth. Maine is going forward in the 
direction of less incarceration and more alternatives, and this bill will create an entity 
that represents the communities who know best about what services Maine needs to 
invest in. 
The solutions are simple. We need to build programs that allow youth that don’t have 
anybody to turn to, to have a space where they can thrive and feel like they belong. 
We need programs that offer young people a chance to be educated, fed, housed, 
clothed. We need to build supports outside of a prison cell. Maine needs to create 
more housing, job opportunities, sober houses, rehabilitation centers that aren't locked
doors. We need mental health services, funded education, and places where kids can 
go and feel safe in their communities. 
This bill will impact so many young vibrant youth as well as me. This bill ensures 
closure and solitude for all the trauma LCYDC caused and it offers an opportunity 
that doesn’t imply a prison. I want to see a healthy community that is surrounded by 
loyalty, love, honor, and respect. I want to see our youth striving to be their best self 
with healthy options. In summary, LD 1779 would work towards that vision. For 
these reasons, I request this Committee to vote ought to pass on LD 1779.
Thank you for your time, 
Dominick Morrison
