Joseph Jackson
Lisbon Falls
LD 1779
To: Committee Members for Criminal Justice                                 05/02/2023
Fm: Joseph Jackson: MPAC Executive Director 
Re: letter in support LD 1779
Good afternoon Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and the
Honorable Members of Criminal Justice 
My name is Joseph Jackson, and I’m the Director of Maine Prisoner Advocacy 
Coalition (MPAC), MPAC is a statewide group formed in 2007. I am also a member 
of the Juvenile Justice task force. I am here today to testify in favor of LD 1779, An 
Act to Develop a Continuum of Care for Youth Involved in the Justice System and to 
Develop Alternatives for Juveniles Incarcerated in Long Creek Youth Development 
Center.
Recently I attended a court hearing for a man seeking to have his sentence for 
probation violation reviewed. The man (who suffers from substance use disorder) had 
been given a full revocation of his sentence due to substance use related issues.
When he shared his story with the court, he spoke of being sent to foster care at age 
11. He shared that he had been emancipated as an adult at 14. He then outlined that he
had been in and out of Long Creek from 14 till adulthood. Within a year of his 
release, he had received 20 years within the Maine Department of Corrections.
That man's testimony was particularly moving for me. Not only because he was a 
black man in an all-white proceeding, but because he was taking accountability and 
apologizing to every person he had harmed. I couldn't help but think of the harm that 
has been caused to him through his contact with Maine's Juvenile Justice System.
How many young people are we willing to throw away? How many young people 
with similar backgrounds are we consigning to the same fate as this man? How many 
more are we intending to fail before we fix this broken system.
LD 1779 lays out a plan towards a new, evidence-based and trauma-informed system 
of creating public safety for all, and support for the youth who end up involved in the 
criminal justice system.
This bill would direct the DOC to create an individual plan for all of the 24 youth 
currently committed and detained at Long Creek. This plan would involve conducting
clinical assessments on all the youth in a multidisciplinary manner that determines 
what each individual youth needs and how those needs can be met in the community.
This plan would create a commission to review community resources available for 
youth and recommend how we should allocate current funding for Juvenile services.
It's time for Maine to do the right thing for our kids and it starts with finding out what 
our kids need and investing in community programs that fills those needs and reduce 
our reliance on Juvenile incarceration.
Thank you for your time and consideration!
Sincerely yours 
Joseph N. Jackson : Director 
Maine Prisoner Advocacy Coalition 
Maine Inside Out Community Liaison 
3 Angel Street Lisbon Falls Maine 04252
jackson.joseph1966@gmail.com 
2078441470
