295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1779   
An Act to Develop a Continuum of Care for Youth Involved in the 
Justice System and to Develop Alternatives for Juveniles 
Incarcerated in Long Creek Youth Development Center  
Sponsored by Representative Lookner  
May 2 , 2023  
 
Good afternoon , Senator B eebe -Center , Representative Salisbury , and esteemed 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety . I am 
Malory Shaughnessy, a Westbrook  resident , and the Executive Director of the 
Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance is the statewide 
association representing the majority of Maine’s safety net communi ty-based  mental 
health and substance use treatment providers. The Alliance advocates for the 
implementation of sound policies and evidence -based practices that serve to 
enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in  support of LD 1779, “An Act 
to Develop a Continuum of Care for Youth Involved in the Justice System and to 
Develop Alternatives for Juveniles Incarcerated in Long Creek Youth Development 
Center.” This bill does exactly what the title says by directing the DOC to gather 
important information on the youth currently incarcerated at Long Creek.  
 
First, the proposal directs the DOC to establish a process to conduct an 
individualized needs assessment and complete a tr ansition plan for every juvenile 
in the department's custody. Second, the DOC, working with the Children's 
Cabinet, is to develop recommendations for the reinvestment of corrections funds 
currently designated for youth incarceration into a continuum of com munity -based 
alternatives and report the recommendations to the Joint Standing Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety.  
 
These two steps are very important and based upon decades of practic al 
experience by providers. Before you can meet the needs o f any client, you must 
condu ct a needs assessment. Combining the DOC and the Children’s Cabinet in this 
effort is brilliant – the Children’s Cabinet, situated in the Office of Policy Innovation 
& Future  should be focused on ALL Maine children. And the  data and 
recommendations would be presented back to the Joint Standing Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety to study the selection of an entity to manage and 
distribute corrections funds currently designated for youth incarceration . 
 
Finally, t he DOC is directed to create and implement a workforce development plan 
for the Long Creek Youth Development Center staff  in coordination with the 
Department of Labor , and to develop a plan to repurpose Long Creek Youth 
Development Center . This plan will be submitted to the Joint Standing Committee 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, including its findings, recommendations , and 
any suggested legislation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  Mental Health  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Concepts, Inc.  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Couns eling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
KidsPeace Maine  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Pathways of Maine  
Portland  Recovery Community 
Center  
Rumford Group Homes  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
 
 
This proposal tracks with the recommendations of the Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment & 
Reinvestment Task Force of which I was a member , as was Commissioner Liberty, O ffice of Child and 
Family Services Director Landry, and many others. The final report of the Task Force, along with all the 
supporting data for the passage of LD 1779 is available at https://www.mainejjtaskforce.org/   
 
The Alliance thanks Representative Lookner for this proposal to better meet the needs of our 
justice0involed youth, and create a continuum of care for Maine’s you ng people . We urge  members of 
the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee to support this initiative . Thank you.  
