Mike Prue
Maine Youth Justice
LD 1779
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Members of the 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety:
My name is Mike Prue or MJ as others call me and I am an organizer/ 1 of the 
cofounders of Maine Youth Justice. I reside in Biddeford, Maine. Thank you for the 
opportunity to provide testimony in support of L.D. 1779. 
As a part of both MYJ and Maine Inside Out I have dedicated myself to trying to find 
better solutions for our youth rather than putting them within concrete walls and 
locked doors and isolating them from socialization. Being a former incarcerated youth
I know from history that there is no longer a chance to learn or be rehabilitated by 
simply locking the key and turning away from a problem that can be fixed. I’ve seen 
both the mental damage and trauma that is provided while inside the cage and out. 
Now I’m not out to bash Long Creek to help my cause but to simply to let you 
understand that as a youth your rights almost feel completely gone and that your voice
means nothing cause no one will listen. I’ve seen kids put in aggressive restraints to 
being tackled and leaving scars both bodily and mentally. I also saw kids being held 
in isolation for 23 hours a day due to low staff when the building and funds are over 
18 million yet kids are treated as a threat to society for making a mistake. Now you 
tell me could you sit in a bland cold room for 23 hours with nothing but a bed and 
toilet? The pandemic alone has shown that mankind is not to be contained without 
insanity setting in. So why put our youth in that same situation. 
Now if we could simply reinvest into our communities with other programs that will 
go out of their way to help and support our youths I think we can find better and more
productive outcomes from troubled kids. If this bill passes it would initiate the 
process of building an entity that represents Maine’s communities. Now is the time to 
reinvest the millions we spend for traumatizing kids so we can head in the direction of
giving Maine’s kids a chance to learn from their mistakes in better, actually 
rehabilitative resources without being isolated from the world.
Thank you for your consideration, 
Sincerely, MJ

