   
 
  STATE OF MAINE  
  DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
  111 STATE HOUSE STATION  
JANET T. MILLS  AUGUSTA MAINE  RANDALL A. LIBERTY  
 GOVERNOR   04333 -0111  COMMISSIONER  
          
1 
 
TESTIMONY OF  
 
RANDALL A. LIBERTY, COMMISSIONER  
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
 
In Opposition to  
 
LD 1779 An Act to Develop a Continuum of Care for Youth Involved in the Justice System and to 
Develop Alternatives for Juveniles Incarcerated in Lon g Creek Youth Development Center  
 
Before the  
Criminal Justice Public Safety Committee  
May 2, 2023  
 
 
Senator Beebe -Center and Representative Salisbury and other distinguished members of the Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety Committee, I am Randall Liberty, Commissioner of the Maine Department of Corrections 
providing testimony  in opposition to LD 1779 . 
 
The Department remains firm there will always be a need for secure placement for violent youth  who pose a 
risk to public safety.  Taking away the opt ion for secure placement will not stop dangerous, violent behavior 
from occurring.   
 
Vermont, the only New England state to close their youth facility, reaches out often to us, asking us to take their 
violent youth  who are currently being held in an adult  facility, and those  being held under guard in hotel s.  
 
The MDOC is deeply committed to supporting the youth in our care  who have been detained and/or committed 
by a judge . The range of services avaible to youth, following a needs and risk assessment, are bountiful, and 
have only become more so as the number of youth remain low.  
 
Long Creek today is not what it was three years ago, five years, ten years ago. Today there is  healing, there is 
education , there is behavioral health treatment, there is laughter, and comradery . Many of you have been inside 
recently and see n it. Many of you have met the principal of the A.R. Gould School, Catherine Curry, who came 
on board in 2021  and has redesigned the school to ensure individual educational goals  and needs are met.  Many 
of you have met Stephanie Netto, Long Creek’s chief of volunteer services, who makes sure the young people 
have regular contact with community members, religious leaders, employers, community groups , and prepares 
the youth for these contacts.  The staff are dedicated and caring professionals  who could tell you stor ies for 
hours about youth who are healed because of the services provided.   
 
And still many others of you , mainly my law en forcement  and legal  peers  know the names of the youth at Long 
Creek because of the violence  they’ve committed.  Like me, you’ve been to the crime scenes, you’ve conducted 
the investigations, you’ve unearthed the ugly, and you’ve heard the victim’s  tragedy.   
 
This bill would close Long Creek, prevent ing the secure confinement of a juvenile under any circumstances, n o 
matter how dangerous the juvenile is , no matter how violent or tragic the crime.   
   
 
  STATE OF MAINE  
  DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS  
  111 STATE HOUSE STATION  
JANET T. MILLS  AUGUSTA MAINE  RANDALL A. LIBERTY  
 GOVERNOR   04333 -0111  COMMISSIONER  
          
2 
 
 
This is dangerous  prospect .  
 
It’s a false narrative to think the State can close a facility, redistribute funds, and suddenly  no longer have 
violent young people.  
 
That said, we are committed to continuing to improve the system, to be re sponsive  to individual  needs, to work 
collaboratively  with community p artners, and other state agencies , for the betterment of young people .  
 
To that end this committee should know we are hard at work negotiating  with Repre sentative  Brennan and 
Speaker Talbot Ross on two other juvenile system related bills. These should be ready for work by this 
committee in the coming weeks. The work happening in that regard build up collaboration and systems, while 
ensuring safety.   
 
We ask this committee to vote ONTP  on LD 1779.   
 
Thank You,  
 
Randall A. Liberty, Commissioner  
Maine Department of Corrections  
 
