STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS 
111 STATE HOUSE STATION 
JANET T. MILLS AUGUSTA MAINE RANDALL A. LIBERTY 
GOVERNOR 04333-0111 COMMISSIONER 
TESTIMONY OF 
RANDALL A. LIBERTY, COMMISSIONER 
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS 
In Opposition to 
LD 1779 An Act to Develop a Continuum of Care for Youth Involved in the Justice System and to 
Develop Alternatives for Juveniles Incarcerated in Long Creek Youth Development Center 
Before the 
Criminal Justice Public Safety Committee 
May 2, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center and Representative Salisbury and other distinguished members of the Criminal Justice 
and Public Safety Committee, I am Randall Liberty, Commissioner of the Maine Department of Corrections 
providing testimony in opposition to LD 1779. _ 
The Department remains ﬁrm there will always be a need for secure placement for violent youth who posea 
risk to public safety. Taking away the option for secure placement will not stop dangerous, violent behavior 
from occurring. , 
Vermont, the only New England state to close their youth facility, reaches out often to us, asking us to take their 
violent youth who are currently being held in an adult facility, and those being held under guard in hotels. 
The MDOC is deeply committed to supporting the youth in our care who have been detained and/or committed 
by a judge. The range of services avaible to youth, following a needs and risk assessment, are bountiful, and 
have only become more so as the number of youth remain low. 
Long Creek today is not what it was three years ago, ﬁve years, ten years ago. Today there is healing, there is 
education, there is behavioral health treatment, there is laughter, and comradery. Many of you have been inside 
recently and seen it. Many of you have met the principal of the A.R. Gould School, Catherine Curry, who came 
on board in 2021 and has redesigned the school to ensure individual educational goals and needs are met. Many 
of you have met Stephanie Netto, Long Creek’s chief of volunteer services, who makes sure the young people 
have regular contact with community members, religious leaders, employers, community groups, and prepares 
the youth for these contacts. The staff are dedicated and caring professionals who could tell you stories for 
hours about youth who are healed because of the services provided.‘ 
And still many others of you, mainly my law enforcement and legal peers know the names of the youth at Long 
Creek because of the violence they’ve committed. Like me, you’ve been to the crime scenes, you’ve conducted 
the investigations, you’ve unearthed the ugly, and you’ve heard the victim’s tragedy. 
This bill would close Long Creek, preventing the secure conﬁnement of a juvenile under any circumstances, no 
matter how dangerous the juvenile is, no matter how violent or tragic the crime.
l
STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF CORRECTIONS 
111 STATE HOUSE STATION 
JANET T. MILLS AUGUSTA MAINE RANDALL A. LIBERTY 
GOVERNOR 04333-0111 COMMISSIONER 
This is dangerous prospect. 
It’s a false narrative to think the State can close a facility, redistribute funds, and suddenly no longer have 
violent young people. 
That said, we are committed to continuing to improve the system, to be responsive to individual needs, to work 
collaboratively with community partners, and other state agencies, for the betterment of young people. 
To that end this committee should know We are hard at Work negotiating with Representative Brennan and 
Speaker Talbot Ross on two other juvenile system related bills. These should be ready for work by this 
committee in the coming weeks. The Work happening in that regard build up collaboration and systems, while 
ensuring safety. 
We ask this committee to vote ONTP on LD 1779. 
Thank You, 
Randall A. Liberty, Commissioner 
Maine Department of Corrections 
22 
E;
L
, 
X 
5,. 
,. 
ll 
2* 
T“ 
T"
I 
it 
,. Ti 
it
U 
ll
l 
it
J 
ll 
,1
l
