February 7, 2023
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Honorable Members of the Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services in the Maine Legislature,
I'm testifying to voice my support for L.D. 234, An Act to Raise from 12 to 24 the 
Annual Limit on the Number of Public Events and Meals Nonprofit Organizations May 
Have That Are Exempt from Certain Rules and Regulations. 
While there are many nonprofit organizations throughout the state that could benefit 
from the passage of this bill, the one that I've become most involved with is the Waldo 
County Woodshed (WCW). For the past three winters I have had the pleasure of 
volunteering for this organization that is the leading wood bank in the state. (I never 
knew I would grow to be so opinionated about splitters!) It has been a model for other 
wood banks and has been featured in publications both nationally and internationally.
Volunteering to help provide free firewood to those in need has been both fulfilling and 
humbling  As I've assisted people in loading their vehicles with a ¼ cord of wood 
they've been so appreciative. 
But purchasing the logs, maintaining the equipment and the other associated costs for 
this free service doesn't come cheaply. And there has been a huge surge in demand for 
firewood this year! Fundraising has been a continuous challenge, but the newest popular 
effort has been with the “Pay What You Can Cafe”. These impressive suppers are put on 
with donated ingredients and a totally volunteer staff in a licensed kitchen. People of all 
walks of life gather together to enjoy the food and camaraderie paying as little or as 
much as they choose. With 100% of their donations going directly to benefit the WCW, 
it has been a refreshing approach to collect much needed financial support for 
continuing their good work. But with the current restrictions of only allowing 12 events 
per year, it  has limited the potential to raise even more funds to meet the associated 
rising costs. 
As I mentioned, the Waldo Country Woodshed has been a touted model among wood 
banks. The passage of this bill could also be a model for other nonprofit organizations to 
expand the reach of their good work. Please use your vote to join me in support of L.D. 
234.  
Repectfully submitted,
Bernice Nadler
Montville, ME
