Maine ssociciiion 
of Nonproﬁts Mill} 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee: 
My name is Mary Alice Scott, and I am the Public Affairs Manager at the Maine Association of 
Nonprofits. MAN P is a growing membership organization made up of over 1,000 nonprofit 
members from all 16 counties. Since 1994, MANP has grown to become Maine's comprehensive 
resource for the tools, knowledge, and connections nonprofits need to be effective and well-run. 
I am testifying neither for nor against LD 234-: An Act to Raise from 12 to 24 the Annual Limit on the 
Number of Public Events and Meals Nonprofit Organizations May Have That Are Exempt from 
Certain Rules and Regulations. 
LD 234 seeks to double, from 12 to 24, the number of public events and meals within one calendar 
year nonprofit organizations may have that are exempt from Department of Health and Human 
Services rules and regulations relating to dispensing foods and nonalcoholic beverages. 
N onprofits are vital to Maine's economy and quality of life, employing 1 in 6 Maine workers and 
mobilizing more than 400,000 volunteers each year. Most Maine nonprofits are very small and 
community-based. 88% have annual budgets less than $500,000. 
Nonprofits have a unique and important role in bringing people together, and in strengthening our 
social fabric in a time when it is sorely needed. Nonprofits across our state, particularly the small 
nonprofits that make up the bulk of the sector, also need to be creative with their fundraising. Many 
depend on grassroots events to help generate the financial support they need to provide services to 
their community. 
We know that following the federal tax cuts in 2017, fewer individuals itemize their tax returns. 
This eliminated an incentive for individuals to donate directly to charitable nonprofits, making 
creative fundraising events even more critical to the continued operations of many organizations. 
With that in mind, MANP is generally in support of reducing barriers for nonprofits while 
maintaining appropriate oversight to ensure continued public trust in our sector. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Wwxa'.Noi “lpr'of:tiviaine og
