 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
February 9, 2023  
 
Senator  Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative  Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD  234 - An Act to Raise from 12 to 24 the Annual Limit on the Number of Public Events 
and Meals Nonprofit Organizations May Have That Are Exempt from Certain Rules and 
Regulations  
 
Dear Senator  Baldacci , Represent ative Meyer , and Members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee:  
 
This letter is to provide information about LD  234, An Act to Raise from 12 to 24 the Annual 
Limit on the Number of Public Events and Meals Nonprofit Organizations May Have That Are 
Exem pt from Certain Rules and Regulations  and the potential impact of the proposed legislation , 
if enacted. The Maine Center of Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC)  is neither for nor 
against this bill  and offers the following information for your consideration . 
 
LD 234 seeks to  double, from 12 to 24, the number of public events and meals within one 
calendar year nonprofit organizations may have that are exempt from Department of Health and 
Human Servic es rules and regulations relating to dispensing foods and nonalcoholic beverages . 
 
Under the authority of 22 MRS chapter 562, M aine CDC – Health Inspection Program (HIP ), 
issues eating place licenses  to entities providing food to the public, including , but not limited to  
eating establishments, lodging places,  camp s and some nonprofits . HIP rules are established to 
ensure that, for public health and safety,  food preparation meets acceptable standards for 
consumption, and food is unadulterated  and prepared in a clean environment . As an exception  in 
the current law , HIP does not license or inspect nonprofit organizations (i.e. 4-H Clubs, scouts 
and agricultural societies , etc)  that conduct 12 or fewer events  or meals  per year . (22 MRS 
§2501 .) As such, HIP is unable to assess whether  food safety laws and best practices are being 
followed properly or whether  there are related complaints or concerns from the public. 
Unregulated eating establishments pose the potential public healt h risk of increasing foodborne 
illness with unsafe food safety practices. Since these certain non profits  are not subject to 
inspection, there is no assessment for potable water, proper wastewater disposal, adequate 
refrigeration, proper hot and cold holdin g, cooking and service of foods, personal hygiene, 
contaminated equipment, and food from unsafe sources.  
 
If LD 234 is enacted  as written, t hose nonprofit organizations that serve up to 24 public events or 
meals per year and currently licensed will no lon ger be required to have a n eating place license  
 
 and subject to the food safety standards required under the oversight of HIP. Currently, the HIP 
licenses are issued based on seating capacity and the licensing process does not identify whether 
an entity is nonprofit . The seating capacity at sites for exempted nonprofits’ events and the 
number in attendance at  these events are unknown, but can vary largely. By permitting  a higher 
limit on the number of nonprofit events  and meals  not regulated by HIP, Maine ’s infectious 
disease epidemiologists anticipate an increase in the number of cases and outbreaks of infectious 
diseases. This in turn would tie up more epidemiologists and laboratorians who may be involved 
in investigating and responding to an outb reak in order to prevent additional illnesses in the 
community. In addition, regulated eating establishments might perceive an uneven “playing 
field,” as they are required as a licensee to have a Certified Food Protection Manager on staff, 
pay a license fe e, and meet all food safety requirements of the State of Maine Food Code1.  
 
In summary, the Maine CDC respectfully recommends this bill , if to be passed,  be amended to 
require that, in lieu of oversight from HIP for food and drink dispens ing at these events , 
nonprofit organizations exempt under 22 MRS § 2501  receive  annual basic food safety training 
and employ  best practices as outlined by  a nationally recognized food safety organization to 
reduce the risk of foodborne illness.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration.   
 
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Deputy  Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 
 
1 Maine Food Code, 10-144 CMR c hapter 200 is a joint rule the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry,  01-001 CMR  Ch. 331 . https://www.maine.gov/sos/cec/rules/10/144/144c200.docx    

