 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Opposition To 
LD 1825 - An Act to Clarify Licensing Jurisdiction for Manufactured Housing Communities 
May 12, 2023 
Sen. Nangle, Rep. Stover, and distinguished members of the State and Local Government 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I am submitting testimony in opposition to LD 1825, An 
Act to Clarify Licensing Jurisdiction for Manufactured Housing Communities, on behalf of the Maine 
Municipal Association, which represents the interests of municipal government before the Legislature.  
Sections 1 and 5 of this bill prohibits a municipality from issuing a building permit and 
recovering the moderate fees to provide the mandatory plumbing and subsurface waste water systems 
inspections for a prefabricated building that must meet the same regulations as a building that is 
constructed on site. Those fees are generally much less than the fees a stick built dwelling would incur 
because there is an assumption they already meet the required codes and do not need the periodic code 
review.   
Since June 15, 1976, must conform to the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety 
Standards established under a law passed by the U.S. Congress.  The standards are administered by the 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).  Mobile homes are the only homes with a 
national building code. Modular homes are the only homes with a state code regardless of what 
municipality they are located in.  Title 30-A ยง 4358(2)(E) state that modular homes must be allowed in all 
zones where other single family homes are allowed. Modular homes built prior to 1973 cannot be verified 
because there was no requirement for a seal.    
Impact fees are charged in areas where there is a need for increased services created by new 
development regardless of the type of building. They can include extending fire and EMS services into 
areas beyond current coverage areas as part of a municipal contract, septic system impact fees in areas 
where municipalities are responsible for on going monitoring of urban impaired streams, waste water 
impact fees to decouple historic combined sewer and stormwater connections as required by EPA rules 
and mobile park fees often around $5 per lot for the offset of individualized lot taxes billed to the lease 
holder instead of the land owner.  All fees charged by a municipality must be based on the extra burden 
that is created by the activity and must be reasonable and directly related to that activity.  
Mobile home parks are allowed on private lots that may not comply with all design and 
construction standards including the pre-1976 standards as long as they are capable of being maintained 
and operated in a safe and sanitary condition. Some parks have quasi-private water companies to provide 
that service to the residents and those must meet ongoing state drinking water guidelines. Fees are 
associated with making sure these private water districts are providing safe and potable water to the 
residents in the community and provide the benefit of municipal enforcement against the park owner on 

their behalf when they do not. This remains and important life safety protection and fees associated 
should be allowed to be assessed on the park owner.  
As no municipal fees is excessive or based on the type of building only the type of development 
and increase in municipal oversight, the burdens of this policy will need to be shouldered by the taxpayers 
of the rest of the community if LD 1825 is passed. For these reasons, municipal officials ask that you 
remove the restrictions on charging additional fees and the prevention of building permits from being 
issued to protect not only the manufactured homeowner, but the rest of the community. 
