 
 
May 12, 2023 
 
RE:  LD 1825 – In Support 
 
 
 Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and distinguished members of the Committee on 
State and Local Government, I’m Representative Dick Bradstreet from House District 61, which 
is comprised of my home town of Vassalboro and most of Sidney.  My apologies for not being 
before you in person today, but I’m enjoying attending my grandson’s college graduation.  I am 
writing to support LD 1825, An Act to Clarify Licensing Jurisdiction for Manufactured Housing 
Communities. I would like to thank Senate President Jackson for bringing this bill forward. 
 
 In addition to serving in the Legislature, I also work part time as the Executive Director 
of the Manufactured Housing Association of Maine, a membership organization that is made up 
of manufactured and modular home manufacturers, retailers, lenders, manufactured home 
communities and other affiliated businesses.  I’m quite familiar with licensing requirements for 
our various types of members.  First of all, manufactured home construction and installation is 
completely within the jurisdiction of the Department of Housing and Urban Development.  The 
“HUD Code” preempts any and all state and local building codes.  It is the federal law and was 
originally established to avoid having a complete mishmash of codes in different states and 
localities.  The homes are inspected during the construction process by independent third 
parties that are approved by HUD.  In Maine, oversight and compliance with the federally 
established building standards and installations come under the authority of the State of Maine 
Manufactured Housing Board, which conducts random inspections of the homes and their 
installations.  Local authorities have no jurisdiction over such matters.   
 
 Manufactured housing communities also come under the jurisdiction of the 
Manufactured Housing Board, which has promulgated rules and regulations to which the 
communities must adhere.  Periodic inspections are done by the Board in every licensed 
manufactured housing community in the state to ensure compliance.  Recently it has been 
brought to my attention that a number of municipalities are charging fees for doing different 
types of “inspections” of these communities on matters over which they have no authority. This 
is wrong, duplicative, unwarranted and expensive – not something we need as Maine is 
struggling to create affordable housing.  LD 1825 will further clarify any misconceptions 
currently existing. 
 
 I hope you will support LD 1825 and move it “Ought to Pass”.   Thank you. 
