St %Ianul"actured 
OIIIC8 
126 Route1 
Scarborough, ME 04074 
Testimony in SUPPORT of LD 1825 (” An Act to Clarify Licensing Jurisdiction for Manufactured Housing 
Communities ”) 
Theresa Desfosses, President, State Manufactured Homes, Inc. May 12, 2023 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and Members of-the Committee on State and Local Government. 
My name is Theresa Desfosses. I am president of State Manufactured Homes in Scarborough. We area 
family owned and operated business that was started by my parents in 1944. The second, third and 
fourth generation are now working at our business. We are truly a family business. 
We own Hillcrest Retirement Community and Pinecrest Community, both in Scarborough. We have 454 
sites for manufactured homes in our two communities. 
We support LD 1825. 
Manufactured Housing is unique. The homes are built in a factory to building standards and codes 
promulgated and enforced by HUD, the Federal Agency of Housing and Urban Development. The homes 
are inspected in the factory by a licensed third party inspection agency during the manufacturing 
process, in addition to the quality control personnel employed by the manufacturer. HUD imposes _ 
requirements for site preparation, the cement slab, and all other facets of thetinstallation. The State of 
Maine Manufactured Housing Boad is the State Administrative Agent for the Department of Housing and 
Uran Development. All inspections of HUD Code manufactured homes~and the installation are the 
responsibility of the State of Maine Manufactured Housing Board. They are built and installed to Federal 
Standards that preempt all municipal requirements. ln fact, cities and towns have no jurisdiction and 
cannot even inspect a HUD Code home: either the home itself or the installation. Municipalities 
charging a fee for a permit for the home or the installation is wrong and only adds an unnecessary cost 
for the consumer. Remember, manufactured homes are unsubsidized affordable housing. 
Every manufactured housing community in the State is licensed and inspected by the State of Maine 
Manufactured Housing Board. We pay an annual licensing fee for each lot to the State of Maine. Many 
towns and cities in Maine unnecessarily and inappropriately impose licensing fees and inspection fees 
for manufactured housing communities over areas they have no jurisdiction. The State of Maine license 
for a community should be accepted by any town or city in Maine since compliance with the rules is 
required for the issuance and maintaining of a License. 
Please support LD 1825 
Office (207) 883-2512 Fax (207) 883-8089 
statemanufacturedhomes.com
