To: Senator Nagle, Representative Stover and Members of the Committee of State and Local Government 
From: Tinamarie Smith, President, Manufactured Housing Association of Maine 
RE: LD 1825 "An Act to Clarify Licensing Jurisdiction for Manufactured Housing Communities"
\ 
Dear Senator Nagle, Representative Stover and Esteemed Members of the Committee of State and Local 
Government, 
I am writing to you today in strong support of LD 1825 "An Act to Clarify Licensing Jurisdiction for 
Manufactured Housing Communities" presented to you by Senate President Troy Jackson on our behalf. 
l apologize for not being present to give my testimony in person, l will be in Boston for medical 
treatment on Friday when the bill is being heard. l would like to participate in the work session when it 
is scheduled. I can be reached at 207-883-2512 or by email at tina.smith.smh@gmaiI.com 
Some cities and towns in the state of Maine impose unnecessary and often inappropriate licensing 
fees and inspection fees on Manufactured Housing Communities within our state. We feel that this isa 
hold over from before the establishment of the Maine Manufactured Housing Board which was 
established in the mid 1980's. Commissioner Ann Head is in charge of this Board, and Peter Holmes is 
the Executive Director. They also employee two full time ﬁeld inspectors and an administrative assistant 
who are all excellent and make sure that all of the communities remain licensed by the state and in 
compliance with all rules and regulations regarding our industry. 
Our industry experts feel that where we are licensed by the State that it is unnecessary, and often 
burdensome and costly to be licensed by the towns we operate in, especially since we are also regulated 
by the Federal Government entity known as HUD. There are third party inspectors who also inspect the 
homes and installation of the homes both in the factories where they are built and then once they are 
placed on site and erected by state licensed installers who place an installation seal underneath the 
kitchen sink in all of the homes that they put together. The ﬁeld inspectors will then randomly choose 
HUD code manufactured homes to inspect and certify and they are also very thorough. 
Town building inspectors do not have jurisdiction over the manufactured housing communities or 
manufactured housing that we sell to consumers- lf there is ever a problem, the consumer calls, writes 
or emails a complaint to the Manufactured Housing Board and the matter is promptly corrected. 
The field inspectors employed by the Manufactured Housing Board frequently visit manufactured 
housing communities and do thorough inspections of each community, and if a complaint is made bya 
resident in the interim, they will come out to inspect and order any corrections that may be needed. 
The problem of certain municipality overreach is very important to our already extremely regulated 
industry and we would ask for your help in solving this. 
Thank you for your time and attention to this matter. 
l3_e7>ectfulIy, I 
Tinamarie Smith, President 
Manufactured Housing Association of Maine
