4/19/23  
Administrative Office of the Courts 
P.O. Box 4820, Portland, Maine 04112-4820 
Tel: (207) 822-0792 FAX:  (207) 822-0781 TTY: (207) 822-0701 
 
Julia Finn, Esq.         Tel:  (207) 822-0767 
Legislative Analyst         julia.finn@courts.maine.gov  
 
Judicial Branch testimony in opposition to LD 1468, An Act to Ensure Equal 
Treatment by the Law Court by Requiring Seven Justices to Decide All Cases: 
 
 Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Julie Finn and I represent the Judicial Branch. I would like to provide 
testimony and comments regarding this bill.  
 
 I recently testified before this committee regarding LD 1192, which reduced the number 
of Supreme Court Justices from seven to five. The seven-member court has served Maine well 
for reasons that include: appropriate timelines for the issuance of decisions, maintaining the 
flexibility to withstand recusals and court vacancies, and having a greater opportunity for 
diversity of viewpoints and experience among the justices.   
 
 The Law Court hears oral argument in some cases, and considers other cases on briefs 
without oral argument. See M.R. App. P. 11. Unlike some state and federal appellate courts, our 
Supreme Judicial Court sits “en banc,” meaning all Justices then available generally sit on the 
cases. Rule 12 of the Rules of Appellate Procedure permits a case to be heard by as few as three 
Justices, but that has not occurred in anyone’s memory. We also believe there have been very 
few cases where only four Justices heard the cases, and it is fair to say that occurred only in cases 
where oral argument was waived, which tend to be more straightforward than other cases.     
 
 However, requiring that seven justices sit on every appeal would create many difficulties 
for the Judicial Branch. I would point out that the Law Court works hard to schedule oral 
arguments when all non-recused justices are available, and the rules permit a Justice to 
participate in a case even if the Justice is not present at oral argument.  
 
 There are several reasons why a full court of seven may not be available on any case.  
First, Justices must recuse from cases because of conflicts or the appearance of conflicts on a 
regular basis; recusals happen about 75 times each year.  That is not the number of cases but 
rather the number of recusals; sometimes there may be more than one recusal in a case.   
 

4/19/23  Second, at times there are court vacancies and thus fewer than seven Justices available.  
This has varied over the years.  While there were no vacancies from mid-2015 to the end of 
2019, there have been five vacancies since early 2020.  Indeed, the position of Chief Justice was 
vacant for about 14 months.  For the period of 2019 through 2022, there were 413 cases in which 
the court had six or fewer members.  Averaging it out over the long term, there could be as many 
as 100 occasions annually where there is a vacancy. 
 
 Third, there are other reasons why Justices may not be available to sit on every case, 
including illness, vacation, work load, and the like.  Although occurring primarily on cases 
resulting in memoranda of decision, this could also result in needing an additional Justice as 
much as 80 times per year. 
 
 If an Active Retired Justice were to fill any panel vacancies that might occur, issues 
regarding both cost and availability would result. Active Retired Justices currently receive a flat 
rate of $350/day and $200/half day although an increase has been requested in the budget. The 
time spent by an ARJ might only be a couple of hours for some more straightforward cases, or 
several days for more complex cases with oral argument.  And that assumes the ARJ is not an 
authoring Justice.  As you can see, the cost of ensuring that seven Justices sit on every case 
would be significant.   
 
 Presently, there are only three Active Retired Justices that previously sat on the Supreme 
Judicial Court and would be able to fill in. They have limits on their availability, however, and 
would not cover the need that would be created by a seven-justice requirement. 
 
 The bill allows trial court jurists to sit on panels of the Law Court, presumably to address 
this problem. There are several concerns with this approach. First, there is a wall of 
confidentiality between the Law Court and the trial courts, not just on individual cases but on 
processes and discussions.  The Justices would have to take care in the discussions involving a 
trial court jurist that would undermine the collegiality and intellectual sharing that are part of 
being a Law Court Justice.   
 
 Second, one of the common reasons for recusals of recently-appointed Law Court 
Justices is their involvement in the case in the trial court. Floating between trial work and 
appellate work would make it very challenging to avoid conflicts of interest. 
 
 Finally, and perhaps most critically, Superior Court Justices and District Court Judges are 
scheduled months in advance on many different case types, including jam-packed criminal 
dockets and jury trial lists, and are working toward addressing the criminal backlog. They would 
have little availability and what time they did have would be better spent addressing the pressing 
matters before the trial court.  
 
 This bill would create a confusing situation that would be expensive and likely increase 
the backlog. Any possible benefits would be outweighed by these factors. 
 
 For these reasons, the Judicial Branch opposes LD 1468. Thank you for your 
consideration. 
 
 
