1. . hrs, 
Richard A. Bennett _:,' ,, 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 18 6. i 
Augusta, Maine 04333J
“ 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
LD 1468, “An Act to Ensure Equal Treatment by the Law Court by Requiring 7 Justices to 
Decide All Cases” 
19 April 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on the Judiciary. l am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and I have the honor of 
serving the people of 14 communities in Western Maine in the State Senate. I am here to 
introduce LD 1468, “An Act to Ensure Equal Treatment by the Law Court by Requiring 7 
Justices to Decide All Cases." 
Without question, ensuring the integrity of Maine’s highest court should a top priority. The Law 
Court has the ﬁnal word in Maine law for our citizens. Because of that reality there ought to be 
consistency and transparency across all cases. This is why I have submitted LD 1468 to require 
seven justices to decide all cases. 
Currently, there are many cases heard and decided by fewer than the full panel of justices, and 
there is opacity as to why this is. There are many beneﬁts to ensuring that a full seven jurists 
hear all cases. First, adding differing perspectives can change the outcome or reﬁne the ﬁnal 
decision of a case. When fewer than seven justices are participating due to retirements or 
recusals the absence can have very real consequences for the Maine people who come before the 
court for justice. 
In Sirois v. Town of Rangeley, only six justices decided the case, resulting in a 3-3 split decision. 
and therefore. the trial court’s decision stood. Had seven justices been present the case could 
have been decided differently. ln Kennelly v. Mid Coast Hospital, a 4-1 decision was reached: 
however, that case was reargued because three positions were vacant, apparently to geta 
decision. Why wasn’t Sirois v. Town of Rangeley also reargued as many other split decisions 
are? It is not clear why some cases are reargued, when others are not. There is too much 
discretion in the number of justices that are hearing a case, whether active retired justices are 
empaneled or not, and how and when justices are chosen to ﬁll in on a given case. This lack of 
transparency is concerning and would be eliminated with the passage of LD 1468. 
To be clear, the intent here is not to force an active retired justice to return and serve; this is 
meant to be voluntary. A language tweak to the proposal before you may be needed to ensure 
this is understood. The proposal would allow that, should an active retired justice not be 
available to fill out the court, a qualiﬁed Superior Court justice or District Court judge. who has 
volunteered. should be called up. 
Fax: (207) 287 -1527 * '/"l')'(207) 287-1583 * Me.s'.vage Se/‘vice I-80!)--/23-690!) * We/9 Sire: legislature.nzainc.gov/senate
This practice of utilizing justices from lower courts is not unique. In fact, this takes place in the 
Federal Circuit Court Federal District Court judges are often deployed to serve on Circuit Court 
panels. This is also happening right now in Maine courts when it comes to lawyer discipline 
cases. If it is good enough to ensure justice in these cases, it is good enough for cases that affect 
other Mainers. 
Opponents of this legislation may say this decision should be up to the Law Court. Yet. I would 
argue the current way of doing things lacks sufficient transparency and consistency. When those 
two elements are missing. confidence in our justice system suffers. Opponents may also worry 
that utilizing judges from the Superior and District Court may contribute to the backlog ofcases. 
I believe a trial court judge would only be needed once a month or so. Additionally, this concern 
could be mitigated if the Governor fully staffed the trial courts. 
I would be pleased to address any questions you may have. Thank you.
