Statement of Mitchell Wheeler, Director of Security 
Cary Medical Center and Houlton Regional Hospital 
April 19, 2023 
Thank you Chairman Baldacci and Vice-Chair, Michele Myer for taking my testimony today in 
regard to LD 1485, An Act to provide Hospital Security in Aroostook County. Just a little of my 
background. I served in the US Military from 1991 — 2003 and left that service to pursuea 
career in law enforcement. I attended the police academy and then served in law enforcement 
in southern Maine before relocating to Aroostook County where I worked for some time untilI 
left the field and attended college earning a degree as a physical therapy assistant. However, 
my true passion was in security and I took the opportunity to join Cary Medical Center as 
Director of their hospital security program, and later, through a joint-relationship between Cary 
and Houlton Regional Hospital, I now serve as the Director of Security in a shared capacity 
between these two Aroostook County Hospitals. At the outset of my work with Cary I was 
shocked by the number of security incidents involving patients interacting with our staff, 
particularly in our Emergency Department. However I quickly learned that this trend of 
increasing violence in healthcare is an emerging crisis. National data reveals that 44% of nurses 
report experiencing physical violence in the workplace and 68% have been verbally abused. 
Data from our own security program at Cary Medical Center documents nearly 400 violent or 
potentially violent incidents in 2022 alone. At Houlton Regional Hospital, positioned in the 
community which houses the Aroostook County Jail, the data unfortunately repeats itself with 
an annualized number of violent or potentially violent incidents is nearly 500. Due to multiple 
issues involving the COVID 19 pandemic, violence in health care has consistently increased with 
no sign of slowing down. This new and growing threat of violence makes the idea of relying on 
local police or other law enforcement to respond to these incidents no longer a practical 
response. Having immediate access to in house security 24-7 is now what is required to protect 
both our staff and other at risk patients. 
This increasing risk to hospital staff and patients has led to additional costs for in-house 
security. A recent Labor Cost Study by the Maine Hospital Association showed that hospital 
labor costs related to security have grown by 78% from 2019 — 2022 now approaching $12 
million dollars. So critical is this issue that in the time that this bill has been coming together 
both Cary Medical Center and Houlton Regional Hospital have been forced to hire several 
additional security officers already and put a new emphasis on in-house security. Due to the 
collaborative relationship that exists between the two hospitals we were able to share one 
Security Director saving considerable cost. The establishment of 24-7 in-house security isa 
new, and considerable cost for the hospitals and will be a permanent expenditure. We would 
ask that the proposed funding provided by LD 1485 would be granted to support either personnel needs 
and/or capital needs to help address these security issues. If used for capital expenditures, such items 
as enhanced surveillance equipment, additional lock-down capacity and perhaps even metal detection
systems to help ensure that weapons are not entering the hospital facilities to help avoid putting staff 
and other patients at risk for harm. 
The one-time funding would best be used to provide such items as enhanced surveillance 
equipment, additional lock-down capacity and perhaps even metal detection systems to help 
ensure that weapons are not entering the hospital facilities to help avoid putting staff and other 
patients at risk for harm. 
The question may be asked, what is the driving force behind this exponential increase in 
hospital related violence and there are many considerations. One contributing factor is the 
number of patients, often with psychiatric, behavioral or substance use disorders who often 
have to face days or even weeks in the hospital Emergency Department awaiting placement at 
an appropriate facility. Additionally some of our in-patients find themselves in the same 
situation ‘Awaiting Placement ’ and many require one on one security observation, 24 hoursa 
day. Hospitals are reimbursed $200/day for patients awaiting placement. That fee does not 
even cover the cost ofthe one on one security. 
While this bill, 1485, speaks to the funding of two specific hospitals, neither Cary Medical 
Center nor Houlton Regional Hospital would be opposed to alternatively making this one-time 
allocation or grant funding available to other rural hospitals facing similar security needs. 
Violence in health care impacts not only the victim but the ability to provide quality patient 
care. It also threatens the health care workforce, already in short supply, with burnout or by 
influencing their decision to enter the field in the first place. 
As someone on the front lines of providing hospital security I can attest to this very alarming 
trend and the threat it poses to our staff and our patients. I urge you to support LD1485. 
Thank you.
