Amanda Jandreau
Poland
LD 1079
As a parent of three children who have been subjected to the toxic behavior of 
narcissistic grandparents, I respectfully oppose to the passing of the grandparent 
rights bill. I do agree that children can benefit from grandparent involvement in their 
lives however, when this involvement becomes overbearing, controlling and 
dangerous in terms of important boundaries being broken by the grandparents it has to
stop. My children have personally been the victims of narcissistic grandparent abuse 
until restraining orders and police involvement were put into place. Sometimes even a
restraining order is not enough to protect children from toxic grandparents because in 
my childrens case, one of the grandparents still violated the protection order further 
scaring my child and making matters worse. Because of the grandparents persistent 
boundary and rule breaking behavior, my oldest child now suffers from OCD and has 
been in therapy for almost four years. He fears our home will be broken into and/or 
that the grandparents will steal him or try to harm myself and or his father in order to 
get him and his sisters. This is due to the grandparents coming into our home while 
my husband and I were at work one day no long after we had cut off the grandparents.
The grandmother assaulted our sitter and woke my children up from the safety of their
own home without permission. This is the definition of extreme toxic grandparent 
behavior. These same set of toxic grandparents are currently pushing for this bill to 
pass and I am here to tell you that it is vital that it does not. I know that even if this 
bill is passed, my children will not be affected, but other children who also have a set 
of toxic grandparents like my children do, need to be protected from this happening to
them. Please leave the bill as it is and understand that not all grandparents are worthy 
of being involved in the grandchildrens lives. As a parent, we all want the very best 
for our children and in this case, no involvement is just that. Thank you for taking the 
time to read my testimony. 
