Janet Curcio Wilson
Weare
LD 1079
I support LD 1079 as a mother, a grandmother and a PhD Psychology doctoral student
at Pacifica Graduate Institute. I believe the APA (American Psychological Assoc.) 
stands against "Parental Alienation" and considers this to be when two parents are 
divorced and one parent chooses to actively undermine and discredit the other parent, 
oftentimes refusing to cooperate in raising the child collaboratively. If parental 
alienation is frowned upon, why isn't grandparent estrangement also frowned upon? 
Parents who choose to amputate their own child's lineage in this manor are 
participating in elder abuse. There is no greater pain for a parent than for their own 
adult child to cut them off from communication with their blood line, their 
grandchildren.  No matter what the parents' issue is with their mother or father, 
alienating their children from a loving grandparent is incomprehensible and not 
healthy for the grandchildren. It amounts to using the child as a weapon to hurt the 
grandparent.
Traditional psychology trains counselors and therapists in an out-dated protocol 
called, "Low contact-No contact."  First, the counselor suggests if a parent does not 
get along with their own parent to "set boundaries." Then, maintain these boundaries 
with little contact controlled by them. Sadly, this protocol was designed for only the 
most severe circumstances whereby the adult child (parent) was abused emotionally 
or physically. In today's culture there are numerous Facebook sites dedicated to 
estranging one's parents for the slightest disagreement.
The protocol goes on - once the grandparent tries to lovingly reach out to their adult 
child, these adults are mis-counseled to then go "No-Contact" and cut the grandparent
off completely. It is a very sad state of affairs in today's "cancel culture" to "swipe 
left" on one's loving parents over small disagreements. Gone are the days of lovingly 
disagreeing and finding common ground. The psychology training in peace-making 
and collaboration are fading.
The child is the victim in this case. Having a loving grandparent is every child's right. 
The research is clear. Children who grow up with a loving grandparent are more 
likely to lead stable and loving lives in solid relationships. The tiny percentage of 
adult children who have cause to create distance between themselves and their parents
is VERY small. Sadly, the common practice of estrangement is eroding family values 
and  valuable ancestral ties. 
Please consider the grandchildren when making the decision in Main to allow 
Grandparent visitation. Why not have the first and second visit supervised by an 
MSW, as a child advocate? Then, if all goes well, grant Grandparent Visitation 
thereafter? Please keep in mind this law respects the rights of children, who had 
nothing to do with the reason their own parent resolved their own adolescence or not, 
to exercise their rights to remain attached to loving grandparents.  Thank you.
