judy dinsmore
caribou
LD 1079
Testimony in favor for LD1079
An act regarding visitation rights for Grandparents
April 3, 2023
My name is Judy Dinsmore, I’m writing today to let you know how important it is to 
me to have grandparents and other family members in the lives of grandchildren.
My sister and brother-in-law, loves their grandchildren. They were there for 
everything the children needed, events they were in, to be picked up from school, 
taken care of when their parents needed to go or do things without the children; they 
were an integral part of their grandchildren’s lives. So many grandchildren rely on the
grandparents to take care of them when needed.
When my siblings and I were growing up, taking a child’s relationship away from 
family members wasn’t a thing that was readily known.  Grandparents, Aunts, Uncles,
and Cousins were never removed from grandchildren’s lives – we were needed to 
make the family whole…a well-rounded time in a child’s life.
I was present in court with my sister and brother-in-law when they had to stand before
the judge – a stranger, and ask if they could see their grandchildren…their own flesh 
and blood, and to continue to be part of their lives.  Painstakingly, the judge did not 
grant the rights. We’re talking about grandparents that were nothing but loving family
members.  Unfortunately, that day was the last our side of the family were allowed to 
be a part of the children’s lives.  We all were erased – just like that!
That day I also experienced just how many other grandparents were in court asking to 
be part of their grandchildren’s lives. 
It is shocking to me how some of the young parents today, do not understand how 
important the grandparent/grandchild bond is. We’re talking about human beings here
– children who should never be involved in adulating or know about any 
disagreements between parents, grandparents and other family members.  In the end –
who are the ones being hurt – yes, the children.  
  
I can only assume each and every one of you know that this world needs all the love 
people and family members can give one another.
Thank you for taking the time to read my letter of support for this bill.
Respectfully,
Judy Dinsmore
Caribou, Maine 

