March 30, 2023 
 To The Members of the Senate Judiciary Committee, 
If you were told that you had to eliminate art or music from life, what would you choose to let go? To eliminate 
one of these tones of human expression would amount to suffocating loss.  
If I look back at my almost-49 years on this planet, I cannot imagine who I would be today if one of my parents had 
selfishly decided to alienate from my life one set of my grandparents. How could I ever fathom choosing between 
the unique tones of love, guidance, support, treasure, legacy, and joy that each of my grandparents and great-
grandparents (as well as my great-aunt) gave me as I grew up? To do so would be to amputate part of who I am. 
From baking cookies to rushing me to Boston Children’s Hospital in the middle of the night, the unconditional love 
of a grandparent, whether biologically related or not, weaves an immeasurable force of strength, belonging, 
identity, and self-worth in a child that is integral to his or her development. Does a child deserve only half of that? 
Or none of it? 
As my sister and I grew up, my parents became grandparents and my grandparents became great-grands of four 
beautiful children: The eldest of those children is my only child, Brycen who I adopted from Portland DHS at age 
11. My son’s traumatic past disabled him, but as he began to thrive within the embrace of his forever family, I 
fantasized about the joys of one day becoming a Nana myself! Imagine how I felt in April 2017 when my son, then 
23, announced to me, “Mom, you’re going to be a Nana!”  
But in the span of five months, my joy would collapse into the worst two tragedies of my life… 
My son was very vulnerable. Not only was he on the autism spectrum, he was in the throes of a severe relapse of 
PTSD. The circumstances in which Brycen became a father were not ideal, as both he and the baby’s mother were 
survivors of childhood trauma. However, for six weeks, I bonded with my unborn granddaughter when her mother 
stayed with my son and I. This arrangement enraged the young woman’s family. After the young woman returned 
to her family, Brycen believed that he would be pushed out of his daughter’s life once she was born, and with his 
history, he could not bear a loss of this magnitude. On September 27, 2017, Brycen committed suicide. Two and a 
half months later, my beautiful granddaughter was born. In spite of my attempts to extend friendship to the baby’s 
maternal side, my side of the family was erased from my grandchild’s life. Imagine the horror—the breath-taking 
anguish—of losing your child to death and then your grandchild to alienation.  
On behalf of my granddaughter, who has a developmental need to know her daddy’s legacy and the love of our 
family, I beg you to support LD 1079. It has been 5 long years, and I have yet to meet her. As the statute now 
stands, I cannot get relief from the court—In 2018 when all else failed, I petitioned the court for Grandparent 
Visitation Rights and I learned that as of 2018, grandparents no longer have standing if their own child has died 
and they are barred from having a relationship with their grandchild. When my case was thrown out of court due 
to the 2018 statute changes, I wanted to crawl in the ground with my son in the embrace of death. However, I 
stand before you today, the originator of LD 1079, so that someday I will be able to hold my granddaughter in my 
arms and tell her how much her daddy loved her and how Nana is willing to go to the ends of the earth for her—
Even amend a law for her! 
Sincerely, 
Laurie A. Couture 
Grandmother of a child who lives in Lisbon Falls 
Laurie A. Couture
Granddaughter resides in Lisbon Falls
LD 1079
If you were told that you had to eliminate art or music from life, what would you 
choose to let go? To eliminate one of these tones of human expression would amount 
to suffocating loss. 
If I look back at my almost-49 years on this planet, I cannot imagine who I would be 
today if one of my parents had selfishly decided to alienate from my life one set of my
grandparents. How could I ever fathom choosing between the unique tones of love, 
guidance, support, treasure, legacy, and joy that each of my grandparents and 
great-grandparents gave me as I grew up? To do so would be to amputate part of who 
I am. From baking cookies to rushing me to Boston Children’s Hospital in the middle 
of the night, the unconditional love of a grandparent, whether biologically related or 
not, weaves an immeasurable force of strength, belonging, identity, and self-worth in 
a child that is integral to his or her development. Does a child deserve only half of 
that? Or none of it?
As my sister and I grew up, my parents became grandparents and my grandparents 
became great-grands of four beautiful children: The eldest of those children is my 
only child, Brycen who I adopted from Portland DHS at age 11. My son’s traumatic 
past disabled him, but as he began to thrive within the embrace of his forever family, I
fantasized about the joys of one day becoming a Nana myself! Imagine how I felt in 
April 2017 when my son, then 23, announced to me, “Mom, you’re going to be a 
Nana!” 
But in the span of five months, my joy would collapse into the worst two tragedies of 
my life…
My son was very vulnerable. Not only was he on the autism spectrum, he was in the 
throes of a severe relapse of PTSD. The circumstances in which Brycen became a 
father were not ideal, as both he and the baby’s mother were survivors of childhood 
trauma. However, for six weeks, I bonded with my unborn granddaughter when her 
mother stayed with my son and I. This arrangement enraged the young woman’s 
family. After the young woman returned to her family, Brycen believed that he would
be pushed out of his daughter’s life once she was born, and with his history, he could 
not bear a loss of this magnitude. On September 27, 2017, Brycen committed suicide. 
Two and a half months later, my beautiful granddaughter was born. In spite of my 
attempts to extend friendship to the baby’s maternal side, my side of the family was 
erased from my grandchild’s life. Imagine the horror—the breath-taking anguish—of 
losing your child to death and then your grandchild to alienation. 
On behalf of my granddaughter, I beg you to support LD 1079. It has been 5 long 
years, and I have yet to meet her. As the statute now stands, I cannot get relief from 
the court—As of 2018, grandparents no longer have standing if their own child has 
died and they are barred from having a relationship with their grandchild. When my 
case was thrown out of court due to the 2018 statute changes, I wanted to crawl in the 
ground with my son in the embrace of death. However, I stand before you today, the 
originator of LD 1079, so that someday I will be able to hold my granddaughter in my
arms and tell her how much her daddy loved her and how Nana is willing to go to the 
ends of the earth for her—Even amend a law for her!

