Pinette, Susan 
From: Laurie A Couture <LAC@LaurieACouture.com> 
Sent: Monday, April 3, 2023 3:25 PM 
To: Carney, Anne; Moonen, Matt 
Cc: Bailey, Donna; Brakey, Eric; Andrews, John; Dana, Aaron; Haggan, David; Henderson, 
Rachel; Kuhn, Amy; Lee, Adam; Moriarty, Steve; Poirier, Jennifer; Ga|gayReckitt, Lois; 
Sheehan, Erin; JUD; Nixon, Lucia; Prawer, Samuel; Stocco, Janet; Pouiiot, Matthew; Trey 
Stewart 
Subject: My suggestions for amending LD 1079 
This message originates from outside the Maine Legislature. 
Honorable Chairs and Judiciary Committee, 
Thank you for hearing my testimony this afternoon for LD 1079 regarding Grandparent Visitation. One of the 
Committee members asked me a question and I was able to raise concerns regarding some of the language of 
LD 1079. I ask that you please consider amending the bill, LD 1079, at these Sections and Subsections below, 
with my reasoning included. 
Sec. l. l. 
- Adoption from DHHS foster care custody legally severs the biological family from the child for good 
reason: A history of severe abuse and neglect. The section could be adjusted to state that a biological 
parent whose legal rights were terminated by DHHS due to substantiated abuse and neglect would not be 
allowed to later petition for grandparents rights. 
- I would not want the biological family of my deceased son to gain access to my granddaughter, for her 
protection. I adopted my son, and he did not want his biological mother to ever meet his child. My 
(adoptive) son was raped, sexually abused, physically and emotionally abused, severely neglected, and 
witnessed unconscionable acts as a toddler in his biological family. 
o The section should be adjusted to reﬂect that STEP-PARENT adoption should NOT sever the legal 
rights of the grandparent whose child is deceased (i.e., If the child's living parent marries/remarries 
after the deceased parent dies and that step-parent adopts the child). Step-parent adoption should be 
viewed through a different lens than DHHS foster care adoption. 
~ In my situation, my grandchild's mother married in 2021. The step-father could possibly adopt my 
grandchild, and I would need protection from this act severing my right to petition. 
Sec 3. 1-A. 
o Should include previous attempts at mediation. Mediation in my case was attempted in 2018, but my 
granddaughter's mother refused to mediate and it was considered by the judge as a "failure" . 
- Provision must be made when the grandchild's gatekeeper parent refuses to have any contact with the 
parent of the deceased parent or has threatened them with legal action. 
0 In my situation, my granddaughter's mother will not respond to any attempts to reconcile and in fact, in 
2018, frivolous attempts to use the police and a false restraining order against me were attempted to 
prevent me from petitioning for visitation. 
Sec. 3. 1-B. (1) and (2)
1
o Provision must be made for grandparents who have never been allowed to meet their grandchildren or 
were cut out of the grandchild's life before the grandchild could remember them. 
~ My granddaughter was born after my son's death and I have never been allowed to meet my 
granddaughter, and she has no knowledge of me, my family, and probably of her father. 
See 5. 19-A. 3. L. 
o Provision must be made when grandchild's parent died before birth, at birth, or at an age when they 
C8.l’111O'[ remember the parent, noting the effect of complex, lifelong grief of a parent never known, as 
well as lost identity and comection to the deceased parent's legacy. 
Sec 5. 19-A. 3. M. 
e Evidence would include: The parent or legal guardian is barring the parent of the deceased parent from 
accessing the grandchild due to deliberate Grandparent Alienation/estrangement (which is the 
counterpart to Parent Alienation, known to be destructive and harmful to children). 
Sec 5. 19-A. 3. N. 
o Could include: "including Grandparent Alienation" (which is the counterpart to Parent Alienation, 
known to be destructive and harmful to children). 
My situation in a nut shell so as to qualify my suggestions for changes: 
0 My son Brycen was removed from his birthfamily by Portland DHHS in 1998 at age 4 due to severe 
sexual and physical abuse and abject neglect. 
- I legally adopted Brycen at age 11 from DHHS in 2005. 
~ Brycen was disabled and sired a child in 2017 due to Brycen being manipulated and mentally 
compromised. 
o Brycen loved his unborn baby and Wanted her raised in our home where I could help, given his 
disabilities. 
- The baby's mother texted, posted on social media, and took other actions suggesting that her family 
wanted to cut Brycen and our family out of the baby's life once born. 
~ Brycen committed suicide (partially as a result of these taunts and while in the midst of a severe PTSD 
relapse with delusions) before his daughter's birth. 
~ My granddaughter was born after Brycen's death and I (and my entire family) was immediately cut out 
of my granddaughter's life and barred from meeting my granddaughter. 
- In spite of cordial and respectful attempts to communicate and reconcile, my grandchild's mother and 
her family attempted to frivolously use the law against me in Dec 2017 and Jan 2018 to prevent 
communication. 
o My petition for grandparent visitation rights in June 2018 was thrown out of court in the Fall of 2018, 
due to the statute removing 1803: A and C. 
o My grandchild's mother married in 2021 and my fear is that if the step-father adopts my grandchild, that 
will further sever any litigation opportunity for me to petition to meet my grandchild. 
e My continued attempts to reconcile with my grandchild's mother are met with non-response anda 
refusal of my one attempt to visit in person in May 2022 (I was asked by the in-laws to leave their 
property). 
Thank you,
2
