I am speaking in favor of the passage of Bill LD 1079. 
 
To lose a child is a pain more bitter than any other.  It cannot be comprehended, 
appreciated, or understood unless one has experienced it.  To be isolated from 
one’s grandchildren also causes unbearable pain that one cannot fully explain so 
that others can feel the extent of it.  When my grandson, Brycen, died I was 
devastated, but when his baby daughter was born less than three months later, and I 
was not able to meet her, my pain only increased. 
 
A law that binds all grandparents and great grandparents from ever meeting or 
visiting their grandchildren is a cruel sentence.  It is also a cruel and damaging 
sentence for the grandchild to be deprived of love from a grand or great 
grandparent.   
 
A child deeply benefits from the love of both parents and grandparents on both 
sides of their family.  To block the grandchild’s access to a grand or great 
grandparent’s love certainly ensures psychological and physical consequences for 
that child the rest of their lives.  When a child grows older they question why they 
have never met that side of their family.  Will they believe they were not loved by 
that side, or are somehow not lovable, or not deserving of love, setting a child up 
for a lifetime of mental health problems of depression and anger?  I grew up with 
limited contact with my father in my life, after the age of 2 ½, and he died when I 
was young.  I believed I was not loved by the paternal side of my family, because 
they were not in my life.  These feelings of being unlovable affected me for 
decades. 
 
How can one ever replace years of love and fun play that will never be experienced 
by that grandchild with their grand or great grandparents?  Even if the grandchild 
meets their great grandparents when they are adults, a lifetime of memories will be 
forfeited.  Even worse, if the grands die before ever meeting that child, it is more 
of a tragedy for the grandchild, as no relationship is ever possible. 
 
I came close to dying on June 3, 2020 and needed emergency pacemaker surgery to 
save my life.  I am 72 years old and hope that I will live long enough to meet, hug, 
and kiss my great-granddaughter.  I purchase birthday, Christmas, Valentine’s 
Day, and Easter gifts and cards for my great-granddaughter and have a party for 
her displaying the gifts, cards and a dessert with lighted candles, including a 
framed photo of her Dad and stuffed animals for guests.  I then take pictures so I 
will hopefully be able to show and give her some day. 
 
In the case of my great granddaughter, she has lost not only our side of the family, 
but more importantly she has lost her father.  Because a father and a mother is so 
crucial to the lives of their children, the grand and great grandparents are the most 
important link left to tell a grandchild about their deceased parent.  Things they 
will never know otherwise about their parent. 
 
I believe in most cases this relationship will only benefit the child.  Thank you for 
allowing me to speak on this important bill. 
 
Linda F. Wade 
My Great Granddaughter resides in Lisbon Falls, Maine 
 
 
 
 
Bill LD 1079 - An Act Regarding Visitation Rights of Grandparents 
 
