.§ 6 
\' 
. * _== 
"i fzéqil 
arr: 31¢ 
~' 
Matthew G_PQu1iQt THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 15 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator Matthew Pouliot 
LD 1079 “An Act Regarding Visitation Rights of Grandparents ” 
Public Hearing: April 3, 2023 
Good morning Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Matt Pouliot and I represent Senate District 15, which 
includes central Kennebec County. I am before you today to present LD 1079, “An Act To 
Regarding Visitation Rights of Grandparents ”. 
Last year I was contacted by Laurie Couture a grandmother who shared her story with me, Which 
I ﬁnd very sad, and how she is not able to petition the court to see her granddaughter because of 
current statute. You will be hearing from her later today and I will let her explain her story. 
This bill amends the Grandparents Visitation Act and other provisions of law concerning 
grandparents in a number of ways. First, it removes the provision that terminates a grandparents 
right to visitation with, and access to, a grandchild when that grandchild has been adopted. It also 
amends provisions for a grandparent to petition the court for visitation with a grandchild by 
requiring mediation before the petition is ﬁled, if possible. When the parties are unable to 
accomplish mediation, it amends the provisions regarding standing for a grandparent to petition 
the court for visitation. 
Additionally, when the court is ruling on a grandparent visitation petition, in the criteria included 
regarding the best interests of the child, it includes for the court to consider the effect ona 
grieving child who has lost a parent of being denied visitation with a grandparent and any 
evidence that a parent or legal guardian of a child is not considering or acting in the best interests 
of the child. 
I hope you will give this bill your full consideration, and am happy to try and answer any 
questions you may have. Thank you. 
Stare House: (207) 287—1505 * Fax: (207) 287-1527 * T0IlFree: I-800-423-6900 * TTY: 711 
Mart.P0uIi0r@legisla1ure.mainagov * Web Site: legislature.maiI1e.g0v/senate
