Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
 
April 3 , 2023  
 
Senator Anne Carney , Chair  
Representative Matt Moonen , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Senator Carney , Representative Moonen , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary : 
 
This letter is to provide information regarding OCFS opposition to LD 1079 , An Act Regarding 
Visitation Rights of Grandparents . This bill would amend provisions of law regarding visitation by 
grandparents and great -grandparents by removing the provision that terminates a grandparent’s right to 
visitation with and access to a grandchild when that grandchild is adopted, amending the provisions 
regarding standing for a grandparent to petition the cou rt for visitation with and access to a grandchild to 
require mediation before the  petition is filed (if possible), amend the provisions regarding standing for a 
grandparent to petition the court for visitation and access to a grandchild when the parties ar e unable to 
accomplish mediation, and adding to the criteria in the best interest of the child analysis for the courts 
when ruling on a grandparent visitation petition (new criteria would include the effect on a grieving 
child who has lost a parent of  being denied visitation with and access to a grandparent and any evidence 
that a parent or legal guardian of a child is not considering or acting in the best interest of the child).  
 
OCFS’ opposition is focused on concerns with proposed changes to Title 22, C hapter 1071, specifically 
22 MRSA §4005 -H. Section six of this bill would remove the language that automatically suspends a 
grandparent’s rights of visitation when a child is placed in a prospective adoptive home and an adoption 
placement agreement has bee n signed. OCFS believes the law, as currently written , is appropriate as it 
provides a mechanism for the court to continue visitation with these relatives if its in the child’ best 
interest to do so.   
 
When appropriate, OCFS seeks to encourage and facilitate ongoing contact between children and 
members of their biological family when a child protective case ends in termination of parental rights . 
Notwithstanding , when a family steps forward to adopt a child and is approved to do so through an 
adopti on placement agreement , they should have the discretion to determine whether ongoing contact 
serves  the child’s best interest  in the absence of a court’s determination to the contrary . The adoption 
placement agreement signals the Department’s determination  that pre -adoptive parents are competent 
and qualified to make all decisions on behalf of the child once adoption is finalized , particularly in light 
of the trauma they may have experienced with their family of origin .  
 
The circumstances of every child’s adoption are unique, and this broad change would shift an undue 
burden on the prospective adoptive parents to seek legal counsel and remedies to ongoing grandparent 
visitation if they believe it to no longer be in the best interest of the child. The law, a s currently written,  
strikes an appropriate balance between the interests of grandparents, the best interest of the children and 
 
the need of children to achieve permanency through adoption as well as the interests and future parental 
rights of adoptive par ents. OCFS is concerned  that th e proposed changes in this bill would have a 
chilling effect on prospective adoptive parents  and could negatively impact the achievement of real 
permanency for children who are in foster care.   
  
For the same reasons articulated above, OCFS is opposed to changes in Title 19 -A which would 
continue grandparent visitation after a child has been adopted.  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If yo u 
have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
       
      Dr. Todd A. Landry  
      Director  
      Office of Child and Family Services  
 

