Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
May 5 , 2023  
 
Senator Joe Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 268 – An Act to Establish a 45 -day Municipal Residency Requirement for General Assistance 
Programs  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information about the Department’s opposition to LD 268, An Act to Establish a 45 -
day Municipal Residency Requirement for General Assistance Programs . The proposed legislation seeks to 
redefine a resident of a municipality as a pe rson who has been physically present for 45 days or longer in a 
municipality  and who has the intent of remaining in that municipality . This bill also re voke s General 
Assistance eligibility for any person who is not considered a resident under this newly pr oposed definition .   
 
The residency requirement that this bill would establish is unconstitutional. There have been several  court 
decisions that have defended an individual ’s right to travel and relocate without forfeiting their rights to 
public assistance . A 1999 U.S. Supreme Court decision ( Saenz v. Roe, et. al ) struck down a California 
durational residency requirement, stating that it is unconstitutional to impose such a requirement for basic 
subsistence benefits . The State of Pennsylvania instituted a r esidency requirement that was successfully 
challenged in the District Courts in 1997 ( Warrick vs. Synder , 2 F. Supp 2d 720). Because of the Court’s 
ruling, Pennsylvania was forced to remove the residency requirement from their policy.    
 
Establishing a dur ational residency requirement for the purpose of applying for General Assistance will 
violate the 1969 Supreme Court Decision Shapiro v. Thompson . The court held that statutes  establish ed a 
fundamental "right to travel" in U.S. law  and that  imposing durational residency requirements for benefits 
were unconstitutional denials of equal protection . 
 
This change would  also decrease access to General Assistance benefits  and would likely bring a  lawsuit from 
advocacy agencies which would result in significant legal costs  for the state .  
 
For these reasons, the Department is strongly opposed to this bill. DHHS is committed to working with 
stakeholders to review and make recommendations for improving the General Assistance program. We 
wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward.
 
Sincerely,  
 
Anthony Pelotte, Director  
Office for Family Independence  
 

