 
  
 
 
Maine Unitarian Universalist State Advocacy Network 
PO Box 8 
Augusta, ME 
 04330 
www.muusan.org 
admin@muusan.org 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Written Testimony of Kathryn Vezina  
 To Committee on Health and Human Services 
In Opposition to LD 268, An Act to Establish a 45-day Municipal Residency Requirement for 
General Assistance Programs 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services, I am Kathryn Vezina, I live in Portland, and I bring to you today testimony in 
opposition to LD 268, An Act to Establish a 45-day Municipal Residency Requirement for General 
Assistance Programs. I submit this testimony on behalf of the Maine Unitarian Universalist State 
Advocacy Network, also known as MUUSAN.  MUUSAN is statewide advocacy and public policy 
network anchored in Unitarian Universalist faith and animated by UU principles.   
 
Unitarian Universalism calls us to change oppressive policies and structures to those that recognize 
the inherent worth and dignity of each person and build justice, equity, and compassion in human 
relations.  We are speaking in opposition to LD 268 because it runs counter to our efforts to move 
us toward a more just society.   
 
Requiring that a person resides in a municipality for 45 days before they would be eligible for 
General Assistance will mean that more people will be hungry, homeless, and otherwise unable to 
meet their basic human needs.  If someone has to move out of one city or town to another for 
reasons beyond their control, they would be unable to access the basic resource of General 
Assistance, on which they may have relied.  For immigrants, refugees, and asylum seekers coming 
to Maine, they would be left with no resources or way to feed themselves and their children for 
over 6 weeks in their new home at a time their need is greatest.  This would be unjust and cruel. 
 
On behalf of MUUSAN, we strongly urge a vote of Ought Not to Pass on LD 268.  Thank you. 
