 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health all Maine people 
 
TO:   Joint Committee on Health and Human Services 
 
FROM: Anna Boucher, Legal Extern  
 
DATE:  April 14, 2023 
 
SUPPORT – LD 1161 , An Act to Fund Free Health Clinics  
 
 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and the distinguished members of the Health 
and Human Services Committee.  My name is Anna Boucher, Legal Extern for the Maine Medical 
Association and I live in Jefferson.  The MMA appreciates the opportunity to submit the following 
comments in support of LD 1161 which would provide one-time funding of $250,000 for the State’s free 
health clinics. 
 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine’s largest professional association representing over 4,300 
current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings.   
 
The MMA’s core priorities include protecting, supporting, and advancing the access to and quality of 
health care for all Maine people.  Along with these goals, the MMA has made physician voluntary work 
a primary focus .  Physicians volunteer at ten free health clinics across the state: Ellsworth Free Medical 
Clinic, Free Clinic L/A at Trinity Jubilee Center, Hope House Free Women’s Health Clinic, Knox County 
Health Clinic, Leavitt’s Mill Health Center, Maine Migrant Health Program, Oasis Free Clinic, Peninsula 
Free Health Services, Portland Community Free Clinic, and The Root Cellar.  
 
Free health clinics  are considered health care community “safety nets” that are operated for the 
purpose of providing primary health care to socio-economically and geographically underserved patient 
populations.  These clinics provide medical, dental, pharmacy, vision, and/or behavioral health services 
to individuals who would otherwise be unable to afford such services. 
 
Free health clinics are an indispensable resource for the State in helping to bridge health care coverage 
gaps for Mainers who have an income too high to qualify for Medicaid, but cannot afford medical 
insurance, or who are homeless.  Without these clinics, Maine’s uninsured population will not have 
access to preventive medical care and will experience negative health outcomes and higher healthcare 
costs .  Today, most uninsured patients report  that they would either not seek medical care or would use 
the emergency department if free clinics were not available.  Therefore, free health clinics are a vital 
asset to our State in their ability to provide competent medical care while lessening burdens on 
emergency departments. 
 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 Protecting access for all to quality medical care by funding Maine’s free health clinics is essential to 
ensuring public health and improving health outcomes statewide.  With these things in mind, we urge 
an “ought to pass” vote on LD 1161 in order to continue our mission of caring for Maine people. 
 
Thank you for your time and attention to this issue.  We are happy to answer any questions the 
committee may have. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Anna Boucher 
anna.z.boucher@maine.edu   
