P .O. Box 2490  
Augusta, ME 04338  
Telephone: 1 -800-965-7476  
Fax: 1 -888-214-5233  
www.mainecahc.org  
consumerhealth@mainecahc.org  
 
   
 
Advocating the right to quality, affordable 
health care for all Mainers.  
 
Testimony In Support of:  
LD 1161 , An Act to Fund Free Health Clinics   
April 14, 2023   
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee On 
Health and Human  Services, thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments in 
support  of LD 1161 , An Act to Fund Free Health Clinics.  
My name is Kate Ende and I am the policy director at Consumers for Affordable Health Care, a 
nonpartisan, nonprofit organization th at advocates the right to quality, affordable health care 
for every person in Maine.   As designated by Maine’s Attorney General, CAHC serves as Maine’s 
Health Insurance Consumer Assistance Program (CAP), which operates a toll -free HelpLine. Our 
HelpLine fi elds approximately 6,000 calls and emails every year from people across Maine who 
need help obtaining, keeping, using, or fixing problems with private health insurance or with 
accessing or affording health care services. CAHC also serves as the Ombudsman p rogram for 
Maine’s Medicaid program, MaineCare, and helps people apply for and navigate the MaineCare 
enrollment process.  
This bill  provide s a modest level of funding to support free health clinics  in Maine . Through our 
HelpLine, we frequently hear from people with low-income s or who are uninsured and are in 
need of  health care, including primary care  services , chronic disease management, oral health 
care, and prescription drugs to treat an illness or health c ondition . In these instances, we often 
refer people to a free health clinic  if there is one available in their area.   
Cost is a barrier to care for many people.1 In fact, we will be releasing data soon from a recent 
survey that shows more than one in three Mainers delayed  or skipped  going to the doctor 
when they were sick due to cost s in the past two years .  Free health clinics remove cost  as a 
barrier for people who may otherwise delay o r skip needed medical  or dental services. These 
clinics  provide incredibly valuable services and often help prevent more serious illness es that 
would likely otherwise require more expensive treatment or care in  a more ex pensive setting , 
such as a hospital emergency department . For these reasons, we urge you to support LD 11 61.  
Thank you.  
 
1 https://www.kff.org/health -costs/issue -brief/americans -challenges -with -health -care -costs/   
