HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Michael Brennan TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
49 Wellington Road 
Portland, ME 04103 
Phone: (201) 939-6462 
Michael.Brennan@legislature.maine.gov 
April 14, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Michael Brennan introducing 
LD 1161, An Act to Fund Free Health Clinics 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services. I am Michael Brennan, and I represent House 
District 115, which includes a portion of Portland. I am here to introduce LD 1161, An Act to 
Fund Free Health Clinics for your consideration. 
This bill provides funding for free clinics across the state, of which there are currently six. 
However, I will focus my remarks on the Portland Community Free Clinic (PCFC), because it is 
the one I am most familiar with. The PCFC provides healthcare at no cost to uninsured adults 
between the ages of 18 and 65 who live in southern Maine, primarily Cumberland and York 
counties. Its mission is to provide high quality healthcare at no cost to those in the community 
who lack health insurance. Traditionally, the population served is in the ‘donut hole’ — people 
who earn too much to qualify for MaineCare, but not enough to afford effective health insurance 
without a large deductible. They are largely working people, but they are the working 
lower-wage jobs whose employers don’t provide health insurance. 
The population they serve has both changed and grown in the past years due to the pandemic, 
with people accessing services who have lost jobs that provided health insurance. 
Using PCF C as an example, the clinic is extremely cost-effective and provides hundreds of 
people in Greater Portland with primary care. It runs largely on volunteers and donations and has 
a very small annual budget to cover the salary of the staff who provide case management, 
volunteer coordination and other essentials. Everything else is donated. 
In short, Maine’s free clinics are a very efﬁcient means of providing health care to a population 
that really needs it, and whose needs and numbers have grown due to the pandemic. Please vote 
‘ought to pass’ on LD 1161. 
Thank you very much for your consideration, I would be glad to answer any questions. 
District 115: Part of Portland
