 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 14, 2023  
 
Senator  Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative  Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1161  - An Act to Fund Free Health Clinics  
 
Dear Senator  Baldacci , Representative  Meyer , and Members of the  Committee  on Health and 
Human Services : 
 
This letter is to provide information about  LD 1161, An Act to Fund F ree Health Clinics, and the 
potential impact of the proposed legislation , if enacted.  
 
LD 1161 provides one -time funding for the State's free health clinics . The bill requires funding 
to be distributed based on a formula adopted by the Department  utilizing the number of clients 
served and a base amount for each clinic.   
 
The State’s free health clinics offer healthcare  services including physician exams, basic lab 
testing and x -rays, routine health care , dental  services , assistance programs , and social services  
to eligible individuals statewide. Collectively, these free clinics serv e hundreds  of individuals 
each year  who may not have access to quality care and do not qualify for health insurance, 
largely through grant  and donor funds and a volunteer workforce . The Maine CDC  values the 
services of free clinics in Maine and underscores the importance of supporting these clinics as a 
cost-effective way of providing accessible quality healthcare and non-emergen t services to 
Mainers who are  uninsured or underinsured.  
 
As written, LD 1161 provides one-time funding appropriated  to the Office of Child and Family 
Services  (OCFS) within the Department , though,  currently,  the Maine CDC is working to 
allocate limited funds to f ree health clinics identified across the State to support medical and 
dental services provided to Maine’s uninsured and underinsured population  in response to similar 
legislation passed in 2021 (Public Law 2021,  chapter  548, introduced as LD 4 7 and enacted by 
the 130th Maine State Legislature, as amended ). A change to the financial account specified  in 
the bill  from OCFS  (0228)  to Maine CDC would  eliminate the need to redirect funds  to the 
Maine CDC  that cause s delay  in the distribution of funds . Additional ly, further clarity  of the 
expected use of funds  and apportionment is needed to ensure  the distribution is as intended .      
 
In summary, the Maine CDC respectfully recommends  that, if enacted, LD 1161 be amended to 
identify a clear methodology for the use of funds  that includes specific criteria for identifying 
eligible recipients  and scope of services,  and further amended to direct the  funding through the 
 
 Maine CDC  for apportionments . Five clinics  are known to be currently operating to provide a 
range of healthcare services at no cost to low -income uninsured or underinsu red Mainers  and 
identified to receive the limited funds made available by PL 2021 , Ch.  548. Given the general 
fund impact, the Department opposes this bill.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 

