Testimony in Support of No. 1161 “An Act to Fund Free Health Clinics” 
 
Dear Representative Brennan, Representative Arford, Representative Collings, Representative 
Craven, Representative Gramlich, Representative Meyer, Representative Murphy, 
Representative Perry, Representative Worth and  Senator Ingwersen, and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee of Health and Human Services: 
 
My name is Thomas White and I am a Physician Assistant who has provided voluntary clinical 
care through the Oasis Free Clinic in Brunswick, Maine for the past 12 years.  I have also worked 
as faculty in the University of New England Physician Assistant Program since 2010..   
 
I am writing in support of LD 1161, “An Act to Fund Free Health Clinics”. Over the past decade 
I’ve had the opportunity to see the positive impact that the Oasis Free Clinic has had in 
providing primary medical and dental care to uninsured residents in Cumberland and 
Sagahodac counties.   
 
The free care provided by the Oasis Free Clinic is an extremely cost effective use of limited 
resources in providing primary care that would otherwise be provided in local emergency 
rooms at much later stages of illness and at a much greater expense.  
 
The Clinic also provides prescription assistance services for high cost medicines that clinic 
patients would not otherwise be able to afford.   
 
Free health clinics have a positive return on investment by reducing the need for expensive 
emergency room care and inpatient hospital care.  Please help our free clinics in Maine to 
continue to provide these vital services to uninsured Mainers.  
 
Thank you for your consideration, 
Thomas White, PA-C 
Harpswell, ME 04079 
 
Thomas White
Harpswell
LD 1161
Testimony in Support of No. 1161 “An Act to Fund Free Health Clinics”
Dear Representative Brennan, Representative Arford, Representative Collings, 
Representative Craven, Representative Gramlich, Representative Meyer, 
Representative Murphy, Representative Perry, Representative Worth and  Senator 
Ingwersen, and members of the Joint Standing Committee of Health and Human 
Services:
My name is Thomas White and I am a Physician Assistant who has provided 
voluntary clinical care through the Oasis Free Clinic in Brunswick, Maine for the past
12 years.  I have also worked as faculty in the University of New England Physician 
Assistant Program since 2010..  
I am writing in support of LD 1161, “An Act to Fund Free Health Clinics”. Over the 
past decade I’ve had the opportunity to see the positive impact that the Oasis Free 
Clinic has had in providing primary medical and dental care to uninsured residents in 
Cumberland and Sagahodac counties.  
The free care provided by the Oasis Free Clinic is an extremely cost effective use of 
limited resources in providing primary care that would otherwise be provided in local 
emergency rooms at much later stages of illness and at a much greater expense. 
The Clinic also provides prescription assistance services for high cost medicines that 
clinic patients would not otherwise be able to afford.  
Free health clinics have a positive return on investment by reducing the need for 
expensive emergency room care and inpatient hospital care.  Please help our free 
clinics in Maine to continue to provide these vital services to uninsured Mainers. 
Thank you for your consideration,
Thomas White, PA-C
Harpswell, ME 04079

