V gin’ 
\l 
_;,\>'¢,j'a~
-
I 
Anne M. Carney _ THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
3¢I1?\Y01 ‘ , District 129 , Augusta, Maine 04333 
V Testimony of Senator Anne Carney introducing. 
LD 767, Ar Act to Provide Uniform Protections from ‘Retaliatio11 ‘for_lV[aine‘ 
Workers in = 
fonnection with the Exercise of Rights Protected Under the Laws
‘ 
V 
Governing Employment Practices .. 
3efore the Joint Standing Committee on Labor'Housing 2 
March 23, 2023-
_ 
Senator Tipp .1g, Representative Roeder, and esteemed members of the Labor and_ 
Housing Committee, 1 am Anne Carney, representing Senate District 29, whichP 
includes South Portland, Cape Elizabeth and part of Scarborough. I am grateful to 
be with you ta day to introduce LD 767, “An,Act to Provide Uniform Protections 
from Retalial =on _ for Maine Workers in Connection with the Exercise of Rights- 
Protected Unfier the Laws Governing Employment Practices. ” ’ ' ' 
LD 767 seek to give the Department of Labor and the Maine Attorney General- 
authority to l 'ing an enforcement action when an employer retaliates against a' 
worker for a: aerting a right under Maine labor laws. The department and Attorney 
General can lready enforce the worker rights found in Title 26, Chapter 7 but they 
have no leve ige for protecting workers against retaliation. This bill would give-the 
them the rigli 1 to bring a claim against an employer for retaliating against an 
worker speci fically because the worker asserted a substantive right. ’Y 
Most of the 1 ghts established in Chapter 7 do not have retaliation protections build, 
into the statt e creating the substantive right. Oneexample is 26 MRS, §63,7,'' 
earned paid >ave. Public Laws 2019, c. 156, §3, created a ﬁrst-in-the-nation _- 
employee right to earn one hour of paid leave for every 40 hours worked, up to 4.0_ 
hours in one year of employment. ,V 
_‘ 
__ 
S.-"re House (207) 287-1515 * Fax (207) 287-"1585 * To/I Free J~'8UU-423-6900 3‘ 77")’ 7Il 
Email: Anne.Curr1ey@legirlaI1ne.znainagov “‘ Web Sire: /egislatzlle.imii/iegovlsenale_'
If a worker is entitled to earned paid leave, and the employer refuses to pay, the 
DOL and AG can bring an action against the employer andimpose a forfeiture of 
up to $1,000 1"' 
or refusing to pay earned paid leave. 26 l\/[RS §53. But if the 
employer ﬁres .a worker because the worker asked for paid leave, no one has the 
right to bring an action for retaliation." -» 
-- 
Other worker rights statutes that the department and Attorney» General can bring‘ -a_ 
civil action to enforce, but have no leverage to prevent retaliation, include: limits 
on mandatoiy overtime; 26 MRS $603; protections forinursing mothers, 26 MRS'
T 
§QQ3;,equal pay, 26I\/1RS §628 (potentially enforceable by an employee under 
Maine Human Rights Act); family sick leave, 26 MRS §636; and veterans -' 
leave, .26 MR‘.-1’! §638. , . .~ 
The bill Woulri empower the department and Office of the"Attomey General to ,~ 
protect worke. "s against retaliation. If proven, any an instance of retaliation would 
be punishable by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 for each 
violation. But more importantly, the statute allows the department torespond0
i 
quickly to a worker’s complaint, investigate, and demand reinstatement where 
appropriate. 
The retaliation provision would extend to any right created in Title 26,, Chapter 7,- 
Einployineiit Practices; The fine would be "in addition to any otlier-reinedy‘ -
I
I 
available under this chapter," and would not prevent a worker from bringing an 
individual claim for damages where one already exists. I recommend this- 
. , 
committee amend the bill to include additional language speciﬁcally stating thatA 
the civil violation created in this legislation does not impact other remediesi
'
- 
available to the employee. Statutes within Title 26 Chapter 7 and other laws , 
provide an in ividual employee the right to bring a civil action in their' ow_n name' 
andton their < Nn behalf. One example is the Whistleblowers ’ Protection Act, 16' 
MRS §833. 15 lother is the Maine Human Rights Act, 5 MRS §4633. LD 767 is not 
intended to li- lit or restrict in any way an employee ’s right to pursue an individual 
claim when ti at protection is set out in statute. An additional sentence could be 
added, stating;i 
Nothing in this section may be construed to li.mit or restrict the rights of an 
individual to recover other available remedies in a separate legal action. _ 
Protections against retaliation serve an important role in our legal system. They 
bring to light behaviors that harm people and businesses. They prevent safety risks, 
foster a positive work environment, and assure employees they will get the beneﬁts 
._
2
earned through their hard work — paid leave, equal pay, and the eothl erfrights set-. 
forth in Maine’s employment practices laws. They create a level playing ﬁeld by 
holding all employers to the same standard.. 
I'm happy to speak with you further about LD 7 67, and am happy to answer your 
questions. .» 
t -
I 
UM/M cwa Anne Carney 
State Senator, Senate District 29. 
South Portland, Cape Elizabeth, and part of ScarboroughV
