   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
 
Testimony in support of LD 767, “An Act to Provide Uniform Protections from 
Retaliation for Maine Workers in Connection with the Exercise of Rights Protected 
Under the Laws Governing Employment Practices"  
 
Arthur Phillips  
March 23, 2023  
 
Good morning , Senator Tipping , Representative Roed er, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is Arthur Phillips, and I am a n analyst at the 
Maine Center for Economic Policy  (MECE P). I am testifying before you today in support of 
LD 767, “An Act to Provide Uniform Protect ions from Retaliation for Maine Workers in 
Connection with the Exercise of Rights Protected Under the Laws Governing Employment 
Practices ." 
 
Submitted by the Department of Labor, LD 767 represents an important improvement to 
our current labor laws , which in many cases are free of  retaliation  protection s. Under 
Maine law, workers have  little  protection from retaliation for exercising many of their  
lawful rights, such as making use of their earned paint leave or accommodating nursing 
mothers. While the rights themselves are protected , being subject  to re taliation for having 
exercised those rights is not. That means if a worker  asserts their right to  the paid time off 
which they’ve earned,  they could  face significant material risks such as demotion or a 
reduction of hours . Workers intuitively understand this reality and are therefore less likely 
to assert their rights.  
 
In the case of the paid time off benefit, fear of retaliation is a problem for man y Maine 
workers; MECEP’s 2019 survey of private -sector workers in Maine found that as many as 
one-third of Mainers who had paid time off declined to take time off explicitly because they 
feared retaliation .i National research has found as many as 4 5 percent of workers who do 
not take needed leave report that they fear ed losing their jobs .ii 
 
This bill follows previous efforts to improve access to Maine’s  earned paid time off  law, 
which was passed in 2019  without retaliation protection. Following that law’s passage, t he 
Attorney General’s office i nformed the Department of Labor that they did not have the 
authority to write rules on the matter because the statutory language did not direct them 
to.  
 
LD 767, which imposes significant monetary penalties for employers who retaliate against 
worker asserting their Chapter 7 rights, will be a welcome improvement. It would also 
extend to future employee rights the legislature may pass , for example  Representa tive 
 
   
 Roeder’s bill (LD 827) to allow worker to request flexible work schedules, which is also 
under consideration before this  committee today.  
 
We do have two suggestions for improving the bill: one, to ensure it explicitly complements 
or strengthens the p rivate right of action that exist s under Maine’s whistleblower law ; and 
two, to index the fi nes so their value does not diminish over time.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify and I welcome any questions you may have.  
 
 
 
 
i https://www.mecep.org/maines -economy/state -of-working -maine -2019/  
ii 
https://www.dol.gov/sites/dol gov/files/OASP/evaluation/pdf/WHD_FMLA2018SurveyResults_FinalReport_Aug202
0.pdf  
 

