TESTIMONY OF MAINE EMPLOYMENT LAWYERS ASSOCIATION  
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAI NST LD 767 , “AN ACT TO PROVIDE UNIFORM 
PROTECTIONS FROM RETALIATION FOR MAINE WORKERS IN 
CONNECTION WITH THE EXERCISE OF RIGHTS PROTECTED UNDER THE 
LAWS GOVERNING EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES ” 
 
My name  is Jeffrey  Neil Young.  I am an attorney with Solidarity Law and 
practice in Cumberland , Maine . I serve as  an executive Board member of the National 
Employment  Lawyers Association (NELA),  and as vice- president of the  Maine  
Employment  Lawyers                                        Association  (MELA).  NELA is  the largest  organization  of civil rig hts 
lawyers in  the country with about  4,000 national  and affiliate  attorney  members.  MELA  
is the largest  organization of civil rights  lawyers  in Maine  with about  75 member  
attorneys who represent employees in labor and employment matters across the  state  as 
at least  2/3of their  practice.  I have  been  practicing  labor  and employment  law for over 
40 years,  the last 35 years  here in Maine.  
 
As proposed, MELA is neither for nor against LD 767. The goal of LD  767 is 
laudatory— to ensur e that every worker may exercise his or her rights  under Maine ’s 
Employment Practices Law without fear of retaliation  to be pa id correctly and on time; t o be 
paid severance  pay in the event of a plant closing;  to be paid equal pay;  to be paid earned 
paid time of f; to take family and medica l leave, and to minimum wages and ove rtime, 
among ot her rig hts es tablis hed by Title 26 of the Main e Revised Stat utes Annotated.  
However, MELA ca nnot support LD 767 in its cu rrent form. LD 767 does not 
provide  for a priva te right of action.  Man y of th e rights enumerated  above currently provide  
that an  aggrieved employee or employees may file suit in their own behalf —for wage and 
hour violations  (26 MRSA  § 626-A); f or severance pay ( 26 MRSA §625 -B); for equal pay 
(26 MR SA § 628); for family and medical  leave (26 MRSA § 844) , and for minimum  wages 
and ove rtime (26 MRSA § 664) . 
MELA is conc erned that if ena cted as proposed, LD 767 might  be read to abrogate 
private rights of action t hat alr eady exist . For that reason, it cannot support the legislation as 
proposed.  
MELA unde rstands, how ever, that the bill may be amended to ad d language to 
ensure the preservation  of existing priva te rights of ac tion f or retaliation. If so, M ELA  
would  endorse LD 767, although  it believe s that the bill should be strengthen ed. 
First, MELA be lieves that in addition to enforcement  by the Att orney General ’s 
office  or the Maine D epartment of Lab or, the bill should provide for a private right of act ion 
and attorneys ’ fees for retaliation for exercising any  of the  rights under  Title 26 . Second , 
even if no private right of action is provided for  where it currently does not exist , fines of 
$500 to $100 0 for eac h violat ion are insufficient  to deter  unlawful c onduct.  The amount 
should be inc reased and/or f ines shoul d increase for re cidivist employe rs, like the increasing 
civil p enal damages under  the Maine Human Rights Act for repeat  offenders .  
For these reas ons, MELA does not support LD 767 in its current  form but would 
support it if the bill i s clarifi ed to preserve existing privat e rights of action.  
