. 
_ STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR. 
54 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0054 
Janet T_ Mills Laura A. Fortman 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Mike Roland, Bureau of Labor Standards 
Maine Department of Labor 
In Support of LD #767 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Public Hearing, March 14, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members ofthe Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. I'm Mike Roland, Director of the Bureau of Labor Standards at the 
l\/laine Department of Labor. l'm here today to testify in support of LD 767, An Act to Provide Uniform 
Protections from Retaliation for lVlaine Workers in Connection with the Exercise of Rights Protected 
Under the Laws Governing Employment Practices.u 
Currently in Maine employment law, anti-retaliation protections vary significantly from statute to 
statute and are entirely omitted from many statutes, making it impossible to determine in advance of 
investigation whether and which protections apply. This patchwork effectively prevents Bureau staff 
from confidently informing potential complainants that they are protected from retaliation. A uniform 
protection covering all Chapter 7 statutes, such as the one proposed here, would alleviate this problem 
and enableus to assure workers who are considering their options that they are protected regardless 
of the right or benefit they attempt-to access. ln doing so, it also would help protect the vast majority 
of l\/laine employers who comply with employment law. . 
The Department's Wage & Hour Division regularly receives inquiries that reveal concerns about 
employer retaliation. Our records show that in the past few years, 29 such calls and emails were 
received, and thirteen investigations involving alleged retaliation were initiated. ln addition to our own 
experience, national research strongly suggests that employer retaliation and the threat of retaliation 
impede enforcement of employment law, to the detriment of workers and responsible employers 
alike. In response, the US Department of Labor's Wage and Hour Division has prioritized preventing 
and aggressively confronting employer retaliation, including in some recent examples in l\/laine. 
LD 767 would go a long way toward removing a major deterrent to the effective enforcement of labor 
standards in l\/laine. I urge you to vote ought to pass.' 
Thank you for your time and attention. l would be happy to answerany questions you may have now 
or at a future work session. 
The Maine Department of Labor is committed to sewing l\/laine workers and businesses by helping employers recruit and train a talented 
workforce, providing workers with skills needed to compete in our economy, assisting individuals when jobs are lost, aiding people with 
disabilities reach career goals, ensuring safe and fair workplaces for people on the job and providing research and analysis of employment 
data to supportjob growth. 
PHONE: (207) 623-7900 - 
TTY users call Maine Relay 711 _ FAX: (207) 287-5292 
The Maine Department of Labor provides equal opportunity in employment and programs. 
Auxiliary aids and services are available upon request to individuals with disabilities.
