1- 
Preble Street 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
Terry Sutton 
Prerident 
Chip Leighton 
T/ire Pmide/It 
Yemaya St. Clair 
Serrelagr 
jennifer Wilson 
T/'ea.r1rrer 
Joann Bautista 
Terry Davies 
Lauren Gauthier 
john Roberts 
Elaine Rosen 
Kini Schoop 
Maurice A. Selinger III 
jay Tansey 
Lannie \‘(/elch 
Lori \‘(/hynot 
Mark R. Swann 
Exer/1/1' 1/e Dirac/or 
55 Portland Street 
Portland, ME 04101 
207.775.0026 
info@preblestreet.org 
\v\v\v.preblestreet.org 
United 
Way 
Unhed Way 
of Southern Maine 
3':- cmmnv 
l\ NAVlGAlUH 
_ e 
at 4»: vi: it 
Four Sm Charity 
Meeting urgent needs 0 Empowering people I Advocating for change 0 Creating solutions to homelessness and hunger Hello Senator Baldacci, Senator Meyer, and honorable members of the 
Committee on Health and Human Services, 
My name is Caroline Fernandes. l am the Director of Health Services for 
Preble Street. lam here today in support of LD 1781 because I have seen 
firsthand for two years how successful HOUSE has been and the potential we 
have to change the lives of more Mainers. Through the HOUSE program, 
Preble Street and our partner Greater Portland Health have worked with 49 
individuals, connected 100% of participants with Medical Assisted Treatment, 
Mental, Behavioral, and Medical Care, and offered all intensive case 
management, including housing services. 
lt has been a profound experience to participate in and guide the social work 
services of clients in HOUSE. From Day One, it was clear we had been granted 
permission to support people in an unprecedented way, including 
wraparound medical services, intensive case management, and the funding 
needed to get results. 
Through HOUSE, the Preble Street Health Services team has been able to take 
time to outreach individuals known to be the most vulnerable in our 
community, who had not been successfully served by existing substance use 
treatment models. To have the flexibility to spend time sitting with, driving 
with, and searching for individuals; in many cases, unsheltered individuals 
who were using opioids, who were vulnerable to overdose, and whose 
experience with treatment, medical care, and SYSTEMS historically had been 
that of stigmatization, suspicion, and judgment. People who understandably 
could be hesitant to say, ”l’m inl” because that would mean trusting, 
connecting with hope, and believing we were not going to disappear, judge, 
or withhold services when things got bad. We had to ask people to believe 
that we were going to hold true to the Harm Reduction model of looking at 
what was better rather than what wasn't perfect. 
We were granted time and money that allowed us to meet people where they 
are. It is a privilege it is to walk alongside a person who has mustered the 
courage to say, ”l will try something new." 
Many people receiving services under HOUSE have told us they don't know 
that they would be here if it weren't for the support they have received. 
Some have reconnected with family, are doing Harm Reduction advocacy 
work and are volunteering. And 27 are housed. More than half of the people 
we worked with are safe and in housing.
The successes have been mind-boggling. There is a saying that ‘housing is 
healthcare' and our Health Services team has witnessed this saying become 
reality many times over the past two years. Many things can come to the 
forefront for individuals when the stress of the streets subsides and there is 
quiet and a lock on your door. Being confronted by the things pushed down 
and put on hold for years while surviving can be overwhelming especially 
when you think ‘Everything is going to be great once I have a home.’ But the 
entire team of HOUSE has been able to support people through the transition 
from the streets to a home. 
We learned a great deal in two years. We learned that this unique model is 
successful for supporting vulnerable Mainers in moving toward hope, safety, 
housing, and recovery. And at a time when Maine is setting new record highs 
every year for fatal overdoses, it is clear that there is need for this proven 
successful model in this state. And we learned many lessons. Some of the 
most important lessons we learned, which are now reflected in LD1781, are: 
o Most, if not all, of the vulnerable individuals we served through 
HOUSE used several different types of drugs, often what was 
available in a moment. Expanding the diagnoses and allowable 
treatment modalities beyond opioid use and suboxone treatment 
ensures access to all the proper care options for people who are 
facing substance use disorder. 
e As a result of the COVlD-19 pandemic, we learned that 
individuals benefited most by having the ability to work with their 
doctor on the best and most effective treatment plan for 
themselves. 
o And we learned that for some the path to a Recovery 
Residence or Sober House through a Rehabilitation Residence stay 
was going to place them on the best trajectory for successful 
recovery. The waitlist for a MaineCare Rehab bed can be months. 
Funding for inpatient settings ensures that the person's recovery is 
not delayed or set off course entirely by having to spend additional 
months on the streets. 
I am eternally grateful for these past two years. The hope I have seen ignited. 
The joy l have seen and the sometimes-painful healing that was necessary to 
go through. I am permanently changed for the honor to walk alongside 
courageous people daring to change and daring to reidentify themselves as 
hopeful and healing. And l am eternally grateful to you for considering moving 
this important bill forward for the next 49 people in the state of Maine ready 
for something new. Thank you.
