      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
May 8, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1781, An Act to Establish Permanent Funding for the Homeless Substance Use Disorder 
Program  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee , my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Communit y Housing of 
Maine (CHOM ).  CHOM  is the largest supportive housing provider for homeless populations in 
Maine.   
 
I am testifying in support of LD 1781, An Act to Establish Permanent Funding for the Homeless 
Substance Use Disorder Program .   
 
This bill establishes the Homeless Substance Use Disorder Service Program to provide rapid access to low- barrier treatment for substance use disorder and stable housing to support recovery. 
The program is similar to the homeless opioid users service engagement pilot  project established 
in Resolve 2019, chapter 105, but the program is not limited to opioid use and provides additional services including transportation, community services and inpatient treatment services. The evaluation of the pilot project must be used  to inform the rules implementing the program and the 
contractors and subcontractors of the pilot project must be included in developing the rules.  
 
More than 107,000 individuals died of drug overdoses in the US during 2021, a 15% increase from 2020.  Main e has one of the country’s highest numbers of fatal drug overdoses and a continuing 
rise in homelessness among women, and families with children.  Overdose deaths are steadily rising with new record numbers of deaths every year.  In 2022, 716 people died of overdoses. In 
2021, 631 people died, and in 2020, 502 people died.  That number had never exceeded 200 prior 
to 2014.  Substance use disorder, poverty, and homelessness frequently interconnect and set the stage for generational barriers to healthy and pr oductive lives.   
 
Members of this population with long -term homelessness are up to 29 times more likely to be in 
the hospital, and up to 57 times more likely to be in jail when unhoused, than when housed. Simply put, this population ricochets though our most expensive emerg ency systems when unhoused.    
 
No one is in a good position to solve their opioid use disorder ( OUD)  and move into recovery if 
they lack stable housing, so homelessness dramatically complicates OUD recovery.  So, what can be done?  The Legislature passed legislations establishing the Homeless Opioid Users Service 
Engagement (HOUSE) pilot project, which utilized best practices by treating the whole person and addressing the issues underlying both homelessness and OUD, and through an effective and accessible continuum of care from homelessness to stable housing – an uninterrupted pathway to 
housing and recovery is critical.   This two -year pilot program housed more than 50 people.  
 
No one will get well without housing, and no one will be successful in recovery  without housing 
and sufficient support.  It is stability in housing, coupled with a progression towards an adequate support network, that become foundational to someone’s success in their recovery.  Homelessness generally offers no structure or accountabi lity.  Structural support and accountability framework 
are keys to success; it is nearly impossible to provide any such framework while a person has no place to live.   
 
LD 1781 would permanently extend the current Homeless Opioid Users Service Engagement 
(HOUSE) pilot project and enhance the program by expanding program participants to people with 
substance use disorder (SUD) and including additional services such as transportation, community 
services and inpatient treatment services.  This bill would expa nd an existing successful program 
and assist in filling a large gap in the continuum of care for people experiencing homelessness and 
SUD.     
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.    
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro  
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell  
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick  
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins  
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 
John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan  
Co-President , Evernorth 
 Kimberly Twitchell  
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba  
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Sarah Derosier  
Asset  Manager  
 
Chris Harmon  
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
