, HOUSE 0E REPRESENTATIVES 
j. 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
. AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Drew Gatﬁne TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
529 Stroudwater Street 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Home: (207) 409-3477 
Drew.Gattincéiilegislaturc.maine.gov 
May 8, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Drew Gattine Presenting 
LD 1781, An Act to Establish the Homeless Substance Use Disorder Service 
Program 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and my distinguished colleagues on the Health and 
Human Services Committee, my name is Drew Gattine and I am honored to represent parts of 
Saco, Scarborough and Westbrook in the Maine House. 1 am pleased to appear before you today 
to present LD 1781, An Act to Establish the Homeless Substance Use Disorder Service 
Program. 
I’m here today to tell you a success story. A success story that this committee was a big part of 
and a success that we can build on this session. 
People with substance use disorder (SUD) who are experiencing homelessness have unique 
challenges in accessing services and are particularly susceptible to overdose and death. A recent 
survey led by the University of Colorado, in coordination with the National Health Care for the 
Homeless Council (NHCHC), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and the 
CDC Foundation, demonstrates through modeling a 151% increase in overdose mortality; 11% 
reduction in life expectancy; 50% increase in hospitalizations; and a 38% decrease in Medication 
for Opiate Use Disorder (MOUD) initiations. 
Traditional case management systems are unsuitable for homeless individuals experiencing acute 
symptoms of SUD. More intensive, low-barrier approaches are needed. Housing is a critical 
component of substance use disorder treatment, as the trauma of homelessness complicates 
people’s ability to engage in treatment and can trigger substance misuse and relapse. 
Recognizing this, the 129“ Legislature, based on a recommendation from this committee, 
unanimously passed LD 1337, creating within the Department of Health and Human Services a 
pilot project called the Homeless Opioid Users Service Engagement (HOUSE) Project. The 
purpose of the project was to bring together low barrier treatment, housing and case management 
for people experiencing homelessness who have substance use disorder. The project launched in 
2021. Two vendors were selected for the pilot, Greater Portland Health (collaborating with 
Preble Street) and York County Community Action Corporation. 
District 126: Parts of Westbrook, Scarborough and Saco
Following me you will hear testimony about how successful this pilot program has been. The 
Greater Portland Health/Preble Street collaboration has served 49 people, connecting 100% of 
participants to Medication Assisted Treatment (MAT) and Mental/Medical Health Treatment, 
and housing 27 individuals. Combined, the 27 individuals housed have experienced over 273 
years of homelessness. Participants have spent 8,179 nights in stable housing, an amount equal to 
22 years. 
You will hear testimony today from people who participated in this program and the 
life-changing impact it has had on their lives. You will also hear from the providers who will tell 
you why this program has been so successful and how the lessons learned from the pilot can be 
used to improve the program going forward. 
The bill before you today continues this program and builds on its success. Iurge you to continue 
to support it. 
I am happy to answer questions. 
Thank you. 
District 126: Parts of Westbrook, Scarborough and Saco
