295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1781 
“An Act to Establish the Homeless Substance Use Disorder Service Program” 
Sponsored by Representative Gattine 
May 8, 2023 
 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health 
and Human Services Committees.  My name is Malory Shaughnessy, and I am the 
Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance 
is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine’s community-based 
mental health and substance use treatment providers, providing services to over 80,000 
Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of 
sound policies and evidence-based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system. 
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 1781, “An Act to 
Establish the Homeless Substance Use Disorder Service Program.” 
 
This bill establishes the Homeless Substance Use Disorder Service Program to provide 
rapid access to low-barrier treatment for substance use disorder and stable housing to 
support recovery.  This program is not limited to opioid use and provides additional 
services including transportation, community services and inpatient treatment services.   
 
Substance use disorder is a complex and devastating problem that is affecting Mainers 
at increasing rates, including many Maine people who are unhoused. Homelessness and 
substance use often go hand in hand, with addiction and mental illness frequently 
contributing to the loss of stable housing and creating a cycle of poverty and despair. 
 
However, with the right treatment and support, individuals struggling with substance 
use disorders can break free from the cycle of addiction and homelessness and achieve 
lasting recovery. These programs offer a range of services, including detoxification, 
medication-assisted treatment, counseling, and support groups, all tailored to the 
unique needs of homeless individuals. They provide a safe and supportive environment 
for people to address their substance use disorder and mental health needs and work 
towards recovery, often in conjunction with supportive housing programs that help 
people rebuild their lives. 
 
Research has consistently shown that substance use disorder programs for the homeless 
can be highly effective in helping people achieve lasting recovery. For example, studies 
have found that homeless individuals who participate in these programs have 
significantly lower rates of relapse and improved mental health outcomes compared to 
those who do not receive treatment. 
 
By supporting substance use disorder programs for the homeless, we can make a real 
difference in the lives of people who are struggling with addiction and homelessness. 
Not only will we be providing essential support and treatment to those who need it 
most, but we will also be helping to reduce the burden of substance use disorder on our 
communities and society as a whole. It is for all of these reasons that I urge committee 
members to vote "ought to pass" on this proposal. ~ Officers ~
Dave McCluskey, President
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1st Vice-President
Day One
Bob Descoteaux, 2nd Vice-
President
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health
Kara Hay, Secretary
Penquis CAP Inc.
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer
Aroostook Mental Health Center
Eric Meyer, Past President
Spurwink
 
~ Board Members ~
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare
Assistance Plus
Brighter Heights Maine 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center
Common Ties Mental Health
Community Caring Collaborative
Community Concepts, Inc. 
Community Health & Counseling
COR Health
Crisis & Counseling Centers
Crossroads Maine
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry
Kennebec Behavioral Health
KidsPeace Maine
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization
Maine Behavioral Healthcare
Milestone Recovery
NFI North, Inc.
Northern Light/Acadia
Pathways of Maine
Portland Recovery Community 
Center
Rumford Group Homes
Sunrise Opportunities
Sweetser
TriCounty Mental Health Services
Wellspring, Inc.
Wings for Children & Families
Woodfords Family Services

