 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of Behavioral Health  
11 State House Station  
41 Anthony Avenue  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -2595 ; Fax: (207) 287 -9152  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
May 8, 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
RE: LD 1781, An Act to Establish the Homeless Substance Use Disorder Service Program.  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services:  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide information for the Committee’s consideration regarding 
LD 1781, An Act to Establish the Homeless Substance Use Disorder Service Program .  
 
This bill would require the Department to create rules for a Homeless Substance Use Disorder 
Service Program to provide rapid access to low -barrier treatment for SUD and stable housing to 
support recovery, based on the lessons learned from the Homeless Opioid User Service Engagement 
(HOUSE) pilot project.  
 
The Office of Behavioral Health (OBH) and the Office of MaineCare Services (OMS) would like to 
share several  concerns with this bill as written.  
• The Emergency nature of this bill may not allow adequate time to fi nalize, review, and 
implement lessons learned from the evaluation, as required by this bill. The final HOUSE 
pilot evaluation for both rural (York) and urban (Portland) areas will not be completed and 
available until August 2023, due to pilot implementatio n delays. Time will also be required to 
issue an RFP for these services, in alignment with State procurement rules, and to move 
awarded providers into contract.  
• The SUD services outlined in LD 1781 are already available through MaineCare. There were 
no rep orted uninsured individuals served in the HOUSE pilot; all participants were 
MaineCare eligible. Services available for MaineCare eligible clients should be accessed 
through MaineCare, not through a separate, duplicative State funding source.  
• The SUD serv ices in the HOUSE model are considered duplicative to the Office of 
MaineCare’s Housing Outreach and Member Engagement (HOME) health home model. 
HOME exists to support MaineCare members experiencing long -term homelessness to secure 
and maintain permanent h ousing and improve their health outcomes. Services provided under 
HOME include comprehensive care management, care coordination, health promotion, 
comprehensive transitional care, individual and family support, and referrals to community 
and social support  services. The HOME service eligibility is two chronic conditions or one 
chronic condition and at risk for another AND experiencing long -term homelessness.  
  
DocuSign Envelope ID: 0B334C9F-04E8-46CC-838E-A839A4BC3E00
 
 • The funds from Maine State Housing Authority’s Housing Assistance Fund (HAF) were not 
fully expend ed and/or utilized as intended in the pilot language. At the end of its first pilot 
year, the urban program had expended $2,155 (<1%) of the HAF budget. In contrast, the 
rural program had expended $158,113.30 (38%) of the approved budget within its first t hree 
months, largely on temporary housing within hotels. LD 1781 requires providers to secure 
access to stable housing for participants that “facilitates recovery, independence, and offers a 
harm reduction approach.” It remains unclear if either program me t those criteria with HAF 
funds.  
• Providers already have access to established housing first programs and targeted rental 
assistance subsidies. The barrier in housing assistance is not access; it is availability of 
affordable housing.  The National Low Inc ome Housing Coalition estimates that Maine is 
currently short an estimated 22,500 affordable rental units.  
• Taxpayers may receive a better return on their investment with other SUD programs. The 
urban program served 29 individuals in its first year, with th irteen (13) housed within 
recovery residences, group homes, and independent housing; the total two -year budget for 
SUD services was $1,137,170, not including the HAF. In its first three months the rural 
program served six (6) individuals, two of whom were permanently housed; the total two -
year budget for SUD services was $516,000, not including the HAF.  
In addition to these concerns, we seek clarification on language within this LD, specifically:  
• An eligible participant is defined as “a person with substanc e use disorder and a person 
experiencing homelessness who has a history of drug overdose.” If a client has an SUD and 
is unhoused but has no self -reported history of overdose, will they be eligible?  
• Contracts “must be sufficient to provide services for up  to 50 participants in each year.” Is 
this across the total program, per geographic location, or per provider? This has implications 
for LD 1781’s fiscal estimate and the scale of program implementation.  
• Services funded in LD 1781 are largely already cover ed by MaineCare, but the language also 
includes “and any other appropriate services.” This needs definition, as it has significant 
implications for the LD’s fiscal estimate as well program implementation.  
• The Housing Assistance Fund is meant to “provide pa rticipants with immediate access to 
stable housing.” What is the timeframe for ‘immediate’? It is assumed that hotels do not 
qualify as “stable housing that facilitates recovery, independence, and offers a harm reduction 
approach.”  
If the Committee determi nes to move forward with this bill, OBH suggests that the bill language 
prioritize the chronically unhoused population over the “at -risk,” require  all providers to leverage 
existing billable pathways to MaineCare , and ensure state procurement policies can be followed .    
 
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide information. Please let us know how else we might 
be of service.  
 
Sincerely,  
       
Sarah Squirrell      Michelle Probert  
Director, Office of Behavioral Health   Director, Office of MaineCare S ervice s 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 0B334C9F-04E8-46CC-838E-A839A4BC3E00

