Shay Dufour
South Portland 
LD 1781
Senator Baldacci and Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Health 
and Human services committee, 
My name is Shay Dufour, I reside in South Portland, and I am submitting my 
testimony in favor of LD 1781: An Act to Establish the Homeless Substance Use 
Disorder Program. I am a strong believer that supported programs such as the 
H.O.U.S.E program, are vital for Mainers dealing with homelessness, substance use 
disorders, and those struggling with traumatic events in their personal lives. I 
personally worker with the H.O.U.S.E pilot program, which is a collaboration of 
Preble Street and Greater Portland Health. The program reaches out mainly to the 
unsheltered individuals who deal with opioid use disorder, while also helping with 
mental health treatment and help finding housing.
I am a terrific example of how the H.O.U.S.E Program can and does work. Back in 
2021, I was homeless, living on the streets of Portland, and struggling with opioid 
abuse and other substance. I was welcomed into the program, with the hope of 
becoming self-sufficient, independent and able to get housing. In the beginning of the 
program, I was put on suboxone to help with my opioid use, and also given a 
caseworker to guide me and help me through the struggles I faced on a daily basis. By
the end of 2022, I am proud to say that I am free from all substances, I found my own 
apartment, and I am currently employed full-time. I’m a firm believer in saving the 
lives of so many that are dealing with the opioid crisis we have facing Maine right 
now. The number of fatalities due to fentanyl overdoses has skyrocketed over the past
year. I've made it my personal mission to help those struggling with the same 
addiction that I had, by being involved in many recovery programs and being a strong
advocate for the unhoused and those who are addicted to substances. I’ve also made a 
strong connection with my family again, and have become a better mother, daughter 
and wife.
LD 1781 will expand the initial pilot, and be available in rural and urban areas. It will 
also include other forms of substance use disorders, and provide funding for 
transportation and  community and inpatient treatment services. We need to continue 
this program, in hopes that we will save lives and help those who struggle with 
homelessness, mental health, trauma, and substance use disorder. I humbly ask you 
are you take the fate of all Mainers' lives into consideration and urge you to pass LD 
1781.
Thank you for your time today. 
Sincerely, 
Shay Dufour

