 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Opposition to 
LD 801- An Act to Require Municipalities to Obtain Housing Units for Residents Experiencing 
Homelessness 
April 28, 2023 
 Sen. Pierce, Rep. Gere, and distinguished members of the Housing Committee, my name is 
Rebecca Graham, and I am providing testimony in opposition to LD 801 on behalf of Maine Municipal 
Association which represents the interests of municipal government before the state and federal 
government. The positions of the Association are formed at the direction of our 70-member Legislative 
Policy Committee, (LPC) who are elected by the selectboards and council of the municipalities in each of 
the 35 Senate districts in Maine. As a result, the positions represent a wide view of communities with 
varying resources, rural and urban, and those with ample local resources as well as those with none.  
This bill constitutes a mandate on municipal government and requires the mandate preamble 
along with 2/3 of all members of each body to override the requirement for the state to fund 90% of the 
purchase of houses for this purpose in all communities. Essentially, it is the state, and not the property 
taxpayers of Maine who should provide this service to the entire state should the legislature believe this is 
method to address homelessness preferred.  
As drafted however, the procurement of homes by municipalities based on population alone will 
effectively diminish the municipally owned residences that exist in communities now. For instance, 
Bangor has over 800 units with waiting lists for need. By this bill, they would only need 31 and meet this 
need. They would not receive any state benefit from the enacted bill or support for what they are already 
providing. 
Most of the 486 municipalities in Maine are in no position to serve as landlords or able to support 
the complex needs of individuals who find themselves unhoused. All communities need skin in the game 
to better support their neighboring service center communities who bear the greatest burdens currently for 
the housing crisis. A bill last year would have established a county level navigation and housing services 
and would have been a regionally more appropriate solution. This bill is not.  
For all these reasons, municipal officials urge you to vote ought not to pass on LD 801.  
 
 
 

