       March 14, 2023  
 
 
 
Support of LD 130  
 
 
 
Dear Members of the Joint C ommittee on Taxation:  
 
I am wri ting in support of LD 130.  The increase in the property  tax exe mption benefit s 
all se niors , while benefit ing most those who need the help the most  (beca use those with  lower 
value h omes have a greater portion of their  value exempted ).  It is also easy to administer  as it 
does not require annual applications , income determination, etc.  
 
 I am also in support  of this law beca use it would  replace last year ’s senior tax 
stabilization  law which is administratively burdenso me and has many unintended 
consequences .  I fear the senior tax stabilization law will result in many who are under 65 years 
old absorbing an ever increasing  share of the tax burden and  make living in  Maine more 
unaffordable for our youn ger population.   As it attracts and retains  older residents, it will drive 
out the younger workers and families who are needed in the la bor force to s upport the elderly.   
 
  I am the assistant  town manager in Topsham, but I am w riting this letter in my 
individual  capacity and do  not purport to speak for  anyone but myself.  Our town assessor  
calculated how new law property tax stabilization law would have affected Topsham if it had 
been applied to the 2022 -23 tax year. The data is as follows:  
 
901 Parcels applied.   20 of them a pplied more than once.  
18.75% of all real estate accounts applied.  
Average assessed value of enrolled home $303,750  
Total taxable value of parcels applied, $273,680,000  
 
Using April 21 to April 22 tax changes for stabilized parcels as a what if, the state would have 
owed Topsham  reimbursement of $125,111  
Estimated expended staff time, Clerk, Assessing, Admin 286.5 hours, or 36 cumulative days @48 
= $13,728  
Staff time to issue future lien notices for accrued interest – TBD 
Postage for information insert with tax bill - $675 per 7 -20-2022 emails  
 
The increased homestead exemption would be more predictable for the State and 
sustainable.   As noted above, if the senior stabilization program  had been in effect the current 
fiscal year,  the amount State would have had to reimburse Topsham alone is $125,111.   This 
amount will grow exponentially in future years.   The senior stabilization program will soon cost 
the State hundreds of millions of dollars.  It isn’t hard to imagine that one of two things will 
have to happen in the future when the program cost increases and revenues tighten:  
 
1) The State will cut the reimbursement to municipalities or other revenue sharing which 
puts the municipalities in a financial bind and will cause greater property tax increases 
on those  not enrolled in the program; or  
 
2) The State will have to raise other taxes such as the income tax in order to sustain this 
program.    It will discourage our younger population from working – or at least working 
in Maine. As the oldest state in the country,  we don’t want to disincentivize young 
people from working in Maine.  
 
I am the parent of two young adults who hope to stay in Maine  – and are part of the 
labor force we need to st ay in Maine.  I think it is important to try replace  the senior 
stabilization bill with the increased homestead  exemption so that the benefit  to the elderly is 
fair, sustainable and provided in su ch a manner that it does not add a significant burden to our 
younger population and force them to leave Maine.    
 
Sincerely,  
 
Mark M. Waltz  
Topsham  
 
Mark Waltz
Topsham
LD 130
Please see attached written testimony.  
