TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: March 16, 2023 
LD 130 - An Act to Eliminate Senior Citizen Property Tax Stabilization and 
Expand the Homestead Property Tax Exemption 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against LD I30~ 
An Act to Eliminate Senior Citizen Property Tax Stabilization and Expand the 
Homestead Property Tax Exemption. 
LD 130 is one of the many bills submitted this year addressing issues facing the 
State, municipalities, and property taxpayers under the Property Tax Stabilization 
Program. If the Legislature decides to signiﬁcantly redesign the program, then LD 
130 provides a reasonable model for doing so. By repealing the Stabilization 
Program and expanding the existing Homestead Exemption, LD 130 continues to 
provide relief to senior taxpayers burdened by high property tax bills, while at the 
same time it addresses concerns with the Stabilization Program that have been 
raised throughout the State. 
For the Committee ’s consideration, an alternative approach that similarly utilizes 
another long-standing relief program would be to replace the Stabilization Program 
with an increased Property Tax Fairness Credit (or “PTF C”). By utilizing the 
PTF C, relief could be targeted to those low—income seniors who are struggling to 
afford their property tax payments. In addition, the PTF C would provide relief to
1
renters, who are also burdened by high property taxes assessed on their apartments, 
and who are among the most housing insecure seniors. 
Turning to the speciﬁcs of the bill, there are several technical and other concerns 
we would like to raise for the Committee. First, the existing exemption statutory 
subsections contain additional language on situations such as foreclosures, 
repurchases of property, and multiple owners, that are not covered in the new 
paragraph. Those items should either be mentioned in the new subsection or split 
out into a new subsection covering all of section 683. 
The bill does not address homesteads with more than one owner, speciﬁcally when 
some of the owners are under 65. It is also unclear whether the language requiring 
the applicant to have “resided in the homestead ” means it was a residence of the 
applicant or the applicant ’s permanent residence. These should be clariﬁed. 
As is the case with the Property Tax Stabilization Program, the ten-year residency 
requirement also raises constitutional concerns. 
Finally, I would point out to the Committee for consideration that the bill does not 
cover all the taxpayers that beneﬁt from the existing Stabilization Program. 
Speciﬁcally, taxpayers who have owned a homestead in Maine for at least ten 
years but have not lived in their current homestead for the previous ten years will 
not beneﬁt from the additional homestead exemption proposed in this bill. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the bill; 
representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide additional 
information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions. I would be happy 
to respond to any questions you may have now.
2
