an 
-, 
Richard A. Bennett 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 18 Augusta, Maine 04333 
THE MAINE SENATE 
l3 lst Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
LD 130, "An Act to Eliminate Senior Citizen Property Tax Stabilization and Expand the 
Homestead Property Tax Exemption" 
16 March 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Taxation. I am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and I have the honor of serving the people of 
14 communities in Western Maine in the State Senate. I am here to introduce LD 130 "An Act 
to Eliminate Senior Citizen Property Tax Stabilization and Expand the Homestead Property Tax 
Exemption." 
Though certainly well intentioned, the Property Tax Stabilization Program that passed last 
session, lacked, in my opinion, proper vetting before enactment. After its passage I have heard 
from many municipalities concerned about how the new program would be implemented, the 
paperwork required for them, and how they would be reimbursed. Though the Department has 
done well to implement the program, I propose we instead expand our existing Homestead 
Exemption Program. 
I understand there may be concerns from some regarding lost revenue to cities and towns over 
the expansion of the Homestead Exemption. It was certainly not my intent to pass the burden of 
this property tax revenue loss on anyone other than the state. Though the ﬁscal note has not yet 
been determined for this bill, I intend for the cost to be funded by the state. With the Property 
Stabilization Program ending, there will certainly be money available to fund this expansion 
instead. I note that the Governor has recommended appropriating nearly $50 million over this 
coming biennium for the introduction of the Property Tax Stabilization Program. That cost will 
balloon in the outyears. 
And worse, I believe the Property Tax Stabilization Program will create unintended 
consequences and many inequities going forward. It will be gamed by people who have ample 
means to pay property taxes to pass their costs to others. It will allow those who get windfalls 
such as large inheritances to move their residences to homes with high property taxes and avoid 
paying them. If this program is allowed to continue, I believe we will come to regret it. 
Helping our seniors’ age in place in their own homes is a worthy investment. With this bill I am 
seeking to streamline government by expanding a program Maine has had for years that lowers 
property taxes, while eliminating another that has been confusing for many. 
I thank you for your time and I would be happy to answer any questions. 
Fax: (207)287-1527 * TTY (207) 287-I583 * Message Service I-800-423-6900 * Web Site: legislature.maine.g0v/senate
