M/nus Assocumom OF Rrzrmzzs 
r 
Ki} DATE: March 16, 2023 
TO: Senator Nicole Grohoski, Chair 
Representative Joe Perry, Chair 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
FROM: Thomas Record 
Vice President, Maine Association of Retirees 
SUBJECT: LD 130, An Act to Eliminate Senior Citizen Property Tax Stabilization and 
Expand the Homestead Property Tax Exemption 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee, I am Thomas Record and 
am Vice President of the Maine Association of Retirees (MAR), a nonproﬁt organization comprised 
of public service retirees including state retirees, retired educators, and retirees from participating 
local districts. 
MAR’s perspective is that while the bill would provide substantial ﬁnancial beneﬁt to many of our 
members, it also contains a signiﬁcant ﬂaw that many of our members would also likely be 
uncomfortable with. 
The Property Tax Stabilization Program which was enacted during the 130th Legislature is designed 
to protect senior citizens who are permanent Maine residents and who have qualiﬁed for the Maine 
homestead exemption for at least 10 years from property tax increases. This is accomplished by 
“ﬁ"eezing” their property tax liability at the level it was at in the year of application. Importantly, 
revenue not collected from qualifying seniors is not lost to municipalities, but is made up through 
state reimbursement. 
LD 130 proposes to replace the Property Tax Stabilization Program with a $75,000 homestead 
exemption for pennanent residents of Maine who are 65 years old or older and have resided in the 
homestead for the preceding 10 years. The homestead exemption is otherwise $15,000. While the 
large increase in the homestead exemption would undoubtedly provide a very substantial beneﬁt to 
many senior citizens, the proposal has a ﬂaw that we believe will make it unpalatable to many. The 
bill contains no mechanism to reimburse municipalities for property tax revenue lost due to the 
$60,000 increased homestead exemption. Therefore, we would expect Maine’s town and cities to 
need to increase their mil rate to make up the difference. This will have the effect of pitting seniors 
against their neighbors in their communities. It is MAR’s sense that many of our members were 
comfortable with the Property Tax Stabilization Program only when they learned it did not place 
them in conflict with their friends and neighbors. 
We would also note that while the intent of the bill seems to be to repeal the Property Tax
Stabilization Program enacted by the 130th Legislature, nothing in the bill actually does that. 
MAR is ready to participate in work sessions on the bill or to provide Whatever other assistance the 
Committee may require. 
CC Senator Rick Bennett 
Leading the Way for Maine Retirees 
280 Maine Avenue, Farmingdale, ME 04344 William H. Laubenstein III —President 
Telephone Number: (207) 5824960 Diane M. Bailey — Executive Director 
1-800535-6555 email: l\/lAR@?=/§aineRetirees.0rg 
(207) 707-1722 FAX www.malneretirees.org
