MHCA Maine Health Care Association 
Testimony of Angela Cole Westhoff, President and CEO 
Maine Health Care Association 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Health & Human Services 
April 20, 2023, at 1:00 PM 
In Support of LD 1521 
An Act to Support the Essential Support Workforce by Promoting Enhanced Reimbursement and 
Benefits and Encouraging Information Sharing 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Committee on 
Health & Human Services. My name is Angela Westhoff, and I am the President & CEO of The 
Maine Health Care Association. We represent approximately 200 nursing homes, assisted living, 
and residential care facilities (also known as Private Non-Medical Institutions or PNMls) across 
the state. Our mission is to empower members to ensure the integrity, quality, and 
sustainability of long term care in Maine. 
l am pleased to testify in support of LD 1521, An Act to Support the Essential Support Workforce 
by Promoting Enhanced Reimbursement and Benefits and Encouraging Information Sharing. 
This bill includes several measures, including a fee waiver for background checks on essential 
support workers and initiating a feasibility study of providing health insurance to all essential 
support workers through the MaineCare program state employee health plan, subsidies for 
commercial health insurance, or another mechanism. 
Long term care facilities must conduct a background check on all employees before hiring, and 
each inquiry through the State Bureau of Identification costs a nominal fee. Waiving this cost 
would be a small but meaningful step in helping our facilities lower their labor expenses.
We fully support long term care workers receiving health insurance. In a 2022 survey of our 
members, 96 out of 101 respondents said they provide some form of health insurance for their 
employees. Over the years, a crucial difference between long term care employers and 
competing industries has been our ability to offer a health insurance benefit to new employees 
That is becoming increasingly difficult, however, as premium costs increase year-over-year. In 
the same survey, 55% of members said they had to make changes in coverage within the past 
year because of the expense. 
The COVID-19 pandemic has emphasized how critical access to quality health care is. It also 
severely disrupted our industry, resulting in a nationwide thirteen-year low of long term care 
workers in the United States.1 Moreover, 85% of Maine's surveyed facilities face a staffing 
shortage. Other industries require fewer qualifications and offer higher wages for typically less 
arduous work. But pay isn't the only determining factor for job seekers when choosing their 
career. Being known as a profession that respects the need to provide health insurance to 
employees only helps with recruitment and retention. 
Thank you for your time, and I urge you to support LD 1521. 
1 
Long Term Care Jobs Report: littpsi//wwvv' .<1iwc.-incai.c>r;{,/Nvvvs .mci~Conimi_:nications/'F<ict Shgets,/FactSheets/Li< , 
Jobs-Repoi tel +12OZ3.pdi ‘ . Accessed February 4, 2023.
