Testimony of Jena Jones on Behalf of 
the Maine Council on Aging to the Committee on 
Health and Human Services 
In Favor of LD 1521 - An Act to Support the 
Essential Support Workforce by Promoting Enhanced 
Reimbursement and Beneﬁts and Encouraging 
U N I N B Information Sharing 
Delivered on April 20, 2023 
MGM > MING TIE HIV IT SMIJID BE 
Greetings, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and the members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Sen/ices. 
My name is Jena Jones and I am the Director of Policy and Advocacy at the Maine Council on 
Aging (MCOA). The MCOA is a broad, multidisciplinary network of over 135 organizations, 
businesses, municipalities, and older community members working to ensure we can all live 
healthy, engaged and secure lives with choices and opportunities as we age at home and in 
community settings. I am testifying in favor of LD 1521. 
Maine’s essential care and support workforce provides invaluable services to people who are 
older, who have intellectual and physical disabilities, and those with behavioral health 
challenges. These services allow people who need assistance to live with autonomy, dignity, and 
choice and the support provided can literally make a difference in someone’s ability to remain 
employed, housed, or free from a prolonged hospital stay. 
Through the sustained efforts of this Committee, the Legislature, and multiple state agencies, we 
have made real progress in valuing this workforce. We have raised reimbursement rates multiple 
times, instituted cost of living adjustments, launched a successful marketing campaign, hosted 
job fairs, created career navigators, and offered time-limited sign-on and retention bonuses. 
Despite these robust efforts, Maine has only stabilized the care and support workforce, not grown 
it. So, we must do more, not only to attract new workers to these jobs, but also to support the 
people who are not getting care or ﬁnding it impossible to ﬁnd a worker. LD 1521 offers many 
solutions. 
Most critically, it directs the Department of Health and Human Services to study the feasibility of 
providing health insurance or subsidies for insurance to essential support workers. Access to 
beneﬁts, including health insurance, is part of one of the ﬁve pillars of Direct Care Job Quality 
as established by PHI. Fair wages and access to insurance would attract more workers to these 
positions.
It requires that workers be reimbursed for mileage when delivering services in the community. 
State workers are afforded this reimbursement without question, but for some reason workers 
doing the work of state programs are not. 
It requires the Department to authorize and pay for advanced care coordination, ensuring that 
people who are not getting all of the care they’re entitled to receive have help navigating to the 
services that will help maintain them in the community. 
It directs the Department to create a voluntary worker registry, making it easier for people who 
need care to ﬁnd workers, including through self-direction. 
Finally, it requires that background checks conducted by the Maine Background Check Program 
be waived. In addition, it allows for background check portability, so that workers can bringa 
valid background check with them, instead of making a new employer pay a new fee. These are 
ways to reduce overall costs within the system, freeing up valuable limited resources. 
We must dedicate all reasonable efforts to establishing real-time solutions to our direct care and 
support workforce shortage, and those solutions must focus on both the worker and the 
individual needing care and support. In addition to drawing workers into the ﬁeld and creating 
the necessary incentives to help them remain working, we are obligated to ensure that the means 
of accessing those workers is as easy and straightforward as possible. The solutions offered in 
LD 1521 allow both of those priorities to be actualized. 
We urge you to support LD 1521 as it represents just one of those solutions. 
Thank you. I am happy to answer any questions. 
Jena Jones
