alzheimer ’s Q5 association “ 
Testimony 
In Support Of 
LD:l521, An Act to Support the Essential Support Workforce by Promoting Enhanced 
Reimbursement and Beneﬁts and Encouraging Information Sharing 
Jill Carney 
Director of Public Policy 
Alzheimer ’s Association, Maine Chapter 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 20, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services: 
My name is Jill Carney, Director of Public Policy for the Maine Chapter of the Alzheimer ’s 
Association. On behalf of the Maine Chapter, I am pleased to register our support of LD 1521, 
which would help create systems of support for the direct care workforce in Maine at a time 
when shortages are impacting access to care for those who need it. It would also establish a 
public, voluntary registry of in-home care workers to more effectively and efficiently connect 
clients with workers. 
Governor Mills and the Maine Legislature have already implemented reforms to help recruit and 
retain workers in this profession, such as improved reimbursement rates that allow facilities to 
increase pay for direct care workers to at least 125 percent of the state’s minimum wage. 
Nevertheless, continued attention on this crisis is of particular importance to the community of 
people living with Alzheimer ’s or other dementia. 
The largest segment of the workforce that supports people living with dementia is the direct care 
workforce. Direct care workers —— who are formally classiﬁed as personal care aides, home 
health aides, and nursing assistants but known by a wide range of job titles in the ﬁeld —— assist 
older adults and people with disabilities in private homes, community-based settings such as 
adult day services and residential care, skilled nursing homes, and other settings such as 
hospitals. Across these settings, direct care workers deliver the majority of day-to-day care to 
patients, clients, or residents living with Alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia. 
Those with Alzheimer ’s are high users of long-term care services. At the age of 80, 75 percent of 
people with Alzheimer ’s live in a nursing home, compared with just four percent of the general 
population. Nearly half of nursing home residents have Alzheimer ’s or other dementia, as does 
more than one in three users of home health agency services.
alzheimer ’s Q5 association ” 
Nationwide, the crisis of a shortage in the direct care workforce signiﬁcantly impacts people 
living with Alzheimer ’s and their families. The Alzheimer ’s Association ﬁnds that an estimated 
1.2 million additional direct care workers will be needed between 2020 and 2030 — more new 
workers than in any other single occupation in the United States. 
Although more direct care workers will be needed in the years ahead, the long-term care ﬁeld is 
already struggling to ﬁll existing direct care positions. Turnover rates are high in this workforce 
~— estimated at 64 percent annually for direct care workers providing home care and 99 percent 
for nursing assistants in nursing homes — and recruitment and retention are long-standing 
challenges. In turn, instability in the workforce and understaf ﬁng across care settings can lead to 
stress, injury and burnout among direct care workers while also compromising care access and 
quality. 
Thank you for considering passage of this bill. 
Jill Carney 
Director of Public Policy 
Alzheimer ’s Association, Maine Chapter 
383 U.S. Route One Suite 2C 
Scarborough, ME 04074
