{J 
iii! 
Direct Care and 
Support Professional 
ADVISORY COUNCIL 
TESTIMONY 
ln Support of 
LD 1521; Act to Support the Essential Support Workforce by Promoting Enhanced Reimbursement and 
Benefits and Encouraging information Sharing 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 20"‘ , 2023 
Maine Long Term Care Ombudsman Program 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Services. 
My name is John Hennessy, and l am an Associate at Moose Ridge Associates. I am here today to 
present testimony for the Maine Long-Term Care Ombudsman Program on behalf of Maine's Direct Care 
and Support Professional Advisory Council. 
The Council was established to bring essential workers together from across the state to establish a 
strong collective voice that offers expertise and guidance to policymakers and legislators on key 
workforce issues and initiatives. Council members are employed across the continuum of long-term 
services and support settings. The membership also represents the diversity of Maine's workforce. 
Mileage Reimbursement: 
One of the first issues raised by Council members employed by home care agencies was the low or 
absent reimbursement for travel to the homes of the consumers they serve. A Council member shared 
the following: ”/ have great concerns about the cost of gas. It causes us to have to work closer to home.
-er 
There may not be as many clients closer to where we live and in turn that causes us to not make our full 
work hours. Paying for gas takes away from our overall paycheck, money that we could be spending on 
other bills orfood. ” ln response to these concerns, the Ombudsman Program reached out to the Home 
Care and Hospice Alliance of Maine who surveyed their members to learn from them about their policies 
for mileage reimbursement. Those agencies responded that they were paying mileage at the federal 
rate in place in 2022 of 58.5 cents per mile. Additionally, the Ombudsman Program surveyed 128 
Personal Care Agencies (PCA) agencies that are not members of the Home Care and Hospice Alliance of 
Maine to learn more about agency policies regarding reimbursement for travel. 
Mileage Reimbursement Provider Result: 44 Responses 
IRS Rate: 58 cents 10 
75 cents per mile 1 
3 65 cents per mile 1
i 
__ 
l 52 cents per mile 1 
l 
50 cents per mile 2 
i _ , 
l 
44 cents per mile 1
l 
l 
40 cents per mile 2 
30 cents per mile 2 
24 cents per mile 1
“ 
No reimbursement provided 5 ifQ
2 
One provider reimburses a limit of1O miles per The remainder of providers responding would 
week and did not provide rate of reimbursement not disclose mileage reimbursement 
The Ombudsman Program received responses from 44 PCA agencies indicating a wide range of 
reimbursement policies with some providing no reimbursement at all. Travel is a requirement for home 
care workers moving from one consumer's home to another. The high cost of gas as well as vehicle 
maintenance create financial concerns for these workers. When you consider the wage scale for home 
care workers, it is important that reimbursed be provided for their travel. 
Included in the reimbursement rate for home care services is consideration of mileage reimbursement 
for home care workers. It is included in consideration of the state rate that is currently 46 cents/mile. It 
should be noted that the federal rate is higher than the state rate. Establishing a requirement that home 
care agencies provide mileage reimbursement and that it be provided at a minimum rate wouldno
doubt be helpful with recruitment and retention of home care workers. 
Health Insurance: 
Health insurance is a critical benefit and should be a priority for essential workers across the state that 
are providing care for Maine's older and disabled adults both in long-term care facilities and in the 
community. The availability and affordability of health insurance is also a primary concern for Council 
members. For example, a Council member who is Diabetic does not have coverage for bloodwork and 
other required medical care. This is a significant concern and barrier for this individual. 
Another Council member shared the following: ”l don't think my company's health insurance is 
affordable. Given it is around $l80.00/ paycheck, it is too much taken out. The plan doesn't have full 
coverage either. It is more of a short-term disability coverage. It will keep you from having to pay 
S100,00 if you have a major accident or health issue.” 
Direct Care workers who have access to health insurance stay in the same job twice as long as workers 
without coverage (Coverage is Critical to Care, The Maine Direct Care Worker Coalition). Workers 
without health insurance may have to go without needed medical care except in emergencies. As 
important as health insurance is, it may not be available or affordable for workers making it an 
important benefit that is out of reach. We support the requirement in this bill that directs the 
Department of Health and Human Services to study the feasibility and projected cost of providing health 
insurance or subsidies for insurance for essential support workers and in drafting recommendations, will 
seek input from the Essential Support Workforce Advisory Committee. The Office of Affordable Health 
Care could also be very helpful in this effort. 
Thank you for your consideration.
