  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 20, 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State  House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1521 – An Act to Support the Essential Support Workforce by Promoting Enhanced 
Reimbursement and Benefits and Encouraging Information Sharing  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information in opposition to LD 1521, An Act to Support the Essential Support 
Workforce by Promoting Enhanced Reimbursement and Benefits and Encouraging Information 
Sharing . This b ill implements a number of initiatives for essential support workers and in -home care 
workers. It establishes provider registries, waives background check fees for essential support workers 
and makes those background checks portable, establishes an enhance d service coordination benefit 
and directs the Department of Health and Human Services to study the feasibility of providing health 
insurance or subsidies for insurance to essential support workers.  
 
Section 1 of this bill would require  MaineCare  to reimburse certain workers for mileage accrued when 
traveling between clients  under certain circumstances.  MaineCare providers delivering services under 
Sections 12, Consumer Directed Services; 19, Home and Community Benefits for the Elderly and 
Adults with Disabilities;  40, Home Health Services; and 96 , Private Duty Nursing and Personal Care 
Services  already have mileage reimbursement assumptions built int o the reimbursement rates.  For 
services delivered by agencies, this bill is unworkable. If the Department were to pay agency staff, 
those staff would have to become enrolled providers,  which is unrealistic for both the workers and the 
Department. The Department is also not positioned  to validate agency workers’ mileage reports . 
Mileage reimbursement  for agency staff should be left to agencies, not the Department.  
 
Section 2 of this bill addressed enhanced service coordination. It is unclear what this section of the LD 
is trying to achieve. The Department already offers a reimbursable care coordinati on service to eligible 
MaineCare members ; however , currently service coordinators do not transport members to and from 
appointments and/or covered services  as this is covered through the Non -Emergency Transportation 
service . Care Coordination Services alre ady assist with locating providers, overseeing the 
appropriateness of the plan of care by regularly obtaining member feedback, and frequently 
monitoring the Member’s health status. The goal of these services is to assist eligible members to 
access services  and goals identified in the authorized plan of care to allow them to retain or achieve 
the maximum amount of independence possible and desired.  
 
Section 3  of this bill , which establishes a new Chapter 1629, would require the Department to create 
essential  support wo rker and in -home care worker registries.  The Department operates a similar 
DocuSign Envelope ID: DF9DBB11-8557-4093-B36B-DD131446AE9E
 
 registry for CNAs; however, we have concerns about the breadth of information outlined here, 
particularly around public health information. We also do not understand the benefit of this proposal. 
Department rules already require the employer to maintain most of this information in an employee 
file. 
 
Sections 4  through 6 of the bill create a mechanism through which a worker’s background  check can 
be made portable , and provide for a fee waiver . The Department’s  Division of Licensing and 
Certification (DLC) notes that t he fee waiver language for the Maine Background Check Center 
(MBCC) in the proposed bill presents a few issues. The MBCC was established in Chapter 1 691 with 
the intent to be a self-funded  program . Waiving the fee here will require a sizable fiscal note as the 
MBCC currently relies on  user fees  to fund its operations and  does not  use general fund dollars. 
Waiving the fee  as proposed here may require th e program to have  some general fund revenue  added . 
DLC also noted that t o incorporate an Essential Support Worker Registry into the current CNA and 
Direct Care Worker Registry would require at a minimum both statutory change (to 22 §1812 -G) as 
well as rule change. The current Registry Rule 10 -144 CMR Ch. 128 Section 2 (I) reads in part "The 
Registry will not list  DCWs  in good standing who are not annotated." The DLC would  need a 
significant increase in staff to handle what would be a significant number  of new placements on the 
registry.  
 
Lastly, Section 7, health insurance for essential support workers would be very challenging and also 
impact provider reimbursement rates . Provider rates under Sections 12, 19, 40, and 96 incorporate 
actual health insurance u ptake rates and associated costs  on employees electing health insurance. By 
providing subsidies for employees, this bill would change those take up rates.  
 
If you have any further questions, please feel free to contact us. 
 
Sincerely,  
      
Michelle Prob ert       Paul Saucier  
Director        Director  
Office of MaineCare Services      Office of Aging and Disability Services  
 
 
 
 
Bill Montejo  
Director  
Division of Licensing & Certification  
DocuSign Envelope ID: DF9DBB11-8557-4093-B36B-DD131446AE9E

