HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
;;j;i,;<§;,§ AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002
“ »,i,ifj;i%;lij*~1- ‘* (207) 287-1400 
Sally Cluchey TTY. MAINE RELAY 71l 
I5 Bricl~; _\-'ard Way 
Bowdoinham. M ii ()4()O§< 
Phone: (207) 8 I4-8379 
_$al!\.( ‘lt|t:lic _\"<¢_1i~;_g;slutt1re._inz1ine.go\ 
April 20, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Sally Cluehey presenting in support of 
LD I 521, An Act to Support the Essential Support Workforce by Promoting Enhanced 
Reimbursement and Beneﬁts and Encouraging Information Sharing 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Good moming/afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the Health 
and Human Sen/ices Committee. My name is Sally Cluehey and l proudly represent the communities of 
Bowdoinham, Bowdoin, and Richmond. 
l am here today to present LD 1521. The ideas in this bill come from many conversations l have had 
with constituents about how to improve conditions for Maine caregivers, as well as from my own 
experience caring for my mother through Medicaid ’s consumer directed program. lt is from that 
perspective that l hope you will hear my testimony. 
When she became ill, my mother was determined to remain at home. She lived in a very rural 
community an hour from her doctors, and nowhere near any kind of support care agency. Managing her 
long-term care myself through a consumer-directed program was really our only option. Here are three 
things I leamed from this experience: 
l. Finding someone to provide care for my mother was hard. For one thing, there wasn’t 
anywhere to look. The social workers and long-term care insurance company weren’t aware of 
anyone providing this care in her town. After several weeks, l finally got one name through word 
of mouth, and that person helped me ﬁnd additional caregivers. 
2. Onboarding caregivers to the ﬁnancial intermediary was challenging. The onboarding 
process to get her caregivers signed up to be paid through a ﬁnancial intermediary once I found 
them was time consuming, expensive, and administratively burdensome for them. lt took 
between 4-6 weeks to get each of the caregivers onboarded so that they could begin being paid 
by Medicaid instead of out of pocket. 
3. Caregiver jobs are physically and emotionally demanding. Even so, the pay that they receive 
is meager, and many of the people doing this work in rural communities are self-employed and 
District 52: Bowdoinhzlni. Richmond and Bowdoin (part)
do not have health insurance, paid leave, retirement beneﬁts, or get reimbursed for their travel 
expenses (other than through tax deductions). 
My goal in introducing LD 1521 is to raise ideas aimed at reducing headaches for families and 
caregivers, and to begin a conversation about how to provide health insurance to the individuals we rely 
on to care for our loved ones. 
Section 1 directs HHS to reimburse caregivers for mileage when they’rc providing care to more than 
one patient in a single day and traveling distances greater than l5 miles between clients. 
Section 2 establishes an enhanced service coordination beneﬁt. ln the case of a consumer-directed 
program, it would allow for a caregiver (under the direction of the supervising family member) to make 
appointments, arrange travel, assist with obtaining prescriptions as care needs change, and stand in as 
the patient representative during medical visits when family members are unable to perform these 
functions. In the case of agency-managed care, an agency representative would be paid to coordinate 
these types of activities. 
Section 3 establishes a voluntary employment paperwork database with the goal of centralizing 
electronic storage of caregiver documents (e. g., credentials, training certiﬁcates, vaccination records and 
statuses, background check veriﬁcations, and other necessary doctunents) so that once hired, sharing 
these documents is far easier if you were to take on new patients using different ﬁnancial intemiediaries, 
or to change jobs. The current process is deeply inefﬁcient and ensures constant, redundant paperwork 
for everyone involved. 
Section 3 also establishes a voluntary care provider registry, which would make it easier for families 
to ﬁnd caregivers close by and for caregivers to ﬁnd new patients. 
Sections 4 through 6 make background checks free (paid for by the state) and portable so that 
caregivers could share the results of those checks with multiple employers over a ceitain period of time. 
Currently, a new background check must be conducted by each employer, which is both inefﬁeient and 
expensive for everyone involved. 
Section 7 directs DHHS to examine the feasibility and projected cost of providing health insurance 
to all essential support workers, either through MaineCare, the state employee health plan, premium 
subsidies for commercial insurance, or another mechanism. It also asks the department to consider the 
pros, cons, and costs and savings of each option. 
As with so many policy challenges we face as a state, I understand that there are no simple ﬁxes for the 
problems this bill seeks to address. I recognize that some of the proposed solutions could inadvertently 
create new challenges, whether for the Department or in the sector more broadly. I look forward to 
leaming more from the testimony of experts in these areas, and am appreciative of the opportunity to 
bring these topics forward for discussion. I am also aware that the Essential Support Workforce 
Advisory Committee may be a good forum for some of these ideas, and I would be happy to work with 
that committee, the department, or relevant stakeholder groups on any aspects of the bill you all decide 
merit further discussion or exploration at this time. 
l.)istrict 52: BUV\'(lt)llll1{lIll, Richmond and Bowdoin (part)
