 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA members 
include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, transportation, amusements, and 
cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kittery to Calais, 
and annually produces the state’s official travel planner, Maine Invites You (since 1933). 
 
 
 
Alison Sucy, Chief Operating Officer & Director of Government Affairs 
On Behalf of the Maine Tourism Association 
 
In OPPOSITION to 
 
LD 1611, An Act to Create the Pine Tree Power Company, a Nonprofit, Customer-owned Utility 
 
 
May 4, 2023 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology Committee: 
 
My name is Alison Sucy, and I am the Chief Operating Officer and Director of Government Affairs for 
the Maine Tourism Association. The Maine Tourism Association is the state’s largest advocate for all 
tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, MTA members includes lodging, restaurants, camps, 
campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, amusements, and cultural and historical 
attractions. I present this testimony in opposition to LD 1611. 
 
MTA supports stable business policies that allow Maine’s tourism businesses to sustain themselves and 
grow. As you’re well aware, the pandemic upended any sense of stability across our state--particularly in 
our industry. Our members struggled to maintain their businesses; and very few had any opportunity for 
growth.  
 
As our members emerge from this incredibly challenging time, we’re relying on the legislature to develop 
policies that will provide more stability for our members and help them recover from these past several 
devastating years. LD 1611 will do neither. We believe this legislation, and the Pine Tree Power company 
it seeks to create, will bring even more instability. 
 
Should Pine Tree Power become law, we expect we’ll be subjected to at least ten years of litigation 
focused on forcibly purchasing the assets of the existing electric utilities as well as the establishment of an 
entirely new state-owned utility company that will control almost all of Maine’s electricity. We will be 
faced with somewhere between $9 and $14 billion in additional state debt, with an elected board who is 
likely to have neither qualifications, nor expertise overseeing the operations, maintenance, and security of 
Maine’s electric grid.  
 
Pine Tree Power does not guarantee what our members need most – reasonable and predictable electric 
rates, responsive service, and a resilient electric grid. Instead, it poses a significant risk for our members 
and our state. We respectfully urge you to vote ought not to pass on LD 1611. Thank you for your 
consideration. 

