Andrew Roberts Van Alstyne
South Berwick
LD 1611
Put this to the voters. 
CMP’s propaganda campaign this year is full of omissions and exaggerations. Its easy
to mail a flyer saying that a consumer-owned alternative is too expensive. So I took a 
look at their FY22 year end audit report and statements, since CMP cannot mislead 
their investors – the only people who matter. Their financial statements tell a very 
different story….
In 2011 several states filed a joint complaint about CMP and other transmission 
providers that the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission return on equity 
calculation was not fair or just; over the last 10+ years, CMP has held millions in 
potential refunds while FERC adjudicates the complaint; and as of 7/26/21, the 
pending outcome could reduce CMP earnings by $1m/year and could cost them $27.8
million in customer refunds. Mainers will ultimately pay for this.
CMP is currently under an MPUC investigation examining how CMP and its 
customers are affected by decisions made at the CMP corporate parent level about 
earnings, capital budgeting, and planning. In this context, the investigation will also 
examine regulatory approaches and structures including ratemaking and performance 
mechanisms.
In August 2022 CMP filed a 3-year rate increase plan asking for $100 million in total 
new revenue. Allegedly CMP wants to invest in the company.
CMP @ YE 2022 had 2.2 billion in equity, and had paid $230 million in dividends.
As of December 2022 CMP had 30.4 million in taxpayer funded government grants.
In 2017, the Tax Cuts act screwed me but gave CMP a $17 million dollar break in 
their corporate tax bill. That could offset rate hikes for Mainers but will go back to 
their profit. 
CMP received a 6.9% distribution rate increase on Feb 19, 2020 to meet a $17m 
revenue requirement with a target return on equity of 9.25%. As I’m reading this, that 
is almost 10% of their revenue to their bottom line that is not going to control costs 
for Mainers and not going to improve the grid’s reliability.
Now their greedy corporate suits want hardworking Mainers to pony up even more to 
pad their bottom line without showing any real improvement to service or reliability. 
My bill has gone up by $100/month for electric alone, not to mention the propane and 
wood stove heating costs. My entire raise at work is going to offset the supplier 
increase. Mainers are already suffering under the supplier rate increase, no doubt 
profiteering by some other Avangrid subsidiary, and we flatly cannot afford more.
MPUC should demand that CMP and Avangrid, CMP’s $8.3 billion dollar 
foreign-owned parent company, put their customers before their profit margin.
I support the creation of Pine Tree Power and the buyout of CMP’s assets to be 
owned by and for the people of Maine. CMP is, flatly, too expensive.
