Barbara Russell
Rome, Maine
LD 1611
My name is Barbara Russell. I live in Rome, Maine. I am very concerned about the 
way power is being handled in Maine.  I believe creating Pine Tree Power company 
will allay these concerns for all of us.
These reasons being:
Electricity has become a necessity to living as compared to when it was first created.  
People are reliant on refrigerators, washing machines and many appliances.  Because 
it is a necessity, it should be a non-profit entity.  Profits go out of our state and 
country because of for profit ownership.
A consumer owned, not for profit , company means everyone has an interest in 
making sure the system is working right.  Many times , when you call the for profit 
company which owns the power at present, they do not respond to trees at risk of 
infringing on the power. They’ll wait until it has caused an issue before taking care of 
the situation.  A consumer owned company would have a better response time.
Since there are no stockholders to be paying out to,  more money  is available to 
maintain and improve our present situation….. There have been many upgrades in the
past few years which CMP has refused to start and this has led to a mis-management 
of many types of power and grid assemblies.
The state of Nebraska has been non profit since their beginning.They had better 
response during the freeze up  in that area a few years back.  Of course no one pointed
this out at the time of the event.  They also had less damage issues even though the 
storm and effects were pretty much equal.
Local people would be utilized and not a constant pulling of workers from other states
to deal with the hazards of electrical lines during storms. This equals quicker response
time and locals know more about the system, how it works and what to watch for.
Nebraska is the only state in the U.S. served entirely by an electric power system 
which is owned and operated by its own citizens. There has not been a single 
privately-owned electric utility company in Nebraska since 1945.    Also they 
managed rolling blackouts during the last freeze up which actually saved many other 
states from suffering complete power losses.
