 
Testimony of Betty Ann Frederic  
In Opposition to LD 1611, An Act to Create the Pine Tree Power Company, a 
Nonprofit, Customer-owned Utility 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology, my name is Betty Ann 
Frederic. I formerly lived in Skowhegan, where I was privileged to represent the good 
citizens of that town in the Maine House of Representatives. I’m here today as a 
resident of Starks to oppose LD 1611, An Act to Create the Pine Tree Power Company, 
a Nonprofit, Customer-owned Utility. 
 
I’d like to begin by reading a letter signed by over 80 former Maine legislators, both 
Democrats and Republicans, who are united in their opposition to the Pine Tree Power 
proposal.  
 
We, the undersigned, former members of the Maine State Legislature, wish to publicly 
state our opposition to a forced takeover of Maine’s electric utilities. Although our 
reasons vary, as do our political affiliations, we firmly believe that the proposed seizure 
of the state’s privately owned utilities would increase costs and insert partisan politics 
into the operation of Maine’s electric grid.  
 
Our climate, our economy, and our communities cannot sustain the financial and 
environmental costs that the unknown nature of this proposal will almost certainly bring 
forth. Our current system for delivering electricity, featuring a unique structure of private 
ownership and tight government oversight, fueled by a work force that combines open 
shop and union entities, is symbolic of Maine–a melting pot of different personalities and 
ideologies in pursuit of a common objective, not unlike the names included below.  
 
Collectively, we ask that Maine voters, as well as our contemporaries in the Maine 
Legislature reject the idea of a forced sale of Maine’s transmission and distribution 
utilities. Thank you for your consideration.  
 
I will be submitting this letter as part of my testimony and it will include the names of all 
the legislators who have signed it to date.  
 
In my remaining time, I’d like to speak only for myself, to add a few specific reasons I 
am so opposed to LD 1611.  
 
I understand the important role state government plays in the lives of Maine people. I 
know, too, how fortunate we are to have dedicated and caring staff working on our 
behalf in all the departments and agencies. With them in mind, I’m very concerned the 
state does not have capacity to operate the entire electric grid and, just as important, 
does not have the ability to take care of it.  
 
Do we really think it will be possible for Pine Tree Power, as a newly created 
governmental authority, to make the necessary improvements and repairs to keep 
electricity flowing through thousands of miles of power lines across the state? Living in a 
heavily wooded area, I don’t put much stock in that happening. The state already 
struggles to maintain our roads. Would it really do a better job delivering our electricity? 
 
I find it troubling that the people making decisions about the grid would be elected to the 
board. What we really need are trained people with the skills and knowledge to make 
sure it operates safely and properly. If I’m reading the bill correctly, only two appointed 
people would need to have “expertise and experience” in utilities and electricity. Even 
those two members could be from a range of areas that may not be familiar with the ins 
and outs of the grid. 
 
I’m concerned, too, about the state taking over privately owned businesses. Setting a 
precedent like this with Pine Tree Power could discourage businesses from coming to 
Maine. We’d be better off encouraging free enterprise and welcoming more jobs into the 
state. If Pine Tree Power becomes law, the long delay expected before it’s operational 
could multiply negative messages to businesses thinking about locating here.  
 
I’ll finish by briefly touching on Pine Tree Power’s enormous cost. Can we really afford 
more than $10 billion in state debt as we continue to recover from the pandemic? My 
response to that is no.  
 
Thank you for listening to my concerns with this legislation. I ask that you vote ought not 
to pass on LD 1611. 
 
