Testimony in Opposition to LD 1611 
An Act to Create the Pine Tree Power Company, a Nonprofit, Customer-owned Utility 
May 4, 2023 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Energy, Utilities and Technology, my name is David Barber and I reside in Cape Elizabeth. I am 
here today to speak in opposition to LD 1611, An Act to Create the Pine Tree Power Company, a 
Nonprofit, Customer-owned Utility. 
 
My father, Gus, started Barber Foods in 1955 with just one employee and a truck. Over the 
years, our family worked together to grow Barber Foods into a nationally recognized brand. I 
served in a variety of roles including President and CEO until we sold the business in 2011. 
Today, the current owner, Tyson Foods, employs more than 350 people at its facilities in 
Portland, and I continue to serve as the business development specialist for the company. 
 
As you can imagine, operating food processing facilities requires huge amounts of reliable 
electricity. We need it to keep our equipment running and to provide safe, sanitary work 
environments. If we don’t have reliable electricity, our brand and the people who support it are in 
trouble.   
 
Our provider, Central Maine Power, has been very reliable and responsive. It’s run by 
professionals who know what they’re doing. I fear the same won’t be true for Pine Tree Power 
given the political makeup of its board. Decisions about rates and repairs could be determined by 
elections rather than by seasoned professionals and sound information. 
 
Like most businesses, we also require predictability. Pine Tree Power will be anything but 
predictable. Right now, there are no firm costs, no timeframes, no implementation plans, no 
meaningful details. There’s only what’s in this bill. As many of you know, in the private sector 
when we’re considering an investment, especially a sizeable one, we conduct due diligence. 
Facts are verified, costs are examined, plans are scrutinized, unintended consequences are 
considered, and in the end all risks are analyzed before decisions are made.  
 
In the case of Pine Tree Power, you’re being asked to upend functioning electric power systems 
and preapprove a multibillion dollar idea, which has not been proven to work or ever executed 
on a statewide scale. To me that sounds like chaos, not predictability. 
 
What little we do know, mostly based on other places, is that Pine Tree Power could take a 
decade to resolve all its legal battles. When the dust finally settles, the only predictable thing will 
be the incredible amount of money we’ll be forced to borrow so the new state authority can 
purchase the assets of Central Maine Power and Versant Power.  
 
The ability to repay this debt raises another red flag – how can we afford to pay back a billion 
dollars a year toward the debt? That question should be addressed before anything is approved.  
 
Thank you for taking the time to listen to my concerns about Pine Tree Power. I urge you to vote 
against this bill.   
