  
 
 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler , and distinguished members of the Select Legislative 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology,  
 
My name is  David Littell, and I am here today in opposition to LD 1611. I am an attorney with Bernstein 
Shur and here  on behalf of Versant Power .  
 
Work on Climate Change  
 
On climate change and Maine’s clean energy initiatives, I want to be clear: Maine’s efforts to transition 
cost-effectively to a low carbon (and low pollution) economy will fail if we go down the road of a hostile 
takeover of Maine’s electric utilities.  
 
I have some climate credentials and experience to speak from: I am a former Commissioner of the 
Department of E nvironmental Protection (DEP) under Governor Baldacci (2005 -2010) and a former 
Commissioner on the Maine Public Utilities Commission (PUC) (2010 to 2015).  
 
I served as the Chair of the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (“RGGI”) as well as vice chair twic e from 
2008 through 2015 after we designed and implemented RGGI from 2005 through 2008. I worked on 
numerous greenhouse gas initiatives, programs, and interstate initiatives on climate change mitigation 
with more than a dozen states active on client initia tives during my time as a public official. I represented 
Maine at the U.N.F.C.C. Conference of the Parties (COP) in Copenhagen with the Obama Administration 
and fellow state environmental commissioners in a cooperative bi -partisan delegation with many U.S.  
companies.  
 
I also worked for seven years with an energy non -profit on greenhouse gas reduction, grid modernization, 
and power sector transformation initiatives with more than 20 U.S. state commissions, energy offices, and 
environmental agencies, U.S. EPA , and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). Now, I 
focus my work in Maine, New Hampshire, and the northeast as Chair of the Bernstein Shur Climate 
Change Practice Group. Success in greenhouse gas and pollution cleanup requires cooperation of pub lic 
and private actors and cannot succeed if we destroy that which we indeed seek to improve.  
 
The Maine PUC’s Regulation of Private Utilities is the Right Model  
 
We know the PUC can and should regulate utilities – that’s the PUC’s job and it’s a very important role 
for our Maine economy. The PUC’s regulatory model works as a regulatory model; the model of 
government regulation of private companies has worked in the  U.S. for more than a century. Yes, the 
model always should be examined for reform from time to time.  
 
The critical concern is that this form of public ownership puts all costs on the customers. This proposed 
structure will reduce the PUC’s ability to imp ose cost disallowances and penalties that now do not impact 
customers. If Maine utilities are owned by this pseudo -public entity, then any penalty or disallowance 
directly hits that entity, and who pays as a result? As proposed, public customers, not the m embers of the 
board, pay. Being on the elected board will not open board members to liabilities in the same way that 
D a v i d  L i t t e l l  T e s t i m o n y ,  L D  1 6 1 1  
P a g e  | 2 
 
 current board members and shareholders of private utilities do. As proposed public power’s board is 
simply a different oversight task more akin to what this and other legislative committees do. The problem 
with that is that it simply doesn’t work well to run a critical and complex enterprise the delivers electricity 
24 hours a day, 365 days a year.  
 
In fact, the regulatory model that works be st in the U.S. for utility regulation and environmental 
regulation is capable regulators, mandating strong standards of performance with incentives and 
disincentives, over private activity that puts its own money at stake to lose if it messes up badly. The 
success of the regulatory model will directly influence success of Maine’s energy transition to a low -
carbon Maine economy.  
 
Maine has much work ahead  to Satisfy Maine’s Climate Law,  
Modernize the Grid and Modernize Maine’s Energy Economy  
 
The Legislature enacted and Governor Mills signed LD 1679 into law in 2019. The law sets Maine’s 
climate goals to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions to 45% below 1990 greenhouse gas emission levels 
by 2030, and 80% below 1990 levels by 2050. Through many piec es of legislation passed through this 
select committee in the 129 th and this 130 th Legislature, Maine is still working toward these goals. In 
fact, the Legislature and Governor have moved solar, grid -scale renewable, electrification, and storage 
initiative s forward which are important pieces of Maine’s energy future. Regulatory innovation is an 
important piece too.  
 
However, Maine has much work to do. Time to meet the Maine Climate Law goals runs quickly when 
combined public/private/citizen/state/regional p lanning, implementation and reassessment to meet each 
state’s laws as well as national commitments in the Paris and Copenhagen UNFCCC accords are at stake.  
 
The governmenta l power initiative, if passed . means Maine will spend most of this decade in fights in 
court over an attempted government taking, and then o n a very challenging transition  and reorganization s- 
even under the best -case scenario . Private investors (Wall Street and bond issuers ) will not be impressed 
with Maine.  As costs crystallize, you can ’t just tax Mainers for the huge costs involved or put it on rates: 
taxes or rates would go through the roof to fund such an effort as Maine’s climate progress stalls in a 
funding crutch. During the ensuing decade, should this government power initiative p ass, grid 
modernization investments to integrate and interconnect distributed and grid -scale renewables mandated 
by the 130 th, the 129 th and prior Legislatures will be stymied . Maine’s grid w ould suffer  and Maine’s 
greenhouse gas efforts will falter . 
 
Ther e are approaches to a low carbon transition that save Maine customers money and improve their lives 
and that help Maine businesses compete and flourish. That is frankly where we should be devoting our 
work: regulatory reform, environmental and economic dev elopment efforts – to help Maine flourish.  
Maine’s grid w ould suffer  and greenhouse gas efforts falter under LD 1611 . 
 
We Cannot Afford to Lose Focus on Decarbonization, Renewable Energy, and  
Grid Modernization for the Environmental and Economic Benefits t o the State.  
 
1. The t ime for legal challenges, and then  set-up and transition to a government -run utility spans 
most of this decade in the best -case scenario.  
 
This is a government forced divestiture of Maine’s largest (privately owned) utilities. It will also take 
significant time to transition if it were to succeed. In New York, the transition to the Long Island Power 
Authority (LIPA) took twelve years initially and that did not go particularly well. In fact, it is still not 
going particularly well a s LIPA continues to be plagued by high rates and poor service.  
 
D a v i d  L i t t e l l  T e s t i m o n y ,  L D  1 6 1 1  
P a g e  | 3 
 
 The timeframe put forth by the proponents is wholly unrealistic. A transition like this is very serious 
business, never done on this scale. Breaking what you are trying to improve is hardly a way forward. 
Albeit well -intentioned, this hostile takeover initiative will undermine the pillars upon which a cost -
effective decarbonization of Maine’s many businesses and institutions will be built.  
 
2. Lost Opportunities for Reforms and Innovation  
 
Years of a hostile takeover would cause delays in many investments and delay attention to necessary grid 
modernization initiatives exactly when Maine needs that focus. It is already diverting our attention.  
 
And Maine’s attention will be diverted from effo rts to reform ISO -NE which requires a long -term 
coordinated effort with other New England states. This is the best time in decades to work with other New 
England states on ISO -NE reform. It is clear LD 1611 will divert attention from working on distributed  
and grid -scale renewable integration – perhaps for years. We can’t afford more lost opportunities.  
 
3. Be Cautious on Claimed Benefits and Mindful of likely Costs and Risks.  
 
Substantial risks are shifted from private investors to utility customers by LD 161 1. Risks over time tend 
to become costs in the utility world. The risk of bad investments, poor management, political pressure to 
keep rates low (below actual costs) will be overwhelming under the proposed structure. There are many 
international jurisdicti ons where this institutional arrangement exists now, and it works poorly at least as 
often as it works out well.  
 
My experience on the PUC suggests that the costs of this bill are far understated. First, the low -cost bonds 
promised by some advocates are un likely to be so low cost. Second, transition and acquisition costs will 
be higher than hoped.  Third, if it passes, the current equity and bonding cost of the utilities rise 
immediately.  The PUC can’t ignore rising utility financing costs and would be forc ed to pass increased 
costs through to ratepayers.  Moreover, fourth, in the long run a statewide politically elected board is 
unlikely to engender good bonds rates – this arrangement is not set up for competent utility management.  
 
A fifth example of faulty  promised savings is an assumption that ISO -NE and FERC will allow federal 
transmission rates above cost of service to shift costs to federal rates to cross -subsidize Maine distribution 
rates. This is not realistic or consistent with my experience with FER C or the ISO -NE tariff. Indeed, I 
would say that it is not going to happen, it’s a false promise.  
 
In the current investor -owned structure, shareholders take most of the current risk. We should keep it that 
way as it leads to the right management signals w hich a governmental entity cannot adequately simulate.  
 
Government power is simply a risk with guaranteed costs and risks and no guaranteed payout or benefits.  
 
We need to continue to move forward rather than get diverted into a bruising years -long series of legal 
proceedings that will wreck the foundations we need to make energy and climate progress. Our climate 
goals are achievable with a focus that builds our economy and jobs in Maine. We should not divert our 
attention and our resources to an expensive and high -risk gamble with guaranteed costs and risks and 
uncertain benefits at best.  
 
Thank you for considering this testimony. I would of course be pleased to answer any questions the 
committee members may have.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
 
David Littell  
