 
Frank O'Hara , 40 Beech Street , Hallowell, ME 04347 , frankomaine@gmail.com , 207 -592-1788                                                                                             
 
 
Testimony of Frank O’Hara  
 
In Opposition to LD 1611  
An Act to Create the Pine Tree Power Company, a Nonprofit, Customer -owned Utility  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
 
May 4, 2023  
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities, and Technology:  
 
My name is Frank O’Hara.  I am a resident of Hallowell, and a longstanding consultant in Maine on 
housing, community development, and economic developmen t.  I am also a liberal by political 
persuasion  (I know this is a word not generally spoken out loud in polite company, but I don ’t serve in 
elected office ).   
 
As such, I don’t have a problem with the idea of government ownership  in the right circum stances.  I 
think government -run Social Security does a more reliable job for retirees than private 401 -k accounts.  
I think government -run health care systems in Europe have better outcomes and lower costs than our 
insurance company -driven system.   But government ownership is not right at all times and in all cases .   
And this is a particularly bad time to contemplate a wholesale government takeover of Maine’s utility 
companies.   
 
Maine faces a climate crisis.  More precise ly, the  world faces a climate catastrophe .  We all must move 
quickly and dramatically to shift energy us age from fossil fuels to renewable and clean sources.  
Governor Mills, with your able assistance, has set the right goals.  Now it will take our full attention 
and effort to achieve them.  Former Maine State Planning Director Rich Silkman estimated that we in 
Maine will have to invest $60 billion to increase electrical production by fivefold in order to reach our 
climate goals.  It is a daunting task . 
 
Then we  have this bill.  Consider what will happen if it or the referendum passes .  There will be  court 
fights to set a sale price ; campaigns  to elect board member s; haggling over how to pay  for the purchase ; 
a contentious rule -setting  process ; a drawn -out bidding process  to cho ose an operator ; the 
rene gotiation of labor contracts.  It will take ten years.  We know what it will look like , because  we have 
the energy corr idor fight as an example.  
 
We don’t have the luxury to spend  ten years in a debating society . The world is burning now .  Let’s 
reform and tighten PUC oversi ght right now to prev ent the problems CMP had in recent decades, and 
then put our full attention and effort into moving Maine into a green future.  Thank you.    
