Greg C. Robie 95 Mineral Springs  
Rd Highland Mills, NY 10930  
May 4, 2023  
 
Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee 
State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Maine State Legislature, Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
LD 1611: a antidote to the 131st Legislature’s #BeltwayOfBills snookering Maine*  
 
Re: LD 1611: the concept of a privately operated, nonprofit, consumer-owned utility 
controlled by a board the majority of the members of which are elected is consistent 
with our right to be responsible under our Constitution, Article I, Section 2: 
Power inherent in people.  All power is inherent in the people; all free 
governments are founded in their authority and instituted for their benefit; they 
have therefore an unalienable and indefeasible right to institute government, and 
to alter, reform, or totally change the same, when their safety and happiness 
require it. 
Chairpersons Lawrence and Zeigler , and Honorable Members of the Joint Committee 
on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
I am Greg Robie. I am a 9th generation titleholder of a family farm in Winslow, and a 
3rd generation one for our family camp on China Lake. I am a 2nd generation 
descendant of a Secretary of State; a 4th generation descendant of our 39th Governor; a 
7th generation descendant of Maine’s first Congresspersons from Winslow (1 of 7 in 
1820!). At the turn of the Millennium I was privileged to teach environmental science at 
the secondary level. Based on what I both taught and learned as a science teacher 
regarding the lag in our climate systems response to the perturbations of the current 
levels of greenhouse gas emissions, and subsequently, what Inuit observations of 
seasonally increased and increasing solar refraction in the Arctic represent as un-
modeled heat gain, it is reasoned to consider that today is our trusted models’ 2050.  
Particularly based on my heritage of civic duty informed by my scientific background 
knowledge, the Committee would be wise to facilitate a well constructed bill with 
significant checks and oversight clauses to be considered by the 131st. 
The 131st Legislature is barraged by a #BeltwayOfBills that feed into an ongoing 
snookering of Maine. Much of what these bills indirectly and directly feed into is 
integral the roll out of a hydrogen economy. Our 2022 IRA returns this economy to 
control of the fossil carbon oil and gas fuel companies and their financiers when it is 
matured. This is by an allowed exploiting – and this when they choose to – to elect to be 
called energy companies. (see annotated pages of the text of the applicable six pagers of 
that law .  
A privately operated, nonprofit, consumer-owned utility controlled by a board the 
majority of the members of which are elected is both consistent with our Constitution, 
Article I, Section 2. AND claws back a bit of the sovereignty (the right be responsible), 
which was lost to the too-BIG-to-fail financial entities through the outcomes of an 
unconstitutional Federal Reserve Act of 1913. 
Thank you for considering this framing regarding voting LD 1611. I am a happy to 
answer any questions this written warning and recommendation may engender.  
 
(845) 534-7291  
robie@hvc.rr.com  
 
or at the above address.  
=)  
Greg  
 
*  The #BeltwayOfBills snookering Maine follows: 
 
 
“The 131st Legislature’s #BeltwayOfBills snookering Maine” 
(5/2/23 V. 2.4, “.4”  version includes more of the systemic oil company snookering of a “blacker-than-black” 
hydrogen economy enacted under the guise of a ‘clean’ hydrogen paradigm language in the IRA) 
…initial 4/19/23 version of this evolving document updated to include LD 1850. 
 
LD 9 : For this bill titled to relate to “Rule by Permit”, AND to apply to the 
Commissioner, AND this is within what is in our law (i.e., not as is a current 
practice), it only applies to the pre-application meeting/hearing where a permit 
for a “Permit by Rule” (as currently practiced) may be qualified for. It is this 
qualification timeframe to which LD 9 – and as amended  to extend this 
timeframe from 20 working days to 90 calendar days – applies. The 
amendment appears to helpfully give our commissioner more time, but, and in 
law, this is in the Permit by Rule process that has been a Board function, not 
the commissioner’s, since 1983 ( new), through 1991 ( amended ),  through 2011 
(amended ), and still, today. The Board (in 1983) is not what our restored to 
authority version of it is today (i.e., since 2019). Neither is the commissioner of 
1983 similar to what that Office is today.  
 
 The continued reference to section 7 of the law in LD 9 is, at best – and this is 
likely by tradition, specious; problematic regarding MAPA rights stuff; further 
effects structural imbalance contrary to the basis statement of the Department’s 
administrative rule chapter (that “ Basis Statement ” is integral to 06-096 CMR 
ch. 2 since this Chapter’s inception in 1994, and as filed with our Secretary of 
State – available for the asking – as a file titled “096c002-94-176-
complete.pdf”).  
 
 But the current practice regarding a “Rule by Permit” is core to what the 1991 
concept of a preapplication meeting* (an undefined term, in rule, but an 
adjudicatory process under our MAPA because rights are being established). In 
practice regarding the preapplication meetings, such are integral and essential 
to the in lieu fee program ( ILF info page ; authorizing law ). The ILU 
application, (now, in practice called a Permit-by-Rule – and this when such an 
application is filed based on the pre-permit permit version; become unlisted 
and uncoded permits regarding an unrecorded application ( this information 
webpage , and/or this form , and when received, has a two year lifetime). A pre-
application meeting, where this all occurs, is effected under the auspices of our 
Commissioner , and is not a “ public proceeding ” (see (3., C.) – and another 
term for which Rule Chapter 2 is silent. A preapplication meeting is, by rule, 
between the applicant and the Department. Under both Land Resources – 
Natural Resources Protection Act, and Land Resources – Stormwater 
Management Law sections of the commissioner annual report  regarding 
timeliness and Department reviews, these listed Permit by Rules are not coded. 
This effects an ILF program which, in terms of all rights being determined is 
not happening under our MAPA. This is hidden in plain sight.  
 
  
 
Why this qualifies as a #BeltwayOfBills snookering Maine bill is that it is 
integral to a functionally confidential hearing where a project will be adjudged 
to qualify for the ILF Program, file a pre-permit-by-rule application, and have 
a timeframe established by which the DEP wraps up its review processes for 
reviewed applications. Licenses are review under the law and rules that exist at 
the time of the application. The adjudicatory process of a public hearing cannot 
redial be applied to a confidential hearing, and this as intended in law. LD 9 (as 
of this version of this #BeltwayOfBills document, law) 
 
 Originally, and still – in law – the Rule by Permit was a Board action under 
section 7. It relates to a project that is a single permitting class. Such a “Rule 
by Permit” is a final action (which in 1983 was consistent with the law), and 
only requires our Board to notify our Commissioner of its action. Because, in 
practice this Pre-Rule by Permit permit and the Rule by Permit is happening 
differently than is otherwise in law, balancing citizen involvement is structured 
out of the process … and consequences happen. 
 
 That this practice seems to have became and remains a common, and at best, 
an extralegal process, this could be how stacked LLCs became, and remain, a 
practice. If this confidential practice stopped – became a public one – the could 
effect significant cuts to our State coffers that is derived from the in lieu fees. 
About 10% of Sate revenues are identified in the Legislators Handbook as 
“other”. Or, a ‘perfect”NOT! storm of traditionally accepted practice that is not 
justified in law; that has embolden the solar industry that relies on stacked 
LLCs to snooker Maine to: 
 
1. effect the 2019 solar gold rush,” and 
2. lay the regulatory ground work for the next phase of the snookering. 
   
* The term “meeting” is utilized irregularly by the Department ( 06-096 C.M.R. 
ch. 2 ; particularly section 8.. 3rd sentence.). In that section a public meeting 
explicitly is not a public hearing under our MAPA regarding rulemaking, while 
our MAPA explicitly states that these are one and the same ( 5 MRS §8052 (1)(¶ 
2). In this Rule Chapter “meeting” can apply to at least three distinct things. This 
contradicts our MAPA. Furthermore, in its generic usage in the Rule Chapter is 
enabled by “meeting” being an undefined term. The weeds this effects, 
particularly on appeal, is beyond the intent of the #BeltwayOf Bills summary, 
but none-the-less, pertinent to the In Lieu Fee Program of the DEP; the revenue 
this Program generates for the budget. 
 
LD 43 : Proposed removing the 100 MW cap on distributed generation projects and 
includes solar. This primarily accommodates an increase in the size and 
scope of solar projects, and as is increasingly required by economics and grid 
capacity issues for the immediate and mid-term timeframes to be 
solar/battery projects. 
 The maturation of this distributive energy generation industry will, over time, 
trend toward larger projects and the economies of scale and monopolistic 
aspirations of the stacked LLC solar development business model. The 
removal of this cap on solar without first redressing the lack of rulemaking 
regarding our solar decommissioning law by the Board of Environmental 
Protection renders the lifting of this cap for solar a matter of functional 
complicity in the snookering/(eventually will be – as of April 19, LD 43 was 
voted ONTP).  
 With LD 496 solar/batteries will be ‘review’ for ‘decommission’ under wind 
turbine decommissioning trigger rules. The content of the ongoing MPUC 
workshopping on the grid already outlines that local and/or regional 
distributed generation is where the changes to our grid will likely be required. 
Any significant benefit from removing the 100 MW cap accrues to grid 
operators and the transmission of electricity out of state via the equipment 
gateways that currently have the capacity to do so. LD 1775 adds hydrogen 
as an “energy storage system” relative to how the existing grid can be utilized 
to maximize the value of interstate transmission of expansive networks of 
solar energy development projects. As interstate financially vertical 
integrated distributed power generation entities, the profitably of this accrues 
primarily to these financial entities and the grid owners. (See LD 1775, 
below, regarding the other systemic snookering that is being rolled out during 
the 131st Legislature. Keep in mind that energy storage systems, including 
hyped hydrogen as a chemical storage medium, are not regulated distributed 
electricity generation systems.) 
LD 399 : This seems to relate to what might be best thought of in terms of RECs 
(renewable energy credits). Particularly as these can and have been applied to 
defense contractors utilizing them to gaining points in the bidding process for 
military contracts, and enhanced placement value. (If anyone reading this 
knows how the REC scheme ‘works’, please share (see email address at the 
end of this evolving document. I am challenged to see how RECs – as a 
mechanism – produces anything other than a delay in any reduction of 
greenhouse gas emissions.)  
 This bill seems to constrain competition from distributed energy generation 
from dumps regarding other such distributive energy generation systems, 
including solar. at the work session concerns that the removal of the 300% 
multiplier could encourage less recycling of combustible waste. Since no data 
was offered to backup this concern/argument is it speculative; is it strategic 
relative to stacked LLCs long range strategy for monopolizing as much of 
this market as it can to effect the lucrative sales of solar RECs to defense 
contractors, etc, and federal government contracts? 
LD 496 : Lumps batteries (defined as an “energy storage system”), with solar panels 
(defined as a “distributed energy resource”), and thereby makes different 
things with different regulatory concerns and different decommissioning 
issues commonly treated as though they are wind turbines (under current 
DEP practice and it Wind Rule Chapter). Wind turbine decommissioning 
triggers – another “distributed energy resource”, not an energy storage system 
as these are defined in MPUC law – merit different, not a common triggering 
mechanism.  
 
 Solar/battery projects are integral to the next phase of the stacked LLC 
business model’s expansion/maturation. When stacked LLCs are treated as 
the single “person” in law (which they are explicitly not), this enables such 
stacked LLCs to exploit the exempt member transfer language in this bill and 
our Solar Energy Development Decommissioning law (FWIW, this 
exemption arrived by amendment in 2021). Regardless, snookering was 
thereby allowed that facilitates abandonment under the guise of ’successful’ 
decommission plans. 
 
 What the link to LD 496 links to, and as an ‘amendment’ offered by the 
sponsoring representative dated 3/27/23, was also referenced at the work 
session on LD 496 as problematic, but could be worked out, and this by the 
Legislative Analyst at the March 29, 2023 work session. Whatever that work 
around was may explain why the “ Concept Draft ” version remains the 
[otherwise misleading] public face of this bill. 
 
 
LD 1134 : Amends subdivision statue under the DEP law that both conflict with 
subdivision law under land use law (Title 30-A, Chapter 187), and, regardless 
of that regulatory nightmare, does so to facilitate a phased 
leasing/development of land that conforms to the business model of solar 
projects on large tracts of land without this also triggering a subdivision 
review [by the DEP]. 
 
LD 1135: As the “ Concept Draft ” text of LD 1135, this sets the stage for tree growth 
classified land of the large tracts the solar industry will be able to exploit 
under LD 1134; to be similarly exploited to be incorporated into the 
unfolding and maturing global carbon offset credit markets. As noted at the 
end of the sponsoring Representative’s pubic hearing testimony, it is now a 
“resolve .” That text, like LD 496 above, is not yet updated in the 
Legislature’s databases and this bill. However, what is in the sponsoring 
Representative’s testimony  is worded to lead to an affirmative framing 
regarding the referenced study relative to the snookering – and this 
snookering is as far as physics is concerned. Carbon offset markets that 
relates to property in a qualified tree growth plan happen with or without the 
offset markets being involved:  
 
 • First, tree growth classification is a State subsidized tax program 
that does it carbon sequestering as a consequence of the silviculture 
practices of qualifying tree growth plans. If such a carbon credit 
product, physics aside, is a thing to be ‘harvested’, this would 
logically accrue to the State and the subsidizing citizens of our State.  
 • Second, carbon credit markets – by their nature – delay keeping 
fossil carbon in the ground. This means they are another iteration of 
the snookering that obfuscates rational action for actually reducing 
carbon emissions commensurate within the emergency introductory 
text of our current Maine Climate Council with its “Maine Won’t 
Wait” report’s policy goals. 
 
  At the work session on April 25, 2023, LD 1135 was voted ONTP, and, 
as was reflected by the Chair (after the unanimous vote for the study by those 
present), as a “positive outcome.” Such is reasoned only if physics does not 
matter and … this as detailed in this ONTP public hearing testimony . 
 
LD 1232 : Indirectly regulates land use law (Title 30-A, Chapter 187), but this through 
Title 25, to build a growing inventory commercial roof area for the stacked 
LLC solar business model to exploit. 
 
LD 1648 : Sets the stage for open space and farmland classified land, and whether in 
large tracts or not in the large tracts, to be similarly be exploited to be 
incorporated into the unfolding and maturing global carbon offset credit 
markets.  
 
 By inserting into what is an alphebetical listing of definitions in the Farm and 
Open Space Tax Law subchapter (Title 36 MRS., Chapter 105., subchapter 
10.), such that as a “c” – this ‘carbon conservation management plan’ – has 
preemptive statutory standing as an ‘a” under a repealed definition of an 
“Assessor” in the definitions for a subchapter and explicitly qualifying for 
additional reductions in assessment valuation. 
 
 Transforms a definition of a term “wildlife habitat” that, and as regulated in 
the definition, is significantly used two additional times in subchapter 10, 
three more under chapter 105 but one of those as a “wildlife plan” under tree 
growth law. The Department of Inland Fisheries ad Wildlife (38 MRS §480-
BB) treats  the term with the adjective significant added to it, and this as 
would become a matter of review at a minimum of every 10 years. A much 
less regulated version of such oversight is subjugated to second ranking in 
law to the proposed carbon conservation management plan while increasing a 
purposed subsidized tax abatement benefit program to a flax and significanly 
increased one in a  
 
 Like the ONTP testimony linked to LD 1135 above, the question of who this 
bill’s concept and framing benefits needs both asking and answers.  
 
LD 1591 : Creates a/[an exceptional?] subsection-specific regulation within MPUC law 
(Title 35-A) for the stacked LLC solar business model to twice snooker 
snookered Maine farmers. First by the application of perfluoroalkyl and 
polyfluoroalkyl, and now, with the DEP permitting stacks of LLCs as a single 
person, and this in direct contradiction to the definition of a person in both 
rule and law, sets up good-hearted Maine farmers who find themselves in the 
desperate situation that they are in, to enter into the snookering of the stacked 
LLC business model’s contractual and memorandum morass. Consider: 
 
1. Through an option and lease framework, their snookering starts with 
agreeing to an option that commits them to a lease, and 
2. That lease of their recorded titled land will strip the leased (or sold) 
part of the farm of its solar rights (and in violation of Maine law 
regarding the leasing of solar rights on recorded title in real property), 
and 
3.  The, also stripped, such solar rights, and treated as an uncommon 
appurtenant to the solar equipment, and 
4. This as a recorded, but uncommonly so due to at the lease effecting of 
subclasses what is in law, appurtenant to the titled real property 
(extralegal-at-best), and 
5, These subclasses-in-leases being transferred via the duplicitous 
mechanism of stacked LLC business (i.e., is nature – think Title 38, 
MRS §481 and the duplicity of the stacked LLC business model) to 
entities other than the LLC that will hold the DEP’s permits, and 
6, This will apply regarding any municipal permit as well(!), and  
7. Due to securitization allowed, both in the stack LLC business model 
leases, AND exempted in the Solar Energy Development 
Decommissioning, upon the implementation of the structured 
abandonment which the decommission law enables significantly colors 
of the recoded title and effects the second snookering, and 
8. This is, at least what is currently the case since the BEP/DEP did not 
do its requisite rulemaking, AND  
9. In lieu of the DEP rectifying its misapplying its “Wind Energy Act 
Standards” rule chapter’s decommission triggers (06-096 CRM c. 
382), and  
10. Doing this misapplying contrary to the judgment of the Department’s 
rulemaking liaison, and  
11. With LD 496 both exacerbating this snookering by lumping in 
batteries – separately defined in MPUC law as an “energy storage 
system” – with solar (defined in MPUC law as a “distributed energy 
resource”), and 
12. both of these having distinct regulator and decommission trigger issues 
that reason demands require separate rulmaking processes, and 
13. Until rulemaking is done, render LD 1591 twice ‘exceptional’: 
A. the proposed placement of the LD 1591 in Maine Statues, and  
B. exacerbation of the structural flaw of the DEP permitting regime 
(if it not malfeasance) and our/the MPUC’s Solar Energy 
Development Decommissioning law. 
 
LD 1775 : This bill "An Act to Establish a Clean Hydrogen Pilot Program" is an 
unqualified homegrown snookering of Mainers. Here is a one minute clip  
that summarizes the why of this that is best grasped as “the colors of 
euphemism” and the lack of a word in English for “blacker than black.” It is 
excerpted from an hour and 20 minute interview  that is part of “The Great 
Simplification” interview series and expands on the foolishness of the 
concept of ‘clean’ hydrogen.  
 
 LD 1775 adopts the language in the 6 pages of ‘clean’NOT! hydrogen in the 
IRA (Inflation Reduction Act). The language in those six pages is structured 
to exempt fossil carbon oil companies emissions, as enacted under the 1964 
Clean Air Act. The exemption regarding theses emissions is retained in law 
whether that 1964 law authorizing them is amended or not.  
 
 Hydrogen is not a fuel, but rather a transportable battery-like energy storage 
system. Perhaps this feels counterintuitive, but more electricity will go into 
the hydrogen made in these subsidized pilot plants than is available in the 
hydrogen. Energy is inefficiently stored in the produced hydrogen. This 
inefficiency relates to both a power and emission perspective.  
 
 While in the proposed piloted plants in LD 1775 utilize electricity for the 
conversion, the IRA also allows for the fuel converted into hydrogen to be 
oil and/or natural gas. The snookering perpetuated in the IRA is national, 
but the consequences are global. With LD 1775 (& the hydrogen loop 
pipeline) a snookered Maine to become complicit in this global snookering 
in two distinct ways: 
 
• The existence of these “clean hydrogen facilities” can be leveraged 
to justify the northeast hydrogen pipeline concept, which, in terms of 
physics and mitigating climate change, is duplicitous.  
• The likely utility for hydrogen facility projects is that of a “battery” 
for the scaling of installations of solar developments in northern 
Maine, and functioning as a “distributed battery” for ineffieienty 
using up to 60 MW of solar distributed generation electricity (among 
the three authorized plants), and this is either with or without the cap 
removal in LD 43 that  
• enhances the enabling that already exists in law due to the 
malfeasance executed by the DEP by licensing of stacks of LLCs as 
person (in direct violation the definition of that term in law), and  
• this under the auspices of decommissioning-as-abandonment under 
our Solar Energy Development Decommissioning law with its 
member interest transfer exemptions loophole for such stacked 
LLCs, and 
• this to be further utilized regarding actual batteries under LD 496. 
   
  
 
As specified in LD 1775’s two month window for a “competitive” solicitation 
under this bill is current technology, this very likely the electrolysis of water. 
In the unfolding phase of the stacked LLC business model and solar, the lag in 
the rollout of a taxpayer enabled smart grid requires batters (again, see LD 
496). LD 1775 authorizes for up to 60 MW of electricity, likely when current 
demand and the interstate gateways for grid will make the solar electricity to 
be excess (without value) to become hydrogen. Hydrogen has a CO2e of 11  
(& the above interview). 
 
LD 1775 would make the transmission of this electricity a cost a twice 
uncompensated burden that the rate payers of Maine subsidize. 
 
First: 
 
• The produced hydrogen is privately owned, and 
• Nothing in the law regulates what this subsidized hydrogen is 
used for.  
 
Current industrial uses of hydrogen could be a market for this 
hydrogen. The northeast hydrogen loop pipeline is the more likely 
anticipated market for the hydrogen/transportable energy.  
 
Second: 
 
 Hydrogen leaks (and has a CO2e of 11 – above). This is because  
 
• Hydrogen is the smallest molecule and leaks (in storage the 
leakage is calculated to be between 0.12% to 0.24%/day), and 
• This leakage is modeled to effect a 1.5 ppm (300% increase) 
above the current background mixing ratio of about 0.5 ppm, 
and 
• This renders LD 1775 problematic regarding our “Maine 
Won’t Wait” goals, and 
• LD 1775’s dependency on the IRA is its fatal flaw, and 
• The ballyhooed hydrogen economy is a physics defined 
boondoggle-via-snookering when it is rolled out, and 
• Hydrogen constitutes a blacker than black thing; a snookering 
of Maine and Mainers. 
 
 AND there is nothing in the law that would regulate the releases of 
the ratepayer subsidized hydrogen by venting it into the atmosphere 
(as is a common practice today in oil refineries where hydrogen is a 
byproduct of fractional distillation of oil). Incidentally that vented 
hydrogen happens because it is too cheep to economically utilize. 
Industries that commercially use hydrogen, to the best of my 
knowledge, are not located in northern Maine. 
 
 Recall, that more energy goes into making the hydrogen than will be realized 
when it is transformed back into electrical energy utilizing hydrogen fuel cell 
technology (revisit wording of LD 496 to see if its wording implicitly might 
cover hydrogen as a MPUC law defined “ energy storage system ”-as-battery). 
There are no findings in LD 1775 supporting that hydrogen derived from 
electrolysis is economical (and this would likely be above the 60 MW 
production level)… and this would be without the northeast part of a 
[national?]  hydrogen loop pipeline (New York’s Governor’s climate 
destroying boondoggle and snookering for Wall Street; the IRA’s tax credits 
effecting its financing). The language in the IRA is explicitly about how 
making hydrogen is an “energy” business – and this regarding any 
process/system. with the oil/natural gas process qualifying for the tax credits 
due to exempted emissions and the use of the “CO@e” metric, and green 
house gas limited to what is listed in the IRA test. When oil companies claim 
themselves to be ‘energy’ companies, with exempted “incidental” emissions, 
these fossil carbon companies qualify as energy businesses for the tax credits 
for hydrogen in the IRA (as referenced in LD 1775.  
 
 To the degree the sponsors are complicit, they are representing the interests 
of Wall Street’s perpetual snookering of Mainers by, is not similarly 
snookered, Mainers:  
 
The IRA is current law. Once the hydrogen infrastructure is permitted and 
built (leveraging the tax credit which oil companies already qualify for when 
processing natural gas into hydrogen to secure the financing) fossil carbon 
companies will become “energy” companies with exempted petroleum by 
products/production and their emissions. With CO2 capture equipment the 
resulting slurry can be reinjected into wells to produce more fossil carbon. 
New York’s Governor initiated a process a year ago March and it is 
announced in this press release  . Maine’s Governor signed on just days after 
the ink dried on the President’s signature  on the IRA. Vermont was the last to 
capitulate  to Wall Street’s snookering. 
 
CO2e is the metric used in the IRA that is a climate modeling work-around 
regarding the processing power limitations of computers relative to the 
complexity of our climate system. Greenhouse gases are defined in the IRA. 
Carbon monoxide is not included. The Department of Energy website  defines 
recognized hydrogen producing process that apply to the IRA. One is 
included that mathematically only produces CO (carbon monoxide), and this 
via the bogus idea that half on oxygen molecule is a thing – it isn’t (& for 
chemistry geeks: CH4 + ½O2  CO + 2H2 (+ heat)). The various tax 
credits that can be claimed can both be sold and securitized. The equipment 
can be securitized as well. At least two futures markets are effected. 
 
The structured share of any benefit for and of this for Mainers: zero. 
 
 
SUMMARY: the northeast hydrogen pipeline loop, is retrograde regarding 
emissions AND economics.  
 
• Hydrogen is definable under Maine law as an “ energy storage 
system ” (35-A MRS §3481(6)), and  
• Hydrogen is not a traditional fuel in any plausible economic 
sense, and  
• As the periodic table’s smallest molecule, it leaks out of any and 
everything, and 
• Leaked hydrogen out competes methane for the hydroxyl radical, 
and 
• The hydroxyl radical (OH) is critical to the measurement of 
methane’s CO2e, and 
• This is because methane (CH4) is broken down through a six step 
set of atmospheric chemical reactions to become carbon dioxide 
(CO2). 
 
Therefore, as the hydrogen piping is conceptualized and built, and this under 
the IRA, and ‘piloting’ is effected – such as under LD 1775 (AND the 
opposite of the independence this number commemorates as a year and is 
memorialized in Longfellow’s poem “ On the 18th of April in Seventy-five”) 
will become integral to a political boondoggle of an imagined-but-physics-
denied ‘clean’NOT! hydrogen economy. Any CO2 captured from the 
fractional distillation of fossil carbon fuels within this ‘economy” for the 
production of a transportable “energy” (and as noted above at the Department 
of Energy’s website), such becomes a slurry that will be injected into gas and 
oil production wells to produce even more fossil carbon. (FYI, in New York 
we have not rescinded our fracking enabling laws. These law remain on the 
books to be executed at the whim of any governor/Wall Street.) 
 
Physics, and for our grandchildren’s sake, dictates that fossil carbon must be 
kept in the ground … or, and in spite of Maine not waiting, ‘few will left 
alive to remember this infamous day and year.’ 
 
LD 1850 : Hydrogen, as noted under LD 1775 (above) is an evolving technology as a 
transportable chemical “energy storage system” under Maine Public Utility 
Commission law (MPUC). Hydrogen’s emissions are not yet regulated under 
Maine law, and the inherent leakage that comes with it, both now, and with 
the roll out of the enabling infrastructure. more so; counter productive to 
Maine’s Climate Council’s “Maine Wont’t Wait” policy goals. Current oil 
and gas companies fuel are enabled by the IRA’s six pages of its [claimed] 
“Clean Hydrogen” section (§13204 of the Inflation Reduction Act) can elect 
at a time of their choosing to become qualifying energy companies. This is 
due to statutory exemptions of emission that occur from the wellhead to the 
distribution pipeline gate for their former, now incidental, fossil fuel by 
products. 
 
 An annotated version of the six page uploaded during the public hearing on 
LD 1775 are uploaded there – and linked here . The almost impossible 
indentation effect in H.R 5376, and given the snookering, may be intentional. 
(A link to a version that is cleanly formatted is requested of any reader who 
has such a link.)  
 
  
 
This evolving document is intended to be an inclusive effort. 
Welcome are the contributions of others for the purposes of  
expanding and/or enhancing its contents’ warning regarding 
our unfolding snookering … & this within the context of a civic duty and honor  
to be eternally vigilant. 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact: BeltwayOfBills@opento.info 

