 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF INTERNATIONAL BROTHERHOOD  
OF ELECTRICAL WORKERS, LOCAL 1837  
IN OPPOSITION TO LD 1611, "AN ACT TO CREATE THE PINE TREE POWER 
COMPANY, A NONPROFIT CUSTOMER-OWNED UTILITY" 
 
My name  is Jeffrey  Neil Young.  I am an attorney with Solidarity  Law and practice  
in Cumberland,  Maine.  I have  been  practicing  labor  and employment  law for over 40 
years,  the last 35 years  here in Maine.  I am on a long-planned  vacation  so I am submitting  
this written  testimony  on behalf  of International  Brotherhood  of Electrical  Workers,  Local  
1837  in opposition  to LD 1611,  “An Act to Create  the Pine Tre Power  Company,  a 
Nonprofit  Customer-owned  Utility.”   
 
Local  1837  represents,  among  other  groups,  almost  1000  utility  workers  who work  
for Central  Maine  Power  and Versant  Energy,  the two largest  public  utilities  here in Maine.  
Together,  CMP  and Versant  provide  electricity  to the vast majority  of Maine  people.  
Before  it decided  what  position  to take regarding  the proposed  creation  of Pine Tree  Power,  
the Union’s  former  business  manager,  Dick  Rogers,  had multiple  conversations  with Rep.  
Berry,  who sponsored  the forerunner  to this bill. In addition,  Dick  Rogers  asked  me to look 
at the legal  consequences  for the Union  if legislation  were  passed  or in the event  Pine Tree  
Power  is created  as the result  of a referendum.   
 
Ultimately,  Local  1837  has determined  to oppose  the passage  of LD 1611  because  
the creation  of Pine Tree  Power  would  have  severe  negative  consequences  for the utility  
workers  represented  by the Union  and potentially  for its customers.  Public  employees'  
collective  bargaining  rights  under  the Maine  Labor  Relations  Act are severely  restricted  
in comparison  to rights  enjoyed  by private  employees  under  the National  Labor  
Relations  Act. Unlike  private  sector  employees,  who have  the right  to strike  over wages,  
hours,  and working  conditions  if they cannot  reach  agreement  with their  employer,  
public  sector  employees  enjoy  no such  rights.  They  cannot  strike  and although  they can 
bargain  with their  public  employer,  in the event  agreement  is not reached,  they can only 
engage  in binding  arbitration  over non-economic  terms.  As members  of this committee  
undoubtedly  are aware,  last year Gov. Mills  vetoed  a bill which  would  have  allowed  
public  employees  to engage  in binding  arbitration  of wage  disputes.  
 
Beyond  the inability  to strike  or to engage  in binding  arbitration  over wages  and 
economic  terms  of employment,  under  the Supreme  Court's  Janus  decision,  public  
employees  cannot  be compelled  to pay their  fair share  of union  dues.  If the employees  of 
Pine Tree  Power  were  deemed  public  employees,  this would  permit  free riders  not to pay 
dues  and could  severely  impact  the ability  of IBEW,  Local  1837  to represent  its 
members  who work  at CMP  and Versant  due to reduced  finances.  
 
 
 
 
Solidarity  Law, PLLC 9 Longmeadow Rood, Cumberland Foreside, Moine 04 l l O 207.844.4243 jyoung@solidarity.law  
LD 1611  attempts  to address  these  concerns  by providing  that the operator  
employees  "are considered  private  employees,  with all the rights  and responsibilities  
of private  employees."  Unfortunately,  this language  is hortatory,  and no alchemy  can 
transform  public  employees  into private  employees  any more  than it can turn dross  
into gold.  In NLRB  v. Natural  Gas Utility  District  of Hawkins  County, 402 U.S. 600, 
604 (1971), the Supreme Court established a test to evaluate whether employees  of a 
quasi-public  entity  like Pine Tree  Power  are private  employees  subject  to the National  
Labor  Relations  Act or public  employees  exempt  from  the NLRA's  jurisdiction.  
Where  an entity  is created  by the State  and the board  is appointed  by or comprised  of 
state  officials,  or is responsible  to the general  electorate,  the entity  is deemed to be a 
political  subdivision  of state  and therefore  exempt  from  NLRB  jurisdiction  under  
Section  2(2) of the NLRA.  Accord:  State  Bar of New Mexico,  346 NLRB  674 (2006);  
NLRB  Advice  memo  StarTran,  Inc., Case  16-CA-27472  (Dec . 6, 2010).   
Here,  Pine Tree  Power  would  be created  by the State  and Section  4002(2)(A)  of 
the legislation  provides  that the Board  be comprised  of 7 elected  members , one for 
each  five of the 35 Maine  Senate  districts.  Because  these  Board  members  would  be 
responsible  to the general  electorate,  it seems  certain  that Pine Tree  Power  and its 
employees  would  be deemed  public,  not private,  employees  despite  language  to the 
contrary  in the bill. 
Indeed,  employees  of other  quasi-governmental  entities  generally  have  been  
considered  to be public  employers  here in Maine  and elsewhere.  For example , in 
Maine,  the employees  of the Maine  Turnpike  Authority  are represented  by the Maine  
Service  Employees  Association  and are deemed  to be public  employees .  
 
Advocates on behalf of Pine Tree Power have suggested that because the employee 
will work not for Pine Tree Power but rather for an operator to be hired by Pine Tree 
Power, therefore they will not be public employees. However, under the joint employer 
doctrine established by the Board, where one employer controls the labor relations of 
another employer, the two are deemed to be joint employers, and the actions of one are 
attributable to the other. https://www.nlrb.gov/sites/default/files/attachments/basic-
page/node-7581/fact-sheet-joint-employer-final-rule.pdf  There is nothing more 
fundamental to the employment relationship than the hiring of employees and payment of 
wages. Sections 4003(4) and 5) of the bill not only requires the operator to retain 
qualified employees of CMP and Versant, but those provisions require the operator to 
maintain all of the terms of the existing collective bargaining agreements and to pay 
employees retention bonuses of 8% and 6% in years 1 and 2 following the acquisition. 
While Local 1837 clearly appreciates these worker-friendly provisions, unfortunately they 
also serve to underscore that the operator and Pine Tree Power would be joint employers 
rendering the employees public employees. 
 
In addition  to the legal  concerns  detailed  above,  Local  1837  has concerns  about  
the operator  who would  be selected  to administer  Pine Tree  Power.  These  concerns  
are better  addressed  by others  than me as they are political , not legal,  considerations.  
I would , however , note that any language  which  would  serve  to effectively  disqualify  
certain  operators  from  bidding  upon  and serving  as the Pine Tree  Power  Company's  
administrator  likely  would  face a long and expensive  legal  challenge.  
 
Finally, one need look only to what has occurred in Austin, Texas to find that 
public power is not the panacea that its advocates would make it out to be. There, for the 
last two winters, citizens of the now 12th largest state in the country have been left 
without power for days as a public power company has failed to promptly restore power 
after a worse than expected ice storm. https://www.texastribune.org/2023/02/07/austin-
ice-storm-power-outages-
2023/#:~:text=How%20freezing%20rain%2C%20tree%2Dlined,storm%20wreaked%20h
avoc%20across%20Texas.&text=A%20damaging%20ice%20storm%20swept%20across
%20Central%20Texas%20beginning%20Jan . 
Of course, Maine is not Texas, and ice storms here are not uncommon. But ask yourself, 
can Maine people afford to be without power for days due to the inefficiencies of a 
government-controlled power company? 
 
For all the foregoing reasons, IBEW, Local 1837 asks that you vote no to protect 
the jobs of Maine workers and power for its citizens. 
 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
 
Jeffrey Neil Young, Esq. 
Solidarity Law 
9 Longmeadow Rd. 
Cumberland Foreside, ME 04110 
jyoung@solidarity.law  
207-844-4243 
 
 
