  
 
 
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1611  
 
An Act to Create the Pine Tree Power Company, a Nonprofit, Customer -owned Utility  
 
May 4, 2023  
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
Committee, my name is Joel Moser , and I  am here today on behalf of Versant Power to testify in 
opposition to LD 1611 .   
 
I'm a Shareholder at Bernstein Shur , Cha ir of our Firm’s Property Tax & Valuation Team, and 
regularly represent clients on complex property tax disputes . I also lecture and teach nationally 
and in Maine on property taxation and consider myself to be well -versed in Maine property tax 
laws. I have  read L.D. 1611  several times and remain  uncertain about how to appropriately 
characterize the legal entity status of the Pine Tree Power Company as it relates to tax status. I am 
therefore concerned about the property tax implications of the proposed legi slation.  
 
By way of background, the equal apportionment and assessment of property tax is a bedrock 
principle of property taxation in Maine, enshrined in Article IX Section 8 of the Maine 
Constitution. This means that if a private company owns property in Maine, it must pay its fair and 
equitable share of taxes. As has always been required, Maine’s investor -owned transmission and 
distribution utilities have paid their fair share of property tax for decades, to the tune of tens of 
millions of dollars per yea r. Maine’s municipalities, school districts, and counties across Maine 
have come to rely on these constitutionally -required payments. It seems very likely, however, that 
L.D. 1611 puts in question this tax revenue, and the many public budgets that rely on that revenue.   
 
The proposed legislation seems to be trying to have it all ways. While it describes the  entity as a 
nonprofit, customer -owned utility, and a quasi -municipal corporation (i.e. an entity that would 
qualify for  a property tax exemption) , it also states that such exemption should be disregarded such 
that “ the company is subject to property taxation pursuant to the laws of the State and must pay 
property tax in the same manner as an investor -owned transmission and distribution utility. ”1  
 
 
1  L.D. 1611 (proposed 35 -A M.R.S. § 4008(1)) . 
 
J o e l  M o s e r  T e s t i m o n y ,  L D  1 6 1 1  
P a g e  | 2 
 
Under Maine law, n onprofit s,2 public municipal corporations,3 and many quasi -municipal entities, 
are all exempt  from paying property taxes . It is therefore puzzling to a property tax lawyer that the 
proposed legislation describes the Company as an entity  that would not otherwise pay property 
taxes, tries to make the Company taxable for property taxes, but at the same time purposely not 
taxable for other taxes. That simply doesn’t work.  
 
I also wish to stress to this Committee that there is absolutely no guarantee that a Company that is 
an instrument of the State will continue to pay property taxes. Unlike investor -owned utilities, 
whose obligations to pay property tax are immutable because they derive from the Maine 
Constitution, Pine Tree Power  Compan y’s tax obligations  would exist only through  this piece of 
legislation and would  last only unless and until this legislation is amended . In the future, based on 
rising energy costs or political expediency, the Legislature could amend state law to strike the 
provision , cutting off a vital source of revenue to Maine’s municipalities, schools districts, and 
counties.  
 
This uncertainty gives me pause and is not hypothetical. The case study of Long Island Power 
Authority (“LIPA”) provides a particularly stark warn ing. LIPA, a public authority exempt from 
property tax, acquired the privately held Long Island Lighting Company (“LILCO”) in 1998. The 
enabling statute authorized LIPA to make payments in lieu of taxes (“PILOTs”) to Long Island 
municipalities equivalent t o the tax payments made by the former LILCO —presumably to make 
the formation of LIPA more politically attractive. The LIPA Reform Act of 2013, however, 
thereafter limited the amount municipalities could collect from the PILOTs. This cautionary tale 
about a  publicly owned utility promising to continue property tax payments, only to change the 
terms of that promise down the road, should give the Legislature pause with respect to L.D. 1611 
and its potential impacts to Maine’s local property tax base.   
 
The ma gnitude of potential lost tax revenue is significant and would have a profound impact on 
towns and cities in Maine. Together, Maine’s investor -owned electric T&Ds pay over $80 million 
annually in local property taxes to Maine municipalities. Last year, Ver sant paid over $16.5 million 
in property taxes to over 180 Maine municipalities. This is greater than the total budgets of 
Addison ($2.75 million), Ashland ($3.02 million), and Millinocket ($10.17 million) combined . 
CMP, Maine’s largest taxpayer, paid over  $65 million in local property taxes, more than the entire 
budget of Lewiston, our second largest city.  
 
Where there is uncertainty about the status of the new entity contemplated by L.D. 1611, and 
because the ultimate tax status of this entity —as describ ed in L.D. 1611 and all future amendments 
therefore —will have enormous implications for the State of Maine, its businesses, and its people, 
I encourage this Committee not to pass this proposed legislation.  
 
 
2  36 M.R.S. § 652 (Property of institutions and organizations).  
 
3  36 M.R.S. § 621 (Public property).  
J o e l  M o s e r  T e s t i m o n y ,  L D  1 6 1 1  
P a g e  | 3 
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
 
