  
 
 
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1611  
May 4, 2023  
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and distinguished members of the Select Legislative 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology , my name is Kat Joyce, and I co -lead the Energy 
and Environmental Practice at Bernstein Shur in Portland. On behalf of Versant Power , I 
respectfully submit this testimony in opposition to LD 1611 .  
The subject matter of LD 1611 has been under discussion and review for  years now. There are 
good reasons that the Legislature has, thus far, declined to pass this into law.  
Proponents of LD 1611 in its various iterations over the last few years have represented that a 
governmental takeover of private utility companies w ould result in significant cost savings 
despite abundant evidence to the contrary. These cost savings would purportedly derive from the 
Pine Tree Power Company’s status as a non -profit and consumer -owned entity. However, t he 
sole impartial legislatively -author ized review  of this policy  by the Public Utility Commission’s 
consultant, London Economics  (LEI)1, comes to a much less optimistic conclusion about  the 
economic risks of this takeover , and reveals the proponents’ claims as inaccurate and based on 
flawed a ssumptions.  
In addition to the analysis performed for the Commission, London Economics  wrote a July 29th, 
2020 letter to this EUT committee  rebutting certain claims public power proponents made 
purportedly based upon LEI’s study . That letter (attached) speaks for itself:  
• Public power advocates proposed transfer is like  asking to tak e out a second mortgage on 
top of the $13 billion in acquisition costs: “the act of refunding the cash balance is akin to  
taking on a second mortgage.” (p. 2)  
 
• Promised benefits from transmission are “gaming” of FERC -regulated rates which FERC 
and other states are unlikely to allow to happen (p. 3)  
 
 
1 While that analysis pertained to an earlier version of LD 1646, the underlying economics of the proposal 
remains the same and the significant concerns raised by the report remain relevant.  
K a t  J o y c e  T e s t i m o n y ,  L D  1 6 1 1  
P a g e  | 2 
 
• Increase d efficiencies cannot be relied  upon. Indeed, “in the near term, electric ratepayers 
may see a rate increase d ue to the incremental costs of starting up . . . ” (p. 2 -3). 
Here are three additional reasons why the public power advocates economic claims and 
assumptions are incorrect:  
First, despite the title of this LD, a Pine Tree Power Company  would not be owned b y the 
customers. Ownership comes with legally defined rights, liabilities, and responsibilities. As 
proposed, this entity would impose many of the responsibilities and liabilities of ownership upon 
its customers, but none of the rights. It is my understand ing that customers would  continue, as 
they do now, to pay for capital investments, capital upgrades, the utility line workers, customer 
service representatives and other workforce costs such as retirement and health care as well as 
line repairs, storm resp onse costs, vegetation management, utility trucks, and other costs 
necessary to deliver electricity and restoration of power around the clock.  
Customers would  continue to pay for interest on debt while debt (and thus interest payments) 
would  be significantly larger with no equity investor in the company.   
Customers would  continue to pay a profit on services rendered in the form of a management fee 
which w ould include a substantial risk and profit premium, and this bill is written to ensure that 
those services w ould be rendered by out of state companies.  
In addition to those costs, which customers already feel are challenging to afford, LD 1611 
obligates custome rs to also pay for the establishment of a new entity, the extraordinary 
transaction costs of a hostile takeover and then costs associated with transferring a utility into 
new ownership of an elected board, the fair market value of the utility, and the lega l proceedings 
to carry out that taking of private property and to transfer it to a pseudo -governmental entity 
without meaningful ownership benefits flowing to those customers.  
The philosophy, as I understand it , is that the proxy for th ose absent  benefits  of ownership is 
certain anticipated savings – for example, savings from lower interest rates derived from being a 
quasi -governmental entity. However, and this is my second point, there is no basis on which to 
presume  lower interest rates by virtue of bein g a quasi -public entity.  
In fact, this bill requires that the assets in question be fully leveraged – 100% debt -financed . 
These types of transactions are typically deemed to be higher risk and ascribed higher interest 
rates . A good corollary , as a referen ce point,  is the kind of interest rate you would get on a home 
mortgage if you finance d 100% of the value of the home, rather than the interest rate you would 
get if you finance d 80% of the value of the home – if you can get that 100% mortgage at all. 
Thes e borrower risk concerns, along with the risk associated with lending to an elected, non -
expert board of political professionals, are likely to elevate, rather than lower, interest rates.  
The other savings promised to balance out and exceed the exceptiona l expenses associated with 
this takeover  are that the payment of profits would no longer be required. However, w hile the 
proposed Pine Tree Power Company is, itself, styled as a non -profit, the proposal also require s a 
K a t  J o y c e  T e s t i m o n y ,  L D  1 6 1 1  
P a g e  | 3 
 
private operator of the assets. So, imagine yourselves in the shoes of such a potential operator, a 
utility company deciding whether to take on the risk of operating the distribution grid in Maine. 
Ask yourself whether your company would enter into such a contract without a m eaningful profit 
margin paid in exchange for your services. The answer is clearly no. A private company taking 
on utility operations would necessarily require a substantial profit premium .  
And if the position of the proponents of LD 1611 is that this new entity would be discerning in 
their selection of contractor(s), it is worth noting that t here are very few companies capable of 
operating one or two large utilities – and they all happen to be utilities. If the bid conditions are 
demanding, there is a very  realistic possibility that there would be poor bids, or even no bids at 
all, from which to choose. In short, the proposed structure would transfer substantial profits and 
authority to an out of state, private operator while Maine customers bear all the co sts and risks.  
This is worse outcome for customers than the current model, in which profits are regulated , 
utilities are subject to rate cases, and imprudent management decisions can be challenged and 
charged to a shareholder. In contrast, the proposal pro poses no profit cap for this new private 
operator , and without a shareholder, all risk and costs are on Maine customers.  
In sum, the economic promises contained within LD 1611 and the proponents’ claims about it 
are not supported by evidence. To the contr ary - this initiative would cost Maine utility 
customers billion s of dollars  for the hostile takeover , would force Maine customers to pay an 
unspecified cost to an operator , with  a profit margin that the Public Utilities Commission w ould 
not directly regul ate (as it does now), and would s hift to customers all costs and liability 
associated with poor management decisions or imprudent investments, liabilities which are 
currently borne by utility shareholders.  
Given the extraordinary liability and risks embed ded in the proposed Legislation, I would 
encourage you to let the voters decide for themselves. For these and other reasons, I urge the 
Committee not to pass the proposed LD 1611.  
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
