Marianne McHugh-Westfall
Woolwich
LD 1611
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and distinguished members of the Energy, 
Utilities,
and Technology Committee, thank you for allowing me to speak in support of LD # 
1611, An Act To Create The Pine Tree Power Company, A Nonprofit, 
Customer-Owned Utility
My name is Marianne McHugh-Westfall and I live in Woolwich, Maine. I appreciate 
this
opportunity to discuss what a Consumer-Owned Utility can do for Maine.
I previously gave testimony in support of LD 1708. Since 2021 when Gov. Mills 
vetoed that bill, the situation has only gotten worse, and the need to bring energy 
transmission in this state under consumer control has only become more clear. I’ll 
illustrate with a short anecdote from my life. My partner and I are new parents of a 
wonderful baby girl, and we are struggling with all the costs and difficult decisions 
that come with the beginning of parenthood. These decisions would be hard enough, 
but the extreme cost of electricity in Maine is creating an immense strain on our 
family on top of the usual costs of having a baby. This winter, our CMP bills went as 
high as $700 a month with our high efficiency heat pumps running. That's with us 
bundling up, keeping the thermostat low, and supplementing with oil hear and fires in 
our wood stove. This cost is simply absurd as it is, and CMP continues to request rate 
increases from the PUC while spending vast amounts of money attempting to defeat 
this citizen’s initiative. And then we have the outages that shut down electric service 
with every winter storm. My partner and I both work from home and depend on 
reliable, affordable electricity to do our jobs. With CMP, we have neither. It has 
become clear that, rather than prioritizing the interests of the rate payers who depend 
on them, CMP is only interested in how much profit they can deliver to their 
corporate shareholders. This is no way to run a utility that everyday working people 
depend on. The people of Maine have simply put up with enough from CMP, and we 
deserve the opportunity to choose between their service or Pine Tree Power in 
November. I urge you to send this bill to the Maine voters.
Sincerely,
Marianne McHugh-Westfall, Woolwich
