Testimony in Opposition to LD 1611 / Gould / Page 1 of 2
May 3, 2023
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1611
An Act to Create the Pine Tree Power Company, a Nonprofit, Customer-owned Utility 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology:
My name is Nathan Gould. I am a resident of Winterport. I am submitting this 
testimony in opposition to LD 1611, “An Act to Create the Pine Tree Power Company, a 
Nonprofit, Customer-owned Utility.”
The right to property, one of our Natural rights, is endowed by our Creator and 
not by any fiat of man. Please refer to Article I, Section 1 of the Constitution of the State
of Maine, and see that the right to acquire, possess, and protect property is one of 
those unalienable rights afforded to all people. If the State is able to force the sale of a 
company’s assets, even one with 50,000 customers, then I, a private individual, have 
less reason to feel secure in my own property. I am not a large company with funds to 
pay for lawyers; I feel less able to litigiously fend off any attempt by the government to 
seize my property. I hope the members of the Committee can understand my alarm 
when such measures are proposed—it should alarm you as well. It sets a bad precedent
of depriving individuals of property.
Governments are established to secure the rights of the consenting governed, as 
we read in the Declaration of Independence. This should be regardless of whether the 
individual works a blue-collar job or owns a utility company. Actions this bill proposes 
work contrary to the founding principles of our Republic; it is wealth redistribution, 
which creates inequality instead of the equality is pretends to bring. It gives the 
government power to do what the people cannot lawfully do themselves: steal. We 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1611 / Gould / Page 2 of 2
must protect the rights of all, and I do not believe that even purported poor customer 
satisfaction ratings justify abrogating those rights.
I would prefer the Committee look for ways to ease the burden on ratepayers by 
reducing the amount of collecting the utility companies are forced to do for various 
programs, such as Efficiency Maine.
I ask the Committee to vote Ought Not to Pass, and I thank you for reading this 
testimony.
Respectfully,
Nathan C Gould
Winterport
