Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1611 (IB 2)  
 
“An Act to Create the Pine Tree Power Company, a 
Nonprofit, Customer- owned Utility ” 
 
May 4, 2023 
 
Patrick Strauch , Executive  Director  
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology, I am  Patrick Strauch  of Exeter, and I am submitting testimony  
today on behalf of the Maine F orest Products Council to testify in opposition to LD 
1611 (IB 2) , “An Act to Create the Pine Tree Power Company, a Nonprofit, Customer -
owne d Utility .” 
 In July of 2021, Governor Mills vetoed LD 1708, a bill that was very similar to the 
referendum presented here today, for very good reasons. According to her evaluation, 
the proposal was “deep ly flawed ” and one of the most  consequential  ever to be 
considered by the legislature with impacts on the lives of every Mainer in “serious, substantial and fundamental ways.” The substantial  risks that lead to her ve to included 
protracted l itigation , delayed investments and problems  that could arise from  entrusting 
an inexperienced board with the complex task of running the State ’s major utilities.  LD 
1708 would have  assume d all this risk without any assurances that the condem ned 
utilities that currently operate the grid wouldn’t be the very same ones to run the grid under this new regime.  Having assessed LD 1611, the Maine F orest P roducts  Council believe s that th ese risks 
are still very much applicable  today, and we are concerned that  the backers of this 
referendum chose to push a “deeply flawed ” and “conseque ntial” proposal directly to 
the ballot for a simple up or down vote rather than sending it back to the Legislature to address the important questions posed by Governor Mills ’ veto letter  before a statewide 
vote. Further, we feel that putting a hostile takeover of two company’s  assets through 
eminent domain  to a popular  vote sets a dangerous precedent , not just for utilities, but 
for all industries in Maine.  
 Other issues to  consider include:  
 
• This referendum  will be considere d hostile,  and the true costs of litigation will 
need to be factor ed in what will be a lengthy and costly cour t battle.  
 
2 
 • Only two members of the 13- member board are required to have the background or experience 
necessary to oversee thi s quasi -governmental utility. Term s are six years long with no limits, and the 
ratepayers would have no authority to remove any of them. 
• One needs to look no further than New York to see that the cost of the contract to manage and operate 
the grid will likely be sub stantially higher than projected in this referendum , and that this model doesn’ t 
come with its own set of issues.  
 
• The referendum would provide utility employees with 14% bonuses over the first two years , plus 
contract up grades , driving up the cost of operation even further.  
 
• With interest  rates continuing to creep up, the debt  that will be transferred  to ratepayers wou ld more than 
likely offset any savings , although we are skeptical that there w ould be any.  
Pine Tree Power was a bad idea when it was presented to the Legislature, and it is still a bad idea today.  As an 
industry that consumes (and generates) a substantial amount of power, we are deeply concerned about  the 
implications of this risky proposal. For these reasons, we urge the committee to find other ways to address the 
affordability and reliability of power in Maine.  
 
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
 
 
