 
                                                                                                                                                              www. aroostookpartnership.org  
11 West Presque Isle Rd. , PO Box 779, Caribou, ME  04736  
Voice: (207) 551-6601 , Toll Free in ME: 1 -800-427-8736, Fax: (207) 493 -3108, TTY: (207) 498 -6377  
 
 
May 2, 2023  
 
The Honorable Senator Lawrence, Chair  
The Honorable Representative Zeigler, Chair  
And esteemed members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: LD 1611, An Act to Create the Pine Tree Power Company, a Nonprofit, Customer -owned 
Utility  
 
Dear Members of the Committee on Energy Utilities and Technology , 
 
I represent the Aroostook Partnership (AP), a unique private/public partnership of over 80  businesses, 
the Northern Maine Development Commission and the three  colleges in Aroostook County.  The mission 
of the Partnership is to speak with one voice to engage the private sector leadership, talents and 
resources to ensure the economic survival and growth of Aroostook County  
 
Aroostook Partnership opposes this legislation for the following reasons:  
1. The list of possible deficiencies , 4 of which would force  the sale of the utility to  Pine Tree Power  
(PTP), are largely subjectiv e and difficult to o bjectively measure . This would lead to years of 
litigation and additional  cost to both side s, pulling  assets and focus away from our utilities’ 
ability  to ev olve our  electric  grid to meet the dramatic changes needed to support dist ributed , 
renewable  generation and benefi cial electrification.  
2. The fi rst 3 of the possible deficiencies  are much more difficult to perform w ell in Maine  
compared to utilities in  other states .  Maine is 89% forested, contain s thousands of mile s of 
densely populated  rural roads through the woods and is very windy.  We also have significantl y 
fewer undergr ound lines, which are much more storm hardened,  than most o ther states  due to 
the cost and c omplexity  of trenching in our  rocky and  ledg e-filled  ground.  
3. I am not aware of any  improved quality of service that has been verified  by an operating 
organization that has not yet been formed , or awarded the contract , to deliver t he intended  
performance improvements?  
4. Item #5 is already a deficiency for Versant  Power  because  of their ownership  by ENMAX , a 
wholly owned s ubsidiary of the City of Calgary, as I understand it .  If this is so critical then why 
did the PUC allow the sale of the utility t o a foreign  government  entit y to begin with?  To impose 
retroactive regulation  without cause to build a case to acquire  a private  company is 
unscrupulous  at best.  
5. If quality of service is at the heart of th is proposed takeover  bill then Maine  already ha s 
mechanisms in p lace to ensure quality is maintained  by our utilities.   The legislature passes laws  
deemed necessary and  the PUC enforces  those laws with the  utilities.  It appears comple tely 
unnecessary to create PTP to seek deficiencies and cause  the forced takeover of two private 
companies  at a cost estimated  at over $10 billion.  
                                                                      www. aroostookpartnership .org 
11 West Presque Isle Rd. , PO Box 779, Caribou, ME  04736  
Voice: (207) 551 -6601, Toll Free in ME: 1 -800-427-8736, Fax: (207) 493 -3108, TTY: (207) 498 -6377  6. If the intent is to reduce costs to Maine ratepayers then how is that possible if every employee 
hired  from th e fired util ity “to ensure continu ity and a n experienced  local  workforce ” is given a 
guaranteed 8% retention bonus ?  This will also be difficult to unwind from as workers do not like 
going  backwards in pay in the following years  as it goes to 6% then zero.  This does not seem 
cost effecti ve to switch the company log o and pay 8% more for labor.  
7. And finally , and the most shocking part of this bill , is the fact that Maine is  even  considering  
forcing  the sale of a pr ivate companies ’ assets  and operations in Maine  against the will of the 
utilit ies.  This type of  government action  might b e expected in  other parts of the wor ld, but not 
in the U S and not in Maine.   If this bill is successful , it sets a  very  dangerous precedent for all 
private companies operating , or hop ing to operate , in Maine.  What industry or company might  
be similar ly scrutinized and penalized  to suc h ext reme extent next ? 
Quite simply , this is  dangerous legislation and every business in Maine is paying attention to this.  What 
Maine businesses  and work ers really need is legislative protections  voted into  law agains t this type of  
action intended by LD 1611, as well as protections against  people’s referendum s like this  from ever 
being enacted . 
 
The Aroostook  Partnership  stands in strong opposition to  this bill  and sincerely hopes your committee  
will consider the certain damage that w ould come to Maine with this bill or referendum and votes 
Ought Not To Pass . 
 
Respectfully,  
 
Paul Towle  
President & CEO  
ptowle@aroostookpartnership.org  
Direct:  207 -551-6601  

