 
Richard A. Bennett                                                                                                        3 State House Station  
Senator, District 18                                                                                                  Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Fax: (207) 287-1527 *  TTY (207) 287-1583  *  Message Service 1-800-423-6900  *  Web Site: legislature.maine.gov/senate 
 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
In Support of  
LD 1611, An Act to Create the Pine Tree Power Company, a Nonprofit, Customer-owned Utility 
May 4, 2023 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Berry and members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities, 
and Technology. I am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and I have the honoring of serving 14 
towns in Androscoggin, Cumberland and Oxford Counties in the Maine Senate.  I am pleased to 
speak today as one of the six petitioners for this initiated bill, LD 1611, “An Act to Create the 
Pine Tree Power Company, a Nonprofit, Customer-owned Utility”. 
 
Maine is largely a rural state. The people of rural Maine -- those I represent -- depend on 
electricity more than ever. In western Maine, our future depends on jobs and small businesses 
that rely on the poles and lines that bring us power and internet services too.  
 
Electricity is essential to Maine homes and businesses, and it is becoming more important every 
day. In addition to running lights and appliances in homes and machinery in factories, we are 
increasingly dependent on electricity for communicating, working, learning, and recreating 
online, as well as heating with heat pumps, charging vehicles, and more.   
 
The reality is that we are driving toward a carbon-neutral, electricity-powered economy.  And 
those owning and operating our electric utility monopolies in Maine have been happy collecting 
ratepayer checks while ignoring this future. 
 
Right now, foreign governments and foreign corporations own Maine’s major electric utility 
monopolies - CMP and Versant. This ownership model has been a disaster, draining money from 
Maine while leaving us with the most outages, the longest outages, the worst customer service, 
and among the highest rates in the country.  
 
I believe Maine people deserve the right to self-determination and the Pine Tree Power Company 
will provide just that, by serving Maine people instead of distant company shareholders in 
foreign lands. 
 
Right now, foreign corporations and stockholders rake in billions of dollars from Maine, while 
we are left in the dark ages, with inadequate infrastructure to serve us today, never mind 
tomorrow.  
 
Long ago, CMP was a company that served Maine, but not any more. Spanish energy giant 
Iberdrola bought CMP’s parent company in 2008, and then reorganized its U.S. holdings under 
an investor-owned, publicly-traded company headquartered in Connecticut. All CMP profits go 
to those investors. Versant is wholly owned by the City of Calgary, in Alberta, Canada, sending 
all of its profits there. 
 
These foreign powers do not care a whit for the people of Maine.  In fact, they have sued the 
people of Maine to deny us the right to determine our own future.  And they have repeatedly lied 
to us – about billing problems, about outages, about metering, about their commitment to clean 
energy, and now about this proposal before you today. Through their rate-payer-funded, million-
dollar megaphones, we have already heard blatant falsehoods, mendacious mischaracterizations, 
and bold-faced lies as these foreign interests try to cling to their monopoly franchises. 
 
They claim this proposal would create a government-run power company.  Wrong.  Pine Tree 
Power will be a consumer-owned non-profit, operated in the private sector, managed on behalf of 
Mainers, and accountable only to us. 
 
They claim taxpayers will be on the hook for the new Pine Tree Power Company.  Wrong. To 
make needed investments, Pine Tree Power will be able to float its own bonds at extremely low 
interest rates, and no need for profit. It will not use state bonds or state tax dollars.  
 
They claim that politicians will run our new entity.  Wrong – and laughable.  A quick look at the 
top leadership of CMP’s parent company shows where the politicians go to feather their nests 
with out-sized pay packages.  Pine Tree Power will be operated by a professional management 
team, overseen by an independently elected board complemented by members selected for their 
specific expertise and experience.  
 
Maine deserves a utility that puts Maine people and local, small businesses first, not profits for 
huge, foreign corporations. We need a utility that serves the people, not itself. We deserve 
infrastructure to serve us well now, and in the coming decades, that will allow rural Maine to 
prosper. 
 
That’s why I support creating the Pine Tree Power Company, our best shot to achieve lower cost, 
reliable power, under local control - managed on behalf of Mainers and accountable only to us. 
 
 
 
 
