Vernon Lickfeld
Lisbon
LD 1611
Good afternoon esteemed members of the Energy, Utilities, and Technology 
Committee and Maine citizens from all around the state who are seeing and hearing 
these testimonies. My name is Vernon Lickfeld. I am a resident of Lisbon, and I am 
writing today to testify as a supporter of the initiative to create Pine Tree Power, a 
consumer-owned utility to replace CMP and Versant. 
Before moving to Maine in 2018 with my now-wife, who is a born-and-raised Mainer,
I was living in suburban Philadelphia, getting power from an electric company called 
PECO. PECO provided abysmal service. We were plagued with frequent outages, 
poor and untimely service, and outrageous prices to boot with nothing to show for it. 
When my wife and I decided to move back to her home state, I was thrilled by the 
possibility of getting out from under the feeble but monolithic grip of PECO. I 
assumed that whatever electric utility Maine had for us would be The Way an Electric
Company Should Be. I was sorely mistaken, and I came to discover how and why one
of the only less popular electric companies than PECO was CMP. 
Upon arrival in Maine I quickly understood why CMP was hated by all my new 
friends and neighbors. Yes, the infrastructure was able to handle Maine’s harsh winter
storms, but when the power did go out there were significant delays to get it back on, 
even in Portland. That, coupled with the endless price hikes and CMP’s frankly 
shocking and ongoing feeling of entitlement to Maine’s public lands with their 
attempt to build the Clean Energy Corridor leave a sour taste in my mouth whenever I
make the mistake of letting my thoughts wander to our current electric utility 
company. If for no other reason, we should oust CMP and Versant for their ceaseless 
pursuit of the ground beneath our feet—a pursuit which includes price hike after price
hike to fund their legal team’s attempts to disregard and disrespect the will of Maine 
voters, who time and time again have told them loudly and definitively NO. Price 
hike after price hike that funds CMP’s advertising team who loudly spreads 
disinformation about Pine Tree Power in order to scare Mainers from questioning 
their monopoly over our power. Price hike after price hike with no improvement to 
their service. 
I am tired of being beholden for power to a company that is not only owned by a 
profit-hungry corporation, but a profit-hungry overseas corporation. Why is it 
permissible that money earned by hard-working Maine residents gets gouged and 
extorted and sent away from our community, and we get terrible service in return? 
Why is this all acceptable to those who are opposed to this ballot initiative, both in 
government and outside of it? At this point my attempts to rationalize to naysayers 
about why Pine Tree Power will be (and I mean will be) better than the existing 
system in place are over; I am now pleading with the doubters: “How could it get any 
worse?!”
