William Thieme
Cumberland
LD 1611
My name is Wil Thieme, I currently live in Cumberland, Maine. I was born in Maine 
and have lived almost my entire life in the section of Maine which the state has 
granted CMP a monopoly over. I am here today to urge you to pass LD 1611, An Act 
to Create the Pine Tree Power Company, a Nonprofit, Customer-owned Utility, on to 
the people of Maine to vote on the matter.
I have been a supporter of the grassroots campaign to pass this legislation since early 
2021. After the governor refused to allow the people of Maine to vote on it in 2021, 
myself and many others were understandably quite frustrated by this apparent distrust 
of the people. Over the next few years I joined others in collecting tends of thousands 
of signatures from fellow Maine residents who want to put Maine back in the 
decision-making seat of our distribution and transmission infrastructure.
The current state of Maine’s electricity system is absolutely dire. For four years 
running, CMP has had the worst customer satisfaction in the nation and right now 
Maine also has the worst electricity reliability in the nation. We cannot continue to 
rely on corporate, for-profit utilities for our electricity as they have shown year after 
year that they -- and really this shouldn't be a shock to anyone -- prefer maximizing 
profit over maintaining our grid.
The Pine Tree Power Company would be a game-changer for Maine in many 
sorely-needed ways. It would be a nonprofit, consumer-owned utility controlled by a 
board the majority of the members of which are elected. This would put power back 
in the hands of Mainers so that extractive profiteering is no longer a concern when 
making grid decisions.
Pine Tree Power Co would also help the state meet its climate, energy, and 
connectivity goals in the most rapid and affordable manner possible. Currently, Maine
has the highest use of heating oil in the nation and transportation is the largest source 
of our emissions. To meet climate goals, Maine must build out public transit and 
electrify everything. Such transitions would necessitate more robust grid 
infrastructure and Pine Tree Power would be able to make these inevitable capital 
investments at a lower cost – saving money that can be reinvested in our 
infrastructure or returned to customers through lower rates.
In addition, in direct contradiction to rumors and misinformation that I have seen 
spreading online, Pine Tree Power Co is not permitted to use general obligation bonds
or tax dollars of the State. This would ensure the burden of financing its operations 
stays with the company itself, as is already the case today.
Finally, I want to emphasize that this legislation is about more than just electricity. It 
is about the people of Maine and our future. We deserve reliable, affordable 
electricity and the improvements that come with Pine Tree Power Co, like 
improvements to rural broadband access and mandatory year-one and year-two 
bonuses and improved labor protections for all the employees of Pine Tree Power Co. 
We deserve to have our money going towards helping Mainers, rather than corporate 
shareholders. With the Pine Tree Power Company, we can have a power system that 
works for all Mainers, no matter their place, race, or income.
I urge you to advance LD 1611 to the voters so they can choose to create the Pine 
Tree Power Company. This is a crucial step in providing reliable, affordable 
electricity to the people of Maine and in helping the state meet its climate, energy, and
connectivity goals.
