William Smith
Gorham
LD 1611
Testimony of William Smith in opposition to LD 1611 "An Act to Create the Pine 
Tree Power Company, a Nonprofit, Customer-owned Utility"
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler and members of the Committee on Energy, 
Utilities & Technology. My name is William Smith, and I am an Engineer with a 
Masters in Applied Mathematics and over 20 years experience in data 
communications and control systems. Thank you for the opportunity to giver 
testimony in opposition of LD 1611. 
I am fundamentally opposed to a governmental organization directly creating and 
being involved in the transmission and distribution of energy. I think creating a 
governmental initiative to research and aid in the development of for-profit 
corporations and non-profit organizations formed by citizens of the state would be 
beneficial. This is rather a public/private partnership, one that appears to have 
embedded in it the priorities of the climate initiative and ESG. 
Below you will find a list of scientifically proven and researched climate forcing 
vectors and concepts. I think I can assume most of you have little to no knowledge of 
these them. 
Why would I assume this?
Because the media, universities, the National Science Foundation and federal 
government do not inform the public of these scientifically well established, naturally 
occurring climate factors or of how they affect our climate directly. On the rare 
occurrence they are mentioned, as in articles by NASA on the Gyre, they are stories 
of doom used to incite fear in the public.
Read the list and understand these, and other parts of nature like them, are at most 
only partially represented in the IPCC climate models politicians and NGOs use to 
push their political climate agenda. 
In closing I restate I am in opposition to the passing of LD 1611 and ask you to vote 
AUGHT NOT PASS. 
Thank you. 
Notes:
* The effects volcanism has on cloud cover and the external forcing of global eruptive
activity in the past 300 years. 
  https://arxiv.org/pdf/2304.09564.pdf
* The Beaufort Gyre causes a cooling of the Atlantic but has for the past decade 
entered an elongated period of holding cold, fresh water in the ocean area north of 
Canada thereby allowing for an elongated warming period of the north Atlantic. 
  
https://www.washington.edu/news/2021/02/24/record-high-arctic-freshwater-will-flo
w-through-canadian-waters-affecting-marine-environment-and-atlantic-ocean-current
s/
* Preindustrial Climate Anomalies such as the Medieval Warm Period (MWP) and 
the Little Ice Age (LIA) and the current understanding of the relationship to global 
climate
  
https://www.opastpublishers.com/open-access-articles/from-behavioral-climate-mode
ls-and-millennial-data-to-agw-reassessment.pdf
* A model that reproduces the observed Dansgaard-Oeschger (DO) events, containing
cycle patterns of four climate variables central to the physics of DO cycles: the typical
saw-tooth shape of arctic atmospheric temperatures, the reduced (extended) sea ice 
cover during interstadials (stadials), the strong interstadial AMOC, with sustained 
northward heat transport during stadials at a weaker level, and the corresponding 
stadial warming of the Nordic Seas.
  https://arxiv.org/pdf/2303.04063.pdf 
* The decrease of our Earth's magnetosphere and that there is an interplay between 
stellar and planetary magnetism influence (exo)planetary environments and their 
habitability in star-planet systems with differing relative magnetic field strengths, or 
in a single star-planet system over the course of their evolution with age. 
  https://arxiv.org/pdf/2303.04770.pdf

