MAINE FAMILY LAW ADVISORY COMMISSION 
Report to Maine Legislature 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
On LD 137, 
“An Act to Amend the Maine Parentage Act Regarding J oinder of Parties” 
Introduction 
The Maine Family Law Advisory Commission (“FLAC”) hereby submits pursuant to 19- 
A M.R.S. § 354(2) to the Maine Legislature, Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, a bill entitled 
“An Act to Amend the Maine Parentage Act Regarding J oinder of Parties” and respectfully 
requests consideration thereof. 
Background 
In 2015, the Maine Legislature enacted the Maine Parentage Act (“MPA”),a 
comprehensive statutory framework for determining a child’ s legal parentage that FLAC proposed 
at the direction of the Judiciary Committee. The MPA took effect in July 2016. Since then, it has 
come to FLAC’s attention that language in two related provisions of the MPA may be susceptible 
to misinterpretation and does not reﬂect the original intent of the legislation. This bill corrects 
both issues. 
First, this bill seeks to clarify whomust be joined as a party in an action seeking to establish 
parentage. Section 1836 requires a party who commences an action to determine parentage to join 
all other parents in the action. This makes sense for the administration of justice and use of judicial 
resources. It has recently come to FLAC's attention that Section 1836 includes language that may 
be read to require that, when commencing an action to determine parentage, a party must also join 
in the action the child whose parentage is being determined. ‘While FLAC understands how the 
language could be so construed, this was not FLAC's intent. There has never been sucha 
requirement in Maine parentage law, nor does such _a requirement serve the best interests of 
children. This bill would delete the language suggesting that a child must be joined with an action 
to determine that child's parentage. 
Second, the bill also seeks to clarify section 1844, which addresses issues relating to the 
binding effect of a determination of parentage. Section 1844(2), in part, provides that in a divorce 
proceeding, the court “is deemed to have made an adjudication of the parentage of the child if the 
court acts under circumstances that satisfy the jurisdictional requirements of [Maine 1aw]” and the 
ﬁnal order “identiﬁes a child as a child of the marriage ’ or ‘issue of the marriage ’ or by similar 
words indicates that the parties are the parents of the child.” l9~A M.R.S. § l844(2)(A). This 
provision is overly narrow. A binding adjudication of parentage should also be is also implicit in 
the parallel circumstance, for example, when a court issues a determination of parental rights and 
responsibilities with respect to a child’s parents who are not married. The bill clarifies the statute’s 
binding effect with respect to this and other related circumstances.
1
A Conclusion 
To avoid potential confusion and to reﬂect the original intent of the MPA in 2015, We 
respectﬁilly request consideration of this bill and urge the Committee to recommend enactment 
retroactive to the July 1, 2016, the effective date of the MPA. 
Dated: December 5, 2022 
Respectfully submitted, 
Maine Family Law Advisory Commission 
l-lon. F, Mary Kelly, District Court Judge (Chair) 
Hon. Wayne Douglas, Superior Court Justice 
Hon. Libby Mitchell, Probate Court Judge 
Hon. Steven Chandler, Family Law Magistrate 
Franklin Brooks, Ph.D., LCSW 
Edward S. David, Esq._ 
Diane E. Kenty, Esq., CADRES, Maine Judicial Branch 
Catherine Miller, Esq., MillerAsen 
Timothy Robbins, Esq., Kids First Center 
Linsey Ruhl, Esq., Pine Tree Legal Assistance- 
Debby Willis, Esq., Asst. Attorney General to Maine Dept. of Health. and Human Services
2
