
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This publication was prepared by IRENA in collaboration with IEA-PVPS Task 12 with valuable input from Dr. Karsten 
Wambach (bifa Umweltinstitut, consultant). 
This report benefited from contributions and review from a panel of experts: Tabaré A. Currás (WWF International 
Global Climate & Energy Initiative), Zhang Jia (IEA-PVPS Task 12), Keiichi Komoto (IEA-PVPS Task 12), Dr. Parikhit Sinha (IEA-PVPS Task 12) and Knut Sanders (Ökopol). 
Valuable input was also received from Henning Wuester, Rabia Ferroukhi, Nicolas Fichaux, Asiyah Al Ali, Deger 
Saygin, Salvatore Vinci and Nicholas Wagner (IRENA).
IRENA and IEA-PVPS would like to extend their gratitude to the Government of Germany for supporting this publication. 
AUTHORS
IRENA: Stephanie Weckend 
IEA-PVPS: Andreas Wade, Garvin Heath
DISCLAIMER
The designations employed and the presentation of materials featured herein are provided on an “as is” basis, for 
informational purposes only, without any conditions, warranties or undertakings, either express or implied, from IRENA 
and IEA-PVPS, its officials and agents, including but not limited to warranties of accuracy, completeness and fitness for a 
particular purpose or use of such content. The information contained herein does not necessarily represent the views of the Members of IRENA and IEA-PVPS. The mention of specific companies or certain projects, products or services does 
not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by IRENA and IEA-PVPS in preference to others of a similar nature 
that are not mentioned. The designations employed and the presentation of material herein do not imply the expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA and IEA-PVPS concerning the legal status of any region, country, territory, city or 
area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries.Unless otherwise stated, this publication and material featured herein are the property 
of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) and the International Energy 
Agency Photovoltaic Power Systems (IEA-PVPS) and are subject to copyright by IRENA 
and IEA-PVPS. Material in this publication may be freely used, shared, copied, reproduced, 
printed and/or stored, provided that all such material is clearly attributed to IRENA and 
IEA-PVPS.
Material contained in this publication attributed to third parties may be subject to third-
party copyright and separate terms of use and restrictions, including restrictions in relation to any commercial use.  This publication should be cited as: IRENA and IEA-PVPS 
(2016), “End-of-Life Management: Solar Photovoltaic Panels,” International Renewable 
Energy Agency and International Energy Agency Photovoltaic Power Systems.© IRENA 2016 AND IEA-PVPS 2016
ISBN 978-92-95111-98-1 (Print, IRENA)
ISBN 978-92-95111-99-8 (PDF, IRENA)
ISBN 978-3-906042-36-7 (IEA PVPS)
IEA-PVPS Report Number: T12-06:2016
ABOUT IRENA
IRENA is an intergovernmental organisation that supports countries in their transition to a sustainable energy 
future and serves as the principal platform for international co-operation, a centre of excellence and a repository of policy, technology, resource and financial knowledge on renewable energy. IRENA promotes the widespread 
adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy, including bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower, 
ocean, solar and wind energy, in the pursuit of sustainable development, energy access, energy security and low-carbon economic growth and prosperity. 
www.irena.org 
ABOUT IEA-PVPS
The IEA, founded in November 1974, is an autonomous body within the framework of the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) that carries out a comprehensive programme of energy co-operation among its member countries. The European Commission also participates in the work of the IEA. 
The IEA-PVPS is one of the collaborative research and development (R&D) agreements established within the 
IEA. Since 1993, participants in the PVPS have been conducting a variety of joint projects in the applications of 
PV conversion of solar energy into electricity.
www.iea-pvps.org

Shutterstock
5 Glossary   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
 Figures, tables and boxes   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
 Abbreviations   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
 1. INTRODUCTION   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
 2. SOLAR PV PANEL WASTE PROJECTIONS   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
  2.1 Global solar PV growth   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
  2.2 PV panel waste model   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
  2.3 PV panel waste projections   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32
 3. PV PANEL COMPOSITION AND WASTE CLASSIFICATION   . . . . . . . . . . .  37
  3.1 Panel composition   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  38
  3.2 Waste classification   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  43
 4. PV PANEL WASTE MANAGEMENT OPTIONS   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  47
  4.1 Waste management principles for PV panels   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  47
  4.2 Regulatory approach: European Union   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  51
 5. NATIONAL APPROACHES TO PV WASTE MANAGEMENT   . . . . . . . . . . . .  59
  5.1 Germany: Mature market with EU-directed, PV-specific waste regulations   . . . . . . . . . .  59
  5.2 UK: Young market with EU-directed, PV-specific waste regulations   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  63
  5.3 Japan: Advanced market without PV-specific waste regulations   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  65
  5.4 US: Established, growing market without PV-specific waste regulations   . . . . . . . . . . . .  69
  5.5 China: Leading market without PV-specific waste regulations   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  70
  5.6 India: Growing market without PV-specific waste regulations   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  72
 6. VALUE CREATION FROM END-OF-LIFE PV PANELS   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  75
  6.1 Opportunities to reduce, reuse and recycle PV panels   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  75
  6.2 Material supply and socio-economic benefits   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  85
 7. CONCLUSIONS: THE WAY FORWARD   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  91
 References   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  94
 CONTENTS
6
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSGLOSSARY
Amorphous silicon Non-crystalline form of silicon formed using silicon vapour which is quickly cooled. 
Electrical and electronic 
equipment The term electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) is defined as equipment designed for 
use with a voltage rating not exceeding 1,000 Volts (V) for alternating current and 1,500 V for direct current, or equipment dependent on electric currents or electromagnetic fields 
in order to work properly, or equipment for the generation of such currents, or equipment 
for the transfer of such currents, or equipment for the measurement of such currents.
Extended Producer 
Responsibility Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) is an environmental policy approach in which 
a producer’s responsibility for a product is extended to the post-consumer stage of a product’s life cycle. An EPR policy is characterised by (1) shifting responsibility (physically 
and/or economically; fully or partially) upstream towards the producers and away from 
governments and (2) the provision of incentives to producers to take into account environmental considerations when designing their products.
Monocrystalline silicon Silicon manufactured in such a way that if forms a continuous single crystal without grain 
boundaries. 
Raw material Basic material which has not been processed, or only minimally, and is used to produce 
goods, finished products, energy or intermediate products which will be used to produce 
other goods. 
Pay-as-you-go and               
pay-as-you-put In a pay-as-you-go (PAYG) approach, the cost of collection and recycling is covered by 
market participants when waste occurs. By contrast, a pay-as-you-put (PAYP) approach 
involves setting aside an upfront payment of estimated collection and recycling costs when 
a product is placed on the market. Last-man-standing-insurance is an insurance product that covers a producer compliance scheme based on a PAYG approach if all producers disappear from the market. In that situation, the insurance covers the costs of collection 
and recycling. In a joint-and-several liability scheme, producers of a certain product or 
product group agree to jointly accept the liabilities for waste collection and recycling for a specific product or product group.
Poly- or multicrystalline 
siliconSilicon manufactured in such a way that it consists of a number of small crystals, forming 
grains. 
Thin-film Technology used to produce solar cells based on very thin layers of PV materials deposited over an inexpensive material (glass, stainless steel, plastic).
7FIGURES, TABLES AND BOXESFIGURES, TABLES AND BOXES
FIGURES
Figure 1 Approach to estimating PV panel waste  ...23
Figure 2  Projected cumulative global PV capacity ... 25
Figure 3  Two-step PV panel waste model  .......... 26
Figure 4  Exponential curve fit of projection of PV panel 
weight-to-power ratio (t/MW)  ............ 27
Figure 5  Failure rates according to customer complaints . 28
Figure 6  Example of Weibull curve with two different shape factors from Table 5  ................ 31
Figure 7  Estimated cumulative global waste volumes (million t) of end-of-life PV panels ......... 32
Figure 8  Annually installed and end-of-life PV panels 2020-2050 (in percentage waste vs. tonnes installed) by early-loss scenario (top) and 
regular loss-scenario (bottom)  .............. 33
Figure 9 Estimated cumulative waste volumes of end-
of-life PV panels by top five countries in 2050 by early-loss scenario (top) and regular-loss 
scenario (bottom)  ........................... 35
Figure 10 Evolution to 2030 of materials used for different PV panel technologies as a 
percentage of total panel mass  .............. 41
Figure 11 Process flow diagram of the life cycle stages for PV panels and resulting opportunities for 
reducing, reusing or recycling  ............... 47
Figure 12 World overview of PV panel producers and 
cumulative installed PV capacity  ............. 51
Figure 13 End-of-life PV panel waste volumes for Germany to 2050 ............................ 60
Figure 14 Collective producer responsibility system for end-of-life management of B2C PV panels  .62
Figure 15 End-of-life PV panel waste volumes                
for the UK to 2050 ........................... 64Figure 16 End-of-life PV panel waste for Japan to 2050  .66
Figure 17 Comparison of PV panel end-of-life scenarios 
for Japan  ..................................... 66
Figure 18  FAIS PV panel recycling system ............. 68
Figure 19 End-of-life PV panel waste volumes for the US to 2050  ....................................... 69
Figure 20  End-of-life PV panel waste volumes for China to 2050  ........................................ 71
Figure 21 Comparison of PV panel end-of-life scenarios 
for China  ...................................... 71
Figure 22 End-of-life  PV panel waste volumes for India to 
2050  ......................................... 73
Figure 23 Preferred options for PV waste management  ..75
Figure 24 Relative material content (%) of a c-Si PV panel . 78
Figure 25  Historic and expected specific silver 
consumption per watt-peak  ................. 78
Figure 26 Projected rooftop and utility-scale PV deployment in 2030 compared to 2015  ..... 80
Figure 27  Process for laminated glass recycling ....... 82
Figure 28 Recycling scheme proposed by NEDO/FAIS ... 83
Figure 29 Thin-film recycling process .................. 84
Figure 30 Loser Chemie recycling process ............. 84
Figure 31  End-of-life recovery potential under regular- loss scenario to 2030  ....................... 85
Figure 32  Potential value creation through PV end-of-life management to 2030  ....................... 86
Figure 33  Potential value creation through PV end-of-life management to 2050  ....................... 87
Figure 34  Industry value creation for                            end-of-life PV management  ................. 88
8
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSTABLES
Table 1  Projected cumulative PV capacity, 2015-2050, 
based on IRENA (2016) and IEA (2014)  .... 25
Table 2 PV panel loss model  methodology for step 1a  .26
Table 3 PV panel loss model  methodology for step 1b  .27
Table 4 PV panel loss model  methodology for step 2  ..29
Table 5 Overview of Weibull shape factors reported in the literature for modelling PV panel loss probability alongside baseline values selected for use in this study ...................... 30
Table 6 Modelled results of estimated cumulative waste volumes of end-of-life PV panels by 
country (t)  .............................. 34
Table 7 Market share of PV panels by technology 
groups (2014-2030)  ..................... 37
Table 8 Top ten PV panel manufacturers in 2015  ...38
Table 9 PV waste characterisation: Leaching test methods in the US, Germany and Japan  ...44
Table 10 Examples of waste codes relevant to PV panels from the EU List of Wastes  ............... 45
Table 11  Annual collection and recovery targets           (% mass) under the WEEE Directive  ....... 54
Table 12 Stiftung EAR factors for calculating guaranteed sum for PV panels ............. 61
Table 13 World production of mineral commodities 
used in PV panels, 2015  .................. 87
BOXES
Box 1  An overview of IRENA’s REmap - a global 
renewable energy roadmap  .............. 24
Box 2 An overview of the IEA's PV technology roadmap to 2050  ....................... 24Box 3 Uncertainty analysis  ...................... 31
Box 4 c-Si PV panel components ................ 39
Box 5 Thin-film PV panel components ........... 40
Box 6 Financing models for collection, treatment, recovery, recycling and disposal of PV panels  .49
Box 7 Definition of producers under the WEEE 
Directive  ............................... 53
Box 8  EU end-of-life management through ‘high-
value recycling’  ......................... 55
Box 9 Financing framework under the WEEE Directive  ............................... 57
Box 10 Overview of Stiftung EAR clearing-house 
activities  ............................... 60
Box 11 Outlook for Germany  .................... 63
Box 12 UK WEEE legislation: Creation of a separate category for PV panels  ................... 65
Box 13 Outlook for the UK  ...................... 65
Box 14 Japan's  PV panel waste projections  ....... 66
Box 15  R&D on PV panel recycling in Japan ....... 68
Box 16 Outlook for Japan  ....................... 69
Box 17 Outlook for the US  ......................70
Box 18  China's PV panel waste projections ......... 71
Box 19  Outlook for China  ....................... 72
Box 20  Outlook for India  ........................ 73
Box 21 Definition of resource and material efficiency  .76
Box 22 Silver components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
Box 23 Innovative treatment processes for              
thin-film PV panels  ...................... 84
Box 24 Socio-economic  benefits of the WEEE Directive in the EU ....................... 89
9ABBREVIATIONS 
a-Si  amorphous silicon
B2B business-to-business
B2C business-to-consumer
BIPV  building-integrated PV
c-Si crystalline silicon
CIGS  copper indium gallium (di)selenide
CdTe  cadmium telluride 
CIS copper indium selenide
CO2 carbon dioxide
CU-PV  Energy Research Centre of the Netherlands 
and PV CYCLE
EEE                  electrical and electronic equipment
EPR extended producer responsibility
EVA ethylene vinyl acetate
GW gigawatts
IEA International Energy Agency
IEA PVPS International Energy Agency Photovoltaic Power System Programme
IEE  Institute for Electrical Engineering of the National Academy of Sciences, China
IRENA  International Renewable Energy Agency
ISE (Fraunhofer) Institute for Solar Energy Systems, Germany ITRPV  International Technology Roadmap for 
Photovoltaic
JNNSM  Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar          
Mission, India
kg kilogramme
kW kilowatt
L litreMETI  Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, 
Japan
mg milligramme
MOE  Ministry of Environment, Japan
MW  megawatt
NEDO  New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization, Japan
NREL  National Renewable Energy Laboratory, US
PAYG  pay-as-you-go
PAYP  pay-as-you-put
PV photovoltaic
R&D  research and development
t metric tonne
W watt
Wp  watt-peak  
WEEE  waste electrical and electronic equipmentABBREVIATIONS/ACRONYMS
Shutterstock
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY11
essential in the world’s transition to a sustainable, 
economically viable and increasingly renewables-
based energy future. To unlock the benefits of such 
industries, the institutional groundwork must be laid 
in time to meet the expected surge in panel waste.
This report presents the first global projections 
for future PV panel waste volumes to 2050. It 
investigates and compares two scenarios for global 
PV panel waste volumes until 2050. 
• Regular-loss: Assumes a 30-year lifetime for solar 
panels, with no early attrition; 
• Early-loss: Takes account of “infant”, “mid-life” and 
“wear-out” failures before the 30-year lifespan. EXECUTIVE  
SUMMARY
Solar photovoltaic (PV) deployment has grown at 
unprecedented rates since the early 2000s.  Global 
installed PV capacity reached 222 gigawatts (GW) at the end of 2015 and is expected to rise further 
to 4,500 GW by 2050. Particularly high cumulative 
deployment rates are expected by that time in China 
(1,731 GW), India (600 GW), the United States (US) 
(600 GW), Japan (350 GW) and Germany (110 GW). 
As the global PV market increases, so will the 
volume of decommissioned PV panels. At the end 
of 2016, cumulative global PV waste streams are 
expected to have reached 43,500-250,000 metric 
tonnes. This is 0.1%-0.6% of the cumulative mass of all 
installed panels (4 million metric tonnes). Meanwhile, 
PV waste streams are bound to only increase further. Given an average panel lifetime of 30 years, large 
amounts of annual waste are anticipated by the early 2030s. These are equivalent to 4% of installed PV 
panels in that year, with waste amounts by the 2050s (5.5-6 million tonnes) almost matching the mass 
contained in new installations (6.7 million tonnes). 
Growing PV panel waste presents a new 
environmental challenge, but also unprecedented 
opportunities to create value and pursue new 
economic avenues. These include recovery of raw material and the emergence of new solar PV end-
of-life industries. Sectors like PV recycling will be The world’s total annual electrical and electronic 
waste (e-waste) reached a record of 41.8 million 
metric tonnes in 2014. Annual global PV panel waste 
was 1,000 times less in the same year. Yet by 2050, 
the PV panel waste added annually could exceed 
10% of the record global e-waste added in 2014. 
As the analysis contained in this report shows, 
the challenges and experiences with e-waste management can be turned into opportunities for 
PV panel waste management in the future.
PV panel waste and global e-waste
12
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSPolicy action is needed to address the challenges 
ahead, with enabling frameworks being adapted 
to the needs and circumstances of each region or 
country.  Countries with the most ambitious PV targets 
are expected to account for the largest shares of global PV waste in the future, as outlined by case studies 43,500
05001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,000
0102030405060708090100
Cumulative PV capacity (GW)Cumulative PV panel waste (million t)
Regular-loss scenario Early-loss scenario Linear (Cumulative PV capacity)250,000 1.7 Million8 Million60 Million78 Million
270 GW1,630 GW4,500 GW
2016 2030 2050
GermanyIndiaJapanUSChina
Regular-loss scenario Early-loss scenario0 5 10 15 204.4 million4.3 million4.5 million7.5 million6.5 million7.5 million7.5 million10 million13.5 million20 million
2050
60-78 million tonnes ofPV panel waste globally
Cumulative PV panel waste (million t)Cumulative waste volumes of top five countries for of end-of-life PV panels in 2050Overview of global PV panel waste projections, 2016-2050
in this report. By 2030 the top three countries for 
cumulative projected PV waste are projected to include 
China, Germany and Japan. At the end of 2050 China is 
still forecast to have accumulated the greatest amount 
of waste but Germany is overtaken by the United States 
of America (US). Japan comes next followed by India. 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY13
At present, only the European Union (EU) has 
adopted PV-specific waste regulations.  Most 
countries around the world classify PV panels as general or industrial waste. In limited cases, such 
as in Japan or the US, general waste regulations 
may include panel testing for hazardous material 
content as well as prescription or prohibition of 
specific shipment, treatment, recycling and disposal pathways. The EU, however, has pioneered PV 
electronic waste (e-waste) regulations, which cover 
PV-specific collection, recovery and recycling 
targets. Based on the extended-producer-
responsibility principle, the EU Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) Directive requires all 
producers supplying PV panels to the EU market (wherever they may be based) to finance the costs of 
collecting and recycling end-of-life PV panels put on the market in Europe. Lessons can be learned from 
the experience of the EU in creating its regulatory 
framework to help other countries develop locally 
appropriate approaches.End-of-life management could become a significant 
component of the PV value chain.
1 As the findings of 
the report underline, recycling PV panels at their end-
of-life can unlock a large stock of raw materials and 
other valuable components. The recovered material 
injected back into the economy can serve for the 
production of new PV panels or be sold into global 
commodity markets, thus increasing the security of 
future raw material supply. Preliminary estimates suggest that the raw materials technically recoverable 
from PV panels could cumulatively yield a value of 
up to USD 450 million (in 2016 terms) by 2030. This 
is equivalent to the amount of raw materials currently 
needed to produce approximately 60 million new 
panels, or 18 GW of power-generation capacity. By 
2050, the recoverable value could cumulatively exceed 
USD 15 billion, equivalent to 2 billion panels, or 630 GW.  
1. The value creation in different segments of the solar value chain has 
been studied in IRENA’s publications “The Socio-economic Benefits of Solar and Wind” (2014) and “Renewable Energy Benefits: Leveraging Local Industries” (2016 forthcoming).
Potential value creation through PV end-of-life management 
2030 2050Cumulative PV capacity:
1,600 GWCumulative PV capacity:
4,500 GW
Life cycle:
Enough raw material
recovered to produce
60 million new panels
(equivalent to 18 GW)Life cycle:
Enough raw material
recovered to produce
2 billion new panels
(equivalent to 630 GW)Cumulative PV
panel waste:
1.7 - 8
million tonnesCumulative PV
panel waste:
60 - 78
million tonnes
Value creation:
USD 450 million alone for 
raw material recovery
New industries
and employmentValue creation:
USD 15 billion alone for 
raw material recovery
New industries
and employment
End-of-life management for PV panels will spawn 
new industries, can support considerable economic 
value creation, and is consistent with a global shift to sustainable long-term development. New industries arising from global PV recycling can yield 
employment opportunities in the public and private 
sectors. In the public sector, jobs may be created in local governments responsible for waste management, 
14
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELS  Reuse
Rapid global PV growth is expected to generate a 
robust secondary market for panel components 
and materials. Early failures in the lifetime of a panel 
present repair and reuse opportunities. Repaired 
PV panels can be resold on the world market at a 
reduced market price. Even partly repaired panels or 
components might find willing buyers in a second-
hand market. This secondary market presents an important opportunity for buyers in countries with 
limited financial resources which still want to engage 
in the solar PV sector.
  Recycle
As current PV installations reach the final decommissioning stage, recycling and material 
recovery will be preferable to panel disposal. The 
nascent PV recycling industry typically treats end-
of-life PV panels through separate batch runs within 
existing general recycling plants. This allows for 
material recovery of major components. Examples 
include glass, aluminium and copper for c-Si panels 
that can be recovered at cumulative yields greater 
than 85% of total panel mass. In the long term, dedicated panel recycling plants can increase 
treatment capacities and maximise revenues owing 
to better output quality and the ability to recover a Preferred options for PV waste management
  Most pre
ferred                              
        
                           Le
as
t pref
er
redRecycleReuseReducesuch as municipalities and public waste utilities, but also public research institutes. Solar PV producers 
and specialised waste management companies may 
become the main employment beneficiaries in the 
private sector. Opportunities could also emerge in 
developing or transitioning economies, where waste 
collection and recycling services are often dominated 
by informal sectors. Here, PV waste management systems could generate additional employment, 
especially in the repair/reuse and recycling/treatment 
industries, while encouraging better overall PV waste 
management practices.
PV end-of-life management also offers 
opportunities relating to each of the ‘three Rs’ 
of sustainable waste management:
  Reduce
As research and development (R&D) and 
technological advances continue with a maturing 
industry, the composition of panels is expected 
to require less raw material. Today, two-thirds of 
globally manufactured PV panels are crystalline 
silicon (c-Si). These are typically composed of more 
than 90% glass, polymer and aluminium, which are 
classified as non-hazardous waste. However, the same panels also include such hazardous materials as silver, 
tin and lead traces. Thin-film panels, by comparison, 
are over 98% non-hazardous glass, polymer and 
aluminium, combined with around 2% copper and zinc 
(potentially hazardous) and semiconductor or other hazardous materials. These include indium, gallium, 
selenium, cadmium, tellurium and lead. Hazardous 
materials are typically subject to rigorous treatment 
requirements with specific classifications depending 
on the jurisdiction. 
By 2030, given current trends in R&D and panel 
efficiency, the raw material inputs for c-Si and thin-
film technologies could be reduced significantly. 
This would decrease the use of hazardous and rare 
materials in the production process and consequently 
improve the recyclability and resource recovery 
potential of end-of-life panels.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY15
greater fraction of embodied materials. PV-specific 
panel recycling technologies have been researched 
and implemented to some extent for the past decade. 
Learning from past, ongoing and future research is 
important to enable the development of specialised, 
cost- and material recovery-efficient recycling plants. 
Technical and regulatory systems, however, need 
to be established to guarantee that PV panel waste streams are sufficiently large for profitable operation.
THE WAY FORWARD
Industry, governments and other stakeholders need to prepare for the anticipated waste volumes of solar 
PV panels in the following three main ways:
	Adopt PV-specific waste regulations
Sustainable end-of-life management policies for 
PV panels can be achieved through an enabling 
regulatory framework, along with the institutions 
needed to implement it.  Addressing the growth of 
PV waste and enabling related value creation will not be easy in the absence of legally binding end-of-life 
standards specific to PV panels. The development 
of PV-specific collection and recycling regulations, including recycling and treatment standards for 
PV panels, will be crucial to consistently, efficiently 
and profitably deal with increasing waste volumes. 
Furthermore, waste regulations or policies can 
promote more sustainable life cycle practices and improve resource efficiency. Lessons learned from the 
experiences summarised in this report can help guide 
the development of regulatory approaches. More data and analyses are needed at the national level to support the establishment of suitable 
regulatory and investment conditions. As a first 
step, accurate assessments of waste panel markets will require better statistical data than is currently 
available. This should include regular reporting and monitoring of PV panel waste systems, with amounts 
of waste produced by country and technology; 
composition of this waste stream; and other aspects 
of PV waste management. In addition, installed 
system performance and, in particular, the causes and frequency of system failures should be reported to 
provide clearer estimates of future end-of-life panel 
waste. The resulting country-level waste and system 
performance data would improve the viability of how 
PV panel waste management is organised, expand 
knowledge of material recovery potential and provide 
a foundation for sound regulatory frameworks. Further data to assess the full range of value creation, 
including socio-economic benefits, will also help to 
stimulate end-of-life market growth for solar PV.
 
  Expand waste management infrastructure  
Management schemes for PV waste should be 
adapted to the unique conditions of each country 
or region. As case studies on Germany and the 
United Kingdom show, different waste management 
frameworks have emerged from the national 
implementation of the EU WEEE Directive. These 
experiences can provide a variety of lessons and best practices from which other PV markets can 
benefit. Rapidly expanding PV markets such as 
Japan, India and China still lack specific regulations 
Shutterstock
16
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELScovering PV panel waste. However, they have started 
preparing for future waste streams through R&D 
and the establishment of long-term policy goals. In 
the absence of sufficient waste volumes or country-
specific technical know-how, regional markets for 
waste management and recycling facilities also help 
to maximise value creation from PV waste.
Co-ordination mechanisms between the energy and 
waste sectors are essential to supporting PV end-of-
life management. A wide array of energy stakeholders 
is usually involved in the decommissioning stage of 
a PV project, which includes dismantling, recycling and disposal. These stakeholders include project 
developers, construction companies, panel producers 
and others. Traditionally, the waste sector has only 
been involved in a limited way (e.g. disposal of PV 
panel waste at landfill sites and/or with general 
waste treatment). However, with increasing waste 
volumes and related recycling opportunities, waste management companies will become an important 
player in PV end-of-life activities. This is already 
the case in several EU countries. In accordance with 
the extended-producer-responsibility principle, 
producers in these countries provide the financing 
for waste management and delegate the treatment 
and recycling of PV panels to the waste sector. The development of industrial clusters that promote 
co-operation across energy and waste sector 
stakeholders can be effective in stimulating innovation 
and contributing to spillover effects.
  Promote ongoing innovation 
R&D and skills development are needed to support 
additional value creation from PV end-of-life 
panels. Considerable technological and operational  
knowledge about PV panel end-of-life management already exists in many countries. This can guide 
the development of effective waste management solutions, helping to address the projected large 
increase in PV panel waste. Pressure to reduce PV 
panel prices is already driving more efficient mass production and material use, material substitutions, 
and the introduction of new, higher-efficiency 
technologies. To improve even further, additional 
skills development is needed. Research and education 
programmes are critical to not only achieve the technical goals but also train the next generation 
of scientists, engineers, technicians, managers etc. 
Such jobs will be required to develop the technical, 
regulatory, logistics and management systems 
necessary to maximise value extracted from growing 
PV waste streams. In addition, specific education 
and training on PV panel repairs can help to extend the lifetime of PV panels that show early failures. 
Material recycling for PV panels faces another 
barrier: recovered raw materials often lack the quality 
needed to achieve maximum potential value because 
recycling processes are not fully developed. Increased 
R&D for PV panel end-of-life treatment technologies 
and techniques could help close this gap and enable improved and efficient recovery of raw materials and 
components. Just as importantly, technological R&D 
must be coupled with prospective techno-economic 
and environmental analyses to maximise societal 
returns, minimise detrimental outcomes and avoid unintended consequences. 
In the years ahead, policy-makers and PV 
stakeholders must prepare for the rise of panel 
waste and design systems to capitalise on the 
resulting opportunities. Unlocking end-of-life value 
from PV panels calls for targeted actions like those described above and, most importantly, appropriately 
designed frameworks and regulations. With the right 
conditions in place, end-of-life industries for solar PV 
can thrive as an important pillar of the infrastructure 
for a sustainable energy future.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY17
Shutterstock
Shutterstock
INTRODUCTION19
The deployment of PV technology has grown  
dramatically in recent years, reaching a cumulative 
global installed capacity of 222 GW at the end of 2015 
(IRENA, 2016b). PV offers economic and environmentally 
friendly electricity production but like any technology 
it ages and ultimately requires decommissioning 
(which includes dismantling, recycling and disposal). 
As PV increasingly becomes a global commodity, and to ensure its sustainable future, stakeholders involved with each step of the product life cycle must 
implement sound environmental processes and policies, 
including responsible end-of-life treatment. Regulatory 
frameworks that support the early development of life 
cycle management techniques and technologies will 
foster such processes and policies.
This report aims to look ahead of the curve, projecting 
future PV panel waste volumes in leading solar markets and distilling lessons from current PV waste management 
approaches. The intention is that other countries can then move faster up the learning curve with technological and 
regulatory systems dealing with PV panel waste.
In mature and saturated markets for products like 
automobiles in Europe or the US, the ratio of waste to 
new products is more or less constant. By contrast, the 
ratio of waste panels to new installed panels is currently very low at 0.1% (around 43,500 metric tonnes of 
waste, and 4 million metric tonnes of new installations 
2. Assuming 80-100 metric tonnes (t) per megawatt (MW). See 
Chapter 2. estimated by end of 2016).2 This is because the global 
PV market is still young, and PV systems typically last 
30 years. Findings in this report show that a large 
increase in PV waste is projected to emerge globally 
around 2030. Some regions, like the EU, will start 
generating important waste volumes earlier because 
of their larger-scale adoption of PV since the 1990s. 
The proportion of global PV panel waste to new installations is estimated to increase steadily over 
time, reaching 4%-14% in 2030 and climbing to over 
80% in 2050. 
End-of-life management with material recovery is 
preferable to disposal in terms of environmental 
impacts and resource efficiency as a way to manage 
end-of-life PV systems. When recycling processes 
themselves are efficient, recycling not only reduces 
waste and waste-related emissions but also offers the 
potential for reducing the energy use and emissions 
related to virgin-material production. This could be 
particularly significant for raw materials with high 
levels of impurities (e.g. semiconductor precursor 
material), which often require energy-intensive pre-
treatment to achieve required purity levels. Recycling is also important for long-term management of 
resource-constrained metals used in PV. INTRODUCTION
20
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSThe PV recycling industry is expected to expand 
significantly over the next 10-15 years. Annual end-of-
life PV panel waste is projected to increase to more 
than 60-78 million metric tonnes cumulatively by 2050 
according to this report’s model. This increasing scale 
should improve the cost-effectiveness and energy/
resource efficiency of recycling while stimulating the 
technical innovations needed to handle the wide variety of materials used in fast-evolving PV technologies.
This report highlights and demonstrates the 
importance and benefit of developing flexible 
regulatory frameworks. They ensure sustainable PV end-of-life management, and enable economically 
and environmentally efficient processes and 
technologies for product and material recovery 
processes. They stimulate associated socio-economic 
benefits like recovery of valuable materials, and foster 
new industries and employment. 
As the first region witnessing large-scale PV 
deployment, the EU started to promote sustainable PV 
life cycle management in the early 2000s. The voluntary 
extended-producer-responsibility (EPR)
3 initiative PV 
CYCLE (PV CYCLE, 2016) was one example. This has led to the development of pilot and industrial-scale 
recycling facilities as well as the first comprehensive 
legal framework on PV panels: the Waste Electrical 
and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) Directive of 2012 
(European Parliament and Council, 2012).
4 In other parts 
of the world, little specific legislation for handling end-of-life PV panels yet exists, and waste is handled under 
each country’s legislative and regulatory framework for 
general waste treatment and disposal. 
3. The OECD defines EPR as an environmental policy approach 
in which a producer’s responsibility for a product is extended to the post-consumer stage of a product’s life cycle. An EPR policy is characterised by (1) shifting responsibility (physically and/or economically; fully or partially) upstream towards the producers and away from governments and (2) the provision of incentives to producers to take into account environmental considerations when designing their products (OECD, 2015).
4. In the context of the WEEE Directive, PV panels have been clearly defined as pieces of electrical equipment designed with the sole purpose of generating electricity from sunlight for public, commercial, industrial, rural, and residential applications—the definition excludes balance-of-system components (such as inverters, mounting structures, andThe purpose of this joint IRENA and IEA-PVPS Task 
12 report is to communicate existing technological 
and regulatory knowledge and experience, including 
best practice related to PV panel end-of-life waste 
management. The report also identifies opportunities 
for value creation from end-of-life PV by analysing 
potential environmental and socio-economic benefits 
based on novel projections of PV panel waste to 2050.The report consists of five main chapters. 
Chapter 2 provides predictions of global PV growth 
which act as the baseline for quantifying future 
PV panel waste streams (globally and for specific countries). These results provide the context and 
motivation for the waste management policies and 
recycling technologies described in the remainder of 
the report.
Chapter 3 characterises the materials embodied in the 
different types of PV panels along with corresponding regulatory waste classification considerations that 
determine required treatment and disposal pathways 
for PV panels. 
Chapter 4 describes general PV waste management 
options, explaining general waste management 
principles and the difference between voluntary and legal approaches. This is followed by summaries 
of country-specific current approaches to waste 
management in Chapter 5 , including case studies 
of major current and future PV markets. These are Germany, the UK, the US, Japan, China and India. 
Chapter 6 covers value creation from end-of-life PV by 
analysing opportunities to reduce, reuse and recycle, 
as well as resulting socio-economic benefits.
Finally, Chapter 7 outlines the conclusions and way 
forward.
INTRODUCTION21
Shutterstock
Shutterstock
SOLAR PV PANEL WASTE PROJECTIONS23
PV panel waste streams will increase alongside 
worldwide PV deployment. This publication is the first 
to quantify potential PV panel waste streams in the 
period until 2050. 
As outlined in Figure 1, a three-step approach is 
used to quantify PV panel waste over time. First, this 
2.1 GLOBAL SOLAR PV GROWTH
In 2015 capacity to generate renewable energy 
increased by 8.3% or 152 GW, the highest annual 
growth rate on record (IRENA, 2016b). Global solar PV 
capacity added in 2015 made up 47 GW of this increase, 
cumulatively reaching 222 GW at the end of 2015, up 
from 175 GW in 2014 (IRENA, 2016b). The bulk of these 
new installations was in non-traditional PV markets, 
consolidating the shift in major PV players. Traditional Figure 1 Approach to estimating PV panel waste
Global solar
PV growthPV panel 
waste modelPV panel waste
projections
PV markets such as Europe and North America grew 5.2% and 6.3% in 2015 respectively. By contrast, Latin 
America and the Caribbean grew at a rate of 14.5%, and 
Asia at a rate of 12.4%. Asia alone thereby witnessed a 
50% increase in solar PV capacity in 2015, with 15 GW of 
new PV capacity installed in China and another 10 GW 
in Japan. Main global PV leaders today include China 
(43 GW of cumulative installed capacity), Germany 
(40 GW), Japan (33 GW) and the US (25 GW).SOLAR PV
PANEL WASTE
PROJECTIONS
chapter analyses trends and future global solar PV growth rates from 2010 to 2050, which is a main input 
to waste volume estimation. Next, the PV panel waste 
model and main methodology used in this report are 
explained. The last section summarises the findings 
and provides PV panel waste predictions globally and 
by country.
24
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELS
To account for current and future waste streams for 
solar PV, global PV growth rates were projected until 
2050. These rely on results from previous work on PV 
forecasts by both IRENA and the IEA. For projections 
to 2030, REmap ( see Box 1), IRENA’s roadmap for 
doubling the global share of renewables, was used (IRENA, 2016a). For 2030-2050, the projections 
are based on IEA’s Technology Roadmap on Solar Photovoltaic Energy  (see Box 2) (IEA, 2014). 
IRENA’s roadmap shows feasible, cost-effective 
ways to double renewables from 18% to 36% in 
the world’s total final energy consumption by 2030. This is based on an in-depth analysis of the 
energy transition in 40 economies, representing 
80% of global energy use. For each technology, 
including solar PV, power capacity deployment 
is calculated from the reference year 2010 in 
five-year increments to 2030. This takes into 
consideration existing technologies, their costs and the available timeframe. 
The REmap analysis finds that doubling the 
renewables share is not only feasible but 
cheaper than not doing so once health and 
environmental factors are taken into account. 
The accelerated energy transition can boost 
economic growth, save millions of lives and 
combined with energy efficiency helps limit the global temperature increase to 2° Celsius in line 
with the Paris Agreement. To meet that goal, 
however, renewable energy deployment needs 
to happen six times faster. For decision-makers 
in the public and private sectors alike, this roadmap sends out an alert on the opportunities 
at hand and the costs of not taking them (IRENA, 
2016a).To achieve the necessary reductions in energy-related CO
2 emissions, the IEA has developed 
a series of global technology roadmaps under 
international guidance and in close consultation 
with industry. The overall aim is to advance global 
development and uptake of key technologies to 
limit the global mean temperature increase to 
2° Celsius in the long term. The roadmaps are 
not forecasts. Instead, they detail the expected technology improvement targets and the policy 
actions required to achieve that vision by 2050. 
The PV Technology Roadmap is one of 21 low-
carbon technology roadmaps and one of nine 
for electricity generation technologies. Based on the IEA’s Energy Technology Perspectives  
(2014), this roadmap envisages the PV contribution to global electricity reaching 16% 
by 2050. This is an increase from 135 GW in 2013 
to a maximum of 4,674 GW installed PV capacity 
in 2050. The roadmap assumes that the costs 
of electricity from PV in different parts of the world will converge as markets develop. This 
implies an average cost reduction of 25% by 
2020, 45% by 2030 and 65% by 2050, leading 
to USD 40-160 per megawatt-hour, assuming a 
cost of capital of 8%. To achieve the vision in this roadmap, the total PV capacity installed each 
year needs to rise rapidly from 36 GW in 2013 
to 124 GW per year on average. It would peak 
to 200 GW per year between 2025 and 2040. 
The vision is consistent with global CO
2 prices of  
USD 46/t CO2 in 2020, USD 115/t CO2 in 2030 
and USD 152/t CO2 in 2040 (IEA, 2014).
As shown in Figure 2, global cumulative PV 
deployment accelerated after 2010 and is expected to 
grow exponentially, reaching 1,632 GW in 2030 and 
about 4,512 GW in 2050.Box 1 An overview of IRENA’s REmap – a   
 global renewable energy roadmapBox 2 An overview of the IEA's PV Technology  
  Roadmap to 2050
SOLAR PV PANEL WASTE PROJECTIONS25
Figure 2 Projected cumulative global PV capacity
Table 1 Projected cumulative PV capacity, 2015-2050, based on IRENA (2016) and IEA (2014)05001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,000
2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050Cumulative PV capacity (GW)
Based on IRENA (2016) and IEA (2014)
To develop annual estimates of PV capacity between 2016 
and 2030, an interpolation was made between IRENA’s 
REmap  estimates for 2015, 2020 and 2030. To achieve 
this, an average annual growth rate was calculated between each five-year period, amounting to 8.92%. In 
some selected countries, the individual growth rates may 
be adjusted higher or lower due to political and economic 
uncertainties foreseen. To extend the model projection to 2050, more conservative growth projections were assumed for 2030-2050 with annual growth rate of about 
2.5%. This extrapolation was matched with the forecast of 
the IEA’s PV Technology Roadmap.
The final projections of global PV growth to 2050 are 
shown in Table 1 and were used to model global waste 
streams in the next chapter.
Year 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
Cumulative installed 
PV capacity (GW)222 511 954 1,632 2,225 2,895 3,654 4,512
2.2 PV PANEL WASTE MODEL
The objective of this report is to quantify future PV panel 
waste streams. Most waste is typically generated during 
four primary life cycle phases of any given PV panel. 
These are 1) panel production 2) panel transportation 
3) panel installation and use, and 4) end-of-life disposal 
of the panel. The following waste forecast model covers 
all life cycle stages except production. This is because 
it is assumed that production waste is easily managed, collected and treated by waste treatment contractors or manufacturers themselves and thus not a societal waste management issue.
Future PV panel waste streams can be quantified 
according to the model described in Figure 3. The two 
main input factors are the conversion and probability 
of losses during the PV panel life cycle (step 1a and 
1b). They are employed to model two waste stream 
scenarios using the Weibull function, the regular-loss and the early- loss scenario (step 2). 
26
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSFigure 3 Two-step PV panel waste model
Step 1
Step 2• a: Conversion of capacity (GW) to PV panel mass (t)
• b: Estimation of PV panel losses (probability of failures during life cycle)
• Regular-loss scenario modeling
• Early-loss scenario modeling
The next section provides a step-by-step guide showing details of the methodology and underlying assumptions.
Step 1a: Conversion of capacity to PV panel mass (from gigawatts to metric tonnes)
Table 2 PV panel loss model methodology for step 1a
Data input and references  
• Standard panel 1990-2013 data sheets (Photon, 2015) 
are used to extract supporting data for the exponential 
fit. Typical panel data were used in five-year periods 
from the biggest producers (Arco Solar, BP Solar, 
Kyocera, Shell Solar, Sharp, Siemens Solar, Solarex, 
Solarworld, Trina and Yingli). 
• Standard panel data are predicted using the 2014 
International Technology Roadmap for Photovoltaic 
(ITRPV) as a baseline (Raithel, 2014) as well as other 
literature (Berry, 2014; IEA, 2014; IRENA, 2014; Marini et 
al., 2014; Lux Research, 2013 and Schubert, Beaucarne 
and Hoornstra, 2013).Model• The model's exponential regression function converts 
gigawatts of PV capacity to metric tonnes of panel 
mass.
• For each year, the annual conversion factor is 
calculated. 
To estimate PV panel waste volumes,5 installed 
and projected future PV capacity (megawatts or 
gigawatts-MW or GW) was converted to mass (metric 
tonnes-t), as illustrated in Table 2. An average ratio of 
mass of PV per unit capacity (t/MW) was calculated 
by averaging available data on panel weight and 
nominal power. For past PV panel production, the 
nominal power and weight of representative standard PV panel types was averaged from leading producers over five-year intervals (Photon, 2015). The panel data 
sheets of Arco, Siemens, BP, Solarex, Shell, Kyocera, 
Sharp, Solarworld and Trina were considered. 
5. Note that ‘volume’ is used interchangeably in this report with the 
more accurate metric ‘mass’ despite the incongruence of units.
SOLAR PV PANEL WASTE PROJECTIONS27
For future PV panel production, the data are based 
on recent publications (Berry, 2014; IEA, 2014; IRENA, 
2014; Marini, 2014; Raithel, 2014; Lux Research, 2013 
and Schubert, Beaucarne and Hoornstra, 2013).
This report’s model includes a correction factor to 
account for panels becoming more powerful and 
lighter over time. This is due to optimisation of cell and panel designs as well as weight reductions from 
thinner frames, glass layers and wafers. The correction 6. In previous studies a constant factor of 100 t/MW was used as a first 
approximation (Sander et al., 2007). This report’s approach is thus more reflective of expected panel weight per capacity change.factor is based on an exponential least-square fit 
of weight-to-power ratio for historic and projected 
future panels.6 Figure 4 shows how the weight-to-
power ratio is continuously reduced over time due to further developments in PV technologies such as 
material savings and improved solar cell efficiencies.
Figure 4 Exponential curve fit of projection of PV panel weight-to-power ratio (t/MW)
1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050PV panel weight-to-power ratio (t/MW)
t/MW - model data Exponential ﬁt (t/MW - model data)200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Table 3 PV panel loss model methodology for step 1b
Data input and references  
• Assumptions on early losses were based on reports 
by TÜV, Dupont, SGS and others (IEA-PVPS, 2014a; 
Padlewski, 2014; Vodermeyer, 2013; DeGraaff, 2011).Model
• Infant failure 
• Midlife failure
• Wear-out failureStep 1b: Probability of PV panel losses
28
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSThe potential origin of failures for rooftop and ground-
mounted PV panels was analysed independently from 
PV technology and application field to estimate the 
probability of PV panels becoming waste before 
reaching their estimated end-of-life targets. The 
three main panel failure phases detected are shown in 
Table 3 (IEA-PVPS, 2014a): 
• Infant failures defined as occurring up to four years 
after installation (average two years);
• Midlife failures defined as occurring about five to eleven years after installation;
• Wear-out failures defined as occurring about 
12 years after installation until the assumed end-of-
life at 30 years.
Empirical data on causes and frequency of failures 
during each of the phases defined above were 
obtained from different literature (IEA-PVPS, 2014a; 
Padlewski, 2014; Vodermayer, 2013 and DeGraaff, 2011). Independent of those phases, Figure 5 provides 
an overview of the main causes of PV panel failure.
7. C-Si panels constituted the largest share of surveyed technologies. 
The weight-to-power ratio was continuously reduced during the development of the PV technology by material savings and improved solar cell efficiencies (Photon, 2015).
Figure 5 Failure rates according to customer complaints
20%
Optical
failure
10%
Glass
breakage19%
J-box and
cables19%
Power
loss
10%6%
Loose frame6%
Unknown defect
5%
Delamination
5%
Transportdamage
Defect cellinterconnect
Based on IEA-PVPS (2014a)The main infant failure causes include light-induced 
degradation (observed in 0.5%-5% of cases), poor 
planning, incompetent mounting work and bad support 
constructions. Many infant failures have been reported 
within the electrical systems such as junction boxes, 
string boxes, charge controllers, cabling and grounding. 
Causes of midlife failures are mostly related to the 
degradation of the anti-reflective coating of the glass, 
discoloration of the ethylene vinyl acetate, delamination 
and cracked cell isolation. 
Causes of frequently observed failures within all phases 
in the first 12 years - after exposure to mechanical load 
cycles (e.g. wind and snow loads) and temperatures 
changes  - include potential induced degradation, 
contact failures in the junction box, glass breakage, loose frames, cell interconnect breakages and diode defects. 
In the wear-out phase, failures like those reported in the 
midlife phase increase exponentially in addition to the 
severe corrosion of cells and interconnectors. Previous 
studies with statistical data on PV panel failures additionally 
observe that 40% of PV panels inspected suffered from 
at least one cell with microcracks. This defect is more 
commonly reported with newer panels manufactured after 
2008 due to the thinner cells used in production.
These failures and probability of loss findings, alongside 
data from step 1a (conversion factors) are used to 
estimate PV panel waste streams (step 2).
On the basis of step 1a and 1b, two PV waste scenarios 
were defined (see Table 4) – the regular-loss scenario 
and early-loss scenario.
Shutterstock
SOLAR PV PANEL WASTE PROJECTIONS29
Both scenarios are modelled using the Weibull 
function as indicated in the formula below. The 
probability of losses during the PV panel life cycle is 
thereby determined by the shape factor α that differs 
for the regular-loss and early-loss scenario.
 Table 4 PV panel loss model methodology for step 2
Data input and references
• The 30-year average panel lifetime assumption was 
taken from literature (Frischknecht et al. , 2016).
• A 99.99% probability of loss was assumed as an 
approximation to 100% for numerical reasons 
using the Weibull function. The 40-year technical 
lifetime assumption is based on depreciation times and durability data from the construction industry 
(Greenspec, 2016).
• The early-loss input assumptions were derived 
from different literature sources (IEA-PVPS, 2014a; Padlewski, 2014; Vodermeyer, 2013; DeGraaff, 2011).Model
Regular-loss scenario input assumptions
• 30-year average panel lifetime
• 99.99% probability of loss after 40 years
• extraction of Weibull model parameters from literature 
data (see Table 5)
Early-loss scenario input assumptions
• 30-year average panel lifetime
• 99.99% probability of loss after 40 years
• Inclusion of supporting points for calculating non-
linear regression:
• Installation/transport damages: 0.5%
• within first 2 years: 0.5%
• After 10 years: 2%
• After 15 years: 4%
• Calculation of Weibull parameters (see Table 5)Step 2: Scenarios for annual waste stream estimation (regular-loss and early-loss scenarios)
Both scenarios assume a 30-year average panel 
lifetime and a 99.99% probability of loss after 40 years. 
A 30-year panel lifetime is a common assumption in 
PV lifetime environmental impact analysis (e.g. in life 
cycle assessments) and is recommended by the IEA-
PVPS (Frischknecht et al. , 2016). The model assumes 
that at 40 years at the latest PV panels are dismantled for refurbishment and modernisation. The durability of PV panels is thus assumed to be in line with average 
building and construction product experiences such as 
façade elements or roof tiles. These also traditionally 
have a lifetime of 30-40 years. 
Neither initial losses nor early losses were included in 
the regular-loss scenario.  The results from Kuitsche 
(2010) are used directly, assuming an alpha shape factor in this scenario of 5.3759 (see Table 5).where
t = time in yearsT = average lifetime
α = shape factor, which controls the typical 
       S shape of the Weibull curveThe formula is:
30
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSIn the early-loss scenario , the following loss 
assumptions are made based on an analysis of the 
literature and expert judgement (IEA-PVPS, 2014a; 
Padlewski, 2014; Vodermayer, 2013 and DeGraaff, 
2011): 
• 0.5% of PV panels (by installed PV capacity in MW) 
is assumed  to reach end-of-life because of damage during transport and installation phases
8;
• 0.5% of PV panels will become waste within two 
years due to bad installation; 
• 2% will become waste after ten years; 
• 4% will become waste after 15 years due to technical 
failures. 
The early-loss scenario includes failures requiring panel replacement such as broken glass, broken cells or 
ribbons and cracked backsheet with isolation defects. 
However, only panels with serious functional or safety 
defects requiring entire replacement are included, 
while other defects that, for example, reduce power output or create panel discoloration are ignored. 
In the early-loss scenario, the shape factor was 
calculated by a regression analysis between data points from literature and also considered early 
failures (see Table 5). The resulting alpha shape factor of 2.4928 for the early-loss scenario is lower 
than literature values presented. This is because it 
includes early defects that yield higher losses in the 
first 30 years and lower losses in later life should a 
panel last longer.
For each scenario (regular-loss and early-loss), the 
probability of failure value (alpha) is multiplied according 
to the Weibull function by the weight of panels installed 
in a given year. Since a bigger alpha value is used in 
the regular-loss scenario, the curve ascends smoothly 
and intersects with the early-loss scenario curve at 
the nominal lifetime point of 30 years. In line with the 
Weibull function and due to the different assigned alpha parameters, regular-loss and early-loss scenarios have 
the opposite effect after 30 years. Hence, the regular-
loss scenario indicates a higher probability of loss from 
30 years on (see Figure 6).
Table 5 Overview of Weibull shape factors reported in the literature for modelling PV panel loss probability alongside 
 baseline values selected for use in this study
Weibull shape 
factorsKumar & Sarkan (Kumar, 2013)Kuitsche(2010)Zimmermann (2013)Marwede (2013)This study
Lower 9.982 3.3 8.2
Upper 14.41 8.7484 12.8
Baseline5.3759
(represents 
regular-loss 
scenario)5.3759 2.4928
(represents 
early-loss 
scenario)8. Most PV system installers might have to purchase excess panels to 
compensate for potential losses during transport and installation, which was accounted for in this model. The model assumes that 0.5% of panels are lost in the initial period and is lower than the rate assumed in Sander’s model (2007).
Shutterstock
SOLAR PV PANEL WASTE PROJECTIONS31
Figure 6 Example of Weibull curve with two different shape factors from Table 5Probability of loss
00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Year of panel life
Shape factor 2.4928 (early-loss scenario) Shape factor 5.3759 (regular-loss scenario)
This study is the first to quantify PV panel waste at 
a global scale and across different PV technologies. 
This means the scenarios portrayed here should 
be considered order of magnitude estimates and 
directional rather than highly accurate or precise, 
owing to the simple assumptions and lack of 
statistical data. Further, they stimulate the need for 
more assessments. This box gives a short overview of the three main areas of uncertainty that could 
affect the results and conclusions of the study. The 
uncertainty related to the cumulative installed PV 
capacity to 2050 is an input factor for the model 
and therefore not further considered here. 
First and foremost, the data available on PV panel 
failure modes and mechanisms is only a small 
fraction of the full number of panels installed 
worldwide. This means the baseline assumptions 
bear some uncertainties and will need to be refined as more data become available. The rapid evolution 
of PV materials and designs adds another level of 
complexity and uncertainty to estimates.
Moreover, failure does not necessarily mean that a 
panel will enter the waste stream at the given year 
of failure. This is because some failures might not be 
detected right away or may be tolerated for years. 
For example, if a PV panel still produces some output, 
even if lower than when initially commissioned, Box 3 Uncertainty analysis
replacement may not be financially justified. Hence, 
data available on the different determinants of the 
end of a PV panel’s lifetime are often interlinked 
with non-technical and system aspects that are very 
difficult to predict.  
The last major uncertainty relates to key 
assumptions used to model the probability of PV 
panel losses versus the life cycle of the panels 
using the Weibull function. To calculate the Weibull 
shape factors for this study’s regular-loss and early-
loss scenarios, existing literature was reviewed. 
The results of the analysis are presented in Table 5. 
It is assumed that the early losses in the early-loss scenario are constant into the future. In other 
words, no learning to reduce premature losses 
is taken into account. The model also excludes 
repowering PV plants.
In summary, this study develops two scenarios 
– regular-loss and early-loss – to account for the 
above uncertainties about the mechanisms and predicted timing of panel failures. To better estimate 
potential PV panel waste streams in the future, 
national and regional decisions on PV waste stream 
regulation must include a monitoring and reporting 
system. This will yield improved statistical data to strengthen waste stream forecasts and enable a 
coherent framework for policy regulations.
32
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSThe above modelling produces PV panel waste 
projections by country up to 2050. The next section 
summarises the findings of the model.
2.3 PV PANEL WASTE PROJECTIONS 
Global PV panel waste outlook
Total annual e-waste in the world today accounts for 41.8 
million t (Baldé, 2015). By comparison, cummulative PV 
panel waste will account for no more than 250,000 t  
by the end of 2016 according to the early-loss scenario modelled in this report. This represents only 0.6% of total 
e-waste today but the amount of global waste from PV 
panels will rise significantly over the next years. 
Figure 7 displays cumulative PV panel waste results 
up to 2050. • In the regular-loss scenario, the PV panel waste 
accounts for 43,500 t by end 2016 with an increase projected to 1.7 million t in 2030. An even more 
drastic rise to approximately 60 million t could be 
expected by 2050. 
• The early-loss scenario projection estimates much higher total PV waste streams, with 250,000 t 
alone by the end of 2016. This estimate would rise 
to 8 million t in 2030 and total 78 million t in 2050. 
This is because the early-loss scenario assumes a 
higher percentage of early PV panel failure than 
the regular-loss scenario. 
Based on the best available information today, this 
report suggests the actual future PV panel waste volumes will most likely fall somewhere between the 
regular-loss and early-loss values. 
Figure 7 Estimated cumulative global waste volumes (million t) of end-of-life PV panels
2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030 2032 2034 2036 2038 2040 2042 2044 2046 2048 205005001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,000
01020304050607080
Cumulative PV capacity (GW)Cumulative PV panel waste (million t)
Regular-loss scenario Early-loss scenario Cumulative PV capacity
Annual PV panel waste up to 2050 is modelled in Figure 
8 by illustrating the evolution of PV panel end-of-life and 
new PV panel installations as a ratio of the two estimates. 
This ratio starts out low at 5% at the end of 2020, for 
instance (i.e. in the early-loss scenario, annual waste of 
220,000 t compared to 5 million t in new installations). However, it increases over time to 4%-14% in 2030 and 
80%-89% in 2050. At that point, 5.5-6 million t of PV 
panel waste (depending on scenario) is predicted in 
comparison to 7 million t in new PV panel installations. A feature of the Weibull curve shape factors for the 
two modelled scenarios is that the estimated waste 
of both scenarios intersects. The scenario predicting 
greater waste panels in a given year then switches. The 
intersection is projected to take place in 2046. This 
modelling feature can be observed in Figure 8 which shows the volume of PV panel waste amounting to over 
80% of the volume of new installations as a result of the 
early-loss scenario in 2050. The comparable figure for 
the regular-loss scenario exceeds 88% in the same year.
SOLAR PV PANEL WASTE PROJECTIONS33
Waste projections by country
Detailed PV panel waste estimates by selected 
countries are displayed in Table 6 from 2016 up to 
2050. The countries were chosen according to their regional leadership when it comes to PV deployment 
and expected growth. 
The projections are modelled using the same 
Weibull function parameters as the global estimates Figure 8 Annually installed and end-of-life PV panels 2020-2050 (in % waste vs. t installed) by early-loss scenario  
 (top) and regular-loss scenario (bottom)
2020 2030 2040 20500123456710
89
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
% waste vs. installedAnnual PV panel mass (million t)
Mass of installed capacity (year)Mass of end-of-life PV panels
(per year, early-loss scenario)Ratio of waste vs. installed mass(early-loss scenario)
2020 2030 2040 20500123456710
89
0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%
% waste vs. installedAnnual PV panel mass (million t)5%14%52%80%
Mass of installed capacity (year)Mass of end-of-life PV panels
(per year, regular-loss scenario)Ratio of waste vs. installed mass
(regular-loss scenario)39%
4%
0%89%
of the previous section. Projected waste volumes 
of PV panels in individual countries are based on 
existing and future annual installations and rely on 
input data available for each country. The historic  
cumulative installed PV capacity was used as benchmark in each country alongside future 
projections to 2030 using IRENA’s REmap  and for 
2030 to 2050 IEA's PV Technology Roadmap , with a 
simple interpolation.
34
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSTable 6 Modelled results of estimated cumulative waste volumes of end-of-life PV panels by country (t)
Year 2016 2020 2030 2040 2050
Scenario 
(regular-loss/early-loss)regular 
lossearly 
lossregular 
lossearly 
lossregular 
lossearly 
lossregular 
lossearly 
lossregular 
lossearly 
loss
Asia
China 5,000 15,000 8,000 100,000 200,000 1,500,000 2,800,000 7,000,000 13,500,000 19,900,000
Japan 7,000 35,000 15,000 100,000 200,000 1,000,000 1,800,000 3,500,000 6,500,000 7,600,000
India 1,000 2,500 2,000 15,000 50,000 325,000 620,000 2,300,000 4,400,000 7,500,000
Republic of Korea 600 3,000 1,500 10,000 25,000 150,000 300,000 820,000 1,500,000 2,300,000
Indonesia 5 10 45 100 5,000 15,000 30,000 325,000 600,000 1,700,000
Malaysia 20 100 100 650 2,000 15,000 30,000 100,000 190,000 300,000
EuropeGermany
3,500 70,000 20,000 200,000 400,000 1,000,000 2,200,000 2,600,000 4,300,000 4,300,000
Italy 850 20,000 5,000 80,000 140,000 500,000 1,000,000 1,200,000 2,100,000 2,200,000
France 650 6,000 1,500 25,000 45,000 200,000 400,000 800,000 1,500,000 1,800,000
United Kingdom 250 2,500 650 15,000 30,000 200,000 350,000 600,000 1,000,000 1,500,000
Turkey 30 70 100 350 1,500 11,000 20,000 100,000 200,000 400,000
Ukraine 40 450 150 2,500 5,000 25,000 50,000 100,000 210,000 300,000
Denmark 80 400 100 2,000 4,000 22,000 40,000 70,000 130,000 125,000
Russian Federation 65 65 100 350 1,000 12,000 20,000 70,000 150,000 200,000
North AmericaUnited States               
of America
6,500 24,000 13,000 85,000 170,000 1,000,000 1,700,000 4,000,000 7,500,000 10,000,000
Mexico 350 800 850 1,500 6,500 30,000 55,000 340,000 630,000 1,500,000
Canada 350 1,600 700 7,000 13,000 80,000 150,000 300,000 650,000 800,000
Middle East
United Arab Emirates 0 10 50 100 3,000 9,000 20,000 205,000 350,000 1,000,000
Saudi Arabia 200 250 300 1,000 3,500 40,000 70,000 220,000 450,000 600,000
AfricaSouth Africa
350 550 450 3,500 8,500 80,000 150,000 400,000 750,000 1,000,000
Nigeria 150 200 250 650 2,500 30,000 50,000 200,000 400,000 550,000
Morocco 0 25 10 100 600 2,000 4,000 32,000 50,000 165,000
OceaniaAustralia
900 4,500 2,000 17,000 30,000 145,000 300,000 450,000 900,000 950,000
Latin America and Caribbean
Brazil 10 10 40 100 2,500 8,500 18,000 160,000 300,000 750,000
Chile 150 200 250 1,500 4,000 40,000 70,000 200,000 400,000 500,000
Ecuador 10 15 15 100 250 3,000 5,000 13,000 25,000 35,000
Total World 43,500 250,000 100,000 850,000 1,700,000 8,000,000 15,000,000 32,000,000 60,000,000 78,000,000
Sum of Leading 
Countries28,060 187,255 72,160 668,500 1,352,850 6,442,500 12,252,000 26,105,000 48,685,000 67,975,000
Rest of the World 15,440 62,745 27,840 181,500 347,150 1,557,500 2,748,000 5,895,000 11,315,000 10,025,000
SOLAR PV PANEL WASTE PROJECTIONS35
  PV panel waste projections until 2030
The results modelled indicate that the highest 
expected PV panel waste streams by 2030 are in Asia 
with up to 3.5 million t accumulated, depending on 
the scenario. Regional Asian champions in renewable 
energy deployment will therefore also experience 
the highest waste streams. For example, China will 
have an estimated installed PV capacity of 420 GW in 2030 and could accumulate between 200,000 t and 
1.5 million t in waste by the same year. Japan and 
India follow, with projections of between 200,000 t 
and 1 million t, and 50,000-325,000 t in cumulative 
PV-waste by 2030 respectively.
Europe is predicted to present the second largest PV 
waste market with projected waste of up to 3 million t by 2030. Germany, with an anticipated 75 GW of PV 
capacity, is forecasted to face between 400,000 and 
1 million t of PV panel waste by 2030. Other future 
significant PV waste markets are projected to include 
Italy and France. 
With an expected cumulative 240 GW in deployed PV 
by 2030, the US will lead in terms of total installed 
PV capacity in North America. It is projected to 
generate waste between 170,000 and 1 million t by 
then. Countries such as Canada (up to 80,000 t) and 
Mexico (up to 30,000 t) will also experience rising PV waste streams by 2030.  By 2030 Africa and Latin America are predicted to also see expanding PV-waste volumes. South Africa 
(8,500 -80,000 t by 2030) and Brazil (2,500-8,500 t 
by 2030) will be regional leaders in this respect.  Other significant PV-waste markets by 2030 will include 
the Republic of Korea with cumulative waste of 
25,000 -150,000 t and Australia with 30.000-145,000 t. 
  Waste volume surge in 2030-2050
Given the worldwide surge in PV deployment since 2010 and average lifetime and failure rates for panels, 
waste volumes are certain to increase more rapidly after 
2030. Whereas in 2030 the top three PV panel waste 
countries are expected to include China, Germany 
and Japan, the picture slightly changes by 2050. By 
then, China is still predicted to have accumulated the greatest amount of waste (13.5-20 million t). 
However, Germany is overtaken by the US (7.5-10 million t), Japan is next (6.5-7.5 million t) and 
India follows (4.4-7.5 million t). The regular-loss and 
early-loss waste estimates by top five countries in 
2030 and 2050 are displayed in Figure 9. 
The analysis presented in this chapter develops 
quantitative estimates for PV panel waste streams until 
2050 by country and region as well as on a global scale. 
At the same time, PV panels and consequently their 
waste differ in composition and regulatory classification, 
which will be discussed in the next chapter.
Figure 9 Estimated cumulative waste volumes of end-of-life PV panels by top five countries in 2050 
 by early-loss scenario (top) and regular-loss scenario (bottom)
Regular-loss scenarioEarly-loss scenarioIndia
GermanyJapanUSChina
India
GermanyJapanUSChina10 15 20 0 5
10 15 20 0 5Cumulative PV panel waste (million t)
Cumulative PV panel waste (million t)2030
20307.5 million4.3 million7.5 million10 million20 million
4.5 million4.4 million6.5 million7.5 million13.5 million2050
78 million tonnes ofPV panel waste globally
205060 million tonnes ofPV panel waste globally
Shutterstock
PV PANEL COMPOSITION AND WASTE CLASSIFICATION37
PV panels create unique waste-management 
challenges along with the increasing waste streams 
forecast in Chapter 2. Apart from in the EU, end-of-life 
treatment requirements across the world for PV panels 
are set by waste regulations applying generically to 
any waste rather than dedicated to PV. 
Waste regulations are based on the classification 
of waste. This classification is shaped according to the waste composition, particularly concerning any 
component deemed hazardous. Waste classification tests determine permitted 
and prohibited shipment, treatment, recycling and 
disposal pathways. A comprehensive overview of 
the widely varying global PV waste classification is beyond the scope of this report. Instead, this 
chapter characterises the materials contained in 
PV panels and corresponding waste-classification 
considerations. These determine the required 
treatment and disposal pathways for PV panels when other more specific waste classifications and 
regulations are not applicable.PV PANEL
COMPOSITION
AND WASTE
CLASSIFICATION
Table 7 Market share of PV panels by technology groups (2014-2030)
Technology 2014 2020 2030
Silicon-based 
(c-Si) Monocrystalline
92% 73.3% 44.8%Poly- or multicrystalline
Ribbona-Si (amorph/micromorph)
Thin-film basedCopper indium gallium (di)selenide (CIGS) 2% 5.2% 6.4%
Cadmium telluride (CdTe) 5% 5.2% 4.7%
OtherConcentrating solar PV (CPV)
1%1.2% 0.6%
Organic PV/dye-sensitised cells (OPV) 5.8% 8.7%
Crystalline silicon (advanced c-Si) 8.7% 25.6%
CIGS alternatives, heavy metals 
(e.g. perovskite), advanced III-V0.6% 9.3%
Based on Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems (ISE) (2014), Lux Research (2013) and author research
38
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELS3.1 PANEL COMPOSITION
Technology trends
To achieve optimal waste treatment for the distinct PV 
product categories, the composition of PV panels needs 
to be taken into consideration. PV panels can be broken 
down according to the technology categories shown in 
Table 7. The different technology types typically differ 
in terms of materials used in their manufacturing and 
can contain varying levels of hazardous substances that 
must be considered during handling and processing.
C-Si PV is the oldest PV technology and currently 
dominates the market with around 92% of market 
share (ISE, 2014). Multicrystalline silicon panels have 
a 55% and monocrystalline silicon panels a 45% share of c-Si technology respectively. Due to low efficiency 
ratios, a-Si products have been discontinued in recent 
years, and the market share nowadays is negligible. 
The two thin-film PV panel technologies make up 7% 
of the PV market, 2% for CIGS panels, and 5% for CdTe 
panels. The following analysis will not pay any more attention to CPV and other technologies because it 
only has a low market share at less than 1%.
IRENA/IEA-PVPS estimates, 20169Table 8 Top ten PV panel manufacturers in 2015
Thin-film Silicon-basedAnnual 
manufacturing 
capacity (MW)
Trina Solar  x ≤5,500
Canadian Solar  x ≤4,500
Jinko Solar  x ≤4,500
JA Solar  x ≤3,500
Hanwha Q CELLS  x ≤3,000
First Solar x  ≤3,000
Yingli  x ≤2,500
GCL System   ≤2,000
Suntech Power  x ≤2,000
Renesola  x ≤1,500
Sum of top 10 PV panel manufacturers   ≥32,000
9. Uncertainty is a core characteristic of PV manufacturing capacity data due to inaccurate or incomplete manufacturing and export data on 
manufactuers discussed.Although the market share of novel devices is predicted  
to grow, mainstream products are expected to retain 
market dominance up to 2030, especially c-Si panels (Lux 
Research, 2013). As shown in Table 7, silicon technology 
has great potential for improvement at moderate cost if 
new process steps are implemented into existing lines. For 
example, an increase in usage of hetero-junction cells is 
predicted, providing higher efficiencies and performance ratios. According to Lux Research (2013 and 2014), CIGS 
technology has great potential for better efficiencies and 
may gain market share while CdTe is not expected to 
grow. In the long term, CIGS alternatives (e.g. replacing 
indium and gallium with zinc and tin), heavy metal cells including perovskite structures, and advanced III-V cells, 
might take nearly 10% of market share. The same can be 
said of OPV and dye-sensitised cells (Lux Research, 2014). 
Recent reports indicate OPV has reached efficiencies of 
11% and dye-sensitised cells 12% (IEA, 2014). 
In line with a PV market heavily dominated by c-Si PV, all 
the main panel manufacturers except for First Solar rely on 
silicon-based PV panel technologies. In 2015, the top ten 
manufacturers for PV panels represented 32 GW per year 
of manufacturing capacity, which is around two-thirds of 
the global PV market, estimated at 47 GW (see Table 8).
PV PANEL COMPOSITION AND WASTE CLASSIFICATION39
c-Si technology consists of slices of solar-grade 
silicon, also known as wafers, made into cells 
and then assembled into panels and electrically 
connected. 
The standard cell consists of a p-doped wafer 
with a highly doped pn-junction. The surface is 
usually textured and may show pyramid structures 
(monocrystalline silicon) or random structures 
(polycrystalline silicon) and an anti-reflective layer to minimise the reflection of light. 
c-Si (monocrystalline) panel, National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory (NREL), 2016
To form an electric field, the front and back of the 
cell are contacted using grid-pattern printed silver 
and aluminium pastes. During a thermal process 
known as firing, the aluminium diffuses into the 
silicon and forms the back surface field. Advanced cell concepts add further layers to the wafer and 
utilise laser structuring and contacting to optimise 
the efficiencies of the cell (Raithel, 2014).Component trends
The various components of major PV panel technologies will influence material and waste characterisation as well 
c-Si (monocrystalline) panel, National Renewable Energy 
Laboratory (NREL), 2016
Box 4 c-Si PV panel componentsas the economics of treatment pathways. As shown in 
Boxes 4 and 5, the design of silicon-based and thin-film 
panels differs, affecting their composition accordingly.
PV CYCLE
PV CYCLE
40
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELS
CIGS panels use high light absorption as a direct 
semiconductor. Adjustment to the light spectrum is 
made by varying the ratios of the different elements 
in the compound semiconductor (e.g.  indium, 
gallium and selenium). The compound has very 
good light absorption properties so much thinner 
semiconductor layers are needed to achieve similar 
efficiencies with C-Si panels (hence the term thin-film). CIGS cells are deposited on a metal back-
contact (which can be composed of different 
metals and alloys) on glass substrates. Deposits 
on a steel carrier or polymer foil are also possible, 
producing flexible designs and high throughputs in roll-to-roll productions. 
To form the junction needed for the PV effect, thin 
layers of cadmium sulfide usually form the hetero-
transfer layers. Zinc oxide or other transparent 
conducting oxides are used as a transparent front contact, which may contain traces of other elements 
for better conductivity. Owing to the deposition of 
the cell layers on the substrate, the surface requires an encapsulation layer and front glass layer usually 
made of solar glass. This mainly protects the layers 
from long-term oxidation and degradation through 
water ingress, for example. Cadmium sulfide is 
needed as a buffer layer but it can be replaced Thin-film (monolithic integration) panel, NREL, 2016
by cadmium-free materials like zinc, zinc oxide, zinc selenide, zinc indium selenide or a chemical 
dependent of indium selenide (Bekkelund, 2013). 
Furthermore, CIGS panels contain cell absorbers 
made of ‘chalcopyrite,’ a crystalline structure, 
with the general formula Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)
2. Most 
frequently, a mixed crystal compound copper indium diselenide with various additions of gallium 
(either copper indium selenide or CIGS) is used in the 
manufacturing process. The substitution of other 
materials such as aluminium for indium, or silver for 
copper is currently under investigation. However, 
these variations will not be commercialised for several years (Pearce, 2014). 
Though CdTe panels  may be grown both in 
substrate and superstrate configurations, the 
superstrate configuration is preferred for better 
efficiencies (up to more than 17%). The transparent 
conductive oxide, intermediate cadmium sulphide 
(CdS) and CdTe layers, are deposited on the glass 
superstrate. The typical thickness of the CdTe layer 
today is 3 microns, which has the potential to be 
reduced to one micron in the future. The back layer 
can consist of copper/aluminium, copper/graphite 
or graphite doped with copper. An encapsulation layer laminates the back glass to the cell.Box 5 Thin-film PV panel components
Thin-film panels consist of thin layers of semiconducting 
material deposited onto large 
substrates such as glass, 
polymer or metal. 
Thin-film PV panel technologies 
can be broken down to two 
main categories, CIGS and CdTE.
PV PANEL COMPOSITION AND WASTE CLASSIFICATION41
A typical crystalline PV panel with aluminium 
frame and 60 cells has a capacity of 270 watt -peak 
(Wp) and weighs 18.6 kilogrammes (kg) (e.g. Trina 
Solar TSM-DC05A.08 ). For a standard CdTe panel, 
110 Wp can be assumed on average for 12 kg weight (e.g. First Solar FS-4100 ). A CIGS panel 
usually holds a capacity of 160 Wp and 20 kg  
(e.g. Solar Frontier SF160-S ). 
Figure 10   Evolution to 2030 of materials used for different PV panel technologies as a percentage of total panel mass 
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%2014
2030
2014
2030 Phase-out expected before 2030
2014
2030
2014
2030CdTe CIGS a-Si c-Si
Aluminium
CopperCompound SemiconductorGlassOther Metals (Zn, Ni, Sn, Pb, Cd, Ga, ln, Se, Te)PolymerSealantsSiliconSilver
Based on Marini et al., (2014); Pearce (2014); Raithel (2014); Bekkelund (2013); NREL (2011) and Sander et al., (2007)
  Crystalline silicon PV panels 
By weight, typical c-Si PV  panels  today contain about 
76% glass (panel surface), 10% polymer (encapsulant 
and backsheet foil), 8% aluminium (mostly the frame), 5% silicon (solar cells), 1% copper (interconnectors) 
and less than 0.1% silver (contact lines) and other 
metals (mostly tin and lead) (Sander et al. , 2007 and 
Wambach and Schlenker, 2006). 
Industry trend studies such as the International 
Technology Roadmap for Photovoltaic (ITRPV) 
suggest new process technologies will prevail, 
encouraging thinner and more flexible wafers as well 
as more complex and manifold cell structures. These 
will require new interconnection and encapsulation techniques. For example, bifacial cell concepts offer 
high efficiencies in double glass panels made of two 
glass panes each two millimetres thick. An encapsulant 
layer reduction of up to 20% is possible owing to thinner wafers. Cells with back-contacts and metal 
wrap-through technologies that reduce shadow and 
electrical losses (known as hetero-junction concept 
cells) are equally expected to gain significant market 
share (Raithel, 2014).
By 2030 the glass content of c-Si panels is predicted to 
increase by 4% to a total of 80% of the weight’s panel. 
The main material savings will include a reduction 
in silicon from 5% down to 3%, a 1% decrease in 
aluminium and a very slight reduction of 0.01% in other Research on the PV components concludes that 
progress in material savings and panel efficiencies will drive a reduction in materials use per unit of power and 
the use of potentially hazardous substances (Marini et al.  
(2014); Pearce (2014); Raithel (2014); Bekkelund (2013); NREL (2011) and Sander et al. , (2007)). On this basis, 
Figure 10 compares the materials employed for the main PV panel technologies between 2014 and 2030.
42
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSmetals. Specific silver consumption is expected to be 
further decreased by better metallisation processes 
and replacements with copper or nickel/copper layers 
(Raithel, 2014).  
In today’s market, the most efficient panels with back 
junction-interdigitated back-contacts have shown 
efficiencies of about 21%. Hetero-junction technologies have achieved 19%. The average efficiency of a c-Si 
panel has grown by about 0.3% per year in the last ten 
years (Raithel, 2014). 
a-Si PV panels  have lost significant market share in 
recent years and do not contain significant amounts 
of valuable or hazardous materials (see Figure 10). 
Thus, they will most likely not require special waste 
treatment in the future. This section and the rest of 
the report therefore does not cover a-Si panels.
In multi-junction cell design , two (tandem) or more 
cells are arranged in a stack. In all cases the upper 
cell(s) have to be transparent in a certain spectrum 
to enable the lower cells to be active. By tailoring the 
spectrum sensitivity of the individually stacked cells, 
a broader range of sunlight can be absorbed, and the 
total efficiency maximised. Such cell types are used in 
a-Si, c-Si and concentrator cells. The low cost of c-Si today allows cost-efficient mass production of high-
efficiency multi-junction cells. This can be combined, 
for example, with III-V alloys, chalcogenides and 
perovskites expected to perform extremely well even 
in non-concentrating tracker applications (Johnson, 2014).
  Thin-film panels
Thin-film panels are technologically more complex 
than silicon-based PV panels. Glass content for c-Si 
panels is likely to increase by 2030. By contrast, it 
is likely to decrease for thin-film panels by using 
thinner and more stable glass materials. This in turn 
will encourage a higher proportion of compound 
semiconductors and other metals (Marini et al. , 2014 
and Woodhouse et al. , 2013).CIGS panels  are today composed of 89% of glass, 
falling 1% to 88% in 2030. They contain 7% aluminium, 
rising 1% in 2030, and 4% polymer remaining stable. 
They will experience a slight reduction of 0.02% in other metals but a 0.2% increase in semiconductors. 
Other metals include 10% copper, 28% indium, 10% 
gallium and 52% selenium (Pearce, 2014; Bekkelund, 
2013 and NREL, 2011).
CIGS panel efficiency is currently 15% and targeted at 
20% and above in the long term (Raithel, 2014). 
By 2030 the proportion of glass as total panel mass 
in CdTe panels  is expected to decrease by 1% from 
97% to 96%. However, their polymer mass is expected to increase by 1% from 3% to 4% compared to today. In comparison to CIGS panels, material usage for 
semiconductors as a proportion of panel usage will 
decline almost by half from 0.13% to 0.07%. However, 
the share of other metals (e.g. nickel, zinc and tin) 
will grow from 0.26% to 0.41% (Marini et al. , 2014; 
Bekkelund, 2013 and NREL, 2011). The main reason for this increase in other metals is the further reduction in CdTe layer thickness (which brings down the 
semiconductor content of the base semiconductor). 
However, the efficiency improvements of the past 
couple of years were also related to ‘bandgap’ 
grading effects, which can be achieved by doping the semiconductor layer with other components. 
The addition of other components to the mix is 
reflected in the rise in other metals. Another reason 
for the increase in the proportion of other metals is 
the addition of a layer between back-contact metals 
and the semiconductor package. This reduces copper 
diffusion into the semiconductor and thus long-term degradation and leads to the thickening of the back-
stack of metals (Strevel et al. , 2013).
The PV industry is aiming for 25% efficiency 
for CdTe panel research cells and over 20% for 
commercial panels in the next three years. This is 
substantially higher than the 15.4% achieved in 2015. New technologies are also expected to reduce the 
PV PANEL COMPOSITION AND WASTE CLASSIFICATION43
performance degradation rate to 0.5%/year (Strevel 
et al. , 2013).
Chapter 6 provides additional details on panel 
composition, the function of various materials 
and potential future changes in panel design and 
composition.
3.2 WASTE CLASSIFICATION
Background
PV panel waste classification follows the basic 
principles of waste classification. This also considers 
material composition by mass or volume and 
properties of the components and materials used 
(e.g. solubility, flammability, toxicity). It accounts 
for potential mobilisation pathways of components 
and materials for different reuse, recovery, recycling 
and disposal scenarios (e.g. materials leaching to groundwater, admission of particulate matter into 
the soil). The overall goal of these classification 
principles is to identify risks to the environment and 
human health that a product could cause during end-
of-life management. The aim is to prescribe disposal and treatment pathways to minimise these threats. 
The risk that materials will leach out of the end-of-
life product or its components to the environment is 
very significant, and assessment of this threat helps 
define necessary containment measures. However, 
this is just one possible risk. Other examples assessed 
through waste characterisation include flammability, human exposure hazards through skin contact or 
inhalation. Risks assessed may differ by country and 
jurisdiction.   
Depending on national and international regulations 
such as the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal (UN, 2016), waste can be classified into 
various categories such as inert waste, non-hazardous 
waste and hazardous waste. To some extent, the origin 
of the waste is also taken into consideration, defining subcategories such as industrial waste, domestic 
waste and specific product-related categories such 
as e-waste, construction waste and mixed solid 
wastes. The different categories of classified waste then determine permitted and prohibited shipment, 
treatment, recycling and disposal pathways. 
In 2015 two-thirds of PV panels installed across the 
world were c-Si panels. Typically, more than 90% 
of their mass is composed of glass, polymer and 
aluminium, which can be classified as non-hazardous waste. However, smaller constituents of c-Si panels can 
present recycling difficulties since they contain silicon, 
silver and traces of elements such as tin and lead 
(together accounting for around 4% of the mass). Thin-
film panels (9% of global annual production) consist of more than 98% glass, polymer and aluminium (non-
hazardous waste) but also modest amounts of copper 
and zinc (together around 2% of the mass), which is 
potentially environmentally hazardous waste. They also 
contain semiconductor or hazardous materials such as 
indium, gallium, selenium, cadmium tellurium and lead. 
Hazardous materials need particular treatment and may fall under a specific waste classification depending 
on the jurisdiction. 
Key criterion for PV panel waste classification: 
Leaching tests
Table 9 summarises typical waste characterisation 
leaching test methods in the US, Germany and 
Japan. The overview provides one of the most 
important characterisation metrics used in PV waste classification across the world at this time.
44
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSBased on Sinha and Wade (2015)Table 9 PV waste characterisation: Leaching test methods in the US, Germany and Japan
US Germany Japan
Leaching testUS Environment 
Protection Agency method 1311 
(TCLP)DIN EN German Institute for 
Standardization standard 12457-4:01-03Ministry of 
Environment 
Notice 13/JIS K 0102:2013 method (JLT-13)
Sample size (centimetres) 1 1 0.5
SolventSodium acetate/acetic acid (pH 2.88 for alkaline waste; pH 4.93 for neutral 
to acidic waste)Distilled water Distilled water
Liquid:solid ratio for leaching test ( e.g. amount of 
liquid used in relation to the solid material)20:1 10:1 10:1
Treatment methodEnd-over-end agitation (30±2 rotations per 
minute)End-over-end 
agitation (5 rotations per 
minute)End-over-end 
agitation (200 rotations per 
minute)
Test temperature 23±2˚C 20˚C 20˚C
Test duration 18±2 hr 24 hr 6 hr
The key criterion for determining the waste 
classification is the concentration of certain substances 
in a liquid which has been exposed to fragments of 
the broken PV panels for a defined period of time in a particular ratio. This leachate typically dissolves some 
of the materials present in the solid sample and hence 
can be analysed for the mass concentration of certain 
hazardous substances. Different jurisdictions, such as 
Germany, the US or Japan provide different threshold values for the allowable leachate concentrations 
for a waste material to be characterised as non-
hazardous waste. For instance, the threshold for 
leachate concentration for lead allowing a panel to 
be classified as hazardous is 5 milligrammes per litre 
(mg/l) in the US and 0.3 mg/l in Japan. For cadmium, 
the hazardous threshold is 1 mg/l in the US, 0.3 mg/l in Japan and 0.1 mg/l in Germany. These compare to publicly available leaching test results in the literature (summarised in Sinha and Wade, 2015) for c-Si and 
CdTe PV panels. They range from non-detect to 
0.22 mg/l for cadmium and non-detect to 11 mg/l for 
lead. Thus, in different jurisdictions, CdTe and c-Si 
panels could be considered either non-hazardous or 
hazardous waste on the basis of these test results. 
Regulatory classification of PV panel waste
From a regulatory point of view, PV panel waste still largely falls under the general waste classification.
An exception exists in the EU where PV panels are defined 
as e-waste in the WEEE Directive. The term ‘electrical and 
electronic equipment’ or EEE is defined as equipment 
designed for use with a voltage rating not exceeding 
1,000 V for alternating current and 1,500 V for direct 
PV PANEL COMPOSITION AND WASTE CLASSIFICATION45
current, or equipment dependent on electric currents 
or electromagnetic fields in order to work properly, 
or equipment for the generation of such currents, or 
equipment for the transfer of such currents, or equipment 
for the measurement of such currents (EU, 2012).
Hence, the waste management and classification 
for PV panels is regulated in the EU by the WEEE Directive in addition to other related waste legislation 
(e.g. Waste Framework Directive 2008/98/EC). This 
comprehensive legal framework also ensures that 
potential environmental and human health risks 
associated with the management and treatment of waste are dealt with appropriately. By establishing 
a List of Wastes (European Commission, 2000), the 
EU has further created a reference nomenclature 
providing a common terminology throughout the 
EU to improve the efficiency of waste management activities. It provides common coding of waste 
characteristics for classifying hazardous versus non-
hazardous waste, transport of waste, installation 
permits and decisions about waste recyclability as 
well as supplying a basis for waste statistics.
Some codes from the EU’s List of Wastes applicable to 
PV panels are given in Table 10.
Table 10 Examples of waste codes relevant to PV panels from the EU List of Wastes
Type Waste code Remark
All types 160214Industrial waste from electrical and electronic 
equipment
160213*Discarded equipment containing hazardous components
200136Municipal waste, used electrical and electronic equipment
200135*Discarded electrical and electronic equipment 
containing hazardous components 
In special cases also: e.g . amorphous-silicon 
(a-Si) panels170202 Construction and demolition waste – glass
* Classified as hazardous waste, depending on the concentration of hazardous substances. Table 10 portrays leaching test methods 
commonly used for hazardous waste characterisation. Based on European Commission, (2000)
Shutterstock
46
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELS
 Shutterstock
PV PANEL WASTE MANAGEMENT OPTIONS47
Beyond general waste regulations, various approaches 
have been developed specifically for managing end-of-
life PV panel waste. The following sections summarise 
the general principles of panel waste management as well as examples portraying voluntary, public-private-
partnership and regulated approaches.
4.1. WASTE MANAGEMENT PRINCIPLES 
FOR PV PANELS
Life cycle methodology
All waste management approaches follow the life 
cycle stages of a given product. 
Figure 11 Process flow diagram of the life cycle stages for PV panels and resulting opportunities for reducing, reusing 
or recycling
Raw material
acquisitionMaterial
processingManu-
facturingUseDecom-
missioningTreatment/
Recovery
or Disposal
Recycle Reuse Reduce
Adapted from Fthenakis (2000)PV PANEL
WASTE 
MANAGEMENT
OPTIONS
Figure 11 displays how for PV panels the life cycle starts with the extraction of raw materials (cradle) and 
ends with the disposal (grave) or reuse, recycling and 
recovery (cradle).
Chapter 6 will provide more information on the cradle-
to-cradle and recovery opportunities to:
• Reduce;
• Reuse;
• Recycle.
48
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSStakeholders and responsibilities
The responsibility for end-of-life waste-management 
activities downstream (waste generation, collection, 
transport, treatment and disposal) are typically 
covered by the following three main stakeholders: 
 Society.  End-of-life management is supported by 
society, with government organisations controlling 
and managing operations, financed by taxation. 
This could create revenue for municipalities and 
eliminate the fixed costs of building a new collection 
infrastructure while providing economies-of-
scale benefits. Drawbacks could include a lack of 
competition and slower cost optimisation.
 Consumers.  The consumer that produces panel 
waste is responsible for end-of-life management, 
including the proper treatment and disposal of 
the panel. The consumer may try to minimise 
costs, which can have a negative effect on the 
development of sound waste collection and 
treatment. Since the producer is not involved, there 
may be less motivation to produce recyclable and ‘green’ products. This approach currently remains 
the dominant framework in most countries for end-
of-life PV panel management. 
 Producers.  End-of-life management is based on  
the extended-producer-responsibility (EPR) 
principle. This holds producers physically and 
financially responsible for the environmental 
impact of their products through to end-of-life and 
provides incentives for the development of greener 
products with lower environmental impacts. This 
principle can also be used to create funds to finance proper collection, treatment, recycling 
and disposal systems. Although producers finance 
the waste management system, the added cost 
can be passed through to consumers in the form 
of higher prices. 
Costs and financing
A decision needs to be made on which of the three stakeholders mentioned (society, consumers and 
producers) is to take financial responsibility for end-of-life management. All waste management approaches, including e-waste, involve incurring costs. That is 
equally true for end-of-life PV panel management. The 
costs can be broken down into three interconnected 
systems outlined below: 
1. A physical system of collection, storage/
aggregation, treatment, recovery, recycling 
and disposal.  This system collects PV panels, for 
instance, from separate waste generation points and transfers them to a more central location 
where first-level treatment can start. After this first treatment step, which usually separates the 
waste product into material groups (e.g. metals, 
mixed plastics, glass etc.), further processing of the 
different material streams is required for recovery 
and recycling. This step removes potentially hazardous materials and impurities from recycling 
materials because they prevent recycling. Finally, 
the disposal of non-recoverable, non-recyclable 
fractions also needs to be taken care of in the 
physical system. The costs of operating these 
physical system are a function of several factors. 
These include the geographical and economic context, the chosen number of collection and 
processing points and the complexity of dismantling 
and separation processes (first-level treatment). A 
final factor is the value/costs associated with final 
processing of the different material streams for 
recycling or disposal. 
2. A financial processing system. This system counts the amounts of various materials recovered from 
the recycling process and the associated revenues 
and costs to the system. 
3. A management and financing system.  This system 
accounts for the overhead costs of operating an 
e-waste system for PV panels, for example. 
To provide the financial basis for recycling end-of-life 
products, several fee models have been developed 
and implemented worldwide. Part of these fees is set aside to finance the waste treatment system 
when end-of-life products are dropped off at 
PV PANEL WASTE MANAGEMENT OPTIONS49
collection points operated by municipalities, dealers, 
wholesalers, producers or their service providers. 
The fees are typically structured to follow several 
principles to ensure they are fair, reasonable, based on 
actual programme costs and include regular revisions: 
• The funds generated from the fees collected 
should cover the system costs and achieve clear environmental goals. 
• The fees should be a function of the return oninvestment, technical and administrative costs. The revenues generated from the collection, recycling 
and treatment fees should be sufficient to cover the 
costs of implementation.
• The fee structure should be implemented without rendering the PV sector uncompetitive with international 
markets. Special care should be taken to avoid free riders. 
• The fee structure should be simple to implement.
• The fee structure should be viable for the PV products covered by the regulation.
The implementation of these different financial approaches can vary considerably from country 
to country owing to different legal frameworks, waste streams, levels of infrastructure maturity, and 
logistical and financial capabilities. In most countries 
with e-waste management systems, a combination 
of the consumer-based and producer-based 
approaches is incorporated into the compliance 
scheme (e.g. in the EU). However, each such scheme 
should be adapted to the unique conditions of each country or region. Producer-financed compliance costUnder this model, the producer finances the activities of the waste management system by 
joining a compliance scheme and paying for its 
takeback system or stewardship programme. It 
covers two types of wastes. The first is orphan 
waste (from products placed on the market after 
implementation of the waste management system 
by producers that no longer exist and cannot be held liable). The second is historic waste (waste 
from products placed on the market before the 
waste management system was established). The 
costs are usually shared between producers. All 
costs are revised regularly and charged per panel or weight based on the actual recycling costs and  
estimates of future costs.  
Consumer-financed upfront recycling fee 
This fee is paid to collect funds for the future end-of-life treatment of the product. Consumers pay the fee 
at the time of the purchase of the panel. The fee is set 
according to estimates for future recycling costs but 
may also be used to offset current recycling costs.
Consumer-financed end-of-life fee (disposal fee)
The last owner pays a fee for the collection and 
recycling costs to the entity in charge of the 
recycling of the end-of-life product.
Enabling framework
Adjusting or developing an end-of-life management 
scheme for PV panel waste requires the balancing of 
a number of factors such as collection, recovery and 
recycling targets. These three targets become the 
main driver of waste management policies. 
Waste management approaches or schemes need 
to take into account different options for collection systems (e.g. pick-up versus bring-in systems). 
They also need to consider the nature and design Box 6  Financing models for collection, treatment, recovery, recycling and disposal of PV panels
50
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSof products to manage end-of-life and recycling 
processes adequately (e.g. PV panels are often 
classified as e-waste). Hence, waste management 
leads naturally also to a motivation to change the 
design of products themselves in favour of easier 
waste treatment, for instance (Atasu, 2011). 
 Voluntary approach.  Producers often rely on 
their internal environmental management systems 
to manage all their company’s environmental 
responsibilities, including the end-of-life of their 
products or services. One example is found in the 
International Standards Organisation ISO 14000 
family of international standards on environmental 
management. ISO 14040: 2006 specifically deals with the principles and framework for life 
cycle assessment of a company’s products and 
operations (ISO, 2006). Within this or other 
frameworks, some PV panel manufacturers 
have established individual voluntary takeback or product stewardship programmes that allow 
defective panels to be returned for recycling on 
request. The management of such programmes 
can be borne directly by the company or indirectly 
through a recycling service agreement outlined in 
more detail below: 
1. Direct management: the manufacturer operates 
its own recycling infrastructure and refurbishment 
or recycling programmes to process its own panels, 
enabling it to control the entire process (e.g. First 
Solar, 2015b). 
2. Indirect management:  the manufacturer contracts 
service providers to collect and treat its panels. 
Different levels of manufacturer involvement are 
possible depending on the contract details.
10In the option on indirect programmes, producers could outsource part or the entire management and operation of 
their recycling programmes to a third party. The members 
of such an organisation may be entirely producers or may 
also include a network of government entities, recyclers 
or collectors. Alternatively, it may be a single entity 
created by the government to manage the system. The 
activities carried out by third-party organisations and other compliance schemes can vary from country to 
country and depend on specific legislative requirements 
and the services offered to members.
 Public-private approach.  Set up in 2007, PV CYCLE 
is an example of a voluntary scheme that includes 
both a ‘bring-in’ and ‘pick-up’ system based on the 
principle of a public-private-partnership between 
industry and European regulators. The association 
was established by leading PV manufacturers and 
is fully financed by its member companies so that 
end-users can return member companies’ defective panels at over 300 collection points around Europe. 
PV CYCLE covers the operation of the collection 
points with its own receptacles, collection, transport, 
recycling and reporting. Large quantities of panels 
(currently more than 40) can be picked up by PV CYCLE on request. In some countries, PV CYCLE has 
established co-operatives and it encourages research 
on panel recycling. PV CYCLE is being restructured to 
comply with the emerging new regulations for end-
of-life PV in the different EU member states (see next 
chapter on the EU) (PV CYCLE, 2016).
  Regulatory approach. The EU is the only jurisdiction 
that has developed specific regulations and policies addressing the end-of-life management of PV. The 
next section examines in more detail the regulatory 
approach taken by the EU.
10. For example, manufacturers could decide to operate part of the 
collection and recycling infrastructure. They could contract out the other parts, as in a business-to-business (B2B) environment in which the panel owner is contractually required to bring the panel to a centralised logistic hub. At that point the manufacturer takes over the bulk logistics and treatment processes.
PV PANEL WASTE MANAGEMENT OPTIONS51
4.2. REGULATORY APPROACH: 
EUROPEAN UNION
Background
Since the late 1990s, the EU has led PV deployment 
with significant volumes installed between 2005 and 
2011, prompting an increase from 2.3 GW to 52 GW 
over that period (IRENA, 2016b). Manufacturers selling into the EU thus also started to devise early 
PV life cycle management concepts, the most 
prominent example being the previously mentioned 
pan-European PV CYCLE initiative (PV CYCLE, 2015). The resulting increases in PV production triggered PV 
recycling technology development since production 
scrap recycling offered direct economic benefits and 
Figure 12 World overview of PV panel producers and cumulative installed PV capacity
100%
Cumulative installed PV capacity (GW)
43,050 0
Top countries: Cumulative installed solar PV capacity (2015)
China
Germany
Japan
US
Italy
UK
Spain
France
India
Australia43 GW
40 GW
33 GW
27 GW
19 GW
9 GW
7 GW
7 GW
5 GW
5 GWSize of the bubble corresponds to
volume of PV panel producers
justified investments in such technologies in the short 
term. 
High deployment rates, growing manufacturing 
capacities and increasing demand for PV globally led 
to a rapid internationalisation and commoditisation of 
supply chains. This made it very difficult to implement 
pan-European voluntary initiatives for long-term producer responsibility (see Figure 12 for global 
overview of PV panel producers and cumulative 
installed PV capacity). This resulted in the need for 
regulation to ensure a level playing field for all market 
participants and secure the long-term end-of-life collection and recycling for PV waste (European 
Commission, 2014).
52
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSWEEE Directive
Balancing the advantages and disadvantages 
of different approaches to addressing e-waste 
management – including waste PV panels - is at the 
core of the EU regulatory framework set up through the 
WEEE Directive. This framework effectively addresses 
the complex EEE waste stream11 in the 28 EU member 
states and the wider economic area, placing the  
extended-producer-responsibility principle  at its 
core. The directive has a global impact, since producers 
which want to place products on the EU market are 
legally responsible for end-of-life management, no 
matter where their manufacturing sites are located 
(European Commission, 2013). 
This combination of producer legal liability for product 
end-of-life, EEE dedicated collection, recovery 
and recycling targets, and minimum treatment 
requirements ensuring environment and human health protection may be a reference point for PV 
waste management regulation development globally.
The original WEEE Directive (Directive 2002/96/ EC) 
entered into force in February 2003 but proved to 
be insufficient to tackle the quickly increasing and 
diverse waste stream (European Parliament and Council, 2002). In 2012, following a proposal by the EU 
Commission, the directive was revised (2012/19/ EU). 
For the first time it included specifics on end-of-
life management of PV panels. The revised WEEE 
Directive entered into force on 13 August 2012, was 
to be implemented by the EU member states by 
14 February 2014 and thus introduced a new legal framework for PV panel waste. Each one of the 28 EU 
member states is now responsible for establishing 
the regime for PV panel collection and treatment in 
accordance with the directive (European Parliament 
and Council, 2012). 
As the revised WEEE Directive is based on 
the extended-producer-responsibility principle, 
producers (see Box 7) are liable for the costs of 
collection, treatment and monitoring. They must fulfil 
a certain number of requirements and responsibilities (European Commission, 2015; European Commission, 2014; European Commission 2013; European 
Parliament and Council, 2008 and 2008b). 
 Financing responsibility.  Producers are liable 
through a financial guarantee to cover the cost of 
collection and recycling of products likely to be 
used by private households. They are responsible 
for financing public collection points and first-level 
treatment facilities. They also need to become a 
member of a collective compliance scheme or may 
develop an individual scheme.
 Reporting responsibility.  Producers are obliged to 
report monthly or annually on panels sold, taken 
back (through individual or collective compliance 
schemes) and forwarded for treatment. Within 
this reporting scheme, producers equally need 
to present the results from the waste treatment 
of products (tonnes treated, tonnes recovered, 
tonnes recycled, tonnes disposed by fraction e.g. glass, mixed plastic waste, metals). 
 Information responsibility. Producers are accountable for labelling panels in compliance 
with the WEEE Directive. They must inform 
buyers that the panels have to be disposed of 
in dedicated collection facilities and should not 
be mixed with general waste, and that takeback 
and recycling are free (European Parliament and 
Council, 2008b). They are also responsible for informing the buyer of their PV panel end-of-life 
procedures. Specific collection schemes might 
go beyond legal requirements, with the producer 
offering pick-up at the doorstep, for example. 
Lastly, producers are required to give information to waste treatment companies on how to 
handle PV panels during collection, storage, 
dismantling and treatment. This information 
contains specifics on hazardous material 
content and potential occupational risks. In the 
case of PV panels, this includes information on  
electrocution risks when handling panels exposed 
to light.
PV PANEL WASTE MANAGEMENT OPTIONS53
11. EEE is defined as equipment designed for use with a voltage 
rating not exceeding 1,000 V for alternating current and 1,500 V for direct current, or equipment dependent on electric currents or electromagnetic fields in order to work properly, or equipment for the generation of such currents, or equipment for the transfer of such currents, or equipment for the measurement of such currents (EU, 2012).
12. ‘Put on the market’ is a complex legal construct defined in the Blue Guide of the European Commission on the implementation of EU product rules (Commission Notice C(2016) 1958, 5 April 2016). It can have different meanings depending on the sales channel used to market a product and effectively provides a temporal determination of the legal responsibility of the producer.WEEE Directive targets
The WEEE Directive follows the staggered approach 
to collection and recovery targets outlined in Table 11. 
Collection targets rise from 45% (by mass) of equipment 
‘put on the market’12 in 2016 to 65% of equipment ‘put 
on the market’ or 85% of waste generated as from 2018. 
Recovery targets rise from 75% recovery/65% recycling 
to 85% recovery/80% recycling in the same time frame. 
Recovery is to be understood as the physical operation 
leading to the reclamation of a specific material stream or fraction from the general stream. Recycling, on the 
other hand, should be understood in the context of 
preparing that reclaimed stream for treatment and reuse 
(European Commission, 2015).
The e-waste recovery quotas are specified in a separate 
directive detailing minimum treatment requirements 
and technical treatment standards and specifications 
for specific equipment such as PV panels (European ‘Producers’ include a range of parties involved in 
bringing a product to market — not just the original 
equipment manufacturer. The WEEE Directive 
defines the producer in Article 3: 
‘Producer’ means any natural or legal person who, 
irrespective of the selling technique used, including distance communication within the meaning of 
Directive 97/7/EC (European Commission, 1997) 
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
20 May 1997 on the protection of consumers in 
respect of distance contracts (19):
i. is established in a Member State and 
manufactures EEE under his own name or trademark, or has EEE designed or 
manufactured and markets it under his name or 
trademark within the territory of that Member 
State;
ii. is established in a Member State and resells 
within the territory of that Member State, 
Commission, 2008). This two-pronged approach enables 
the implementation of ‘high-value recycling’ processes 
(see Box 8 for definition). The European Commission has also committed to further developing methodologies 
establishing individual collection and recycling targets 
for PV panels. They will take into consideration recovery 
of material that is rare or has high embedded energy 
as well as containing potentially harmful substances (European Commission, 2013).under his own name or trademark, equipment produced by other suppliers, a reseller not 
being regarded as the ‘producer’ if the brand 
of the producer appears on the equipment, as 
provided for in point (i);
iii. is established in a Member State and places 
on the market of that Member State, on a 
professional basis, EEE from a third country or 
from another Member State; or
iv. sells EEE by means of distance communication directly to private households or to users other 
than private households in a Member State, and 
is established in another Member State or in a third country.
Whoever exclusively provides financing under or 
pursuant to any finance agreement shall not be 
deemed to be a ‘producer’ unless he also acts 
as a producer within the meaning of points (i) 
to (iv).Box 7  Definition of producers under the WEEE Directive
54
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSTable 11 Annual collection and recovery targets (mass %) under the WEEE Directive
Annual collection targets Annual recycling/Recovery targets 
Original WEEE Directive     
(2002/96/EC)4 kg/inhabitant 75% recovery, 65% recycling
Revised WEEE Directive     (2012/19/EU) up to 20164 kg/inhabitantStart with 75% recovery, 65% recycling, 5% increase after 3 years
Revised WEEE Directive    (2012/19/EU) from 2016 to 201845% (by mass) of all equipment put on the market80% recovered and 70% prepared for reuse and recycled
Revised WEEE Directive    (2012/19/EU) from 2018 and 
beyond65% (by mass) of all equipment 
put on the market or 85% of waste 
generated
1385% recovered and 80% prepared 
for reuse and recycled
13. Products put on the market are reported by producers so these figures have a low uncertainty. However, a 65% target is unrealistic for items 
like PV panels, which have a very long life. It will not account for increasing amounts of historic waste (not recorded in the past) as well as varying life cycle curves per product category. An alternative measure is provided to account for the actual waste generated alone.
Shutterstock
PV PANEL WASTE MANAGEMENT OPTIONS55
Future WEEE Directive revisions might impose even 
further cost-effective, high-quality and high-yield 
recovery and recycling processes as these become 
available. They would minimise societal material losses 
that could occur through ‘downcycling’. The term 
‘downcycling’ refers to the deterioration of intrinsic 
material or energy value of a secondary raw material 
by using it for new purposes (e.g. using a high-grade semiconductor material such as broken silicon scrap 
as backfill for street construction). 
In addition to quotas and treatment requirements, 
the revised WEEE Directive also references measures specific to PV panels to prevent illegal shipments 
(European Parliament and Council, 2006) and new 
obligations for trade (Directive 2012/19/EC, Art. 14). 
Modified provisions to trade include, for example, 
the need to provide information to end-users on 
environmental impact. They equally contain proper 
collection mechanisms and the acceptance of old products free-of-charge if a replacement is bought 
(European Parliament and Council, 2012). 
The WEEE Directive sets minimum requirements 
which member states may adjust when they transpose 
the directive into their own legislation. They may, 
for instance, define more stringent requirements or target quotas and add requirements. At the time 
of this report’s publication, all EU member states 
have incorporated the WEEE Directive into national 
legislation, sometimes with the addition of certain 
country-specific regulations. 
This can pose challenges for producers because 
almost every member state has implemented 
slightly varying definitions of extended-producer-
responsibility (see Chapter 5 for case studies on 
Germany and the UK). Since the directive has been 
transposed very recently (in some cases as recently as early 2016), no statistical data on PV collection and 
recycling is available at the time of the publication of 
this report in June 2016. The environmental and socio-economic impacts of the different end-of-life waste-
management options for PV panels have 
been widely assessed in previous literature 
(GlobalData, 2012; Münchmeyer, Faninger and 
Goodman, Sinha and Cossette, 2012; Held, 
2009; Müller, Schlenker and Wambach, 2008; 
Sander, et al. , 2007). These assessments have 
concluded that ‘high-value recycling,’ is the 
option preferred for all technologies for the 
benefit of society in general. It not only ensures 
the recovery of a particular mass percentage 
of the total panel but also accounts for minor 
fractions. The high-value recycling approach is 
now the foundation for the WEEE Directive and 
ensures the following: 
• Potentially harmful substances (e.g. lead, 
cadmium, selenium) will be removed and 
contained during treatment;
• Rare materials (e.g. silver, tellurium, indium) 
will be recovered and made available for 
future use;
• Materials with high embedded energy value 
(e.g. silicon, glass) will be recycled;
• Recycling processes will consider the quality 
of recovered material (e.g. glass). 
The European Commission also asked the European Committee for Electrotechnical 
Standardization to develop specific, qualitative treatment standards for different fractions of 
the waste stream to complement the high-value 
recycling approach. As part of that mandate 
(European Commission, 2013), a supplementary 
standard and technical specification for PV panel collection and treatment is under development 
(European Committee for Electrotechnical 
Standardization CLC/TC 111X, 2015). The findings 
are due to be released in 2016 and may lead to 
another revision of the WEEE Directive.Box 8  EU end-of-life management through   
 ‘high-value recycling’
56
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSThe revised WEEE Directive distinguishes between 
private household or business-to-consumer (B2C) 
transactions and non-private household or B2B 
transactions when mandating an effective financing 
mechanism (see Box 9). The regulation is flexible on the 
responsible party (owner or producer) and financing 
methods. This depends on the characteristics of the 
PV system (e.g. system size) and the characterisation of PV panels themselves in the respective member 
state. For example, France stipulates that all PV 
panels are characterised as B2C product independent 
of system size or other product attributes. 
To fulfil the ambitious WEEE Directive recycling 
targets starting 2016, PV panels will have to be rapidly 
incorporated into new or existing waste management 
systems. Several national schemes by EU member 
states have already been managing other parts of 
the electrical and electronic waste stream for years, 
organising collection, treatment, recycling and reporting to regulators. These can serve as an important reference 
point to manage increasing PV panel waste streams.
The next chapter describes in more detail the EU legal 
framework and different national applications in EU 
member states such as Germany and the UK.WEEE Directive financing schemes 
Varying requirements for end-of-life PV panels under 
the WEEE Directive have included classifying the 
waste stream as ‘waste from private households’ in 
France and the option to classify the waste as ‘waste 
from other users than private households’ in the 
UK. These differing definitions have implications for 
collection and recycling financing as well as waste 
responsibilities. Another important issue that has evolved during transposition is the different estimates 
of treatment costs among member states. 
Two financing approaches can be distinguished in 
the WEEE Directive:
• Individual pre-funding or collective joint-and-
several liability schemes; 
• Contractual arrangements between producer and 
customer (dependent on B2C or B2B transaction).
The implementation of the original WEEE Directive of 2003 has shown that pre-funding approaches are 
only practical for e-waste sold in very low quantities 
such as specialty e-waste (e.g. custom-made fridges). 
Thus, the pre-funding scheme for collecting and 
recycling high-volume e-waste such as PV panels has 
not proved cost effective. Producer pay-as-you-go (PAYG) approaches combined with last-man-standing 
insurance and joint-and-several liability producer 
schemes are therefore more commonplace today 
although the revised 2012 directive still allows the pre-
funding scheme.
14
14. In a pay-as-you-go (PAYG) approach, the cost of collection and 
recycling is covered by market participants when waste occurs. By contrast, a pay-as-you-put (PAYP) approach involves setting aside an upfront payment for estimated collection and recycling costs when a product is placed on the market. Last-man-standing insurance is an insurance product that covers a producer compliance scheme based on a PAYG approach if all producers disappear from the market. In that situation, the insurance covers the costs for collection and recycling. In a joint-and-several liability scheme, producers of a certain product or product group agree to jointly accept the liabilities for waste collection and recycling for a specific product or product group. How the concept is put in practice is explained in the next chapter in the case of Germany.
PV CYCLE
PV PANEL WASTE MANAGEMENT OPTIONS57
The WEEE Directive defines the framework for 
two financing mechanisms depending on the end-
use (private household or not) of the product. 
Under this framework, each EU member state can 
further determine the financial responsibility of 
stakeholders and related transactions.
Private households (B2C transactions)
Requiring the producer to collect and recycle has 
proved to be more enforceable and efficient than 
forcing private household customers to recycle 
e-waste at their end-of-life. PAYG approaches 
combined with last-man-standing insurance/
joint-and-several liability schemes (producer 
compliance schemes) are more efficient and viable 
for equipment sold in a B2C context. 
For B2C transactions the producer is not allowed 
to enter into a contractual arrangement with the 
Box 9  Financing framework under the WEEE Directive
customer on financing. However, it is required to 
fulfil the mandatory requirements set out by the 
regulator.
Non-private households (B2B transactions)
In B2B transactions both customer and producer 
may be capable of collecting and recycling end-
of-life e-waste. For example, for large volume or big equipment like large-scale PV plants, the 
project owner may be best positioned to fulfill 
the recycling obligation. It has the option to use 
project cash flows, hire the original producer or 
hire a professional third party to recycle. For B2B 
transactions a regulatory framework ensuring 
collection and recycling to common standards 
for all industry players and allowing contractual 
arrangements between producer and customer for financing end-of-life obligations is considered most 
effective.
Shutterstock
58
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELS
 Shutterstock
NATIONAL APPROACHES TO PV WASTE MANAGEMENT59
This chapter analyses current approaches to PV waste 
management. It begins with an overview of how 
today’s most comprehensive end-of-life PV regulation, 
the EU WEEE Directive (see Chapter 4), is applied in 
selected EU member states, including Germany and 
the UK. In the following sections, PV panel waste 
management approaches are outlined for Japan and 
the US. Finally, this chapter also includes case studies of China and India, two of the most important growing PV markets globally. The six case studies were chosen 
to span a range of maturity of both PV deployment 
markets, and regulatory and voluntary approaches.
5.1 GERMANY: MATURE MARKET WITH 
EU-DIRECTED, PV-SPECIFIC WASTE 
REGULATIONS
PV market and waste projection
The German PV market started growing in the 1990s. 
In that decade the first support schemes were 
introduced, clearly targeted at residential use, and 
there were scientific assessments of the feasibility of 
grid-connected, decentralised rooftop PV systems. 
One example was the 1,000 Rooftop Programme 
(Hoffmann, 2008). In the early 2000s this rooftop 
PV support programme was extended to 100,000 roofs and eventually led to the renewable energy support act, the first of its kind. This set a feed-
in-tariff for electricity generated from renewable 
energy, including PV. The feed-in-tariff kick-started the German PV market and provided a significant 
global impetus for the PV industry to grow to the 
next scale.
In 2015, PV contributed 6% of total net electricity 
consumption in Germany with a total installed capacity 
of almost 40 GW distributed over 1.5 million PV power 
plants (IRENA, 2016b and Wirth, 2015). Germany was 
the world’s largest PV market for two consecutive 
decades. Only in 2015 was it overtaken by China to 
become today the second-largest PV market.
In line with the Chapter 2 model, Germany’s expected 
end-of-life PV panel waste volumes will cumulatively 
range between 3,500 t and 70,000 t by 2016. This is 
mainly due to its historic installed PV capacity. The 
figure varies according to scenario selected. In 2030 
and by 2050 the regular-loss and early-loss scenario 
forecast between 400,000 t and 1 million t and  
4.3-4.4 million t respectively (see Figure 13). Bearing in mind uncertainties inherent in these projections, 
as explained in Chapter 2, Germany will clearly be 
one of the first and largest markets for PV recycling technologies in coming years. NATIONAL
APPROACHES TO PV 
WASTE MANAGEMENT
60
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSFigure 13  End-of-life PV panel waste volumes for Germany to 2050
2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030 2032 2034 2036 2038 2040 2042 2044 2046 2048 2050120
0204060801005.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Cumulative PV capacity (GW)Cumualtive PV panel waste (million t)
Regular-loss scenario Early-loss scenario Cumulative PV capacity
Regulatory and non-regulatory frameworks
 National regulation
The revised EU WEEE Directive (see previous section) 
was transposed into German Law in October 2015 
through a revision of the Electrical and Electronic 
Equipment Act (Elektroaltgerätegesetz or ElektroG). 
Hence, the new requirements on the collection and 
recycling of PV panels have come into effect in 
Germany since that date.
Germany’s e-waste management is regulated through 
the National Register for Waste Electrical Equipment 
(Stiftung Elektro-Altgeräte Register or Stiftung EAR). 
Stiftung EAR was founded during the implementation of the original WEEE Directive by producers as their clearing house (Gemeinsame Stelle) for the purposes 
of applying to the ElektroG (see Box 10). Entrusted 
with sovereign rights by the Federal Environment Agency (Umweltbundesamt), Stiftung EAR registers 
e-waste producers. It co-ordinates the provision of 
containers and pick-up at the öffentlich-rechtliche 
Entsorgungsträger (örE, public waste disposal 
authorities) in entire Germany (Stiftung EAR, 2015). 
However, Stiftung EAR is not accountable for 
operational tasks such as collecting, sorting, 
dismantling, recycling or disposing of e-waste. 
These fall under the responsibility of producers 
accountable for e-waste recycling and disposal 
since March 2005 under the original Electrical and Electronic Equipment Act (ElektroG, 2005). 
Stiftung EAR is independent in terms of financing and personnel. Its work is funded by fees and 
expenses set by cost regulation from the Federal 
Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation 
and Nuclear Safety (Bundesumweltministerium) 
(Stiftung EAR, 2015). The Stiftung EAR clearing 
house performs the following functions for all 
e-waste producers, including PV panel producers:
• Registers producers placing e-waste on the 
market in Germany; Box 10  Overview of Stiftung EAR clearing-house activities
• Collects data on e-waste amounts placed on the 
market;
• Co-ordinates the provision of containers and e-waste takeback at the public waste disposal 
authorities (örE); 
• Reports the annual flow of materials to the Federal Environment Agency; 
• Ensures that all registered producers may 
participate in the internal setting of rules;
• Identifies free riders and reports these to the Federal Environment Agency.
NATIONAL APPROACHES TO PV WASTE MANAGEMENT61
Table 12 Stiftung EAR factors for calculating guaranteed sum for PV panels
CategoryType of 
equipmentPresumed return rate Presumed 
medium-life expectancy Average maximum-life expectancy Presumed disposal costs/ group 
Consumer equipment and 
PV panelsPV panels for 
use in private 
households30% 20 years 40 years EUR 200/t
Based on Stiftung EAR (2015) Implementation of WEEE Directive
In line with the new transposed WEEE Directive in 
2015, Germany has approved specific provisions for 
PV panel panel collection, recovery and recycling 
(Table 12). These set the amount of financial 
guarantee any producer must provide for each new 
panel sold. 
The guarantee calculation depends on the form of 
financing selected by the producer. If the producer 
selects the joint-and-several liability scheme for B2C 
panels sold, the following simplified formula provides 
an understanding of the principle:
Cost responsibility =
basic amount for registration
(PV panel tonnage put on the market)
x presumed return rate (%)
x presumed disposal costs (EUR/t)
For B2B PV panels, the German regulator allows 
contractual arrangements between producer and 
owner to fulfil the legal requirements through 
recycling service agreements, for example. 
Germany has also established a separate collection 
category for PV panels and thus provides separate collection and treatment of waste panels at municipal 
collection points. This means any PV panel owner 
who wishes to discard it can take it to a municipal 
collection point, where it will be accepted free of 
charge. This is the disposal pathway open to private customers owning residential PV systems. However, 
since removing a PV panel requires professional skills, most end-of-life PV panels are expected to be returned through B2B networks. This is because 
installers who remove rooftop panels will most 
likely also take care of the disposal. These PV panels 
will either be directly returned to B2B e-waste compliance schemes or to collection and recycling 
systems owned by producers.
Prior to the implementation of the revised ElektroG 
in Germany, there were a number of non-regulatory 
initiatives which organised the collection and 
recycling of end-of-life PV panels. They were mainly based on voluntary producer initiatives (e.g. PV 
CYCLE). These schemes will either cease or have 
to become compliant with the new regulation and 
register themselves as B2B e-waste compliance 
schemes.
 National financing schemes under the WEEE Directive
The most important aspect of the WEEE Directive is financing collection, recovery and recycling in 
coming years given the massive amounts of historic 
installed capacity in Germany destined to become 
waste. The German government foresees two 
distinct mechanisms based on the WEEE Directive depending on the type of transaction. They are 
outlined below.
Business-to-consumer (B2C) transactions
The new ElektroG mandates producers selling e-waste to private households (or users other than 
private households but with similar demand i.e. dual-
use e-waste) to fulfil associated present and future 
62
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSFigure 14  Collective producer responsibility system for end-of-life management of B2C PV panels
Producers
Joint ﬁnancing 
guarantee + last man
standing insurancePutting product X on
the market (POM)
Register and
report POMﬁgures
Reportingcollectedand recycledvolumesCollection of
EOL productsMarket
B2C public
collection systems
B2C industry
collection
systems Recovery and
recyclingA
DB
EC
Clearing 
HouseDistributing costs
according to
market share
to registered
producers, which
are obligated
to pay for the
running system
(pay-as-you-go)end-of-life obligations. This ensures producers are 
taking care of end-of-life management of PV panels 
sold to private households (e.g. residential rooftop 
systems) when placing products on the market. The 
approach is the result of previous experience of 
accredited producer compliance schemes that follow 
a joint-and-several liability format as illustrated in 
Figure 14. 
The collective producer compliance system establishes 
two levels of operation and financing: 
• Level 1 covers collection system operation and costs 
related to immediate collection and recycling of 
products (including historic products put on the 
market before being included in the scope of the 
law). 
• Level 2 ensures that sufficient financing is available for future collection and recycling of products put 
on the market today i.e. after inclusion into the scope of the law. The costs forming the basis of Level 2 financing are uniform for the PV equipment 
category. They are calculated by the regulator, 
taking into consideration the average lifetime, the 
return quota at municipal collection points, and the 
treatment and logistic costs.
Level 1 costs are covered using a PAYG system for all market participants who put products of a certain 
category (e.g. PV panels) on the market through 
B2C transactions. In addition, before being allowed 
access to the market, producers must register with a 
clearing house. They have to declare they have made an agreement to cover Level 2 costs for B2C products 
placed on the market. At the same time, they have to 
accept responsibility for Level 1 costs based on their 
current market share (i.e. accepting the liability for 
other market participants). The clearing house then 
provides a producer e-waste registration number that 
must be printed on the product and invoices. 
NATIONAL APPROACHES TO PV WASTE MANAGEMENT63
The producer now decides how to fulfil its Level 1 
contribution. For example, it can run an individual 
collection and recycling system or join a co-operative 
system. Either way, costs for collecting and recycling 
all the B2C waste in a particular product category are 
distributed among all registered market participants 
according to volume collected. This ensures that 
historic waste (or orphan waste in the case of products made by producers now defunct) is collected and 
treated. If a producer demonstrates that it collected 
and recycled its share individually, those volumes will 
be deducted from the remaining fraction. If a producer 
disappears from the market, its market share will be taken up by the others along with the responsibility 
for financing collection and recycling.
Each producer must also ensure that sufficient Level 2 
financing is available for B2C products placed on the 
market today. This occurs naturally if the joint Level 1 
system continues to run. However, if all producers of a certain product category disappear, last-man-
standing insurance has to provide financing. All Level 1 
participants pay an annual premium for insurance 
that guarantees costs are covered if all market players 
disappear. Usually this premium is minimal because 
the likelihood of all market players disappearing is 
very low. 
Business-to-Business (B2B) transactions
Germany’s new ElektroG provides a different way of 
financing end-of-life PV obligations for producers that 
sell products on a B2B basis only owing to quantities, size, level of complexity etc. This is because collection 
and recycling could be more effectively organised if 
the final equipment or installation owner provides 
for it. It is up to the contractual partners to agree on 
end-of-life responsibilities as prescribed by the WEEE 
Directive either by contracting the producer to collect 
and recycle or seeking competitive market bids.
The B2B approach also includes the flexibility to 
agree on a funding/financing mechanism. For large-
scale PV plants this will most likely result in models 
that generate funds for collection and recycling 
from near-commercial end-of-life project cash flows. Consequently, very cost-effective financing will be provided that enables previously agreed (pre-WEEE) 
end-of-life obligations to be honoured by contractual 
partners. Historic waste volumes will thus be covered.
Germany will most likely become the first end-of-
life PV panel recycling market to reach profitable 
economies of scale. The current disposal costs 
identified by the regulator reflect the average 
treatment costs outlined in Table 12 above. 
However, with increasing amounts of waste, 
these costs should decrease once the industry 
has gone through a learning curve. This trend 
has already been observed in other parts of the 
e-waste stream. A number of R&D initiatives are 
currently driving the improvement of recycling 
technologies for the different PV technology families. These aim to further decrease recycling 
costs and increase the potential revenue streams 
from the secondary raw materials recovered 
through the recycling process.
5.2  UK: YOUNG MARKET WITH 
 EU-DIRECTED, PV-SPECIFIC WASTE 
REGULATIONS
PV market and waste projection 
The UK is still a relatively young market for PV and 
thus end-of-life panels. However, it has recently 
experienced rapid PV deployment with an increase 
from just under 1 GW in 2011 to over 9 GW in 2015 
and now more than 750,000 installations (IRENA, 
2016b; UK Department of Energy and Climate Change, 
October 2015). Three-quarters of the existing PV 
capacity was installed after the WEEE Directive came into effect in the UK in early 2014 (UK WEEE Directive, 
2013). 
Figure 15 displays the UK’s predicted end-of-life PV panel 
waste volumes modelled following the methods described 
in Chapter 2. The near-term cumulative volumes of PV 
panel waste are still limited (250-2,500 t). It is thus highly Box 11  Outlook for Germany
64
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSlikely that most of the country’s waste panels will be 
exported to centralised European treatment facilities or 
co-processed with other e-waste streams domestically 
to start with. However, in the medium and long term, PV panel waste is projected to increase exponentially. Regular-loss and early-loss scenarios estimate cumulative 
waste at 30,000-200,000 t by 2030. However, this 
figure could climb to 1-1.2 million t by 2050.
Figure 15  End-of-life PV panel waste volumes for the UK to 2050
2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030 2032 2034 2036 2038 2040 2042 2044 2046 2048 205045
020
15105253035401.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Cumulative PV capacity (GW)Cumualtive PV panel waste (million t)
Regular-loss scenario Early-loss scenario Cumulative PV capacity
Regulatory and non-regulatory frameworks 
Since the UK’s PV market is still young, the status quo 
for collection, treatment and recycling is essentially 
reflected in the implementation of the WEEE Directive 
transposed on 1 January, 2014. Prior to the WEEE 
Directive the UK was also covered by voluntary producer 
initiatives (e.g. PV CYCLE) and by takeback and recycling 
systems owned by producers. Due to the limited number 
of PV installations before 2014, the majority of end-of-life PV panels occurring then would have been covered 
by producer warranties and returned through the B2B 
channel.
The UK has set out some specific rules when it comes 
to defining a PV producer and hence the extended-
producer-responsibility principle when transposing the 
WEEE Directive into national law. A PV producer under 
the UK WEEE legislation is defined as follows:
• UK manufacturer selling PV panels under its own 
brand;
• Importer of PV panels into the UK market;
• UK business selling PV panels manufactured or imported by someone else under its own brand.As in other European markets, all PV producers in the UK must register via a producer compliance scheme (a takeback and recycling scheme managed by industry). 
They must submit relevant data on products destined 
for household (B2C) and non-household (B2B) markets. 
However, when it comes to financing for B2C and B2B 
sales, the UK WEEE legislation contains requirements 
that differ significantly from the EU WEEE Directive.
• PV producers are required to finance the collection 
of household (B2C) PV panels on the basis of market 
share. For example, a producer placing 10% (by 
weight) of new panels on the UK market in any given year pays for the collection and treatment of 10% of 
old panels collected in the following year. The year 
when they were first placed on the market is ignored.
• PV producers must finance the collection and recycling of non-household (B2B) panels carrying the wheelie-
bin symbol as well as those that do not if such panels 
are simultaneously being replaced by new ones.
In addition to the producer compliance scheme, the UK WEEE legislation has introduced a new requirement 
NATIONAL APPROACHES TO PV WASTE MANAGEMENT65
for installers to join a distributor takeback scheme. The 
UK now has several producer compliance schemes and 
distributor takeback schemes that offer their services for 
very similar fees (UK Environment Agency, 2015).
After consultation between the PV sector and the UK Government, national legislation created 
a new separate category dedicated to financing 
the collection and recycling of PV panels. Had a new category not been created, PV producers 
would have paid heavily for the collection and recycling of consumer WEEE. This is because 
the financing obligations relate to the weight of products placed on the market and PV panels 
are by far the heaviest ‘appliance’ used by 
householders. 
This special category status was granted “on the 
basis that the UK Government is satisfied that 
PV producers are able to deliver a sustainable strategy for the collection and treatment of end-
of-life PV panels” (UK Department for Business, 
Innovation and Skills, 2014). The creation of a 
separate PV category will give the PV sector 
more control over financing PV panel collection and recycling.The UK's WEEE legislation requires first-level treatment of PV panels, which includes the registration of collected 
volumes, to take place within the UK. Further treatment 
will most likely happen abroad, since the economies of 
scale would not currently allow dedicated PV recycling 
facilities in the UK. In principle, the UK WEEE legislation 
requires waste to be treated in the UK. 
However, in specific cases (such as PV panels) no 
high-value treatment facilities are available in the UK. 
Export to other EU member states is thus possible 
as long as the facilities there comply with the UK 
treatment facility requirements. 
The UK PV panel recycling market will probably remain minor over the next couple of years. 
However, pricing dynamics and a strong political 
focus on building-integrated PV (BIPV) might 
motivate new technology developments for 
recycling BIPV components, for instance, as part 
of buildings waste streams. 
5.3  JAPAN: ADVANCED MARKET 
WITHOUT PV-SPECIFIC WASTE 
REGULATIONS
PV market and waste projection 
Japan has been a PV pioneer, contributing substantial 
R&D for decades and home to several of the world’s 
leading manufacturers (e.g. Sharp, Kyocera and 
Panasonic). Although the country’s own PV market 
was relatively small to start with, a feed-in-tariff 
introduced in July 2012 has stimulated rapid expansion. Cumulative installed PV capacity in Japan jumped 
from over 6.7 GW in 2012 to 34.3 GW in 2015 (IRENA, 
2016b; IEA-PVPS, 2014b and IEA-PVPS, 2015).
Figure 16 and Box 14 show estimates for PV panel 
waste according to this report’s model and Japanese 
governmental forecasts. Cumulative waste could 
amount to 7,000-35,000 t by 2016 rising to between 
Box 12  UK WEEE legislation: Creation of a   
 separate category for PV panels
Box 13 Outlook for the UK
Shutterstock
66
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELS200,000 and 1 million to 2030. By 2050 it could 
reach 6.5-7.6 million t according to the scenarios 
employed in this report.
Ministry of Economy, Trading and Industry (METI) 
and Ministry of Environment (MOE) estimates are lower, predicting waste volumes at later date than figures in this report (see Box 14). This is mainly due 
to the methodology used herein, which includes 
early-stage failures covered through warranty 
replacements, and is not fully incorporated into end-
of-life volume predictions by METI/MOE.
Figure 16  End-of-life PV panel waste volumes for Japan to 2050
2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030 2032 2034 2036 2038 2040 2042 2044 2046 2048 20500200
15010050250300350400 8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Regular-loss scenario Early-loss scenario Cumulative PV capacity
Cumulative PV capacity (GW)Cumualtive PV panel waste (million t)
According to Japan’s Guidelines on Management of 
End-of-Life PV Panels released in April 2016 (METI 
and MOE, 2016), end-of-life PV panels will come to 
approximately 2,808 t per year in 2020. This will rise to 
an annual amount of 9,580 t in 2025 and 28,800 t after 
2030, leading to 61,000 t in 2035 and finally 775,000 t 
in 2039. These estimates assume an expected panel 
Figure 17 Comparison of PV panel end-of-life scenarios for JapanAnnual PV panel waste (t)
2035 2039 2020 2025 2030800,000
700,000
600,000
500,000
400,000
300,000
200,000
100,000
0
Regular-loss scenario Early-loss scenario METI/MOE scenarioBox 14  Japan’s PV panel waste projections  
lifetime of 25 years and initial failure and/or warranty 
activation in 0.3% of panels installed each year. Figure 17 
compares the report’s annual PV panel waste volumes 
for selected years with the METI/MOE scenario. In the 
national Japanese scenario, waste streams are lower 
than in the regular-loss and early-loss scenarios but 
jump far ahead of this report’s scenarios after 2035. 
NATIONAL APPROACHES TO PV WASTE MANAGEMENT67
Regulatory and non-regulatory frameworks 
Japan has no specific regulations for end-of-
life PV panels, which therefore must be treated 
under the general regulatory framework for waste 
management: the Waste Management and Public 
Cleansing Act (METI and MOE, 2015). The act defines 
wastes, industrial waste generator and handler 
responsibilities, industrial waste management 
including landfill disposal etc.
In addition, the Construction Waste Recycling Law 
(METI and MOE, 2015) prescribes how to manage 
construction and decommissioning waste. The law 
requires recovery and recycling of concrete, wood and construction materials (containing concrete, iron 
and asphalt). Although PV panels are not specifically 
identified in the law, PV panels integrated with 
building material might require recycling, according 
to current interpretations. Panels in ground-mounted 
PV plants are not affected by this regulation. 
However, system components made of concrete or iron would also be subject to the law.
A proposed amendment to Japan’s feed-in-tariff 
scheme for renewable electricity includes the 
consideration of end-of-life management with 
recycling but without obligations and penalties 
(METI, 2015).
Since 2013, METI and MOE have jointly assessed how 
to handle end-of-life renewable energy equipment 
such as PV, solar water heaters and wind turbines. 
A June 2015 report produced a roadmap for promoting a scheme for collection, recycling and 
proper treatment. It also covered the promotion of 
technology R&D, environmentally friendly designs, 
guidelines for dismantling, transportation, and 
treatment, and publicity to users (METI, 2015 and 
METI and MOE, 2015). 
On the basis of this roadmap, the first edition 
of guidelines for promoting proper end-of-life 
treatment including recycling was published in 
April 2016 (METI and MOE, 2016). The guidelines cover basic information such as relevant law and 
regulations on decommissioning, transportation, reuse, recycling and industrial waste disposal. It 
is expected that these reports will lead to further 
consideration of policies on end-of-life management 
of PV panel waste. 
Shutterstock
68
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSIn Japan, PV R&D has been conducted by the New 
Energy and Industrial Technology Development 
Organization (NEDO), and some PV panel recycling 
projects have taken place. Figure 18 shows an 
example of PV recycling technology developed under 
NEDO in 2014. The technology enables the automatic 
separation of different types of panels (c-Si, thin-film 
Si and copper indium selenide – CIS) and consists of four main processes: aluminium frame removal, 
The objective of a different NEDO PV recycling 
R&D project (Komoto, 2014) is to contribute 
to a social system for PV recycling. This is 
achieved by establishing low-cost recycling 
technology and investigating optimal removal,  Figure 18   Foundation for Advancement of International Science (FAIS) PV panel recycling system 
Module
loadingAluminium
frame
removalBack
sheet
removalGlass &
Si cell
recovering
CIS layer
scrapingGlass
crushingEVA burning
Recovering valuable materialsAluminium
framesSi cell
fragmentsGlass
culletCIS metal
powder
CIS
Crystalline SiThin-ﬁlm Si
Based on Noda et al., (2014)Box 15  R&D on PV panel recycling in Japan
backsheet removal, ethylene-vinyl-acetate  resin burning and CIS layer scraping (for CIS panels only). 
The technology is currently in its experimental phase. 
Its early loss annual throughput is about 12 MW for 
c-Si panels and 7  MW for CIS panels, depending 
on panel type and size. Long-term field tests are 
expected in order to verify performance at potential 
industrial scale, including operating cost, throughput and stability (Noda et al. , 2014).
collection and sorting. The R&D project has 
advanced to the demonstration stage since 2015. 
Further R&D for low-cost reuse technologies will be 
launched in 2016 and R&D should be concluded by 
2018.
NATIONAL APPROACHES TO PV WASTE MANAGEMENT69
There are no specific schemes for treating end-of-
life PV panels in Japan so they are expected to be 
dealt with in much the same way as other industrial 
wastes. PV panels will be removed from buildings 
or installation sites and transported to intermediate 
processors for waste treatment. There, components 
of PV panels will be separated as much as possible, 
and valuable materials will be recovered and recycled. For example, recoverable metals will be transported 
to companies which refine metals and recycled as 
secondary metals. Glass that can be separated and 
retain high purity will be recycled as glass cullet. 
Materials difficult to separate, recover and recycle will be sent to landfill subject to regulation and 
classification of hazardous content.5.4  US: ESTABLISHED, GROWING 
MARKET WITHOUT PV-SPECIFIC 
WASTE REGULATIONS
PV panel market and waste projection 
Since the mid-2000s, the US PV market has been 
growing rapidly, and cumulative installed capacity 
reached over 25 GW by the end of 2015 (IRENA, 
2016b). With 7.2 GW new PV capacity installed in 
2015 alone, the US presents today the fourth largest 
PV market in the world after China, Germany and 
Japan (IRENA 2016 and IEA-PVPS, 2015).  
Large-scale PV deployment in the US has only 
occurred in the past ten years. Thus cumulative end-
of-life PV waste volumes in the US are expected to 
remain low at the end of 2016 at 6,500-24,000 t. In 
2030 cumulative waste is projected to rise to between 170,000 t and 1 million t and then possibly increase 
sevenfold to 7.5-10 million t in 2050 (see Figure 19).
Regulatory and non-regulatory framework
There is no PV-specific waste law in the US and no 
regulations mandating the collection and recycling 
of end-of-life PV panels. Hence, PV panels have to be 
disposed of in line with the Resource Conservation Despite a lack of current statistical data on end-of-life PV panels in Japan, the volume will probably 
be low in the near term given only recent market 
growth to significant levels. Although Japan has no 
specific regulations for end-of-life PV panels, several 
political trends and R&D activities are helping build 
the groundwork for recovery and recycling.
Figure 19 End-of-life PV panel waste volumes for the US to 2050
2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030 2032 2034 2036 2038 2040 2042 2044 2046 2048 20500200
100300400500600700 12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Cumulative PV capacity (GW)Cumualtive PV panel waste (million t)
Regular-loss scenario Early-loss scenario Cumulative PV capacityBox 16  Outlook for Japan
70
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSand Recovery Act (Resource Conservation and 
Recovery Act, 1976) that is the legal framework for 
managing hazardous and non-hazardous solid waste.
As the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
does not include specific requirements for PV 
panels, they have to be treated under its general 
regulatory framework for waste management. For instance, there are two types of hazardous waste – 
characteristic hazardous waste and listed hazardous 
waste. The latter refers to actual listings of specific 
types of hazardous waste. Since end-of-life PV 
panels are not a listed hazardous waste, they must be evaluated using the characteristic hazardous 
waste method (US Environmental Protection 
Agency Method 1311 Toxicity Characteristic Leaching 
Procedure). This is done by assessing whether the 
extract from a representative sample of the waste 
contains contaminants exceeding regulatory levels. 
Within the US, different states can use additional leaching procedures such as California with the Total 
Threshold Limit Concentration and Soluble Threshold 
Limit Concentration for waste classification.
In California’s 2014-2015
15 legislative session, 
Senate Bill 489  was proposed. It authorises 
the California Department of Toxic Substances 
Control to change the classification of end-of-life 
solar PV panels identified as hazardous waste to 
universal waste. This means they would meet Total 
Threshold Limit Concentration/Soluble Threshold 
Limit Concentration standards and be subject to Department of Toxic Substances Control regulations 
and proper management (California Legislature, 
2015). The bill has been enacted into California law 
now. However, it will not take effect until the US 
Environmental Protection Agency authorises the addition of hazardous waste PV panels in California 
alone as an additional universal waste category 
under California’s hazardous waste programme.Voluntary collection and recycling of end-of-life PV panels has been provided by several PV industry 
stakeholders. For example, the company First 
Solar operates a commercial-scale recycling facility 
with a daily capacity of 30 t in Ohio for its own 
CdTe products (Raju, 2013). The US Solar Energy Industries Association maintains a corporate social 
responsibility committee that reviews developments 
related to PV recycling.
No federal regulations currently exist In the US 
for collecting and recycling end-of-life PV panels, 
and therefore the country’s general waste 
regulations apply. California is in the process of 
developing a regulation for the management of end-of-life PV panels within its borders, though 
several steps remain before this regulation is 
implemented.
5.5 CHINA: LEADING MARKET WITHOUT 
PV-SPECIFIC WASTE REGULATIONS
PV market and waste projection  
In 2015 China installed 15 GW of PV, for the second consecutive year reaching its 10 GW target for 
average annual growth and maintaining its position 
as the world’s largest PV market. In December 2015 
the National Energy Administration issued its 13th 
Solar Energy National Plan 2016-2020 (National Energy Administration, 2015). The main near-
term targets proposed by 2020 are 150 GW PV of 
cumulative installation. This is to be composed of 
70 GW of distributed PV and 80 GW of large-scale 
ground-mounted PV.
This report projects cumulative PV panel waste streams 
of 8,000-100,000 t in 2020. This is due to climb to 
between 200,000 t and 1.5 million t by 2030 and surge 
to 13.5-19.9 million t until 2050 (see Figure 20). 
15. Senate Bill 489, an act to add Article 17 (commencing with Section 
25259) to Chapter 6.5 of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code, relating to hazardous waste.Box 17  Outlook for the US
NATIONAL APPROACHES TO PV WASTE MANAGEMENT71
Figure 20 End-of-life PV panel waste volumes for China to 2050
2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030 2032 2034 2036 2038 2040 2042 2044 2046 2048 20500200
150
100
50250300350400 25
20
15
10
5
0
Regular-loss scenario Early-loss scenario Cumulative PV capacity
Cumulative PV capacity (GW)Cumualtive PV panel waste (million t)
Because of China’s rapidly developing PV industry, PV 
panel recycling is receiving more attention from the 
government and PV producers. China has therefore 
China has developed its own PV panel waste 
projections through its Institute for Electrical 
Engineering of the National Academy of Sciences (IEE) 
(Zhang and Fang, 2014). The IEE produced two case 
scenarios (CAS), a business-as-usual scenario and a 
better-treatment scenario. Both consider different 
operation and maintenance behaviours over the 
lifetime of deployed panels. Overall, the IEE estimates 
Figure 21  Comparison of PV panel end-of-life scenarios for ChinaAnnual PV panel waste (t)
Regular-loss scenario Early-loss scenario IEE/CAS scenario 1 IEE/CAS scenario 22034 2025 20301,200,000
1,000,000
800,000
600,000
400,000
200,000
0Box 18  China's PV panel waste projections
are similar to the results of the regular-loss and early-loss scenarios of this report to 2034. The two IEE 
scenario annual predictions amount  to 61,250 t up 
to 87,000 t for 2025, rising to 262,000-330,000 t  
for 2030. From 2034 the IEE scenarios show higher end-of-life volumes than this report’s scenarios with 
900,000 t per year and 1.1 million t per year for 2034 
respectively (see Figure 21).developed its own national PV panel waste projections 
outlined in Box 18. 
72
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSRegulatory and non-regulatory frameworks 
At present, PV panels in China do not have specific 
requirements for end-of-life treatment. In February 2009 
the State Council promulgated the Waste Electrical and 
Electronic Product Recycling Management Regulation 
which came into effect in January 2011 (State Council of 
the People’s Republic of China, 2011). The 2011 regulation 
requires e-waste to be collected in various ways and 
recycled in a centralised processing system. Producers can collect and recycle the products by themselves or entrust 
collection to the sellers, after-sales service agencies 
or e-waste recyclers and entrust recycling/disposal to 
qualified institutions. At present, however, PV panels 
are not included in the waste electrical and electronic products processing directory of the regulation.
Because of the current low volume of waste, China does 
not have a mature PV panel recycling industry. China has 
sponsored R&D on PV recycling technologies, focusing on 
two recycling methods for c-Si PV under China’s National 
High-tech R&D Programme PV Recycling and Safety Disposal Research from 2012 to 2015. These methods 
are based either on physical or thermal recycling. In the 
physical method various processes — including crushing, 
cryogenic grinding and separation — yield aluminium, 
glass cullet, copper, ethylene-vinyl-acetate and backsheet 
particles as well as a silicon powder mixture. The recycling 
rate is at about 90% by mass but silicon cannot be recycled for use in the PV industry owing to low purity. In 
the thermal method the clean cell debris goes through a 
thermal process and is then used for chemical experiments 
for recycling silicon, silver and aluminium.China currently has no specific regulations for end-of-life PV panels, and related technology 
research has just begun. However, the National 
High-tech R&D Programme PV Recycling and 
Safety Disposal Research provides policy and 
technology signposts for the future. On the 
policy side, these include the need for special laws and regulations for end-of-life PV panel 
recycling, targets for recycling rates and the 
creation of necessary financial frameworks. On 
the technology and R&D side, recommendations 
concentrate on developing and demonstrating 
high-efficiency, low-cost and low-energy 
consumption recycling technologies and 
processes for c-Si and thin-film PV panels. 
Specific attention should thereby be given to 
improving the onsite/mobile recycling and 
disposal platform for c-Si PV power plants. 
5.6  INDIA: GROWING MARKET WITHOUT 
PV-SPECIFIC WASTE REGULATIONS
PV market and waste projection  
Since 2012, India has installed over 1 GW of PV annually achieving a cumulative capacity of almost 5 GW in 2015 
(IRENA, 2016b). This places India today amongst the 
top ten PV markets in the world (IEA-PVPS, 2014b). The 
Indian power sector faces two main challenges. Firstly, it 
needs to alleviate energy poverty (more than one-third 
of India’s population lacks electricity access). Secondly, 
it needs to meet increased electricity demand arising from rapid economic growth (electricity demand is 
forecast to increase five- to sixfold by mid-century) 
(IEA, 2011). This represents a significant opportunity 
for renewable energy, including PV.
The Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission (JNNSM) 
aims to install 100 GW of grid-connected PV systems 
by 2022 (Government of India, 2011). PV in India also 
represents an alternative to traditional grids, and the 
JNNSM targets to install 2 GW of off-grid systems. 
Box 19  Outlook for China
Shutterstock
NATIONAL APPROACHES TO PV WASTE MANAGEMENT73
Figure 22   End-of-life PV panel waste volumes for India to 2050
2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 2028 2030 2032 2034 2036 2038 2040 2042 2044 2046 2048 20500200
100300500
400600700 8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Regular-loss scenario Early-loss scenario Cumulative PV capacity
Cumulative PV capacity (GW)Cumualtive PV panel waste (million t)
Regulatory and non-regulatory frameworks 
India has no regulations mandating collection, 
recovery and recycling of end-of-life PV panels. This 
means waste PV panels generated today are covered 
by general waste regulations. Waste is managed 
by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change under the 2016 Solid Waste Management 
Rules and the Hazardous and Other Wastes 
(Management and Transboundary Movement) Rules (Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, 
2016a and 2016b). The recently amended Hazardous 
Waste Rules include use of Toxicity Characteristic 
Leaching Procedure. Transfer of hazardous waste 
requires authorisation from the State Pollution Control Board, and interstate transport is permitted under 
certain conditions (Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change, 2016b). 
Legislation covering requirements for general 
e-waste and restrictions on the use of hazardous 
substances in electronic products are included in the In 2015 the original JNNSM deployment target of 20 GW of grid-connected PV systems by 2022 
was updated to 100 GW by 2022. If supported 
by funding and grid infrastructure, progress 
towards the updated target would increase end-
of-life PV panel waste volume projections for 
India by 2030 and especially by 2050. Although 
India currently has no specific PV-related waste regulation, increasing growth rates will most 
likely lead to waste regulations for end-of-life 
PV panels in the future.Large-scale PV deployment has taken place only recently so major end-of-life PV waste volumes in India 
may not be expected until after 2030. Figure 22 shows 
India’s expected end-of-life PV panel waste volumes in 2016-2050. Minimal waste is projected in 2016. However, waste could average 50,000-320,000 t  
by 2030, possibly culminating in 4.4-7.5 million t by 2050 (depending on scenario chosen).
E-waste (Management and Handling) Rules of 2016 (Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, 
2016c). However, these rules only apply to household 
electronics and not PV. Accordingly, an industrial-scale 
e-waste recycling infrastructure already exists in India 
but only covers household electronics and not PV.
Box 20  Outlook for India
74
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELS
 Shutterstock
VALUE CREATION FROM END-OF-LIFE PV PANELS75
Opportunities for value creation exist in each segment 
of the PV value chain, including the end-of-life stage. 
This chapter provides an overview of value creation 
opportunities relating to reductions in material use, 
options for repair and reuse and finally recycling and 
treatment considerations for PV panel waste. In the 
first section PV panel recycling is set in the context of 
well-known waste-reduction principles: reduce, reuse and recycle. The second section describes how socio-economic and environmental value is derived from 
end-of-life PV panels.
6.1  OPPORTUNITIES TO REDUCE, REUSE 
AND RECYCLE PV PANELS
The framework of a circular economy (cradle-to-
cradle opportunities) and the classic waste reduction
principles of the 3Rs (reduce, reuse, and recycle) can also be applied to PV panels (see also Chapter 4 on 
Waste Management Options). The preferred option among these is the reduction of material in PV panels 
and thus an increase in efficiency. Strong market 
growth, scarcity of raw materials and downwards 
pressure on PV panel prices are driving more 
efficient mass production, reduced material use, 
material substitutions and new, higher-efficiency 
technologies. This works towards cutting materials use per unit of generation.The reuse option follows the reduce option. This encompasses different repair 
and reuse modalities. Recycling is the least preferred 
option (apart from disposal) and only takes place after the first two options have been exhausted. It provides 
for the processing and treatment of PV panels and can 
unlock raw materials for new PV panel manufacturing 
or other products (see Figure 23).
Figure 23   Preferred options for PV waste managementVALUE CREATION
FROM END-OF-LIFE
PV PANELS
  Most pref
erred                                      
                           Le
as
t pref
err
edRecycleReuseReduce
76
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSPV panel material savings through R&D 
(reduce) 
Chapter 2 included a projection of changes in PV 
panel composition between now and 2030. The 
following analysis will summarise potential "reduce" 
options for the material components used in different 
PV technologies.
Resource or material efficiency means using the 
world’s limited resources in a sustainable manner 
while minimising impacts on the environment. Resource/material efficiency enables the creation 
of more value (e.g. products) with less input (e.g. resources or materials).
The mix of materials within PV panels has not changed significantly in the past. However, considerable material savings have been achieved due to 
increased resource and material efficiency (see Box 
21 for definition). For instance, materials savings and 
even substitutions have been and are continuing 
to be researched for lead, cadmium and selenium 
so that the amount of hazardous materials can be 
reduced. For the other materials used for different 
PV panel technologies, research mainly focuses on 
minimising amount per panel to save costs. Since 
total consumption of rare and valuable materials will 
increase as the PV market grows, availability and prices will drive reduction and substitution efforts. 
Recent studies agree that PV material availability is 
not a major concern in the near term although critical 
materials might impose limitations in the long term. In 
addition, increasing prices will improve the economics of recycling activities and drive investment for more 
efficient mining processes. This includes extraction 
of metals used in the PV manufacturing process like silver, aluminium, copper and tin (Marini et al. , 2014; 
Marwede, 2013; Zimmermann, 2013; Taoa, Jiang and Taoa 2011 and Erdmann, 2011).  PV R&D has specifically set priority topics for material use reduction or substitution for different components 
commonly used in current PV panels
16  including for: 
• c-Si panels: glass, polymer, silicon, aluminium, silver 
and lead and others;
• CIGS panels: glass, polymer, aluminium, cadmium, gallium, indium, selenium and others;
• CdTe panels: glass, polymer, cadmium telluride, nickel and others.
Furthermore, considerable R&D is focused on new materials and material replacements. The following is 
an illustrative set:
 Indium.  New transparent conducting oxide layers 
incorporating more abundant and hence cheaper compounds like fluorine doped tin-oxide may 
replace indium-tin-oxide as front electrodes 
(Calnan, 2014).  This reduces the use of indium in 
indium-tin-oxide available in some thin-film PV 
technologies as transparent conducting oxide.
 Glass.  Further optimisation of glass composition, 
thickness, anti-reflective coating and surface structures will increase the transmission of the 
front glass panes by another 2% by 2024. The use of 
glass two millimetres thick or even less in a single-
pane laminate will require additional mechanical 
stabilisation effort which might be achieved by 
double-glass panels with a thin encapsulation layer. These are proven constructions deployed for 
decades in thin-film PV panels and could lead to 
significant material reductions by substituting the 
need for a backsheet (Raithel, 2014). 
 Polymers. Encapsulants and backsheet foils are not 
recycled today because the duroplastic materials that dominate the market cannot be dissolved 
or melted for recycling without decomposition. 
Research is looking at reducing or replacing the 
amount of polymers, especially for backsheets that 
use a polyethylene terephthalate foil. They contain 
up to a few hundred parts per million of antimony Box 21  Definition of resource and material   
 efficiency
VALUE CREATION FROM END-OF-LIFE PV PANELS77
used as polymerisation catalyst (Ramaswami, 
2014). For example, the research project led by the 
Energy Research Centre of the Netherlands and 
PV CYCLE (CU-PV)17 will develop and demonstrate 
alternatives to current practices. One example 
is the use of thermoplastics, which are easier to 
separate, as encapsulant. Another is the elimination 
of encapsulant use altogether (CU PV, 2016 and 
Oreski, 2014).
 Silicon.  Thinner cells can reduce the amount of 
silicon used in c-Si cells. For instance, by moving to 
a back-contact cell design, the use of silicon could 
be cut by half, and energy consumption could be 
reduced by about 30% (Raithel, 2014). 
 Silver. About 95% of c-Si solar cells are now 
produced with screen-printed silver contact lines on the front side covering roughly 6%–8% of the 
cell area. A significant reduction of silver on cells 
is expected by 2018 according to International 
Technology Roadmap for Photovoltaic (ITRPV) 
study (Raithel, 2014) owing to recent progress in 
inkjet and screen-printing technologies. This allows the use of other metals like copper in combination 
with nickel and aluminium. Use of rear-contact 
or bifacial cells can help further reduce silver 
consumption per watt (W) by enhancing cell 
efficiency (Raithel, 2014 and Perez-Santalla, 2013). For example, the research project led by CU-PV 
will develop new metallisation methods suitable for 
thinner wafers. These are based on inkjetting seed 
layers plated afterwards with nickel and copper 
and result in at least a 99% reduction in silver. The 
silver components used in PV panels are further 
explained in Box 22.
16. The list in this chapter focuses on key materials which are the 
subject of active materials reduction research for panels. This list may differ from the materials rank ordered by weight per panel as reported in Chapter 3.
17. The CU-PV research project aims to address PV sustainability concerns by improving the recyclability of PV panels through advanced designs and collaboration over the value chain on recycling solutions. 
Shutterstock
78
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSFrom a value standpoint, silver is by far the most 
expensive component per unit of mass of a c-Si panel, 
followed by copper, silicon, aluminium, glass and 
polymer (see Figure 24). The PV industry consumes 
about 3.5%-15% of global silver production (Berry, 
Figure 25 shows recent silver consumption per watt 
and future projections. New printing techniques 
and pastes brought in silver savings of more than 
30% in 2009-2012 (Silver Institute, 2014; Schubert, 
Beaucarne and Hoornstra 2013 and Perez-Santalla, 
2013). Owing to expected growth rates in the global 
PV industry, the Silver Institute forecasts a mid- to 
long-term increase in silver consumption although 
the use per unit of power will shrink further. Silver 
consumption per watt is projected to decline by 
two-thirds from 2013 to 2017 while total silver 
consumption is expected to be the same in 2017 as in 2013 (Silver Institute, 2014). Assuming the silver 
contacts are ten microns thick and cover roughly 
10% of a cell’s surface, total c-Si cell manufacturing 
capacity would be limited by silver availability to five 
terawatt-peak (assuming 15% efficiency) (Tao, Jiang 
and Tao 2011). According to Raithel (2014), improved 
efficiencies, reduced consumption and better recovery should increase this limit in coming years.
Figure 25   Historic and expected specific silver consumption per watt-peakFigure 24 Relative material value (%) of a c-Si PV panel
8%
Glass
26%
Aluminium
8%
Copper
11%
Silicon47%
Silver
Based on Raithel (2014)
Estimates based on Perez-Santalla (2013)2014 and Marini et al. , 2014). The higher numbers in 
this range include production losses while the lower 
numbers result from analysis of the silver content of 
solar cells. On average, a typical c-Si panel contains 
about 6-10 grammes of silver.Silver (g/Wp)
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20200.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.10
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0Box 22  Silver components
VALUE CREATION FROM END-OF-LIFE PV PANELS79
Various new technologies for cells, backsheets, 
coatings and encapsulation materials have been 
implemented, resulting in over 50,000 panel types 
(Photon, 2015 and 2016). Tracking all materials for 
the purposes of waste treatment and recycling is 
challenging and will continue to be so. Establishing 
global information flow systems with panel and 
material databases could facilitate the objective of long-term end-of-life management systems that 
maximise material recovery.
The next section analyses the different end-of-life 
options for PV panels. The environmentally preferable approach is to repair a potential end-of-life panel and 
make it fit for reuse. 
Repair of PV panels (reuse)
Most PV systems were installed in the last six years 
(from 15 GW in 2008 to 222 GW in 2015), which means 
that these have aged to an early loss of 20% of the 
expected average lifetime (30 years) today. If defects 
are discovered during the early phase of a PV panel’s 
life, customers may try to claim warranties or guarantees 
for repair or replacement provided the contract partner 
still exists. Insurance companies may be involved to compensate for some or all of the repair/replacement 
costs within the contract agreements. In such cases the 
ownership of the panels often changes to the insurance 
company. Most defective panels are thus typically 
returned to the contract partner, a producer service partner or the producer itself for inspection and repair. 
In order to recover some value from a returned 
panel through resale, quality tests have to be made 
checking mainly electrical safety and power output. 
A flash test characterisation and a wet leakage test 
is one example. When repairs are both required and feasible, they typically involve applying a new frame, 
new junction box, diode replacement, new plugs and 
sockets and more. Solar cells may even be replaced, and panels relaminated. This is similar to the ‘B-spec’ and ‘C-spec’ qualities
18 in panel products that might 
be sold into special projects or relabelled to another 
brand name in some cases prior to marketing. In 
consequence, the product receives a new label with 
new guarantees (in compliance with national laws). 
The repaired PV panels can be resold as replacements. 
Alternatively they can be resold as used panels  at a 
reduced market price of approximately 70% of the 
original sales price compared to new panels, according 
to research conducted for this report. Partly repaired 
panels or components might be sold in a second-hand 
market. A modest used panel market has already been emerged supported by virtual internet platforms 
such as www.secondsol.de and www.pvXchange.
com. With more and more PV installed, the number 
of these second-generation panels or components 
may well increase, generating a market for their use. 
Chapter 6.2 provides further information on emerging 
industry stakeholders in this market.
According to the Weibull statistics applied to the PV 
forecast in this report, a proportion of installed panels 
may remain intact even after an average lifetime 
of 30 years. If a PV system is dismantled after its 
nominal lifetime, these panels may be reused after a 
quality check and refurbishment. This creates a good opportunity for a significant secondary market of 
used panels and new repair service jobs in the future. 
Panels that cannot be repaired or reused will be taken 
apart (see next section) and then forwarded to local waste treatment companies for further processing 
according to local regulations.
18. Panels are grouped according to the results of the final quality 
inspection. An A-panel is of excellent quality, a B-panel may suffer from some minor quality issues like a scratch, stains and other discoloration or slightly wrong cell position. The next letters (C, D…) indicate more defects. Such panels usually are sold at lower prices.
80
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSDecommissioning and treatment of PV panels 
(recycle)
 Disassembly and dismantling
The types and sizes of PV systems installed have 
important implications for future waste management. 
For example, the proliferation of highly dispersed, 
small rooftop PV systems can add significant costs 
to dismantling, collection and transport of expired 
PV panels. By contrast, waste management for large 
utility-scale PV applications is logistically easier. 
It is useful to distinguish two different scenarios for 
the collection of PV panels depending on size and 
geographic location:
• Utility scale (> 100 kilowatts – kW);
• Home single-panel system (< 500 W), small rooftop 
(< 5 kW) and large rooftop system (> 5 kW).
Utility-scale systems (> 100 kW) are usually ground-
mounted, regularly serviced and monitored. The panels 
may be placed on racks of aluminium or steel with concrete bases. The electrical system is based on string 
or central inverters with a grid connection. In some 
cases even an energy storage system may be present, 
which can be based on lithium-ion batteries, lead-acid 
batteries or other technologies. 
For these large plants, competition among 
decommissioning actors results in high cost efficiency. 
Figure 26   Projected rooftop and utility-scale PV deployment in 2030 compared to 2015
Germany UK US 2015 2030 China India Japan1,800
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0Installed PV capacity (GW)National projections for 2030
Rooftop PV Utility-scale PV
Based on IRENA (2016a)Dismantling, packing, transport and recycling can be easily contracted for parts of or the whole system. 
Dismantling and pick-up services for transport to 
the recycling facilities will usually be defined during 
contractor bidding processes and supervised and 
performed by skilled workers. The tendering processes 
may include the entire dismantling of the plant or 
parts of it depending on the intended use of the area afterwards. It can be assumed that relatively high 
quality standards will be applied in such a case. The 
components of the PV plant will be stored separately: 
panels, cables, electronics (inverters, charge 
controllers, transformers, monitoring electronics etc.), metals (aluminium, steel), typical buildings and 
construction demolition waste etc. The quantities 
of the different wastes are relatively high and can 
easily be collected separately at reasonable cost 
for transport to specialised recyclers or landfill sites 
(Brellinger, 2014 and Fthenakis, 2000). Depending on 
the local regulations, some components — typically some batteries or power transformers — may be 
considered hazardous or toxic waste. 
Costs of dismantling smaller installations (5-100 kW) 
depend on the type of PV system (ground-based, 
BIPV, rooftop, etc.) and the location. Dismantling 
small PV installations may require skilled workers like roofers and electricians. Single panels, small 
home single-panel systems (< 500 W) or other  
small systems (< 5 kW) might be returned by bring-in or pick-up services. In these cases, logistics costs 
VALUE CREATION FROM END-OF-LIFE PV PANELS81
can dominate the overall costs of the takeback and 
recycling systems. The different wastes will be sent 
to recyclers or landfill sites depending on local 
regulations and the presence of specialised waste-
treatment companies. 
IRENA’s REmap study (IRENA, 2016a) predicts that 
rooftop deployment with system sizes of a few 
kilowatts up to the megawatt range will be substantial 
through to 2030 with 580 GW installed. Nevertheless, 
larger utility-scale (mostly ground-mounted) 
applications will make up larger share of total installed 
capacity at 1,180 GW (see Figure 26). 
Logistics costs can become decisive in takeback 
systems for PV panels in remote areas like islands 
or rural areas. On the basis of the dismantled PV 
generator costs at Pellworm Island in Germany’s North 
Sea, the costs for ship and truck transport can be at 
least three to five times higher than with mainland installations (United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development, 2014). The presence of monopolistic 
structures (e.g. in the logistics system) can be an 
additional cost driver given the general observation 
that competition can reduce prices.
Damage to PV panels should be avoided during 
dismantling, transport and storage to support sound 
waste treatment with best available technologies 
and best possible results. Cables, junction boxes and 
frames should not be removed during dismantling. 
These may require special attention for their secondary material value and possibly in line with 
local legal requirements (Wambach et al. , 2009). 
 Recycling
Since currently only moderate PV waste quantities exist on the global waste market, there are not 
sufficient quantities or economic incentives to create 
dedicated PV panel recycling plants. End-of-life PV 
panels are thus typically processed in existing general 
recycling plants. Here, the mechanical separation of 
the major components and materials of PV panels is the focus. This still achieves high material recovery by panel mass even although some higher value materials (that are small in mass) may not fully be recovered. This current strategy offers legal compliance without 
the need for new PV-specific recycling investments. 
In the long term, however, constructing dedicated 
PV panel recycling plants  could increase treatment 
capacities and maximise revenues owing to better 
output quality. In addition, it could increase recovery 
of valuable constituents.
Recycling technologies for PV panels have already 
been researched for the past 15 years. This knowledge 
has provided a foundation for developing specialised 
recycling plants once the waste streams are sufficiently 
large for profitable operation. For example, extensive 
research was conducted by solar PV companies including AEG, BP Solar, First Solar, Pilkington, Sharp 
Solar, Siemens Solar, Solar International and many 
others (Sander et al. , 2007). Research institutes 
have also examined different recycling options for PV. Examples include the Brookhaven National Laboratories in the US, the National Institute of 
Advanced Industrial Science and Technology in Japan, 
the Interuniversity MicroElectronics Center in Belgium 
and the Energy Research Centre in the Netherlands 
(CU PV, 2016). All future recycling processes will need 
to keep abreast of ongoing cell and panel innovations 
to obtain the best possible results at acceptable costs. Such processes will have to recover major components 
like glass, aluminium, copper and other potentially 
scarce or valuable materials (e.g. silver, indium) at 
sufficient quality for sale on the world market. They 
might equally need to handle modest quantities of 
hazardous and toxic materials (e.g. cadmium) (see 
Chapter 3 for PV panel waste composition).
One of the main technical challenges in PV recycling 
is the delamination or the removal of the encapsulant 
material (e.g. ethylene-vinyl-acetate). Various methods 
have been explored for effective delamination, including mechanical crushing (Giachetta et al. , 
2013 and Berger et al. , 2010), thermal processing 
(Wang  et  al. , 2012), organic solvents (Kang et al. , 
2012 and Doi, 2001), pyrolysis and vacuum blasting 
82
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELS(Berger  et al. , 2010 and Kushiya, 2003), micro-
emulsions (Marwede and Reller, 2012) and ultrasonic 
radiation (Kim and Lee, 2012). 
The following points are important for designing any 
future PV panel waste recycling systems independent 
of the PV technology used: These considerations 
would produce the best possible results, including high recovery rates and high quality even for materials 
present in low quantities (Sander et al. , 2007).
• Avoid further damage to the PV panel during 
dismantling, collection and transport phases;
• Depending on economic feasibility, reclaim as 
much valuable (e.g. silver, copper, silicon, glass, 
aluminium), scarce (e.g. indium, tellurium) and most 
hazardous materials (e.g. cadmium, lead, selenium) 
as possible; 
• Use durable labelling to help identify the product;
• Link material compositions relevant to recycling and recovery processes to the label;
• Create recycling-friendly panel designs.
In the rest of this section, some of the more commonly used methods are described for the two main PV 
technologies: crystalline silicon and thin-film PV panels.
Recycling crystalline silicon PV panels
The major components of c-Si panels, including glass, 
aluminium, and copper, can be recovered at cumulative 
yields greater than 85% by panel mass through a 
purely mechanical separation. However, without a combination of thermal, chemical or metallurgical steps, 
impurity levels of the recovered materials could be high 
enough to reduce resale prices (Pennington  et al. , 2016 
and Sander et al. , 2007).
Separation of the major components such as laminated glass, metal frames, wiring and polymers is the first step in current and first-generation recycling 
processes. Recycling strategies for each of these 
major components is discussed below. Recycling the laminated glass component of c-Si panels is a relatively low-cost process which flat-
glass recycling companies can implement with little 
additional investment (see Figure 27). The process 
is frequently run in batches to enable adjustment of 
parameters and account for the modest quantities 
available for processing today. Typical equipment 
for removing impurities like polymer (glue) residues or screws from the glass cullet includes magnets, 
crushers, sieves, eddy-current devices, optical 
sorters, inductive sorters and exhaust systems. The 
resulting crushed-glass fraction, which may still be 
heavily contaminated with silicon, polymers and metals, can be blended with other recycled glass 
as thermal insulating material in the glass-foam or 
glass-fibre industries. Research conducted for this 
report shows a blend composition including 15%–20% 
of PV panel glass is thereby achievable. However, 
with increasing waste PV streams, this market could 
become saturated, and investments in new recycling technologies will be required. 
Figure 27  Process for laminated glass recycling
Pre-crushing
Manual sorting
Magnetic separator
Fine crushing
Screening
Non ferrous separator
Extraction Unit
Color based sorting
Automatic sampling
Glass CulletFine grain,
foil
Foil
VALUE CREATION FROM END-OF-LIFE PV PANELS83
The aluminium or steel of the frames, and the copper 
of the cables can become part of the already well 
established metal recycling loops and therefore have 
easy potential for recycling. The polymer fractions 
can partly be processed in waste-to-energy plants 
provided they meet the input specifications of the 
plants. 
Recovering small amounts of valuable (e.g. silver, 
copper), scarce (e.g. indium, tellurium), or most 
hazardous materials (e.g. cadmium, lead, selenium) 
as components might require additional and more 
advanced processes. These are found predominantly in the glass and encapsulant (polymer) fractions.       For example, the technical feasibility of recovering and purifying silicon from end-of-life c-Si PV panels has 
been demonstrated by Wambach et al. , (2009) which 
separated the panels in a pyrolysis step. It removed the solar cell metallisation and dopant layers in several 
selective etching steps and cast a new silicon ingot 
from the silicon obtained. A very similar process was 
developed by the Japanese NEDO programme by the FAIS – see Figure 28 (Komoto, 2014). The pilot plant 
also relies on pyrolysis of the polymers in a conveyor 
kiln. One main difference is the removal of frames and 
backsheet foil prior to the thermal step that precedes 
semiconductor material recovery (Si or CIS) and the glass cullet (see also Chapter 5.3 on Japan).
Figure 28  Recycling scheme proposed by NEDO/FAIS 
Glass cullet CIS metal powder Si cell fragmentsThin-ﬁlm Si, CIS, Crystalline Si
Aluminium frames
EVA deposition gas
(thermal recycling)Combustion gasLoading
Dissolution of aluminium frame
Removal of backsheet
Burning of EVA
Glass crusherRecovering Si cell 
and bus bar
Colour based sorting Recovering CIS layer
Based on Komoto (2014)
Shutterstock
84
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSLoser Chemie (Palitzsch and Loser, 2014) has 
developed and patented new processes to enrich 
the compound semiconductor metals or silver 
of solar cells via chemical treatment after panels 
Figure 30   Loser Chemie recycling process
Crusher SeparatorGlassChemical
treatmentSolid/liquid
separation
Chemical
treatmentSolid/liquid
separationFoilMetal
solution
Metal
solutionGlass
drying
Foil dryingRecycling thin-film PV panels (CIGS and CdTe)
The large-scale recycling of thin-film PV panels is still in its early stages and will improve as waste volumes and 
corresponding waste treatment knowledge increases. 
Thin-film panels are currently processed and recycled 
using a combination of mechanical and chemical 
treatments (see Figure 29). 
A prominent example of this process includes the 
following steps (Sinha and Cossette, 2012) which can 
achieve about 90% recovery of the glass and about 
95% of the semiconductor material by mass:
1. Panels are shredded and crushed in a hammer 
mill to particles of about 5 millimeters to break the 
lamination bond. The dust is then collected in an 
aspiration system equipped with a high-efficiency 
particulate air filter.
2. Semiconductor layer etching is carried out with a 
mixture of sulphuric acid and hydrogen peroxide. The glass and larger pieces of ethylene-vinyl-acetate  are 
separated in a classifier and on a vibrating screen. 
Finally, the glass is rinsed with water and dried on a 
belt filter unit. Figure 29  Thin-film recycling process
Panel recycling
process
First Solar panel
Shredder
Hammer mill
Crushed/milled scrap
holding bin~95%
recycling of
semiconductor
material~90%
recycling of
glass
Film removal solid/
liquid separation in-situ
EVA glass separation Metals precipitation
Tellurium and Cadmium
separation and recycling
Laminate
materialClean glass
culletTellurium
productCadmium
product
Based on First Solar (2015a); cadmium and tellurium separation and refining are performed by a third party
Box 23  Innovative treatment processes for thin-film PV panels
are pre-crushed (see Figure 30). The aluminium 
metallisation can subsequently be used for 
producing wastewater treatment chemicals 
(aluminium oxides).
VALUE CREATION FROM END-OF-LIFE PV PANELS85
3. The filtration liquids with the metals can be 
extracted via ion exchangers or precipitated. The 
cadmium and tellurium can be further purified by 
third parties for reuse in the solar industry. 
Several new treatment processes for thin-film PV 
panels are currently undergoing research. The 
innovative Loser Chemie process described in Box 23 is one example.
6.2 MATERIAL SUPPLY AND SOCIO-
ECONOMIC BENEFITS
With estimated PV panel waste volumes growing 
steadily in the coming years, the last section of 
this report assesses value creation of end-of-life 
PV by looking at potential socio-economic and 
environmental benefits. If approached and co-
ordinated in time, significant opportunities can arise 
from managing the end-of-life of PV panels.19
Unlocking raw materials and their value 
Important value can be created by extracting 
secondary raw material from end-of-life PV panels 
and making them available on the market again. 
Having an average lifetime of 30 years, PV panels will 
build up a large stock of raw materials embodied in 
products that will not become available for recovery 
for a considerable period of time. For example, a large 
flow of silver from panel recycling is not expected until 2025 (Perez-Santalla, 2013). Value creation from unlocking raw materials is 
estimated below. The following assumptions are used:
• Raw materials can be treated and recycled at a 
rate of 65%-70% by mass. These recovery rates are 
already achievable today and are in line with the 
only existing regulation for PV panel recycling to 
date, the EU WEEE Directive (see Chapter 4). They 
are also a blended rate and assume a collection rate 
of 85% of total end-of-life PV waste stream as well as high value treatment and recycling technologies 
available to recover the majority of material fractions. 
This excludes losses from mechanical processing 
(e.g. shredder and mill dusts) and thermal recovery of 
non-recyclable polymer fractions (e.g. duro-plastics).
• The estimates are based on expected PV cell 
technology ratios and related waste composition 
multiplied by the cumulative waste volume of 
1.7 million t for 2030 under the regular-loss scenario. 
• Monetary value estimates reported are based on April 2016 market prices (Europäischer Wirtschaftsdienst, 
2016) and may vary in future due to 1) possible price fluctuations on the raw material market and 2) 
changes in the raw material composition of PV panels.
The results of potential cumulative raw materials 
recovered by 2030 are displayed in Figure 31. 
19. The value creation in different segments of the solar value chain 
has been studied in IRENA’s publications “The Socio-economic Benefits of Solar and Wind” (2014) and “Renewable Energy Benefits: Leveraging Local Industries” (2016 forthcoming).
Figure 31 End-of-life recovery potential under regular-loss scenario to 2030 (t)
1,000 000 800,000 600,000 200,000 400,000 0120Silver
Sealants
Compound Semiconductor
Other Metals (Zn, Ni, Sn, Pb, Cd, Ga, ln, Se, Te)
Copper
Silicon
Aluminium
Polymer
Glass
Recovery potential in t7,200
29,50090
101,300310
75,000
965,100390
86
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSmaterials offer an important additional raw material 
supply by 2030.
Material usage for silicon  cells has been reduced 
significantly during the last ten years, from around 
16 grammes/Wp to less than 4 grammes/Wp due 
to increased efficiencies and thinner wafers. Silicon 
crystalline technologies continue to dominate the PV market. This means up to 30,000 tonnes of silicon, 
a valuable material, can potentially be recovered in 
2030, assuming low yield losses. This is equivalent 
to the amount of silicon needed to produce over 45 
million new panels or around USD 380 million (using current polysilicon prices at USD 20/kg and a value 
recovery rate of 70%).   
Silver  recovered from PV panels also has significant 
potential value. Based on an estimate of 90 tonnes 
recovered in 2030 and at a current market price 
(April 2016) (Europäischer Wirtschaftsdienst, 2016), the value of recovered silver is estimated at USD 50 
million. This is enough to produce 50 million new 
panels.
The potential recoverable mass of other materials  is 
390 tonnes. These include zinc, nickel, gallium, indium, 
selenium tellurium and others. By comparison, the world production of these raw materials amounted to 
3 billion tonnes in 2015 (see Table 13). This is equivalent 
to approximately USD 180 million. Up to 60 million 
new PV panels can be manufactured with this amount 
of material assuming increasingly efficient use of rare materials in manufacturing processes as well as 
improved recovery of purity in recycling treatments.
The potential recoverable amount of semiconductors  
is 310 tonnes, a relatively low number compared to the 
other materials discussed above. However, this could 
be used for the production of 40 million new PV panels.
Sealants  and polymers  are hard to recover today. New 
treatment and recycling processes are needed in order to 
create value for over 100,000 tonnes of these materials 
and substances potentially recoverable by 2030.The total potential material value recovered through PV panel treatment and recycling amounts to 
USD  450  million by 2030. This is equivalent to 
the current raw material value needed to produce 
60  million new panels or 18 GW. By comparison, 
180 million new panels were produced in 2015.
Over 80% of the weight of panels made through any PV 
technology is glass ; thus the greatest mass of recycling 
material comes from glass, estimated at approximately 
960,000 tonnes by 2030. Hence, development of 
efficient recycling technologies for PV panel glass is 
essential. With an average secondary material market 
price for glass at USD 30-50/t depending on recovery quality (Eurostat Statistics, 2014), the potential for 
recovery value exceeds USD 28 million.  
Significant amounts of aluminium  (approximately 
75,000 tonnes) and copper  (approximately  
7,000 tonnes) are projected to be re-released on 
the secondary material market through PV panel treatment. Both can easily be recycled using mature 
infrastructure available today. Their current combined 
value is up to USD 140 million (Europäischer 
Wirtschaftsdienst, 2016). If compared with world 
production in 2015 (see Table 13), these unlocked 
2030 2050Cumulative PV capacity:
1,600 GWCumulative PV capacity:
4,500 GW
Life cycle:
Enough raw material
recovered to produce
60 million new panels
(equivalent to 18 GW)Life cycle:
Enough raw material
recovered to produce
2 billion new panels
(equivalent to 630 GW)Cumulative PV
panel waste:
1.7 - 8
million tonnesCumulative PV
panel waste:
60 - 78
million tonnes
Value creation:
USD 450 million alone for 
raw material recovery
New industries
and employmentValue creation:
USD 15 billion alone for 
raw material recovery
New industries
and employmentFigure 32   Potential value creation through PV end-of-  
   life management to 2030
VALUE CREATION FROM END-OF-LIFE PV PANELS87
Table 13 World production of mineral commodities used 
 in PV panels, 2015
World production 2015 
(thousand t) 
Aluminium 58,300
Cadmium 24,200
Copper 18,700
Gallium 435
Indium 755
Lead 4,710
Lithium 32,500
Molybdenum 267,000
Nickel 2,530,000
Selenium > 2,340
Silicon208,100
Silver 27,300
Tellurium > 120
Tin 294,000
Sum 3,268,460
Based on US Geological Survey, 2016
20. Production quantities are combined totals of estimated silicon content for ferrosilicon and silicon metal.
As shown above, significant value could be created by 
recovering secondary raw materials by 2030. Applying 
the same regular-loss scenario until 2050, the value potential for unlocked raw materials is expected to surge 
to over USD 15 billion. This equates to the raw material 
needed to produce two billion new panels – 630 GW.
Recovered raw material tonnage can be traded and 
shipped just like primary raw materials from traditional extractive resources. The volumes injected back into the 
economy can serve for the production of new PV panels 
or other products, thus increasing the security of future 
PV supply or other products dependent on raw materials 
used in PV panels. As a result, rapidly growing panel waste volumes over time will stimulate a market for secondary 
raw materials originating from end-of-life PV.
Additional R&D and optimisation of recycling 
processes will be required to realise the full potential 
of material recovery, especially considering previous 
and current panel designs not yet incorporated into designs for recycling.  
Creating new industries and jobs in PV
The overall waste management industry includes different stakeholders such as producers, importers, 
dealers, system operators, utilities, municipalities, 
governments, waste treatment companies and end-
users. Co-operation is needed among these players to 
guarantee the acceptance of future PV panel waste 
management systems. 
End-of-life PV panel management for holds the 
potential to develop new pathways for industry growth 
and offers employment opportunities to different 
stakeholders. These jobs are distributed among the 
public sector (governments, public research, etc.) and private sector (producers, waste management 
companies, etc.) (see Figure 32). 
The emerging PV recycling industry will necessitate 
trained staff with specific skills and knowledge of 
recycling processes. Specific education and training 
programmes will need to become part of the renewable energy education sector. This will supply the technical 
skillset required to make the renewable energy industry 
part of the 3R and circular economy model.
2030 2050Cumulative PV capacity:
1,600 GWCumulative PV capacity:
4,500 GW
Life cycle:
Enough raw material
recovered to produce
60 million new panels
(equivalent to 18 GW)Life cycle:
Enough raw material
recovered to produce
2 billion new panels
(equivalent to 630 GW)Cumulative PV
panel waste:
1.7 - 8
million tonnesCumulative PV
panel waste:
60 - 78
million tonnes
Value creation:
USD 450 million alone for 
raw material recovery
New industries
and employmentValue creation:
USD 15 billion alone for 
raw material recovery
New industries
and employmentFigure 33   Potential value creation through PV end-of-  
   life management to 2050
88
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSFirstly, R&D organisations  will have an important role 
to play to achieve the further reduction of materials, 
increase efficiencies and further investigate the best 
available recycling and treatment processes for PV panels. As seen in Chapter 5, public institutes in 
several countries (e.g. Germany, Japan and China) have 
already started to research recycling methodologies 
with support from the local government . 
With PV panel cost reduction as a primary driver, 
producers  have since the industry’s infancy built high-
tech research capabilities to increase material and panel efficiencies. However, traditionally producers have concentrated more on production rather than 
end-of-life (repair/treatment and recycling). This is 
also explained by the renewable energy industry’s 
relatively recent significant growth. The increasing 
PV waste volumes will change this perspective and should redirect R&D to the entire life cycle of a panel. 
The private sector is also expected to be at the 
forefront of a new repair and reuse service industry 
for PV panels. Most likely, additional employment opportunities will arise for the producers  themselves 
and independent or contract and service partners 
dependent on producers (e.g. installation and 
construction companies). However, waste collectors 
and companies  and pre-treatment companies  are 
also expected to expand their portfolio as investment 
opportunities in this sector rise. 
Most importantly, the end-of-life management of PV 
panels in itself will trigger an important recycling and treatment industry . All waste management 
is regulated by governments so it entails different 
responsibilities for concerned stakeholders, 
depending on the legislation. Everywhere except in the EU, PV panels are part of regular waste streams. 
At the same time, actors mostly include general waste 
utilities and regulators or waste management and 
pre-treatment companies . No formal and established 
PV panel recycling market exists today. Yet waste treatment companies are studying the new business 
case for PV panel treatment given the increase in 
e-waste regulations and PV markets (see Chapter 5 
country case studies).
With binding extended-producer-responsibility 
through the EU WEEE Directive, for instance, 
producers  have become additional players essential 
to driving end-of-life management practices for PV. 
According to Nasr and Thurston (2006) “… (when a 
product manufacturer has a leading role in the entire 
product life cycle… (it) promotes… efficient material 
use and reuse.” Contracting waste management 
partners with specialised knowledge in PV end-of-life has therefore become essential for big producers 
to maintain market competitiveness. A small number 
of producers have or are also in the process of 
investigating the option of developing their own 
recycling production facilities (e.g. First Solar).  
This study has analysed how different frameworks for 
end-of-life PV provide the potential to grow local PV 
recycling industries, especially in jurisdictions with specific 
PV waste legislation, such as the EU. Yet the recycling Figure 34    Industry value creation from end-of-life PV management
R&D
OrganisationsRepair/Reuseservices industryRecyclingtreatment industry
• Public and private
   institutions
• Producers• Producers
• Independent service partners
• Producer-dependent contract  
   and service partners (e.g.   
   installation and construction  
   companies
• Waste collectors and companies• Pre-treatment companies• Public waste utilities and     
   regulators
• Waste management companies
• Pre-treatment companies
• Producers
VALUE CREATION FROM END-OF-LIFE PV PANELS89
According to Monier and Hestin (2011), the main 
socio-economic benefits of the WEEE Directive arise 
from the inclusion of PV panels in the regulatory 
framework. 
Firstly, they estimate that the environmental 
impact of end-of-life PV panels can be reduced by a factor of six in comparison to a baseline 
scenario which assumes no pre-treatment and 
recycling of PV panels. By implementing high-value 
recycling processes, the recovery of a certain mass 
percentage of the total panel is guaranteed but 
also minor fractions are accounted for. For e-waste, it means the costs of collection and treatment are 
more than offset by potential revenues of materials 
recovered from the PV panels and create additional 
value. Monier and Hestin estimate that jobs will 
increase alongside the quantity of end-of-life PV 
panels collected and properly treated in high-value 
recycling operations. 
The evaluation concludes that the resulting net 
benefits of including PV panels in the WEEE Directive 
could amount to up to EUR 16.5 billion in 2050.industry is also one of the few true global industries today and therefore needs to be treated accordingly. For PV panel waste, many opportunities can therefore 
emerge in developing or transitioning economies with 
informal sectors dominating collection and recycling services. Producers are active in many of these countries so a mandatory PV waste system could retain additional employment, especially in the repair/reuse and recycling/
treatment industries. At the same time, it would improve 
national waste management practices. 
Box 24  Socio-economic benefits of the WEEE Directive in the EU
Shutterstock
90
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELS
 Shutterstock
CONCLUSIONS: THE WAY FORWARD91
Effective deployment policies have supported the 
growth of renewables globally, including PV. In 
early 2015, more than 145 countries had introduced 
regulatory support mechanisms (e.g. feed-in tariff, 
net-metering or auctions), fiscal incentives and 
public financing (e.g. capital subsidy, investment 
or production tax credit). Overall, the number of 
incentives related to renewable energy has increased nearly tenfold over the past decade, leading to a global cumulative installed capacity of 222 GW at the end of 
2015 (IRENA, 2016). PV now makes up a distinct share 
of the energy mix in several countries. Substantial 
growth is anticipated in coming decades, leading 
to a projected installed capacity of approximately 
4,500 GW in 2050.
PV panels have a long life (average life expectancy is 
30 years) and in most countries have only since the middle of the 2000s been installed at a large scale. 
This study predicts that significant amounts of PV panel waste will be generated by 2030 as these long-
lived PV systems age. 
PV end-of-life recycling systems and regulatory 
schemes to deal with PV end-of-life management 
have only recently emerged. Certain countries and 
regions are ahead of that curve, such as the EU. Long lead times have already preceded the implementation of environmentally and economically robust technological and regulatory policies for e-waste. 
Given this experience, the time to start devising these 
systems for PV panel waste in many countries is now. 
A range of potential policy options exist for PV 
waste management which can be adapted to the 
unique conditions of each country or region. Previous 
experience, particularly in relatively mature EU markets, has identified numerous lessons learned 
and best practices from which newer market entrants 
can draw. For example, various models for financing 
PV collection and recycling have evolved and been 
tested. However, voluntary-producer and public-
private-partnership programmes have not achieved 
the desired results, making way for uniform regulatory regimes with clearer roles and responsibilities.
End-of-life management policies need to be part of 
a broad range of cross-cutting enabling instruments that support the transition to sustainable PV life cycle 
policies. Tailored to specific national conditions and 
relative PV sector maturity, the enabling framework 
should focus on adopting a system-level approach. It 
should build institutional, technological and human 
capacity, strengthening a domestic or regional PV 
recycling industry and creating a financial framework in support of end-of-life management. CONCLUSIONS:
THE WAY FORWARD
92
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSCENTRAL ROLE OF AN ENABLING FRAMEWORK
Institutional development is essential to supporting 
sustainable end-of-life practices for PV. Sustainable 
management of end-of-life PV panels will be strongly 
influenced by the abilities of public sector institutions 
and the private sector to take informed and 
effective decisions on management and treatment 
opportunities. Thus far, end-of-life regulation exists 
only in the EU, which is pioneering rules that categorise PV panels as a type of e-waste. However, other 
countries are investigating institutional capacities to 
implement end-of-life policies (e.g. China, Japan). To 
improve decision-making and ensure better planning, 
a monitoring and reporting system covering PV waste streams needs to be included into national 
and regional regulations. This can in turn provide 
the statistical data needed to enhance waste stream 
predictions, better understand the causes of panel 
failure and further refine regulatory frameworks.
A system-level approach to PV end-of-life 
management can enhance the integration of 
different stakeholders, including PV suppliers 
and consumers alike, as well as the waste sector. 
Considerable efforts to develop technologies and 
policies to support PV deployment have taken root 
over the last few years. To meet the challenge of 
managing greater PV waste volumes in a sustainable way, support will also need to include end-of-life 
technologies and policies. Such support can ensure 
deeper integration across the different PV life cycle 
stages and other policies targeting a comprehensive 
life cycle approach of products (e.g.  3R concept, circular economy approach).  End-of-life management 
can affect a variety of stakeholders, including 
producers and owners, such as households and larger 
consumers. Growing PV panel waste is transforming 
the ownership structures in the sector. For instance, 
PV panel producers wishing to sell in the EU are 
now liable for the end-of-life phase of a panel and financing waste management (see Chapter 4 on 
extended-producer-responsibility framework in the 
EU). A system-level approach to policy making for PV end-of-life can balance the ambitions and 
responsibilities of PV suppliers with those of PV 
consumers, new entrants (e.g. waste companies) and other stakeholders.
R&D, education and training, are all needed to 
support PV end-of-life management to design and 
implement socio-technological systems.  Support 
for R&D in PV end-of-life activities can improve technological performance and produce greater value from the recycling output. Further technology 
innovations can create high-value recycling processes 
for rare, valuable and potentially hazardous materials 
which surpass legal requirements and provide 
additional environmental and socio-economic benefits and that do not exist today. Industrial cluster 
cultivation between the energy and waste sectors as 
well as cross-cutting R&D programmes can contribute 
to increased quality for recycling technologies and 
processes. Just as importantly, technological R&D 
must be coupled with prospective techno-economic 
and environmental analyses to maximise societal returns, minimise detrimental outcomes and avoid 
unintended consequences. This requires systematic 
access to human talent across different disciplinary 
fields, including engineering, science, environmental 
management, finance, business and commerce. In 
addition, vocational training programmes will be 
necessary. They can, for instance, retrain PV installers on potential repair and reuse opportunities for PV 
panels showing early failures. 
With the right policies and enabling 
frameworks in place, the spawning of new 
industries that recycle and repurpose old 
solar PV panels will drive considerable economic value creation. This will be an 
essential element in the world’s transition to 
a sustainable energy future.
CONCLUSIONS: THE WAY FORWARD93
Strengthening domestic capabilities and boosting 
the development of local PV recycling industries 
can help to maximise the value creation of PV 
end-of-life.  As a result of increasing PV waste 
streams, new markets will emerge. They will create new trade flows while providing local opportunities 
for the energy and waste sectors in different 
segments of the decommissioning stage (e.g. repair or recycling of PV panels). The ability to localise 
depends on the characteristics and competitiveness 
of local complementary industries – mainly the 
waste sector. It relies on the quantity, quality and 
reliability of supply of projected local waste streams and projected demand for secondary panels and 
secondary raw material extraction. The nascent 
PV waste and recycling industry can be further 
supported through measures that create demand for 
local recycled goods and services (e.g. purchase tax 
rebates for secondary raw material recovered through 
PV recycling processes).
Stimulating investment and innovative financing 
schemes for PV end-of-life management is necessary 
to overcome financing barriers and ensure the 
support of all stakeholders. Previous experience has 
produced technological and operational knowledge 
on financing end-of-life PV panel management that can inform the organisation of increasingly large 
waste streams. Experience in mature markets like 
Germany has shown that forcing household consumers 
to recycle WEEE is impractical. Voluntary approaches 
ultimately fail owing to the financial risks of free riders misusing the system and to a lack of enforceability 
over the long lifetime of the products. Extended-
producer-responsibility schemes have thus proved the 
most successful in practice, including pay-as-you-go 
combined with last-man-standing insurance, and joint-
and-several liability approaches in which producers 
become responsible for PV panel collection and recycling. The costs of proper treatment and recycling 
can be included in the production sales price through 
a modest fee per kilowatt-hour produced, for example.As countries strengthen their policy and regulatory frameworks to transform their energy 
systems, they have the unique opportunity to 
address sustainable end-of-life management 
goals at the same time. Establishing PV end-
of-life management policies can generate value 
and secure long-term socio-economic benefits 
such as material recovery through recycling, creating new industries and jobs.
Going forward, holistic, adaptable frameworks 
capturing and measuring the multiple impacts 
of PV end-of-life management (e.g. EU WEEE 
Directive) can tip the balance in favour of sustainable life cycle practices and policies 
worldwide.
Governments and stakeholders in the PV 
sector need more complete analysis of 
projected PV waste management streams and 
compositions to make decisions. The IRENA and 
IEA-PVPS study End-of-life Management: Solar Photovoltaic Panels  provides a first glimpse of 
the opportunities offered by the sustainable management of PV end-of-life. The report 
intends to establish a foundation to move 
countries more quickly up the learning curve in policies and technologies for PV end-of-
life management. It leads the way for further 
exploration of this field.Outlook
94
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELS
REFERENCES  
 
Atasu, A. and L.N. Van Wassenhove (2011), An Operations 
Perspective on Product Takeback Legislation for E-Waste: Theory, Practice and Research Need,  www.prism.gatech.
edu/~aatasu3/index_files/AV11.pdf (viewed February 2015).
Baldé, C.P., et al. (2015), The Global E-waste Monitor – 2014: 
Quantities, Flows and Resources, United Nations University, 
Institute for the Advanced Study of Sustainability, Bonn, 
https://i.unu.edu/media/unu.edu/news/52624/UNU-1stGlobal-E-Waste-Monitor-2014-small.pdf.
Bekkelund, K. (2013), A Comparative Life Cycle Assessment 
of PV Solar Systems , www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/
diva2:654872/FULLTEXT01.pdf (viewed March 2015).
Berger, W., et al. (2010), “A Novel Approach for the Recycling 
of Thin Film Photovoltaic Modules,” Resources, Conservation 
and Recycling,  Vol. 54, Nr. 10, pp. 711–18, doi:10.1016/j.
resconrec.2009.12.001.
Berry, C. (2014), “Case Study of a Growth Driver – Silver Use in 
Solar,” 21 July 2014, guest blog on PV-Tech website, Solar Media 
Limited, www.pv-tech.org/guest_blog/case_study_of_a_growth_driver_silver_use_in_solar (viewed November 2015).
Brellinger, C. 2014), " Costs for the Recycling and Registration 
of Solar Modules, " Proceedings of Intersolar Munich, Germany.
California Legislature (2015), Hazardous Waste: Photovoltaic 
Modules,  Senate Bill No. 489, Chapter 419, an act to add Article 
17 (commencing with Section 25259) to Chapter 6.5 of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code, relating to hazardous waste, approved by the Governor on 1 October 2015, https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.xhtml?bill_
id=201520160SB489.Calnan, S. (2014), A pplication of Oxide Coatings in Photovoltaic 
Devices and Coatings , 2014, Vol. 4, pp. 162-202, doi: 10.3390/
coatings4010162, www.mdpi.com/2079-6412/4/1/162.
China National Energy Administration  (2015),  The 13th 
Solar Energy National Plan 2016-2020 , National Energy 
Administration, Beijing, (viewed May 2016).CU-PV (2016), CU-PV - Sustainable PV - Cradle-to-Cradle 
Sustainable PV Modules , Energy Research Centre of the 
Netherlands and PV CYCLE, www.sustainablepv.eu/cu-pv/ 
(viewed May 2016).
DeGraaff, D.E.A., et al. (2011), "Degradation Mechanisms in 
Si Module Technologies Observed in the Field, Technologies Observed in the Field; Their Analysis and Statistics," NREL 
2011 Photovoltaic Module Reliability Workshop Golden , 2011 
SunPower Corporation, Colorado, www1.eere.energy. gov/solar/
pdfs/pvmrw2011_01_plen_degraaff.pdf (viewed November 2015).
Doi, T. (2001), “Experimental Study on PV Module Recycling 
with Organic Solvent Method,” Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, Vol. 67, No. 1–4, pp. 397–403, doi:10.1016/S0927-0248(00)00308-1.
ElektroG  (2005), Bundesgesetzblatt (German Parliament 
Official Journal) BGBl I S.762 , March 2005, www.bmub.bund.
de/fileadmin/bmu-import/files/pdfs/allgemein/application/
pdf/elektrog.pdf (viewed March 2016).
Erdmann, L., S. Behrendt and M. Feil (2011), Kritische 
Rohstoffe für Deutschland (Critical Raw Materials for Germany) , 
www.izt.de/fileadmin/downloads/pdf/54416.pdf (viewed 
September 2015).Shutterstock
REFERENCES95
Europäischer Wirtschaftsdienst (2016), Stock Market 
Prices for First and Secondary Raw Materials , Europäischer 
Wirtschaftsdienst, Recycling und Entsorgung, Gernsbach, 
Germany.
European Commission (1997), Directive 97/7/EC of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 20 May 1997 on the 
Protection of Consumers in Respect of Distance Contracts, 
European Commission, Brussels.
European Commission (2000), Commission Decision 
2000/532/EC of 3 May 2000 Replacing Decision 94/3/EC 
Establishing a List of Wastes Pursuant to Article 1(a) of Council Directive 75/442/EEC on Waste and Council Decision 94/904/EC Establishing a List of Hazardous Waste Pursuant to Article 1(4) of Council Directive 91/689/EEC on Hazardous Waste , 
European Commission, Brussels, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/ALL/?uri=CELEX%3A32000D0532 (viewed November 2015).
European Commission  (2008), Directive 2008/98/EC of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 
on Waste and Repealing Certain Directives , Known as the Waste 
framework Directive 2008/98/EC, European Commission, Brussels, Belgium. http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/
framework/ (viewed November 2015).
European Commission  (2013), Mandate to the European 
Standardisation Organisations for Standardisation in the Field of 
Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (Directive 2012/19/
EU) (M/518 EN) , European Commission, Brussels, Belgium.
European Commission  (2014), Frequently Asked Questions 
on Directive 2012/19/EU, April 2014 , European Commission, 
Brussels, http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/weee/pdf/faq.pdf (viewed January 2016).
European Commission  (2015), Study on WEEE Recovery 
Targets, Preparation for Re-use Targets and on the Method for 
Calculation of the Recovery Targets , European Commission, 
Brussels, www.weee-forum.org/system/files/documents/2015_
weee_recovery_targets_bipro_final_report.pdf (viewed January 2016). 
European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization 
CLC/TC 111X (2015), Collection, Logistics & Treatment Requirements for WEEE - Part 2-4: Specific Requirements for the Treatment of Photovoltaic Panels , European Committee for 
Electrotechnical Standardization, Brussels, www.cenelec.eu/
dyn/www/f?p=104:110:1509447067868501::::FSP_ORG_ID,FSP_
PROJECT,FSP_LANG_ID:1258637,59265,25 (viewed July 2015).
European Parliament and Council (2002), Directive 2002/96/
EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 January 
2003 on Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) , 
EU, Brussels, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/ALL/?uri=CELEX:32006R1013 (viewed May 2016).European Parliament and Council (2006), Regulation (EC) No. 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2006 on Shipments of Waste, and Commission Regulation 
(EC) No. 1418/2007 of 29 November 2007 Concerning the 
Export for Recovery of Certain Waste Listed in Annex III or IIIA to Regulation (EC) No. 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council to Certain Countries to which the OECD 
Decision on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Wastes 
does not Apply , EU, Brussels, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/en/ALL/?uri=CELEX:32006R1013 (viewed March 2016).  
European Parliament and Council (2008a), Directive 
2008/98/EC on Waste , EU, Brussels, http://ec.europa.eu/
environment/waste/framework/ (viewed May 2016).
European Parliament and Council (2008b), Regulation (EC) 
No. 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
16 December 2008 on Classification, Labelling and Packaging of Substances and Mixtures, Amending and Repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 1999/45/EC, and Amending Regulation (EC) 
No. 1907/2006,  EU, Brussels, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex:32008R1272 (viewed May 2016).
European Parliament and Council (2012), Directive 2012/19/
EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 
2012 on Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) , 
EU, Brussels, http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/weee/
legis_en.htm (viewed November 2015).
Eurostat Statistics (2014), Recycling – Secondary Material Price 
Indicator , http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/
index.php/Recycling_%E2%80%93_secondary_material_
price_indicator#Glass (viewed May 2016).
First Solar (2015a), First Solar Resource Library ,  www.firstsolar.
com/~/media/documents/sustainability/recycling/first%20
solar%20recycling%20brochure.ashx (viewed July 2015).
First Solar (2015b),  The Recycling Advantage , http://www.
firstsolar.com/en/technologies%20and%20capabilities/
recycling-services (viewed in March 2015).
Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems (2014), 
Photovoltaics Repor t, Fraunhofer ISE, www.ise.fraunhofer.
de/en/downloads-englisch/pdf-files-englisch/photovoltaics-
report-slides.pdf (viewed July 2015).
Frischknecht, R., et al. (2016),  Methodology Guidelines on 
Life Cycle Assessment of Photovoltaic Electricity , International 
Energy Agency Photovoltaic Power Systems (IEA-PVPS) T12-
06:2016, 3rd edition, IEA-PVPS, Bern.
Fthenakis, V. (2000), “End-of-Life Management and Recycling 
of PV Modules,” Energy Policy , Vol. 28, pp. 1051-1058, Elsevier, 
Amsterdam.
Giacchetta, G., M. Leporini and B. Marchetti (2013), 
“Evaluation of the Environmental Benefits of New High Value 
Process for the Management of the End of Life of Thin-film Photovoltaic Modules,” Journal of Cleaner Production Vol. 51, 
pp. 214–24, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.01.022.
96
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSGlobalData (2012),  Solar Module Recycling  - a Necessary Step 
to Maximise Environmental Benefits of Solar PV Industry, Global 
Data 2012.
Government of India (2011), Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar 
Mission - Resolution No.5/14/2008-P&C , Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy, New Delhi, www.mnre.gov.in/solar-mission/
jnnsm/resolution-2/ (viewed May 2016).
Greenspec  (2016), Materials, Durability and Whole-Life Costing, 
www.greenspec.co.uk/building-design/durability/ (viewed May 
2016).
Held, M. (2009), “Life Cycle Assessment of CdTe Module 
Recycling,” Proceedings 24th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference , Hamburg. 
IEA (2011), Technology Development Prospects for the Indian Power Sector , information paper, Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD)/International Energy 
Agency, Paris.
IEA (2014), Technology Roadmap: Solar Photovoltaic Energy , 
IEA, Paris.
IEA-PVPS (2014a), Review of Failures of Photovoltaic Module s, 
International Energy Agency - Photovoltaic Power Systems T13, 
Bern, www.iea-pvps.org (viewed May 2015).
IEA-PVPS (2014b), Trends in Photovoltaic Applications 2014, 
Survey Report of Selected IEA Countries between 1992 and 
2013 , IEA-PVPS T1-25:2014, Bern. 
IEA-PVPS (2015), Snapshot of Global PV Markets 2014 , IEA-
PVPS T1-26:2015, Bern. 
IRENA  (2014), REmap 2030: A Renewable Energy Roadmap , 
International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi. 
IRENA (2016a), Remap 2030: A Renewable Energy Roadmap , 
IRENA, Abu Dhabi. 
IRENA (2016b), Renewable Energy Capacity Statistics 2015 , 
IRENA, Abu Dhabi. International Standards Organisation (2006), International 
Standard ISO 14040:2006 on Environmental Management — Life Cycle Assessment - Principles and Framewor k, ISO, www.
iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?csnumber=37456 (viewed May 
2016).
Johnson, D. (2014), Graphene and Perovskite are a Winning 
Combination for Photovoltaics , http://spectrum.ieee.org/
nanoclast/green-tech/solar/graphene-and-perovskite-are-a-
winning-combination-for-photovoltaics (viewed June 2015). 
Kang, S., et al. (2012), “ Experimental Investigations for 
Recycling of Silicon and Glass from Waste Photovoltaic 
Modules ,” Renewable Energy, Vol. 47, pp. 152–159, doi:10.1016/j.
renene.2012.04.030.
Kim, Y. and J. Lee (2012), “Dissolution of Ethylene Vinyl Acetate 
in Crystalline Silicon PV Modules Using Ultrasonic Irradiation 
and Organic Solvent,” Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells , 
Vol. 98, pp. 317–322, doi:10.1016/j.solmat.2011.11.022.Komoto, K. (2014), “Developments on PV Recycling in Japan,” Proceedings 24th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference , Hamburg.
Kuitsche, J. (2010), “Statistical Lifetime Predictions for PV Modules,” presentation, www1.eere.energy.gov/solar/pdfs/pvrw2010_kuitche.pdf (viewed October 2015).
Kumar, S. A. S. (2013), “Design For Reliability With Weibull 
Analysis For Photovoltaic Modules,” International Journal of Current Engineering and Technology , Vol. 3/1, pp. 129–34, http://
inpressco.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/02/Paper18129-134.pdf (viewed May 2015).
Kushiya, K. (2003), “Progress in Large-Area Cu (In,Ga) Se2-
Based Thin-Film Modules with the Efficiency of ver 13%,” 
Proceedings of the 3rd World Conference on Photovoltaic 
Energy Conversion , Osaka.
Lux Research (2013), Sunset for Silicon,  www.
compoundsemiconductor.net/article/91254-sunset-for-silicon.html (viewed October 2014).
Lux Research (2014), Solar Market to Grow to Over 65 GW by 
2019 , www.pvsolarreport.com/solar-market-to-grow-to-over-
65-gw-by-2019 (viewed October 2014).
Marini, C. et al. (2014), “A Prospective Mapping Of 
Environmental Impacts Of Large Scale Photovoltaic Ground Mounted Systems,” 29th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference , Amsterdam. 
Marwede, M. and A. Reller (2012), “Future Recycling Flows of Tellurium from Cadmium Telluride Photovoltaic Waste,” Journal Resources, Conservation and Recycling , Vol. 69, pp. 35-49.
Marwede, M. (2013), Cycling Critical Absorber Materials of CdTe- and CIGS-Photovoltaics: Material Efficiency Along the Life-Cycle , Augsburg, opus.bibliothek.uni-augsburg.de/opus4/
files/2440/Thesis_Marwede.pdf (viewed May 2015).
Ministry of Economy, Trading and Industry (METI) (2015), 
11th New and Renewable Energy Subcommittee under the Committee on Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy 
Subcommittee, April 201 5, METI, Toyko. 
METI and Ministry of Environment (MOE) (2015), Report on 
Reuse, Recycling and Proper Treatment of EOL Renewable Energy Equipment, METI and the MOE, Tokyo. 
METI and MOE (2016), Guidelines on End-of-Life Management 
of PV Modules , METI and MOE, Tokyo, www.env.go.jp/press/
files/jp/102441.pdf.
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (2016a), 
“Solid Waste Management Rules,” Gazette of Indi a, Part II, 
Section 3, Sub-section (ii).
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
(2016b), “Hazardous and Other Wastes (Management and Transboundary Movement) Rules,” Gazette of Indi a, Part II, 
Section 3, Sub-section (i).
97Ministry of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change (2016c), 
“E-waste (Management) Rules,” Gazette of India , Part II, Section 
3, Sub-section (i).
Monier, V. and M. Hestin (2011), Study on Photovoltaic Panels 
Supplementing the Impact Assessment for a Recast of the WEEE Directive , report ENV.G.4/FRA/2007/0067, Paris, France. 
Müller, A., S. Schlenker and K. Wambach (2008), “Recycling of Silicon, Environmental Footprints and Economics,” Proceedings for the 23rd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy 
Conference and Exhibition 2008 , Valencia, Spain. 
Münchmeyer, T., T. Faninger and P. Goodman (2012), Measures 
to be Implemented and Additional Impact Assessment with 
Regard to Scope Changes, Pursuant to the New RoHS Directiv e, 
final report prepared in collaboration with ERA Technology for the EC, Directorate-General Environment, Brussels.
Nasr, N. and M. Thurston (2006), Remanufacturing: A Key 
Enabler to Sustainable Product Systems , Rochester Institute of 
Technology, Rochester.
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (2011), Polycrystalline 
Thin-Film Materials and Devices R&D , web page, National 
Renewable Energy Laboratory, www.nrel.gov/pv/thinfilm.html 
(viewed October 2015).
v, M., et al. (2014), “Development of the PV Recycling System 
for Various Kinds of PV Modules,” 6th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion , 23-27 November 2014, Kyoto.
Oreski, G. (2014), “Encapsulant Materials and Degradation 
Effects - Requirements for Encapsulants, New Materials and Research Trend,” presentation at IEA Task 13 open workshop, 
Freiburg, http://iea-pvps.org/fileadmin/dam/intranet/task13/
Workshops/04_Open_Workshop_Task_13_Meeting_Freiburg/Oreski_IEA_Task_13_Workshop.pdf (viewed July 2015).
Padlewski, S. (2014), DEC-Selecting-Right-BOM-for-Solar-
Modules , Dupont, www.dupont.com/content/dam/assets/
products-and-services/solar-photovoltaic-materials/assets/
DEC-Selecting-Right-BOM-for-Solar-Modules.pdf (viewed 
October 2014).
Palitzsch, W. and U. Loser (2014), Integrierte 
Wiederverwendung von Hightech- und Greentech-Abfällen (Integrated reuse of high-tech and green-tech waste) , 
Strategische Rohstoffe - Risikovorsorge, pp.173–81, Springer: 
Berlin, Heidelberg. http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-642-
39704-2_12 (viewed October 2015).
Pearce, J., et al. (2014), Producer Responsibility and Recycling 
Solar Photovoltaic Modules ,  www.appropedia.org/Producer_
responsibility_and_recycling_solar_photovoltaic_modules 
(viewed October 2014).
Pennington, D., et al. (2016), Analysis of Material Recovery 
from Silicon Photovoltaic Panels , Publications Office of the 
European Union, Luxembourg.
Perez-Santalla, M. (2013), Silver Use: Changes & Outlook ,  
www.bullionvault.com/gold-news/silver-use-103020132 
(viewed November 2015).Photon (2015), Photon Databases , http://photon.info/en/
photon-databases (viewed May 2015 and March 2016).
PV CYCLE (2015), Solarwaste in the European Union , PV cycle, 
www.solarwaste.eu/in-your-country (viewed July 2016).
PV CYCLE (2016), Overview on PV CYCLE , PV cycle, www.
pvcycle.org/ (viewed May 2016).  Raitel (2014), International Technology Roadmap for 
Photovoltaic - Results 201 3,  www.itrpv.net/Reports/Downloads 
(viewed March 2016).
Raju, S. (2013), “First Solar’s Industry-Leading PV Technology 
and Recycling Program,” presentation, Solar Power International 2013 Conference , Chicago. 
Ramaswami, V., et al. (2014), “Issues Concerning Use of Antimony in Solar Glass and Development of Antimonyfree Low Iron Glass for Solar Applications,” Proceedings 29th European 
Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference , Amsterdam.
RCRA (1976), Resource Conservation and Recovery Act , RCRA, 42 
U.S.C. §6901 et seq. 1976, Environmental Protection Agency, US.
Sander, K., et al. (2007), Study on the Development of a 
Takeback and Recovery System for Photovoltaic Modules , 
European Photovoltaic Industry Association, German Solar Industries Association, Berlin. 
Schubert, G., G. Beaucarne and J. Hoornstra (2013), “The 
Future of Metallization - Results from Questionnaires of the Four 
Workshops from 2008 to 2013,” Energy Procedia , Vol. 43,  pp. 12-17.
Sinha, P. and M. Cossette (2012), “End-of-Life CdTe PV Recycling 
with Semiconductor Refining,” 27th European Photovoltaic Solar 
Energy Conference and Exhibition , Frankfurt am Main. 
Sinha, P. and A. Wade (2015), “Assessment of Leaching Tests for Evaluating Potential Environmental Impacts of PV Module Field Breakage,” IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics , Vol. 5/6, , pp. 
1710-1714, New Orleans.  
State Council of the People’s Republic of China (2011), Waste 
Electrical and Electronic Products Recycling Regulations , Beijing, www.
gov.cn/flfg/2009-03/04/content_1250844.htm (viewed May 2016).
Stiftung Elektroaltgeräte (Used Electronic Equipment 
Foundation) (2015), Stiftung Elektroaltgeräte Register , Stiftung 
Elektroaltgeräte, www.stiftung-ear.de/en/ (viewed July 2015).
Strevel, N., et al. (2013), “Improvements in CdTe Module 
Reliability and Long-Term Degradation Through Advances in Construction and Device Innovation,” Photovoltaics 
International , Vol. 22, 2013.
Taoa, C., J. Jiang and M. Taoa (2011), “Natural Resource 
Limitations to Terawatt Solar Cell Deployment,” ECS 
Transactions , Vol. 33/17, pp. 3-11, Las Vegas, http://ecst.ecsdl.
org/content/33/17/3.full.pdf (viewed November 2015).
The Silver Institute and Thomson Reuters (2014), World 
Silver Survey 2014 - a Summary , The Silver Institute, www.
98
END-OF-LIFE MANAGEMENT: SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC PANELSPhotovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition 2006 , 
Dresden.
Wambach, K. et al. (2009), “Photovoltaics Recycling Scoping 
Workshop,” 34th PV Specialists Conference , Philadelphia, 
www.bnl.gov/pv/files/PRS_Agenda/3_4_PV-Module-RecyclingWambach.pdf (viewed February 2015).
T. Y. Wang, et al. (2012), “Recycling of Materials from 
Silicon Base Solar Cell Module,” Photovoltaic Specialists Conference,  2012 38th Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers, Austin, Texas, pp. 002355-002358, doi: 10.1109/PVSC.2012.6318071.
Wirth, H.  (2015), Recent Facts about Photovoltaics in 
Germany , Fraunhofer ISE, Freiburg, www.ise.fraunhofer.de/en/
publications/veroeffentlichungen-pdf-dateien-en/studien-und-
konzeptpapiere/recent-facts-about-photovoltaics-in-germany.pdf (viewed February 2016).
Woodhouse, M. et al . (2013), “Supply-Chain Dynamics of 
Tellurium, Indium, and Gallium Within the Context of PV 
Manufacturing Costs,“ Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Journal of Photovoltaics,  Vol. 99, pp. 1–5, doi:10.1109/
JPHOTOV.2013.2242960.
Zhang, J. and L. Fang (2014), “Forecast for the China PV 
equipment Recycling,” Chinese Academy of Sciences, Institute of Electrical Engineering, presentation at IEA-PVPS Task 12 Meeting, Beijing.
Zimmermann, T. (2013), “Dynamic Material Flow Analysis of 
Critical Metals Embodied in Thin-film Photovoltaic Cells,” Artec Forschungszentrum Nachhaltigkeit (Sustainability Research 
Centre) , Artec-paper Nr. 194, Bremen, www.uni-bremen.de/
fileadmin/user_upload/single_sites/artec/artec_Dokumente/
artec-paper/194_paper.pdf (viewed June 2015).silverinstitute.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/
WSS2014Summary.pdf (viewed November 2015).
T. Y. Wang, et al. (2012), “Recycling of Materials from 
Silicon Base Solar Cell Module,” Photovoltaic Specialists Conference,  2012 38th Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers, Austin, Texas, pp. 002355-002358, doi: 10.1109/PVSC.2012.6318071.
UK Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (2014), 
WEEE Regulations 2013 – Government Guidance Notes , UK 
Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, London, 
England. www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/292632/bis-14-604-weee-regulations-
2013-government-guidance-notes.pdf (viewed March 2016).
UK Department of Energy and Climate Change (2015), 
National Statistics Solar Photovoltaics Deployment , UK 
Department of Energy and Climate Change, London, England, 
www.gov.uk/government/statistics/solar-photovoltaics-
deployment (viewed March 2016).
UK Environment Agency  (2015), List of Approved Compliance 
Schemes for WEEE - 2014, UK Environment Agency, Bristol, 
www.sepa.org.uk/media/36439/approved-pcss.pdf (viewed July 2015).
UK WEEE Directive (2013), The Waste Electrical and Electronic 
Equipment Regulations 2013 ,  www.legislation.gov.uk/
uksi/2013/3113/introduction/made (viewed March 2016).
United Nations (2016), Basel Convention Homepage , www.
basel.int/ (viewed February 2016).
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 
(2014), Small Island Developing States: Challenges in Transport and Trade Logistics , Note by the UNCTAD secretariat, 
TD/B/C.I/MEM.7/8, Trade and Development Board, Trade and Development Commission, Multi-Year Expert Meeting on Transport, Trade Logistics and Trade Facilitation, Third session, Geneva, 24–26 November 2014. http://unctad.org/meetings/en/SessionalDocuments/cimem7d8_en.pdf (viewed May 2016).
United Nations Environment Programme (2012), E-waste: 
Volume III: WEEE / E-waste, “Takeback system ,” United Nations 
Environment Programme, Osaka, Japan. 
US Geological Survey (2016),  Mineral Commodity Summaries 
2016 : U.S. Geological Survey, Reston, Virginia, US. http://dx.doi.
org/10.3133/70140094.
Vodermeyer, C. (2013), “Photovoltaics Long Term Reliability 
and Typical Error Patterns,” Allianz Global Corporate & Specialty 
Expert Days 2013 , www.agcs.allianz.com/assets/Global%20
offices%20assets/Germany/Expert%20Days%202013/11%20Vodermayer_Photovoltaics%20Reliability.pdf (viewed February 
2015).
Wambach, K. and S. Schlenker (2006), “The Second Life Of 
A 300 kW PV Generator Manufactured With Recycled Wafers 
From The Oldest German PV Power Plant,” 21st European 
PHOTO CREDITS
Cover: Power plant using solar energy with sun / 
shutterstock
Page 4: Electric solar cell panel in sunlight / shutterstock
Page 10:  Solar panels background / shutterstock
Page 15:  Desert solar energy / shutterstock
Page 17: Damaged PV panel / shutterstock
Page 18: Field of blooming sunflowers / shutterstock
Page 21: Photovoltaic installation with sunlight on the 
background / shutterstock
Page 22: Solar power plant / shutterstock
Page 28: Solar panel with broken glass, Italy / shutterstock
Page 30:  Engineers in Khonkaen, Thailand / shutterstock
Page 36: Broken solar panel / shutterstock
Page 39: Frameless PV modules and PV CYCLE box / PV 
CYCLE
Page 45: Solar panel texture / shutterstock
Page 46: Asian engineer / shutterstock
Page 54: Solar PV panels / shutterstock
Page 56: End-of-life PV modules / PV CYCLE
Page 57: Sunship in green city in Freiburg,                 Germany / shutterstock
Page 58:  Urban landscape, Shanghai                                           / shutterstock
Page 65: Aerial view of a solar farm, UK / shutterstock
Page 67: Broken and destroyed solar panel / shutterstock
Page 72: Solar panels at Rangdum, Padum, Zanskar valley, India / shutterstock
Page 74: Fresh green grass field against the sun with solar panel / shutterstock
Page 77:  Solar installer / shutterstock
Page 83: Automated production line in modern Solar silicon factory / shutterstock
Page 89: Greeting to the sun in Zadar, Croatia / shutterstock
Page 90: Solar panel texture / shutterstock
Page 94:  Photovoltaic panels / shutterstock

© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Nadav Enbar Principal Project Manager Solar Power International 14 September 2016 PV Life Cycle Analysis Managing PV Assets over an Uncertain Lifetime 
2 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Agenda ! Background – Industry needs – Overview of EPRI project ! Research Findings – PV site surveys – Repowering and decommissioning guidance ! Conclusions and Next Steps 

3 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Background Industry Needs The Issue ! PV project lifetimes are not well-understood ! Factors that influence lifetimes have not been quantified ! Underperforming assets can be a burden to project owners ! Options and steps to restore power or decommission systems need to be defined 

4 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Background Overview of EPRI Project The project provides guidance to PV system owners around assessing plant health—performance and safety issues—and determining best options for repowering and decommissioning.  Scope 1. Develop detailed methodology for PV site condition surveys 2. Conduct surveys of 30 PV systems 3. Develop processes for a) re-powering PV systems and b) decommissioning PV systems  4. Develop generic economic model to allow plant owners to compare repowering options 5. Research options for recycling and disposing of modules and other plant components Results were  packaged into a PV Life Cycle Analysis Manual, which provides guidance for owners and operators of PV systems. 
EPRI Supplemental Project Stats: • Schedule: 2013-2017 • $660k study funded by 6 utilities • EPRI Report (3002008832) to be published late-Sept. 2016 
5 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Research Findings PV Site Surveys 
6 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Background Site Survey Methodology ! Visual Inspection  ! Measurements – I-V curves  – Bypass diode check – Infrared scanning  – Power quality analysis – Shading analysis 

7 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Research Findings  Examples of Safety Failures 

8 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Research Findings Example Site Survey Results: SolarTAC 

9 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Research Findings Example Site Survey Results: SolarTAC 
Negative degradation rates, or performance gains, may be due to manufacturer underrating of modules, whereas positive values may indicate underrating. -6%	-4%	-2%	0%	2%	4%	6%	
CdTe	Mono	c-Si	Hybrid	1	Hybrid	2	CIGS	1	CIGS	2	Poly	c-Si	1	Poly	c-Si	2	Module	Degrada?on	
Min.	Nameplate	Rated	Nameplate	Max.	Nameplate	
10 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Research Findings Example Site Survey Results: SolarTAC Poly c-Si 1 System System ! Size: 9.4 kWdc  ! Modules: 33 (3 strings) ! Tilt: Latitude (20°) ! Installation: November 2010 ! Status: Operational Inverter ! Size: 10 kWac ! Quantity: 1 ! Status: Operational String	2String	3String	1
Example Results  One safety failure: failed diode  Average String Degradation: 0.31%/yr Average Module Degradation: 0.03%/yr 

11 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. 
Research Findings Example Safety Failure Mapping for a Older, Larger Site 
Hotspot	issues	leading	to	backsheet	burn	(37/2352)Ribbon-ribbon	solder	bond	failure	with	backsheet	burn	(86/2352)Failed	diode	wih	no	backsheetburn	(26/2352)Hotspot	issues	with	backsheet	burn	+	Ribbon-ribbon	solder	bond	with	backsheet	burn	(1/2352)Backsheet	Delamination		(10/2352)Backsheet	Delamination	+	Ribbon-ribbon	solder	bond	failure	(2/2352)Safety	failure	rate	at	the	plant	level	=	162/2352	=	7%	
12 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Research Findings  Summary of Module Distribution (all sites) 
Degradation generally seems higher in the hotter climates (AZ and TX) Cool climates (NY) tend to have lower degradation, and CO systems fall in between. 

13 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Research Findings Repowering and Decommissioning 
14 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Repowering and Decommissioning Guidance Process for Determining Best Path Steps for PV System Owners and Utilities 1. Conduct site survey 2. Identify issues to be fixed – Safety – Performance – May include non-PV assets like roof repairs, infrastructure upgrades 3. Develop scope of work (perhaps for multiple options) – May include re-design – Can be reduced to time & materials (or sub-contracts) – Meet latest code for safety and performance ! Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ) dependent ! Grandfathering may apply ! PV specific code changes: 2014 NEC for PV 4. Perform cost-benefit analysis 
15 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Repowering Guidance 2014 NEC Code With Legacy PV Plants ! The 2011 and 2014 NEC code cycles made significant changes to Article 690 – Improved safety – Improved performance ! Allow ungrounded DC systems ! Require use of PV Wire not USE-2 for ungrounded systems ! Improved ground fault detection ! Require arc fault detection ! Rapid disconnects required for rooftop systems The above changes significantly affect repowering legacy PV plants 
16 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Repowering Guidance Implications of Inverter Replacement for Legacy PV Plant ! For some legacy systems, to replace the inverter means: " Switch to a transformerless inverter due to limited availability of isolated inverters and lack of manufacturer support/warranties "  Unground the PV system, as required by the transformerless inverter ! Replace all modules with products that have PV wire ! Replace home runs and combined wires (no white wire) "  Restring to 1000 V to match inverter specifications ! Replace combiner boxes to support positive and negative fusing ! Replace disconnects to support positive and negative disconnecting means "  Relabel entire system Replacing the inverter may cost almost as much as a new installation. 

17 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. PV Plant Decommissioning ! Reasons for decommissioning include: – End of project life – Economic viability – Safety ! Decommissioning plans include steps to restore sites to their intended use: – Land and water use restoration – Salvage, recycling, and disposal of plant equipment – “Safe” disposal of all materials (although plans often don’t specify what to do or how to do it) 

18 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Decommissioning PV Plants Balance of System  ! Equipment removal, disposal, and recycling – Inverters and other electronic components – e-waste recycling – Module mounting structures – steel recycle, resale – Concrete – recycle – Electrical equipment – reuse or recycle – Wiring – copper recycling ! Equipment abandon in place – Underground conduit – Certain structures ! Equipment reuse – Infrastructure improvements – roads, fences, etc. – Substations, communication towers – Maintenance buildings 

19 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Decommissioning PV Plants Modules  Recycling ! No federal, state, or local regulations require PV module recycling in the U.S. ! No 3rd party or public module recycling programs in the U.S., with the exception of limited manufacturer take-back programs ! Recycling technologies exist to extract/reuse ~80% of module material Disposal ! PV modules are not classified as hazardous waste, but they contain hazardous materials ! Disposal options in U.S. – Modules that fail the Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP) must be disposed of in hazardous waste landfills – Long-term storage in storage containers may be best option until recycling becomes available Module waste volumes are 0.1-0.6% of total e-waste today, but by 2050 panel waste may  surge to over 10% of 2014 global e-waste levels* *Source: IEA-PVPS Report: T12-06:2016 (June 2016) 
20 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Conclusions ! Interest in PV plant repowering and decommissioning is growing as PV plants age and experience performance and safety issues ! Module disposal is potentially a major issue – Some modules contain hazardous waste, but limited data available to verify which modules fail the Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP) – Some deployment estimates show that PV waste could equal 10% of today’s e-waste by 2050 – Disposal in regular landfills not recommended in case modules break and toxic materials leach into the soil ! Regulatory environment – Europe regulates panel recycling, and Japan and Korea are establishing recycling programs – Currently no regulatory framework in U.S. and no public PV recycling facilities 

21 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Next Steps  Planned Work ! Deeper dive study on PV recycling feasibility in the U.S. – Regulatory environment – Feasibility of developing a comprehensive collection system – State of the art in PV recycling technology – Limited TCLP testing to determine module toxicity in landfill environment Proposed Projects ! Comprehensive test and evaluation program to assess various factors that may influence TCLP outcomes ! Technical and cost considerations for the decommissioning and disposal of PV plants 
More data is needed to clarify the extent to which module toxicity is a pervasive issue. 

22 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. 
Together…Shaping the Future of Electricity 
23 
© 2016 Electric Power Research Institute, Inc. All rights reserved. Questions for potential discussion ! Who budgets for PV end-of-life costs? – Method and considerations in your cost calculation? – Is PV salvage value positive or negative? Anecdotal data? ! Has anyone repowered or decommissioned a plant? – Challenges and/or key questions during the process? – Chosen method of module and/or balance of plant disposal? – Compatibility of new vs. old equipment?  ! Hazardous waste associated with PV plant disposal? – Aware of Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure?  – Usefulness to include on module or BOS spec sheet? ! Do you think the U.S. needs to regulate PV recycling? – What are the biggest challenges, e.g., economics / value of materials, collection? – Percentage of project developers opting to include recycling in the upfront purchase contract? 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION1
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY
CATALYSING ACTION
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION2

THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION3
Preface 4
Foreword 5In Support of the New Plastics Economy 6
Executive Summary 16
Global Momentum for a Plastics Rethink is Greater than Ever 22
The Road Ahead: Three Distinct Strategies to Drive the Transition  26
The New Plastics Economy Initiative: A Catalyst for Change 46
Appendix: Key Analytical Assumptions  52
Acknowledgements and Disclaimer 56
Endnotes 57About the Ellen MacArthur Foundation 64THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY
CATALYSING ACTION
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION4
Preface
In January 2016, the World Economic Forum, the Ellen MacArthur Foundation and McKinsey & 
Company published the report The New Plastics Economy – Rethinking the future of plastics. It was produced as part of MainStream – a multi-industry, global initiative which aims to 
accelerate business-driven innovations and help scale the circular economy. For the first time, 
the report provided transparency on global plastics material flows and associated economics. It found that, while plastics and plastic packaging are a key part of the global economy, the current plastics economy has significant drawbacks that are becoming more apparent by the 
day. In addition, it presented a blueprint for a more effective plastics system based on circular 
economy principles – in effect, a New Plastics Economy.
In May 2016, the Ellen MacArthur Foundation launched the New Plastics Economy initiative 
– a bold, three-year project to mobilise the report’s recommendations, together with its Lead Philanthropic Partner – the Eric and Wendy Schmidt Fund for Strategic Innovation; its Philanthropic Funders – MAVA Foundation, Oak Foundation, and players of People’s Postcode 
Lottery (GB); its Core Partners – Amcor, The Coca-Cola Company, Danone, MARS, Novamont, 
Unilever and Veolia; and a broad group of participant companies, cities and governments across the value chain. 
This new report is one of the first key deliverables of the New Plastics Economy initiative. 
It represents a logical next step to the 2016 report: from rethinking the future of plastics to catalysing action. To trigger action, the report aims to make three original contributions to the 
transition towards the New Plastics Economy:
• Three distinct transition strategies for three plastic packaging categories covering the 
entire market (Redesign and innovate; Reuse; Recycle) based on a granular, segment-by-segment analysis and a quantification of the economic value creation potential for core aspects of the Reuse and Recycling categories 
• A set of priority actions for each category, mobilising the strategies and setting a common direction for players across the global plastics packaging value chain
• A targeted plan for the New Plastics Economy initiative to carry out in 2017 to catalyse progress on the priority actions.
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION5
Foreword
The World Economic Forum, the Ellen MacArthur Foundation and McKinsey & Company joined 
forces in 2014 to create Project Mainstream, a cross-industry, CEO-led global initiative to help scale the circular economy by unravelling systemic stalemates. Taking a global, cross-sectoral 
look at material flows, the project quickly identified plastics as one of the value chains most 
representative of the current linear model, bringing undisputed functionality to a variety of applications, but also entailing significant economic losses and severe negative externalities.
The resulting report, The New Plastics Economy: Rethinking the future of plastics, launched 
at the World Economic Forum Annual Meeting 2016 in Davos-Klosters, analysed these global 
flows for the first time and set out a vision for a new and effective plastics packaging system, 
guided by circular economy principles, and fit for the long term. This compelling vision provided the impetus for the Ellen MacArthur Foundation to set up an ambitious three-year initiative, the New Plastics Economy, to act on the report’s insights and turn the vision into reality.
The initiative has made a strong start. Leading players from the plastic packaging supply 
chain have committed to it, alongside major capital cities, philanthropists, policy-makers and 
academics. The momentum gathered is indicative of its exceptionally collaborative approach that builds bridges along value chains, across silos, and between the private and public sectors to initiate a genuine system shift. The interest it has generated echoes a growing consensus on the need to phase out the negative impacts associated with today’s patterns of use by notably 
redesigning certain materials and rethinking business models.
This new report shows that we are now firmly at the action stage. The initiative has solidified its 
five building blocks – dialogue, harmonisation, innovation, analysis and outreach – and each has catalytic actions planned for 2017. All these elements will be needed on the road ahead and the insights presented in this paper make the next steps on that journey clear. 
We look forward to following the progress of this singular and powerful initiative over the 
coming years as it stimulates the innovation, redesign and new thinking needed to pave the 
way towards creating a plastics system that works.
Dame Ellen MacArthur 
Founder and Chair of Trustees  ELLEN MACARTHUR FOUNDATIONRichard Samans Head of the Centre for the Global Agenda and Member of the Managing Board
WORLD ECONOMIC 
FORUMDominic Waughray Head of Public-Private Partnership and Member of the Executive Committee
WORLD ECONOMIC 
FORUMProf. Dr. Martin R. Stuchtey Founder and Managing Partner 
SYSTEMIQ
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION6
In Support of the New 
Plastics Economy
We urgently need to transform global plastic packaging material flows if we are 
to continue to reap the benefits of this versatile material. This report marks a major milestone, calling out specific actions to capture opportunities for redesign and innovation, reuse, and recycling. It’s now up to us all to get it done. 
PAUL POLMAN,  CEO, UNILEVER   
Resources management should not be summarised as a matter of cost optimisation but as a powerful driver of shared value creation. This belief runs through our entire business at Danone, fundamental to our relationships with suppliers, partners and our customers. Danone has embedded the principles of the circular economy in its value chain, managing now plastic as a cycle rather than as conventional linear supply chain. We are hugely supportive of the New Plastics Economy report as it lays out actions to turn the challenges posed by plastics today into an opportunity that will deliver value tomorrow. I am excited that Danone is taking a leading role in this initiative to help drive systemic change.
EMMANUEL FABER,  CEO, DANONE
It will take a concerted effort involving various stakeholders to make the systemic changes needed to transition to a circular economy. This is especially true for plastics. Veolia believes that the New Plastics Economy initiative provides an excellent collaborative platform to catalyse the transition. The initiative’s latest report, “The New Plastics Economy: Catalysing action”, builds on the findings of the previous report and provides a clear roadmap of priority actions for 2017 to drive progress towards a global plastics system that works: a system that will capture material value and contribute to improved economic and environmental outcomes. Veolia looks forward to its continued participation in these efforts. 
ANTOINE FRÉROT,  CEO, VEOLIA
Shifting towards a circular economy based systems whereby the biological and technical cycles are linked and driven by innovative products delivered through new supply chains and systems will not be easy, but will result in significant benefits for the economy and environment. To make this transition successful, it is crucial to know where we want to go and what we want to achieve, which is exactly what the first New Plastics Economy report lays out. At Novamont we welcome this second report which now helps develop further our collective learning and is a call to action for the creation of tangible new links between upstream and downstream value chains. 
CATIA BASTIOLI,  CEO, NOVAMONT
Through innovation and collaboration, The Dow Chemical Company is committed to advancing a circular economy to deliver economic, societal, and environmental value. This important report by the Ellen MacArthur Foundation offers a key step in delivering science-based solutions by providing options that help us close resource loops for plastics and facilitate the transition towards a New Plastics Economy. 
ANDREW LIVERIS,  CHAIRMAN AND CEO, THE DOW CHEMICAL COMPANY
SUEZ is delighted to have contributed to this next milestone and to continue its collaboration within the New Plastics Economy initiative. This report underwrites SUEZ’ view of transitioning towards a plastic packaging system in line with circular economy principles, through a concerted, cross-value chain approach. The initiative’s Pioneer Projects, with tangible actions and concrete goals, are a great example of how SUEZ aims to overcome plastics challenges. 
JEAN-LOUIS CHAUSSADE,  CEO, SUEZ
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION7
Healthy oceans can support healthy people and healthy profits; if we let them. That 
means governments, business and individual citizens backing an inclusive, circular economy. It means using legislation, innovation and consumer choices to replace plastic related demand and pollution with better alternatives that create jobs and still look after our planet. And it means supporting this initiative by ensuring that each us knows 
how we can help rethink, reuse and recycle plastic. This report is a great place to start.
ERIK SOLHEIM,  EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, UN ENVIRONMENT
The New Plastics Economy initiative is undertaking groundbreaking efforts to prove 
that positive economic and environmental progress can coexist in supply chains that have become increasingly global. The initiative’s work complements Mayor de Blasio’s OneNYC Plan and New York City’s goals of achieving an 80% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2050, and zero waste to landfills by 2030.  At NYCEDC, we look forward to opportunities to apply this report’s findings to promote innovative and sustainable approaches to design, infrastructure, and new business models.
MARIA TORRES-SPRINGER,  PRESIDENT AND CEO, NEW YORK CITY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
CORPORATION
Carrefour fully supports the New Plastics Economy initiative. Our group pledges to continue its worldwide efforts working with industry partners and other stakeholders to move toward a circular model for plastics. Together we will create innovative and tangible actions to achieve this goal.
GEORGES PLASSAT,  CHAIRMAN AND CEO, CARREFOUR
The New Plastics Economy represents a huge opportunity for design, as evidenced in this report. From more circular products and services to new business models and industry systems, design is needed in the absence of established roadmaps or models that we can simply re-tune or optimise. To deliver the step change in industry practices that is required, we need to recognise that transitioning to the circular economy is one of the biggest creative challenges of our time. The New Plastics Economy initiative plays an important role, inspiring and supporting designers to capture the opportunity.   
TIM BROWN,  CEO, IDEO
The New Plastics Economy report calls attention to the vast amount of plastic packaging material that is lost to the economy after only a single use. Amcor understands the challenge, but we also see a tremendous opportunity to continually develop packaging that is better for the environment throughout its life: production, use and re-use.
RON DELIA, CEO, AMCOR 
Packaging has an outsized impact on our planet. As a global consumer goods company, we need to find ways to drastically improve the environmental, as well as economic, impact of plastic packaging, while keeping protecting and presenting our products effectively. Mars joined the New Plastics Economy initiative as a core partner in order to proactively drive this effort in our industry. We applaud this report and fully support the initiative’s ongoing efforts to promote a circular economy approach for plastics. 
BARRY PARKIN,  CHIEF SUSTAINABILITY AND HEALTH & WELLBEING OFFICER, MARS, INCORPORATED
At Coca-Cola we’ve been a long-time proponent of circular thinking, particularly when it comes to packaging. We introduced refillable bottles 120 years ago. As market and consumer preferences shifted so did we, offering recyclable PET bottles and then a fully recyclable PET bottle made partially from plants. It’s time for another change—a plastics system fully aligned with the circular economy. The market and environment demand it and Coca-Cola is proud to support the New Plastics Economy Initiative. We applaud the Ellen MacArthur Foundation as they lead this innovative and responsible endeavor. 
BEA PEREZ, CHIEF SUSTAINABILITY OFFICER, THE COCA-COLA COMPANY 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION8
Borealis, as a leading provider of innovative solutions in the field of 
polyolefins, is committed to realising the opportunities presented by the New Plastics Economy. The initiative has already convened all stakeholders to work effectively together. With this new report, the initiative now offers a roadmap to create effective markets based on circular economy principles – an action plan where Borealis wants to take an active and leading role.
MARK GARRETT,  CEO, BOREALIS
As one of the world’s leading retailers Schwarz Gruppe relies on packaging materials. If we want to safeguard future resources, eliminate waste and save energy, it is of central importance that we circulate resources -including our packaging- effectively. Ellen MacArthur Foundation’s New Plastics Economy initiative is an excellent platform to meet this challenge together with other leading companies.  
GERD CHRZANOWSKI,  CEO, SCHWARZ CENTRAL SERVICES (LIDL & KAUFLAND)
At TriCiclos, we understand the urgency on rethinking the plastic industry worldwide; and strongly support the idea on setting the principles of the New Plastics 
Economy through cooperation between all the actors of the value chain. We are 
very proud to be involved with the New Plastics Economy initiative, contributing 
with our experience on improving plastic packaging design and harmonising 
collection and sorting systems towards circular economy models for packages. 
This report is totally aligned with our mission, as it offers a clear way forward to solve a highly relevant problem. We are eager to carry on the journey!
GONZALO MUÑOZ,  CO-FOUNDER AND CEO, TRICICLOS 
Enhancing packaging is a key driver for L’Oréal in achieving our commitments on improved environmental and social profile of our products while providing equal or greater benefits to the customer. This new report of the New Plastics Economy initiative shows a tangible way forward to innovate our plastic packaging - we believe this is the right direction to go, and are ready to drive this transition to a circular plastics system! 
ALEXANDRA PALT,  CHIEF SUSTAINABILITY OFFICER, L’ORÉAL
The world is at a turning point. For millennia, production and consumption cycles were circular, consistent with the “waste = input” flows inherent in nature. The invention of plastics fostered disposable goods and packaging that were cheaper to replace with virgin rather than recycled materials. The age of waste, symptom of the linear economy, unfolded globally. Today, the companies and NGOs participating in the New Plastics Economy initiative are pioneering steps, presented in this report, to move towards a circular economy for plastics. This critical global initiative is urgent, timely and achievable.
TOM SZAKY,  CEO, TERRACYCLE
The City of Phoenix handles more than 54,000 tons of plastics every year, and has been actively working with local partners to boost plastics recycling over the past few years. The report ‘New Plastics Economy: Catalysing action’ is helping cities like Phoenix build a framework for systemic change to transition plastics from the linear take-make-dispose model to a true circular economy. 
GREG STANTON,  MAYOR, CITY OF PHOENIX
A new circular plastic paradigm will create great value for business and society. Many actions can be taken individually, but we need collaborative effort to make a meaningful shift. This report on catalysing action by the New Plastics Economy initiative provides an excellent view of the opportunities across the plastics value chain while explaining the interplay between design innovation and after-use systems. The action steps put forward are practical ideas that will help bring a new plastics economy from vision to reality. 
ANDREW AULISI,  SENIOR DIRECTOR, GLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY, PEPSICO
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION9
It is incumbent on companies of every size around the world to take an honest 
look at how they are using resources, and focus their ingenuity on reducing waste. Sealed Air is committed to deliver even more value for its customers and the wider society, by taking the next steps to make dramatic improvements that prevent waste and reuse resources, as laid out in this new report. 
JEROME PERIBERE,  CEO, SEALED AIR CORPORATION
In 2016, the Ellen MacArthur Foundation provided for the first time what had long been lacking – a comprehensive, truly global perspective on plastics innovation needs at a societal level, and on the business opportunity for industry. Now, the 2017 report nicely advances the thinking, with specific, actionable priorities that strike the right balance between ‘evolutionary’ and ‘revolutionary’ – respecting current materials in the market, while simultaneously creating space for significant new materials innovation. 
MARC VERBRUGGEN,  CEO, NATUREWORKS
As one of the world’s leading manufacturers of flexible packaging and labels, Constantia Flexibles understands the importance of modern plastic packaging 
design. We are delighted to see how the New Plastics Economy initiative is bringing 
together other major players in the plastic packaging value chain to improve design 
and thus create both economic and environmental benefits for all stakeholders. 
ALEXANDER BAUMGARTNER,  CEO, CONSTANTIA FLEXIBLES
Think Beyond Plastic believes in harnessing the forces of innovation and 
entrepreneurship to advance the New Plastics Economy. Essential for the success of this endeavour is building the entire innovation eco-system and mobilising the cumulative power of the participants of the New Plastics Economy initiative. 
DANIELLA RUSSO,  CEO, THINK BEYOND PLASTIC INNOVATION ACCELERATOR
As a global leading provider of technology for handling post-use plastics, TOMRA aims to be a frontrunner in the transition towards a New Plastics Economy. We engage in this initiative because we believe it provides a common vision for the industry combined with a unique platform for pre-competitive collaboration and action. With this report these two elements are now complemented by tangible guidance for the way forward. 
STEFAN RANSTRAND,  PRESIDENT & CEO, TOMRA SYSTEMS ASA 
MMBC supports the New Plastics Economy initiative as a platform for the creation of a global circular plastics system. While MMBC has been able to achieve significant progress in recycling plastics at a local level, we need this type of initiative to be able to address the growing issue of plastics at a global scale. 
ALLEN LANGDON,  MANAGING DIRECTOR, MULTI-MATERIALS BRITISH COLUMBIA (MMBC)
P&G believes transformational change can be achieved by combining the perspectives of all stakeholders, including industry, governments and consumers. We are actively engaged in several multi-stakeholder collaborations that seek to improve recycling uptake, quality and economics. The New Plastics Economy initiative’s collaborative way of working is aligned with ours and represents a powerful opportunity to drive positive change in the plastics system.  
VIRGINIE HELIAS,  VICE PRESIDENT GLOBAL SUSTAINABILITY, PROCTER & GAMBLE
Through first-hand experience, KKPKP knows how recyclable plastics create income for waste pickers in India. The New Plastics Economy initiative attempts to ambitiously take a detailed and long term view on the trade with a multi-pronged approach of value enhancement - critical for informal recyclers - and format and delivery model redesign for plastics packaging. This new report has tremendous potential to influence policy at the global and local levels and we look forward to how it will impact the recycling economy.
MALATI GADGIL,  TREASURER, KAGAD KACH PATRA KASHTAKARI PANCHAYAT (KKPKP)
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION10
The New Plastics Economy initiative represents a truly momentous and unique 
opportunity to completely rewrite the rules of global resource management, in line with the circular economy principles. Whilst the ambition is breathtaking this report sets outs some key steps to transition to the New Plastics Economy. The London Waste and Recycling Board is proud to be part of this initiative. 
WAYNE HUBBARD,  COO, LONDON WASTE AND RECYCLING BOARD
As a family owned company, Werner&Mertz is fully committed to capturing the value of plastic packaging after use, and so creating economic and environmental benefits. By using post-consumer recycled plastics for our branded goods packaging, we show how recycling allows to close the loops while meeting the highest quality standards. We whole heartedly support the New Plastics Economy initiative and are happy to be part of this tremendous important programme. 
REINHARD SCHNEIDER,  CEO AND SOLE OWNER, WERNER & MERTZ GROUP
We are proud to explore together with the New Plastics Economy initiative how plastic packaging design can enable circular material flows in addition to the delivery of 
safe, high-quality products to our customers. This report shows the crucial role of 
such design in moving towards a plastics system that works economically, socially 
and environmentally. Crucially it offers a practical transition strategy for the different 
packaging applications enabling us to turn theory into reality rapidly and with scale. 
MIKE BARRY,  DIRECTOR, PLAN A, MARKS & SPENCER 
As an innovative recycling company, APK Aluminium und Kunststoffe 
AG continuously strives to improve the quality and economics of plastic packaging recycling. Connecting different players in the supply chain, from designers to recyclers, will be crucial to create an effective plastics system, as laid out in this report. The New Plastics Economy initiative’s collaborative approach is exactly what is needed to turn this endeavour into a success. 
KLAUS WOHNIG,  CEO, APK ALUMINIUM UND KUNSTSTOFFE AG
As shown in this report, innovation is essential for a successful transition to the New Plastics Economy. As an innovator, Loop Industries is proud to support this shift with our high-quality depolymerisation technology.
DANIEL SOLOMITA,  FOUNDER AND CEO, LOOP INDUSTRIES 
As one of the leaders in the field of polyethylene recycling, RPC bpi recycled products understands the many benefits of closing material loops. This new report shows how we can further strengthen recycling economics, by moving towards the New Plastics Economy - a promising journey we are pleased to be part of! 
GERRY MCGARRY,  MANAGING DIRECTOR, RPC BPI RECYCLED PRODUCTS
WRAP welcomes this new report on the New Plastics Economy as it provides a global vision that builds on the extensive work WRAP has focussed on in the UK over the last few years, including packaging design, collection harmonisation and plastic packaging recycling infrastructure. 
MARCUS GOVER,  CEO, WRAP
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION11
At Surfdome many of our staff, customers, suppliers and I are regularly faced 
with the results of a dated linear economy, with plastic pollution consistently visible in our oceans. We’ve been working hard to reduce our impact on the world, protect our waves, and the waters they belong to, but it’s dramatically clear how the plastic pollution crisis is escalating. This report from the New Plastic Economy initiative is vital for guiding all on the best path to improve the negative impact and unavoidable outcome that will arise if action isn’t taken.
JUSTIN STONE,  FOUNDER & MANAGING DIRECTOR, SURFDOME
Recycling Technologies believes that fundamental innovation is needed to move some of the most challenging plastic packaging segments forward, as explained in this report. As a recycling technology innovator, we are eager to drive industry collaboration within the 
New Plastics Economy initiative towards a system in which plastics never become waste.  
ADRIAN GRIFFITHS,  CEO, RECYCLING TECHNOLOGIES
Transforming the current plastics system is a key priority for OVAM and Circular Flanders, 
our public private partnership to boost the circular economy in Flanders. This report 
is a major step towards the New Plastics Economy vision described in the previous 
report, and clearly outlines the key actions for the plastic packaging value chain to 
focus on. As a participant of the initiative, we are excited to start working on this plan! 
HENNY DE BAETS,  CEO, PUBLIC WASTE AGENCY OF FLANDERS (OVAM)
Bringing many benefits, plastics have become an indispensable part of our 
daily life. Currently this versatile material also entails serious economic and environmental disadvantages, to which a solution needs to be actively and consequently pursued. Thanks to the Ellen MacArthur Foundation’s New Plastics Economy initiative, renowned companies from the plastics industry, non-profit 
organisations and municipalities are working together to achieve such a solution.
AXEL KÜHNER,  CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD, GREINER GROUP
New York City, under the leadership of Mayor Bill de Blasio, has set ambitious goals 
to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions 80 percent by 2050 and to send zero waste to landfills by 2030 ensuring that we create a more sustainable, resilient, and equitable NYC. Achieving these goals from our OneNYC plan requires a shift towards a more circular economy, with improved recycling rates and economics. The first New Plastics Economy report has introduced a revolutionary vision for plastic material management - this second report will inform our work and encourage a paradigm shift in the way the global community thinks about and acts on plastics. 
MARK CHAMBERS,  DIRECTOR, NEW YORK CITY’S OFFICE OF SUSTAINABILITY
To ensure we can retain the benefits of plastic packaging, we have to rethink and change how we use it, dispose of it and of course, how we create plastic material in the first place. Solegear believes that renewable bioplastics are an important element of the New Plastic Economy. This new report shows how to move from rethinking the plastics system to taking action towards a circular economy - we are ready to play our role! 
PAUL ANTONIADIS,  CEO, SOLEGEAR BIOPLASTIC TECHNOLOGIES INC.
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION12
In line with our technology to capture more value by recycling plastics, we fully endorse 
this report and its messages on how to create a more effective after-use system for plastics. We’re excited to translate these strategic plans into actions on the ground. 
RAFAEL GARCIA,  CEO, CADEL DEINKING
As enthusiastic supporters of the reimagined plastics economy we know the great value a targeted action plan will bring to the plastics cycle. The New Plastics Economy looks at more than just the global material flow and advocates for a fundamental redesign of the whole system. We, and the planet, cannot wait to see the new innovations and solutions scale - time is of the essence! 
MOLLY MORSE,  CEO, MANGO MATERIALS
At Reflow, we are determined to put plastic recycling at the heart of 3D printing, sparking a societal and manufacturing revolution. To ensure this technology fits into an effective plastics system, a profound shift is needed. 
The transition strategies at the core of this new report resonate with our 
mission and we found its realistic yet positive message truly inspiring! 
JASPER MIDDENDORP,  FOUNDER AND CEO, REFLOW
Zero Waste Scotland was involved in the New Plastics Economy initiative from the 
beginning, and we continue to support its aims. Scotland is a small nation making big steps towards a more circular economy. We know that redesigning, reusing and optimising the recycling of plastics can create new economic opportunities as well as stop the harmful impacts of the linear economy. To achieve that goal, collective endeavours like the New Plastics Economy initiative need widespread support and commitments to turn ideas into action - and this report provides an excellent blueprint to do so. 
IAN GULLAND,  CEO, ZERO WASTE SCOTLAND
Nextek believes industry leaders should take a close look at this valuable work of the New Plastics Economy initiative, so that they, together with governments and NGOs, can transform the current plastics economy into a circular one. In this way we do not only respond to pressures on resources and waste reduction, but also create a value-adding plastics system at every level. 
EDWARD KOSIOR,  MANAGING DIRECTOR, NEXTEK
A wealth of innovation is ready for a New Plastics Economy, which can be unlocked if policymakers, corporations and consumers work together. The work of the Ellen MacArthur Foundation to start the conversation and create a new space is leading by example. This report on actions towards a circular economy for plastics is just the beginning, and we look forward to contributing expertise and watching it grow!
SUSANNA CARSON,  FOUNDER AND CEO, BSIBIO PACKAGING SOLUTIONS
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION13
Advisory Board Members of the 
New Plastics Economy Initiative
The New Plastics Economy initiative is grateful for 
the support of its Advisory Board members:
LEAD PHILANTHROPIC PARTNER
PHILANTHROPIC FUNDERS
CORE PARTNERS

THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION14
EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION15
EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY

THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION16
Executive Summary
Global momentum for a fundamental 
plastics rethink is greater than ever. Plastics have become the ubiquitous 
workhorse material of the modern economy: 
combining unrivalled functional properties with low cost, their use has increased twentyfold in the past half-century. While 
plastics and plastic packaging are an 
integral part of the global economy and deliver many benefits, their archetypically linear, take-make-dispose value chains entail significant economic and environmental 
drawbacks. It is only in the past few years 
that the true extent of these drawbacks has become clear. We now know, more than 40 years after the launch of the 
first universal recycling symbol, that only 
14% of plastic packaging is collected for recycling globally. Each year, USD 80-120 billion plastic packaging material value is lost to the economy. Given projected 
growth in production, in a business-as-usual 
scenario, by 2050 oceans could contain more plastics than fish (by weight). Across the entire range of plastic products, not 
just packaging, concerns are raised about 
the potential negative impact of certain substances on society and the economy. Businesses and governments are now, for the first time, recognising the need to 
fundamentally rethink the global plastics 
system.
This growing recognition is triggering action 
across the world. Policy-makers continue to broaden and refine regulations for 
plastics, introducing landmark legislation 
worldwide throughout 2016, such as restrictions and bans on single-use plastic (carrier) bags. The European Commission is planning to publish a strategy on plastics 
as part of its Circular Economy Action 
Plan by the end of 2017. NGOs and the wider public are increasingly calling for change, with movements such as the 
#breakfreefromplastic campaign gaining 
traction. Front-running businesses and industry groups are taking action. It is clear that the topic of plastics is coming to a head. The key question is, will societies 
gradually reject the material due to its negative effects and forgo its many 
benefits, or will they carve out a future for it characterised by innovation, redesign and 
harmonisation, based on circular economy 
principles?
The New Plastics Economy presents 
a bold and much-needed vision for a plastics system that works. It provides a 
new way of thinking about plastics as an 
effective global material flow, aligned with the principles of the circular economy. It aims to harness the benefits of plastics while addressing its drawbacks, delivering 
drastically better system-wide economic 
and environmental outcomes. This vision, laid out initially in the 2016 report, The New Plastics Economy – Rethinking the 
future of plastics, has inspired businesses, 
policy-makers and citizens worldwide. It forms the basis for the ambitious New Plastics Economy initiative, launched in May 2016 and supported by dozens of leading 
businesses, philanthropists, cities and 
governments.
This report is the first to provide a 
concrete set of actions to drive the transition, based on three strategies differentiated by market segment. 
Thorough analytical work, including a 
detailed segment-by-segment analysis of the plastic packaging market, numerous interactions with players across the plastics 
value chain and discussions with experts 
revealed that a programme of concerted action across three key areas could trigger an accelerated transition towards the New Plastics Economy. The three key transition 
strategies and related priority action areas 
are:
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION17
1
Without fundamental 
redesign and innovation, 
about 30% of plastic 
packaging will never be reused or recycled.
Today, these packaging applications – 
representing at least half of all plastic packaging items, or about 30% of the 
market by weight – are, by their very design, 
destined for landfill, incineration, or energy recovery, and are often likely to leak into the environment after a short single use. This segment includes small-format packaging, such as sachets, tear-offs, lids and sweet 
wrappers; multi-material packaging made of 
several materials stuck together to enhance packaging functionality; uncommon plastic packaging materials of which only relatively 
low volumes are put on the packaging 
market, such as polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polystyrene (PS) and expanded polystyrene (EPS, sometimes referred to under its brand names Styrofoam or Thermocol); and highly 
nutrient-contaminated packaging, such as 
fast-food packaging. 
Their lack of a viable after-use pathway 
and often small size make these items 
particularly prone to escaping collection 
systems and ending up in the natural environment, especially in emerging economies where most of the leakage 
occurs. Even when collected, their after-
use material value is hard or impossible to capture at scale. Fundamental redesign and innovation are required: for some segments, this means reinvention from scratch; for 
other categories, it means scaling existing 
solutions or accelerating progress made so far. As many of these packaging items have important functional benefits, their 
drawbacks should not be seen as arguments 
to remove all these applications from the market today; rather, they set the direction and focus for redesign and innovation. Priority actions for the global plastic 
packaging value chain include:• Fundamentally redesign the packaging 
formats and delivery models (and after-
use systems) for small-format plastic 
packaging, avoiding such small formats where relevant and possible
• Boost material innovation in recyclable or compostable alternatives to the currently unrecyclable multi-material 
applications as described above
• Actively explore replacing PVC, PS and 
EPS as uncommon packaging materials with alternatives (converging to a few key materials being used across most 
of the market, while continuing to 
allow for innovation and entry of new materials into the market)
• Scale up compostable packaging and related infrastructure for targeted nutrient-contaminated applications
• Explore the potential as well as the limitations of chemical recycling and other technologies, to reprocess currently unrecyclable plastic 
packaging into new plastics feedstocks
2
For at least 20% of plastic 
packaging, reuse provides 
an economically attractive 
opportunity.
New, innovative delivery models and 
evolving use patterns are unlocking a reuse opportunity for at least 20% of plastic 
packaging (by weight), worth at least 
USD 9 billion. New models that effectively replace single-use packaging with reusable alternatives are already being demonstrated 
in the cleaning- and personal-care market 
by only shipping active ingredients in combination with reusable dispensers. For other applications, recent policy developments have demonstrated societal 
acceptance of reusable alternatives, 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION18
exemplified by large reductions in the usage 
of single-use bags after the introduction of relatively minor levies. This societal 
acceptance could also reinvigorate tried 
and tested reuse systems, including returnable beverage bottles in cities. In addition, several companies have already 
successfully demonstrated the benefits 
of reusable packaging in the business-to-business market, where there remains significant room for scaling up. As always, when evaluating the shift to, or scaling up 
of, reuse models, it is important to take a 
system perspective and understand the broad impact of each solution, including environmental and societal aspects. Priority 
actions in the area of reuse include:
• Innovate towards creative, new delivery 
models based on reusable packaging
• Replace single-use plastic carrier bags by reusable alternatives
• Scale-up reusable packaging in a business-to-business setting for both large rigid packaging and pallet wrap
3
With concerted efforts 
on design and after-use 
systems, recycling would 
be economically attractive for the remaining 50% of 
plastic packaging.
Implementation of good practices and 
standards in packaging design and after-use processes as part of a Global Plastics 
Protocol, allowing for regional differences 
and continued innovation, would reinforce recycling as an economically attractive alternative to landfill, incineration and 
energy recovery. It would add an estimated 
USD 190-290 of value to every tonne of mixed plastic packaging collected, or USD 2-3 billion annually across OECD countries. In addition, it would improve resource productivity and reduce negative externalities, such as greenhouse gas emissions. Even though it would lift average 
profitability into positive territory, certain 
technological and economic barriers would remain for specific packaging segments, such as flexible films. Given the current fragile economics of recycling, demand-pull 
for recycled plastics and other supporting 
policy measures could trigger progress in the near term. As part of the redesigned and reused packaging described above will 
also lead to recycling, the 50% mentioned 
here should not be interpreted as an upper limit for a recycling target. In regions with high levels of leakage into the natural environment, another critical short-term 
action is to deploy basic collection and 
management infrastructure – requiring dedicated and distinct efforts. This is already under way at the local level through, 
for example, the Mother Earth Foundation 
in the Philippines and, globally, through the Ocean Conservancy’s Trash Free Seas Alliance. Priority actions for improving recycling economics, uptake and quality 
include:
• Implement design changes in plastic 
packaging to improve recycling quality and economics (e.g., choices of materials, additives and formats) as 
a first step towards a Global Plastics 
Protocol
• Harmonise and adopt best practices for collection and sorting systems, also as part of a Global Plastics Protocol
• Scale up high-quality recycling processes
• Explore the potential of material markers to increase sorting yields and quality
• Develop and deploy innovative sorting mechanisms for post-consumer flexible films
• Boost demand for recycled plastics through voluntary commitments or policy instruments, and explore other 
policy measures to support recycling
• Deploy adequate collection and sorting infrastructure where it is not yet in 
place
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION19
Design is essential to move ahead on all 
three categories above. To shift towards the New Plastics Economy, the entire 
plastic packaging value chain needs to be 
involved – from packaging designers at the beginning of the chain to recyclers at the end. The analysis in this report has revealed 
that design (of materials, packaging formats 
and delivery models) plays a particularly important role and is essential to mobilise the transition strategies for each of the plastic packaging categories, as reflected in 
the set of priority actions.
In addition to the priority actions above, 
sourcing virgin feedstocks from renewable sources would accelerate the transition to the New Plastics Economy by helping 
decouple plastics from fossil feedstocks.
To catalyse the transition, the New 
Plastics Economy initiative has mobilised 
a systemic and collaborative approach across five building blocks – with a targeted action plan for 2017. In May 2016, 
the Ellen MacArthur Foundation launched 
the New Plastics Economy initiative – an ambitious global programme, which has secured over USD 10 million funding to date and involves over 40 key stakeholders 
across the value chain – to accelerate the 
shift to the New Plastics Economy. This report forms the basis for a catalytic action plan the initiative will use to tackle this 
complex issue from all relevant angles. 
These catalytic actions for 2017 fit the five interlinked and mutually reinforcing building blocks on which the New Plastics Economy initiative is set up. The following actions are 
planned for 2017 (the initiative will continue 
to explore other areas in 2018 and beyond):
• Dialogue Mechanism: Put cross-value chain collaboration at the heart of the initiative by convening a group 
of over 40 leading companies, cities 
and governments across the plastic packaging value chain twice a year, and continuously driving collaborative pioneer projects.
• Global Plastics Protocol: Take the next 
step towards a Global Plastics Protocol 
by collaboratively developing a cross-value chain perspective on the top opportunities for design shifts; this will allow the prioritisation of changes 
that would most enhance recycling 
economics and material health.• Innovation Moonshots: Launch two innovation challenges to inspire a generation of material scientists and 
designers to develop solutions for 
the 30% of packaging that requires fundamental redesign and innovation.
• Evidence Base: Finalise the ongoing study with the Plymouth Marine 
Laboratory on the socio-economic 
impact of plastics in marine environments. Bridge other knowledge gaps such as, for example, the potential and limitations of material markers and 
chemical recycling. 
• Stakeholder Engagement: Encourage 
the wider stakeholder group to work towards a system shift – designers, in particular, whose involvement is critical for successful action on each of the 
three transition strategies, and policy-
makers, who can trigger progress in the near term. Launch and build on the Circular Design Guide – an online 
reference point on circular design – 
together with leading global design company IDEO, to inspire and support designers, innovators and change makers. Engage and inform policy-
makers on the New Plastics Economy’s 
vision and recommendations.
Through these actions, the New Plastics Economy initiative aims to set direction, inspire innovation and build momentum 
towards the vision of a plastics system that 
works, moving the plastics industry into a positive spiral of value capture, stronger economics and better environmental outcomes.
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION20
GLOBAL 
MOMENTUM FOR A 
PLASTICS 
RETHINK IS GREATER THAN EVER
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION21
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION22
Global Momentum for a 
Plastics Rethink is Greater than Ever
THE CASE FOR RETHINKING PLASTICS, 
STARTING WITH PACKAGING
While plastics and plastic packaging are 
an integral part of the global economy 
and provide it with many benefits, their typically linear value chains currently entail significant drawbacks, which are becoming 
more apparent by the day. Projected 
growth in plastics production could lead by 2050, in a business-as-usual scenario, to the oceans containing more plastics than fish (by weight), and the entire plastics 
industry could be consuming 20% of total 
oil production and 15% of the annual carbon budget. Looking at the full range of plastic products (not just packaging), concerns 
have been raised about the potential 
negative impact of some substances, such as certain phthalates in PVC and bisphenol A in polycarbonate, on society and the economy. Plastic packaging – the focus of 
the New Plastics Economy initiative – is 
plastics’ largest application, representing 26% of the total volume, and encountered by virtually everyone daily.
1 Most plastic 
packaging is used only once and 95% of its value, estimated at USD 80-120 billion 
annually, is lost to the economy after its 
initial use. Additionally, plastic packaging, which is particularly prone to leakage into the environment, generates negative 
externalities, degradation of natural systems 
and greenhouse gas emissions, that have been valued conservatively by UNEP at USD 40 billion.
2 For these reasons, plastics and 
plastic packaging have gradually morphed from a fringe to a mainstream issue. 
The global momentum for a plastics 
rethink has triggered a broad group of 
stakeholders to act. Policy-makers are introducing landmark legislation worldwide, affecting plastics and plastic packaging, 
with examples from 2016 including: further 
national regulations on single-use plastic bags in Indonesia, Colombia, and Morocco; a ban on non-biodegradable plastic cutlery, cups and plates in France; and a ban on EPS 
packaging in San Francisco.
3 In November 2016, citizens of California approved 
Proposition 67, which prohibits grocery and other stores from providing customers 
with single-use plastic takeaway bags. This 
is in addition to more 130 regulations, at a city level and county-wide, across 20 states, governing plastic packaging in the United States alone.
4 Importantly, the EU 
Commission aims to publish a strategy on plastics as part of its Circular Economy 
Action Plan by the end of 2017. The NGO 
community is also intensifying its efforts, as shown by the #breakfreefromplastic 
movement.
5 Launched in September 2016, 
the movement, which aims for a future free 
from plastic pollution, grew to over 500 
member organisations in just a couple of 
weeks. 
Academic experts are increasingly studying 
plastics and their impact on the economy and society. Aside from plastics leakage 
into the ocean, the impact of substances 
of concern in plastics (not just packaging) is one active area of research. Besides polymers, plastics contain a broad range of other substances, with some of them 
raising concerns about complex long-
term exposure and compound effects on human health. As discussed in The New Plastics Economy – Rethinking the future 
of plastics, while scientific evidence on 
the exact implications of substances of concern is not always conclusive, some stakeholders are already acting.
6 They are 
motivated by different reasons – regulators are often driven by the precautionary principle and potential cost to society, and 
businesses anticipate reputational risks and 
aim to capture potential economic value.
7 
For example, the European Commission continued in 2016 the development of 
science-based criteria for endocrine 
disruptors – chemicals which are considered within the EU chemicals policy (known as REACH; Registration, Evaluation and 
Authorisation of Chemicals) to be of similar 
regulatory concern as substances already classed as being of very high concern.
8
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION23
Front-running businesses and industry 
groups are already responding in a variety of ways. They are improving the 
design of their products, packaging and 
delivery models, including, for example, public commitments on sourcing recycled content or eliminating single-use carrier 
bags. Companies are also collaborating 
to work on solutions across the after-use value chain, such as the REFLEX, FIACE and MRFF projects to improve recycling of flexible packaging.
9 Examples of industry-
wide initiatives include the Recycling Partnership, Closed Loop Fund and, 
launched in October 2016, the Polyolefin 
Circular Economy Platform.
10 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY: A VISION OF A MORE EFFECTIVE SYSTEM, IN LINE 
WITH THE PRINCIPLES OF THE CIRCULAR 
ECONOMY 
As laid out in the report, The New Plastics 
Economy – Rethinking the future of plastics, 
the New Plastics Economy offers a much-needed, fundamental rethink for plastics and plastic packaging. It presents an 
ambitious target state, enhancing system 
effectiveness to achieve better economic and environmental outcomes while continuing to harness the many benefits of plastic packaging. This bold vision builds on and aligns with the principles of the 
circular economy, an economic model that 
is restorative and regenerative by design. To move the plastics value chain into a positive spiral of value capture, stronger economics and better environmental outcomes, the 
New Plastics Economy has three main 
ambitions (see Figure 1).
1 Create an effective after-use plastics economy by improving the economics and uptake of recycling, reuse and controlled biodegradation for targeted 
applications. This is the cornerstone of 
the New Plastics Economy and its first priority, which will help it to realise the following two ambitions.
2 Drastically reduce leakage of plastics into natural systems (in particular, the 
ocean) and other negative externalities.
3 Decouple plastics from fossil feedstocks 
by – in addition to reducing cycle losses and dematerialising – exploring and adopting renewably sourced 
feedstocks.
FIGURE 1: THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY AND ITS THREE AMBITIONS
RADICALL Y IMPRO VED
ECONOMICS & QU ALITY
 AD1 AND/OR COMPOSTINGRECYCLING
DESIGN &
PRODUCTIONUSE
DRASTICALL Y REDUCE THE
LEAK AGE OF PLAS TICS INT O
NATUR AL SYS TEMS & O THER
NEGA TIVE EXTERNALITIESDEC OUPLE PLAS TICS FROM
FOSSIL FEED STOCK SCREA TE AN EFFECTIVE AFTER-USE
PLAS TICS EC ONOMY 1
2 3REUSE
RENEW ABLY SOURCED
VIRGIN FEED STOCK
LEAKAGEOTHER
MATERIAL
STREAMS
ENERGY  RECOVERY2
Source: The New Plastics Economy – Rethinking the future of plastics
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION24
THE ROAD 
AHEAD: THREE 
DISTINCT 
STRATEGIES TO DRIVE THE TRANSITION
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION25
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION26
The Road Ahead: Three 
Distinct Strategies to Drive the Transition 
For the first time, a concrete set of priority 
actions for the global plastic packaging value chain to trigger an accelerated 
transition towards the New Plastics 
Economy has been identified. These actions are based on three major new insights. These insights were revealed through 
thorough analytical work, including a 
granular segment-by-segment analysis of the plastic packaging market, numerous interactions with players across the plastics value chain and discussions with over 75 
experts. The three insights, which have the 
potential to drive a genuine transformation within the plastic packaging sector and herald the shift to the New Plastics 
Economy, are (see Figure 2):1 
Without fundamental redesign and 
innovation, about 30% of plastic packaging will never be reused or recycled
2 
For at least 20% of plastic packaging, 
reuse provides an economically attractive 
opportunity
3 
With concerted efforts on design and 
after-use systems, recycling would be 
economically attractive for the remaining 50% of plastic packaging
FIGURE 2: THREE DISTINCT TRANSITIONS STRATEGIES TO ACCELERATE THE SHIFT TOWARDS THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY (SHARE OF PLASTIC PACKAGING MARKET BY WEIGHT)
30% 20%
50%FUND AMENT AL REDESIGN
& INNO VATIONREUSE
RECYCLING WITH R ADICALL Y
IMPRO VED EC ONOMICS & QU ALITY
Source: New Plastics Economy initiative analysis (see Appendix for details)
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION27
1
Without Fundamental 
Redesign and Innovation, about 30% of Plastic Packaging Will Never Be Reused or Recycled
This category, representing at least half of 
the plastic packaging items and about 30% of the total market by weight, consists of 
four segments: small-format packaging; multi-material packaging; uncommon 
plastic packaging materials; and nutrient-contaminated packaging (see Figure 3). 
While often offering high functionality, these 
packaging types do not have a viable reuse or recycling pathway and are unlikely to have one at scale in the foreseeable future. To shift these segments to a more positive 
material cycle, fundamental redesign and 
innovation of materials, formats, delivery models and after-use systems is required.
 
FIGURE 3: PLASTIC PACKAGING SEGMENTS THAT NEED FUNDAMENTAL REDESIGN AND 
INNOVATION
SMALL -
FORMA T
MUL TI-
MATERIAL
UNC OMMON
MATERIALS
NUTRIENT -
CONT AMINA TED~10%
~13%
~10%
NOT QU ANTIFIEDpackaging formats 
and/ or deliv ery models
(and aft er-use syst ems)
in mat erials and 
reprocessing t echnologies
as a priority PV C, EPS, PS 
by known alt ernativ es
compostable plastics for 
targeted applications to help 
recover nutrients of 
packaging c ontentsLids, t ear-oﬀs, caps, 
sachets and gener ally 
all items smaller than
40 – 7 0mm
Packaging with insepar able la yers 
of diﬀer ent 
materials
Uncommon 
plastic packaging materials lik e 
PVC, EPS, PS
Coﬀee capsules, 
organic wa ste bags, 
takeaway food 
packagingREDESIGN
INNO VATE 
REPLA CE
SCALE UPEXAMPLESSHARE OF PLAS TIC
PACKAGING MARKET
% BY  WEIGHTPRIORITY
SOL UTIONS
FUND AMENT AL REDESIGN AND INNO VATION is needed fo r
>50% of plastic packaging (b y no . of it ems),
or >30% of plastic packaging (b y weight)*Actively e xplor e to 
* Total is not the sum of separate categories due to overlap
Source: New Plastics Economy initiative analysis (see Appendix for details)
THERE ARE FOUR PLASTIC PACKAGING 
SEGMENTS WHICH HAVE A VARIETY OF BARRIERS IMPEDING AN EFFECTIVE 
AFTER-USE PATHWAY 
Small-format plastic packaging (about 10% 
of the market, by weight, and up to 35%-
50% by number of items), such as sachets, tear-offs, lids, straw packages, sweet 
wrappers and small pots, tend to escape collection or sorting systems and have 
no economic reuse or recycling pathway. 
The small size of these items means they are likely to leak out of the system into the natural environment. This can be witnessed 
in emerging countries where their low 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION28
after-use value makes them less likely to 
be collected by the informal sector (i.e. waste management activities carried out by 
waste pickers)
11 and in advanced economies, 
where items like lids, caps, straws and sweet 
wrappers are consistently mentioned as 
some of the plastic packaging items most 
found in litter.12 Cleaning up these small-
format items after they have escaped collection systems is particularly hard 
precisely because they are small. Sachets 
are a typical small-format example: they are used all over the world, but particularly in emerging markets, to sell products 
such as condiments and shampoo in small 
quantities, making them more convenient and affordable. Especially in countries without a formal collection system, many of these sachets end up as litter. 
Even when they are collected, small-format 
items are hardly ever recycled due to 
significant technical and economic barriers. A study ordered by the industry association, PlasticsEurope, estimated the effective 
recycling potential for this segment to be 
zero, even in an optimistic scenario.
13 The 
main barrier is the difficulty of sorting small-format items – a critical step in the 
recycling process. One of the first stages 
in automated sorting facilities is a screen that removes all small items, such as loose dirt, stones and other materials that could 
damage equipment in subsequent sorting 
steps. During this process, all items smaller than 40mm-70mm fall through the mesh in the screen, end up in the fines fraction, and are sent for energy recovery, incineration or 
landfill.
14 Due to the small size and low value 
of these items, a successive layer of sorting 
technology to extract the plastics from the 
fines fraction is not economically viable 
and is unlikely to be so in the foreseeable future.
15 In theory, manual sorting could 
perhaps overcome the technical barriers small-format items pose to automated sorting, but it is economically challenging 
given the low volume-to-time ratio of 
sorting these items. 
Multi-material packaging (about 13% of 
the market, by weight) currently cannot be economically, and often not even 
technically, recycled. By combining the 
properties of materials, multi-material packaging can often offer enhanced performance versus its mono-material alternatives and resulting functional benefits, such as providing oxygen and moisture barriers at reduced weight and costs. However , this combination of 
multiple materials means that many of these 
applications, like those combining plastic 
and aluminium layers, are economically, and in some cases even technically, unrecyclable. 
For some applications, technologies exist 
that, in theory, could capture part of the 
material value through downcycling, i.e. 
the process of converting materials into new materials of lesser quality, economic value and/or reduced functionality. For 
example, compatibilisers are chemical 
substances that can allow some multi-material packaging to be downcycled into blended materials. Still, such technologies lead to significant loss of material value in 
the recycling process and likely add just one 
extra use-cycle rather than creating a truly positive, virtuous material cycle.
Uncommon plastic packaging materials 
(about 10% of the market, by weight), 
while often technically recyclable, are 
not economically viable to sort and recycle because their small volumes prevent effective economies of scale.
16 
The economics of plastics sorting, which is a critical step in the recycling process, are 
highly dependent on scale. If the volume of 
a certain material is too low, the additional sorting step becomes unaffordable. This is particularly relevant for business-to-
consumer packaging, mainly collected as a 
mixed plastic packaging stream, as opposed to business-to-business packaging, where sometimes mono-material volumes are collected in bulk. 
PVC, PS, and EPS stand out as uncommon 
plastic packaging materials to focus on 
first. They collectively represent 85% of the uncommon plastic packaging materials, so dealing with these three would make a huge 
impact on this segment. Their low volumes 
lead to poor outcomes: less than 5% of PVC packaging is recycled in Europe,
17 and PS 
and EPS are rarely sorted from household waste and recycled
18 (although there are 
occasional exceptions, including some very large-scale facilities in Germany).
19 Even 
if volumes were higher, problems remain. For instance, EPS is often used in takeaway 
food packaging such as clamshells, which 
become heavily contaminated with organic matter and disposed of in public bins for 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION29
residual litter, further reducing recycling 
potential. Also, these materials frequently contaminate streams of other plastics 
and harm their recycling economics. For 
example, even very small concentrations of PVC (0.005% by weight) lead to significant quality reductions in recycled 
polyethylene terephthalate (PET)
20 and 
EPS is a known contaminant for polyolefin 
recyclers as it is not removed during the 
float-sink separation process. In addition, 
there are safety concerns about PVC. It often contains vinyl chloride monomers, which are carcinogenic to humans, and 
many additives, including phthalates, a class 
including substances like bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP), about which concerns have been raised relating to negative effects on human health and the environment.
21
Nutrient-contaminated packaging is often difficult to sort and clean for high-quality recycling. This segment includes 
applications that are prone to be mixed with 
organic contents during or after use. This could either be by design, such as in coffee capsules, or because the application leads 
to a high food waste-to-packaging ratio 
after use, such as food packaging for events, fast food restaurants and canteens. Either way, when there is high contamination with organic nutrients, recycling becomes 
problematic, as organic residues and 
odours might be hard to separate from the packaging in the recycling process.
A COMBINATION OF REDESIGN AND 
INNOVATION SOLUTIONS IS REQUIRED TO MAKE PROGRESS IN THESE FOUR 
CHALLENGING PLASTIC PACKAGING 
SEGMENTS
Given the wide variety of barriers impeding 
effective after-use pathways for the four segments, it is unlikely there will be one instant and effortless solution at scale for 
them all. However, when looking at each 
category individually, clear priority redesign and innovation areas emerge, as outlined below. As always, when making progress 
in these segments, it is important to take 
a system perspective and understand the broader impact of interventions, including the impact of packaging on packaged goods. Given that these products have significant functional benefits, their drawbacks are not necessarily arguments to remove them all from the market today but 
rather to start on a path of reinvention as 
outlined. 
Format and delivery model redesign 
could reduce or eliminate the need for small-format plastic packaging items, 
while providing the same or even better 
functionality. Beverage cans are a classic example of the potential of format redesign. The tear-off tab, being a small-format item, was difficult to collect and prone to 
leakage until it was replaced in the 1970s 
by the stay-on tab that is prevalent today. The potential of format redesign can also be witnessed in innovative personal care 
bottles and tubes for which separate, small-
format components have been designed out. Examples include the flip-top cap for ketchup or shampoo bottles, which connects the closure to the main packaging, 
or the Nephentes bottle concept, by which 
items can be closed without a cap.
22 
Delivery-model redesign could involve reusable or returnable packaging items, or even reduce the need for the packaging in 
its current form. For example, a dispenser 
could replace sachets in restaurants or shops; such a delivery model would have the potential to supplant billions of small-
format items being used every year. The 
Disappearing Package illustrates how redesigning the packaging concept could work for several packaging applications, including laundry detergent pods. The 
new pods are water-soluble and stitched 
together forming a sheet, so the user can tear off a pod each time and use them one-by-one. With the last pod, the package itself 
is gone.
23
While redesigning formats and delivery 
models is the most powerful approach for the small-format segment, such 
redesign efforts take time and might not 
be applicable to all small-format items. For some targeted applications, designing small-format items with compostable 
materials could be another potential 
solution – though its implementation brings a series of challenges that need to be addressed first. Also, the redesign efforts should be combined with actions 
focusing on after-use collection, sorting and 
reprocessing innovations for small-format items.
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION30
For multi-material packaging, both 
material and reprocessing technology innovations would need to be explored. 
Replacing layers of different materials by 
one material, while maintaining the same functionalities, could lead to packaging which is more suitable for recycling. For 
example, Dow Chemical, together with 
Printpack and Tyson Foods, developed a mono-material, stand-up pouch with improved recyclability versus the existing multi-material alternatives, suitable 
for a specific set of applications (e.g., 
certain frozen food segments).
24 Another 
potential way ahead is the development of compostable multi-material packaging, 
which combines enhanced performance 
due to the use of multiple layers of different materials, with an effective after-use pathway (such as composting or 
anaerobic digestion). The benefits of such 
compostable packaging, and the conditions needed for it to work, are laid out further in this section, when discussing solutions for nutrient-contaminated applications. 
To replace multi-material packaging with 
recyclable mono-material or compostable packaging – with similar performance, weight, and costs – continued innovation-at-
scale is needed.
Innovation in reprocessing technologies 
could also create new, viable after-use pathways for multi-material packaging (and possibly some of the other plastic packaging segments for which there are 
currently no technical or economic recycling 
routes). Two prominent examples are:
• Thermochemical recycling technologies, such as pyrolysis, could, in theory, provide a closed-material loop for currently unrecyclable 
packaging items. They work by 
breaking down the material into a mix of hydrocarbon molecules, which could be refined into precursors for making 
new plastics. These technologies should 
not be relied on as silver bullets – they are an energy-intensive outer loop where little material value is retained, compared with, for example, reuse or 
mechanical recycling. Furthermore, 
it remains to be proven that these technologies, in practice, can realise closed-material loops with high yields 
of hydrocarbon output being fed 
back into the polymer production processes. Current applications of the technology are still largely confined 
to the conversion of plastics into a 
(non-renewable) fuel. This provides a brief second use but also leads to the definite loss of the material and so perpetuates a linear, take-make-dispose 
model. Other issues to be explored 
within this process are the potentially fragile economics, energy requirements and how it relates to substances of 
concern.
25
• Disassembly of multi-material 
laminates could provide another alternative. Companies like Saperatec 
(delaminating),
26 Cadel Deinking 
(delaminating)27 and APK (dissolving)28 
are developing or scaling up 
technologies that separate materials 
after use. Like the thermochemical 
recycling technologies, they currently only exist at pilot scale, with the first industrial-scale plants just built 
or planned to be built over the 
coming years. The potential impact of these technologies, and how their performance could be influenced by packaging design (e.g., design for easy 
disassembly), remains to be seen. 
In summary, innovation in reprocessing 
technologies should be explored but not relied on as the single, simple solution. Rather, it should be investigated as part of 
the broad range of redesign and innovation 
activities outlined above to propel the multi-material segment and possibly some other plastic packaging segments for which, at the moment, there are no technical or 
economic recycling routes.
Replacing the uncommon materials PVC, 
EPS, and PS in packaging with known alternatives would need to be actively explored. This would enhance recycling economics and reduce the potential 
negative impact of substances of concern. 
As discussed in the 2016 The New Plastics Economy – Rethinking the future of plastics report, for many PVC, PS, and EPS 
packaging applications alternative solutions 
are already in place.
 29 Also, the use of these 
materials in packaging is already declining, as businesses and policy-makers alike 
are reducing or phasing them out – their 
replacement represents an accelerated 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION31
evolution rather than a revolution.30 For 
cases where no clear solutions with similar 
cost and functionality yet exist, research 
and innovation would need to be focused 
on developing alternatives.
Of course, not all uncommon plastic 
packaging materials should be replaced by known alternatives. By definition, any new 
material will, on introduction to the market, 
initially have small volumes and there should be space for such innovation – it is a core aspect of the transition to the New Plastics Economy. 
Scaling up the use of compostable 
materials and the infrastructure for 
targeted nutrient-contaminated applications could help return organic nutrients to the soil, thus contributing to natural capital maintenance. For example, 
when made of compostable materials, 
fast-food packaging could be disposed of, together with its contents, in an organics bin. This would increase the value capture 
of organic material through composting 
or anaerobic digestion. Compostable materials could also reduce the impact of unintentional leakage, if the material can truly degrade safely and completely 
in a range of different, uncontrolled 
environments – a strong assumption that would need serious innovation to become reality across a wide range of applications. 
Of course, as laid out in The New Plastics 
Economy – Rethinking the future of plastics, 
several elements need to be in place to make wider use of compostable plastics beneficial. These include the development of adequate infrastructure to handle 
such materials (e.g., separate collection 
of organics, composting or anaerobic digestion facilities) – infrastructure which is emerging but not yet widely available in 
many parts of the world. 
Priority actions to reinvent the 30% of the 
market without a viable reuse or recycling 
pathway are:
• Fundamentally redesign the packaging formats and delivery models (and after-use systems) for small-format plastic 
packaging, avoiding such small formats 
where relevant and possible• Boost material innovation in recyclable or compostable alternatives to the currently unrecyclable multi-material 
applications as described above
• Replace PVC, PS and EPS, as a priority, 
as uncommon packaging materials with alternatives (converging to a few key materials being used across most of the 
market, while continuing to allow for 
innovation)
• Scale up compostable packaging and related infrastructure for targeted nutrient-contaminated applications
• Explore the potential as well as the limitations of chemical recycling 
and other technologies to reprocess 
currently unrecyclable plastic packaging into new plastics feedstocks
2
For at Least 20% of 
Plastic Packaging, Reuse Provides an Economically Attractive Opportunity
Reusable packaging was a common choice 
until roughly half a century ago. Since then, single-use, disposable packaging has 
increasingly become the preferred option. 
Nowadays, recent innovation, evolving use patterns, and societal acceptance are again positioning reuse models as attractive 
options for some plastic packaging 
segments. The plastic packaging reuse opportunities identified and quantified in this update report represent at least 20% of today’s market, by weight (see Figure 
4). The examples of personal and home-
care bottles and carrier bags alone could generate about 6 million tonnes of material savings and an economic opportunity of 
USD 9 billion. More could be unlocked 
as business-model innovation continues to push the boundaries of application to create a variety of attractive reuse models. As always, when evaluating different reuse 
models, it is important to take a system 
perspective.
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION32
FIGURE 4: SELECTED PLASTIC PACKAGING REUSE OPPORTUNITIES
PERSONAL AND
HOME CARE BO TTLESCARRIER BA GS BEVER AGE BO TTLES
PALLET WR APS LARGE RIGID PA CKAGINGOTHER REUSE OPPORTUNITIES
(E.G. E-C OMMERCE PA CKAGING)>20%5%3% 2%
7% 3%?%TOTAL REUSE PO TENTIAL
OF PLA STICS PA CKAGING MARKET 
GROCER Y
Source: New Plastics Economy initiative analysis (see Appendix for details)
PERSONAL AND HOME-CARE BOTTLES: 
INNOVATIVE DELIVERY MODELS COULD RESULT IN 80%-90% PACKAGING 
MATERIAL SAVINGS
Innovative delivery models can create value 
by encouraging the reuse of packaging in the home. Such new models could affect 
a range of segments, including laundry 
liquid, home cleaning, as well as bath and shower products. Many of these goods, which usually come in single-use bottles, mainly consist of water, with only a small 
volume of so-called “active ingredients”. A 
delivery model using refillable bottles, for which only such active ingredients are sold and shipped, can offer significant material and transport savings. Splosh
31 – with 
dissolvable sachets – and Replenish32 – with 
refill pods – show these models are viable. Their innovative delivery models could lead 
to 80%-90% packaging material savings 
and 25%-50% packaging cost savings, offering clear incentives for businesses and customers alike.
33 If such reuse models were 
to be applied to all bottles in beauty and personal care as well as home cleaning, 
this would amount to about 3 million 
tonnes or at least USD 8 billion packaging cost savings.
34 In addition, shipping only 
active ingredients would result in 85%-95% transport cost savings. Packaging and 
transport savings together would represent an 80%-85% reduction in greenhouse gas 
emissions versus today’s traditional single-
use bottles.
35 Such delivery models could 
also apply to other products that mainly consist of water, such as laundry products, 
sprays for lawn and garden use, pet-care 
products and even the beverage market, as demonstrated by Sodastream
36 and MiO37.
CARRIER BAGS: REUSABLE BAGS COULD REPLACE OVER 300 BILLION SINGLE-USE CARRIER BAGS PER YEAR, GENERATING 
USD 0.9 BILLION IN MATERIAL COST 
SAVINGS
About 330 billion single-use plastic carrier 
bags are produced every year – that is over 10,000 bags per second.
38 They have 
an average use period ranging from only a couple of minutes to a few hours, after 
which many leak into the environment 
and almost none is recycled.
39 In emerging 
economies, the economics of waste picking are not favourable enough for collecting 
carrier bags as it takes so long to aggregate 
a significant mass of material.
40 In advanced 
economies, bags are prone to leak into the natural environment – plastic bags are 
among the most-found plastic packaging 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION33
litter items.41 Public awareness of this 
problem is growing and, with reusable 
alternatives available, so are regulatory 
interventions: at least 35 countries 
worldwide have taken action to tax or ban single-use carrier bags.
42 Also, front-
running businesses are acting, as shown by the retailer Carrefour, which announced at 
the UN Climate Change Conference 2016 
in Marrakech its commitment to eliminate all free single-use carrier bags throughout its worldwide integrated store network by 
2020.
43 Encouragingly, these outcomes have 
often been achieved by very small charges 
on bags and without major resistance, 
indicating the readiness and acceptance 
of the public for this type of policy. For example, studies reported an instant 80%-95% drop in usage of single-use carrier bags 
and a reduction of over 90% in the share of 
plastic bags in the total visible litter items in the first year after such an intervention.
44
If all countries in the world were to achieve 95% replacement of single-use carrier bags by reusable alternatives, this would 
represent an annual reduction of over 300 
billion single-use plastic bags. Even when considering rebound effects in terms of increased production of reusable bags 
and bin liners (as single-use bags often 
get a second use as bin liner), this would lead to over 2 million tonnes of material savings and USD 0.9 billion material cost savings.
45 The latter is excluding additional 
cost savings in collecting and reprocessing carrier bags after use and a reduction in 
negative externalities related to the leakage 
of single-use carrier bags, such as impacts on infrastructure and the environment.
BEVERAGE BOTTLES: REUSE SYSTEMS 
COULD OFFER ECONOMIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS IN THE RIGHT CIRCUMSTANCES
Beverage bottles are a major plastic 
packaging application, representing at least 16% of the market (by weight).
46 While 
widely collected for recycling, the material value loss of single-use beverage bottles 
after each use cycle is still significant; 
even for PET bottles in Europe, this loss is over 50%.
47 As shown by various studies, 
reuse models – be it returnable bottle systems (with or without deposit) or 
refillable bottles at home or on the go – 
can, given the right local conditions, offer an attractive alternative with the potential for lower material costs and a considerably lower carbon footprint than single-use 
alternatives.
48 Moreover, reuse models for 
beverage bottles, both plastic and non-
plastic ones, have a proven track record.
The success of return systems for beverage 
bottles relies on several factors: cost of raw 
materials relative to other input costs; cost and distance of collection and redistribution infrastructure; level of differentiation of 
packaging; regulatory framework; and use 
pattern.
49 Each of these factors needs to 
be considered to evaluate the potential benefits of reusable bottle systems for any 
specific case. 
The success of refillable bottles at home 
or on the go is impacted by the availability of refill stations (e.g., drinking water fountains) and user preferences. As the 
global reusable water bottle market (valued 
by Transparency Market Research at about USD 7 billion in 2015) is estimated to grow by more than 4% year on year between 2016 and 2024, reuse models are again 
positioned as an attractive alternative.
50 
Considering the success factors, a reuse 
model is estimated to offer economic and environmental benefits for at least 10% of 
all beverage bottles worldwide, or at least 
2% of the global plastic packaging market. Whether such a system should be based on returnable (deposit) bottles or user refillable 
bottles depends on the exact application 
and local circumstances. 
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS LARGE RIGID 
PACKAGING: ALTHOUGH IMPLEMENTED IN SOME SECTORS, RETURNABLE PACKAGING COULD CREATE FURTHER 
ECONOMIC VALUE BY INCREASING ITS 
USE, POOLING, STANDARDISATION AND MODULARISATION 
Large rigid business-to-business packaging 
items, such as pallets, crates, foldable boxes, pails and drums (i.e. cylindrical containers 
used for storing and shipping bulk cargo), 
have a sufficiently high material value to make reuse business models profitable. They are often used 20 to 100 times depending on the application and the vast 
majority are recycled afterwards.
51 These 
plastic reusable packaging items often 
replace non-plastic alternatives, such as 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION34
cardboard boxes or wooden pallets. A study 
on the Schoeller Allibert’s Maxinest® tray 
for food and grocery distribution shows that as soon as this reusable packaging is 
used 20 times, it is environmentally and 
economically beneficial versus single-use cardboard boxes. In reality, this type of product is estimated to have over 90 use 
cycles, on average, before being recycled.
52 
The critical part of this reuse business 
model is the reverse logistics where crates 
or pallets are sent back, often empty. To 
overcome this, pooling solutions companies like Brambles offer logistics services, managing a shared pool of standardised 
pallets and crates across a wide and dense 
network of companies, leading to significant logistics savings. 
There is still economic potential to be 
captured by implementing standardised returnable rigid packaging systems at scale. 
Currently, large differences exist in both the 
use of reusable transport packaging and the share of pooled versus non-pooled reusable packaging, both between and within 
industries.
53 These differences indicate the 
potential to capture further efficiency gains 
and, therefore, economic value. In addition, 
as mentioned in The New Plastics Economy 
– Rethinking the future of plastics, global standardisation and modularisation could facilitate pooling and help to realise the 
vision of the Physical Internet, a logistics 
system based on standardised, modularised and reusable containers, using open networks across industries with pooled assets and protocols.
54
BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS PALLET WRAP: SCALING UP EXISTING REUSE SOLUTIONS COULD CREATE ECONOMIC AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL VALUE
Single-use pallet wraps (e.g., stretch 
wraps and shrink hoods) are currently the default choice to stabilise and secure products on pallets during transport, leading to an estimated annual pallet 
wrap film production of 5 million-6 million 
tonnes.
55 Globally, most of the material 
value of these films is lost after one use cycle – even though in some regions, 
large and sometimes medium enterprises 
have dedicated collection systems for commercial film.
56 Several reusable 
solutions to address this material value loss are available.
57 Lid and strap systems, as 
provided by Loadhog, are already used in a range of industries, such as postal (e.g., Royal Mail), automotive (e.g., Honda) and healthcare (e.g., Baxter Healthcare UK).
58 
Reusable pallet wrappers, offered by companies like Reusa-wraps, Envirowrapper 
and Dehnco, have already been adopted 
by other companies across various sectors such as Aldi, Universal, AkzoNobel, Budweiser, Coca-Cola, Pepsico, Verizon and 
Microsoft.
59 Taking the modularisation and 
standardisation of business-to-business 
packaging one step further, and developing 
containers that can be interlocked to act 
as one unit, might even avoid the need for wrapping altogether. This concept has been developed and researched by the 
MODULUSHCA project,
60 which is aligned 
with the Physical Internet vision.
DELIVERY MODEL INNOVATION AND 
CONTINUED INCREASE OF SOCIETAL 
ACCEPTANCE, AND EVEN PREFERENCE, COULD UNLOCK FURTHER PLASTIC PACKAGING REUSE OPPORTUNITIES
Alongside the above examples, other 
opportunities for reuse business models exist or could be envisioned across different 
sectors. Repack, for example, is a system 
for reusable transport packaging in the rapidly growing and packaging-intense e-commerce market. After unpacking the delivered item, people can simply fold the 
packaging, drop it in the nearest postbox 
to send it back, free of charge, for reuse, and receive a voucher for doing so.
61 The 
Repack example illustrates an innovative way of dealing with the reverse logistics 
challenge, often a key factor for successful 
implementation of reuse models. With innovators exploring new delivery models and people increasingly accepting – or even 
actively seeking – such reusable packaging, 
multiple reuse opportunities are likely to be discovered and successfully deployed.
TO CAPTURE THE REUSE OPPORTUNITY, 
A SET OF PRIORITY ACTIONS HAS BEEN IDENTIFIED:
• Innovate towards creative, new delivery models based on reusable packaging
• Replace single-use plastic carrier bags 
by reusable alternatives
• Scale up reusable packaging in a 
business-to-business setting for both large rigid packaging and pallet wrap
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION35
3
With Concerted Efforts 
on Design and After-use Systems, Recycling Would Be Economically Attractive for the Remaining 50% of Plastic Packaging
The uptake, economics and quality of 
plastic packaging recycling are currently in a fragile state. At the moment, only 
14% of plastic packaging is collected for 
recycling globally
62 – a number that reflects 
the economic challenges of gathering and processing a diversity of packaging 
formats and materials through fragmented 
and sometimes under-developed after-use systems. Although recycling economics are stronger for some packaging applications, 
such as PET beverage bottles, on average, 
the cost of collection, sorting and recycling outweighs the generated revenues. Estimates suggest that in Europe this cost is about USD 170-250 per tonne collected, 
compared with the cost of collection and 
disposal of plastic packaging as part of residual waste
63 – an average across widely 
different collection and sorting systems, regulatory and geographical conditions and 
packaging types. This net cost estimate 
excludes the additional environmental and societal benefits of plastics recycling such as: reduced greenhouse gas emissions; 
reduced environmental impacts on land 
use, biodiversity and air quality; and job creation. For example, one tonne of plastic collected for recycling avoids emission of an estimated one tonne of carbon dioxide 
equivalent greenhouse gas compared with a 
mix of landfill and incineration with energy recovery.
64 This alone has an estimated 
societal value of more than USD 100 per tonne of plastics collected for recycling.
65
There are several reasons for these fragile economics of collection, sorting and recycling. Plastic packaging materials 
and formats are diverse and there is a 
further threat from continued, unrestrained diversification into new materials and formats, which, while often bringing important functional benefits, have lower value in the after-use recycling system and drive up its costs. Also, the entire system of 
collection and sorting is highly fragmented, 
which prevents economies of scale and the delivery of consistent, high-quality material streams to recyclers. Furthermore, both 
virgin and recycled plastic prices have been 
volatile and declining for many plastic types between 2012 and 2015, especially for PET, when the price of recycled PET dropped by 30%-40%.
66
A MUCH-NEEDED COLLABORATIVE APPROACH TOWARDS PACKAGING DESIGN AND AFTER-USE SYSTEMS COULD 
INCREASE RECYCLING ECONOMICS BY 
USD 190-290 PER TONNE COLLECTED FOR RECYCLING
67 (USD 2-3 BILLION ANNUALLY 
IN THE OECD REGION).
A concerted, cross-value-chain, global 
approach is required to improve plastic packaging recycling uptake, economics and quality. Many – often local and 
small-scale – initiatives aim for these 
improvements, demonstrating the broad awareness and appetite for change. However, collectively they have not scaled 
up to the extent required, as evidenced by 
the current 14% global recycling rate. As described in The  New Plastics Economy – 
Rethinking the future of plastics, a Global Plastics Protocol provides a common 
target state to innovate towards, that 
would overcome existing fragmentation and enable the creation of effective markets. It would guide convergence of 
packaging design (materials and formats) 
and after-use systems (collection, sorting and reprocessing) towards best practices, while allowing for regional differences and innovation, thus improving recycling 
economics.
Implementation of good practices in 
packaging design and after-use processes as part of a Global Plastics Protocol could generate a value improvement of USD 190-290 per tonne of plastics collected, 
lifting economics into positive territory. 
As detailed below, this improvement, representing USD 2-3 billion a year for OECD countries, requires concerted action 
both on packaging design and after-
use systems – neither of these mutually reinforcing areas would be able to trigger this system shift on their own. Implementing 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION36
such a set of good-practice levers would be 
no small feat but, if done successfully, would move recycling economics into positive 
territory (on average) (see Figure 5). In 
this way, it would reinforce recycling as an attractive, cost-competitive alternative to landfill, incineration, or energy recovery 
by increasing the capture of material 
value and resource productivity, as well as decoupling the system from fossil feedstocks and reducing greenhouse gas emissions and other negative externalities. While implementing such a Global Plastics Protocol would lift the average profitability 
of plastic packaging recycling, significant 
challenges remain for specific packaging segments, such as technological barriers for sorting post-consumer films. Also, the 
estimates in this report are based on current 
plastics prices. If these change significantly, the economics of the recycling situation could become very different too.
FIGURE 5: POTENTIAL IMPACT OF GLOBAL PLASTICS PROTOCOL IMPLEMENTATION ON THE ECONOMICS OF PLASTIC PACKAGING RECYCLING (AVERAGE FOR MIXED PLASTIC PACKAGING COLLECTED IN EU MEMBER STATES)
0
CURRENT A VER AGE NET CO STIMPRO VE PA CKAGING DESIGN
(90– 140 USD /tonne )
EXTENT OF
IMPLEMENTATION OF
GLOBAL PLAS TICS PROTO COLHARMONISE C OLLECTION AND
SORTING SYS TEMS, AND SCALE UP
HIGH-QU ALITY RE CYCLING
(100– 150 USD /tonne )POTENTIAL QU ANTIFIED 
IN THIS REPORT BY  
IMPLEMENT ATION OF 
GOOD PR ACTICES AS  
PART OF A GL OBAL 
PLAS TICS PRO TOCOL  
-170 – -25020 – 40
IMPLEMENT ATION OF BO TH  
LEVERS C OULD GENER ATE A 
VALUE IMPRO VEMENT OF 
190–290 USD/ tonnePOTENTIAL OF 
CONTINUED 
INNO VATION 
AND FURTHER 
HARMONIS ATIONNET VA LUE PER TO NNE OF
MIXED PLA STICS C OLLECTED*
(USD /tonne )
* Value is calculated as average net cost/benefit of collection, sorting and recycling relative to net cost of 
collect/dispose alternative; and as an average across geographies, materials and formats – some market segments have much better economics, some have worse.
Source: New Plastics Economy initiative and SYSTEMIQ analysis (see Appendix for details)
PACKAGING DESIGN IMPROVEMENTS 
COULD CREATE AT LEAST USD 90-140 PER TONNE OF PLASTIC PACKAGING 
COLLECTED.
Packaging design has a direct and 
significant impact on the economics of collection, sorting and recycling. The 
choice of materials, colours, formats and 
other design factors determines whether a packaging item will generate positive after-use revenues – and how much – if it is recycled, or whether it will lead to the additional cost of disposal otherwise. Non-
recyclable items entering the recycling 
stream incur an estimated additional net cost of up to USD 300-350 per tonne collected, compared with designs that are 
easily recyclable.
68 For example, with their 
low recyclability compared to clear bottles, 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION37
opaque PET bottles (about 5,000-6,000 
tonnes sold in France alone each year)69 
add an estimated USD 1-2 million a year in avoidable costs to the French recycling 
system.
70Implementing four areas of packaging 
design changes could have a positive impact on recycling economics amounting to USD 90-140 per tonne collected (USD 1.1-1.6 billion in OECD).
71 
FIGURE 6: ECONOMIC VALUE CREATION POTENTIAL OF SELECTED DESIGN CHANGES IN 
FOUR AREAS (ABSOLUTE VALUE FOR OECD REGION; USD; VALUE PER TONNE OF MIXED PLASTIC PACKAGING COLLECTED, USD/TONNE)
PIGMENT CHOICE
USD ~0 .2 bn
(15–20 USD /tonne )POLYMER CHOICE
USD 0. 3–0.5 bn
(25–40 USD /tonne)FORMA T DESIGN
USD 0 .5–0 .8 bn
(50– 70 USD /tonne )
ADDITIVE CHOICE
USD ~0 .1 bn
(>5 USD /tonne )TOTAL DESIGN 
IMPRO VEMENT S
USD 1. 1–1.6
BILLION
(90– 140 USD /tonne )QUANTIFIED
Source: New Plastics Economy initiative and SYSTEMIQ analysis (see Appendix for details)
The four areas for which impact has been 
quantified are (see Figure 6):
1. Format design (USD 50-70 per tonne). Format design improvements can 
have a direct and significant impact on 
the recycling economics, depending on the type of packaging. Examples 
include design choices relating to: 
labels; sleeves; inks and direct printing; glues; closures and closure liners; (silicone) valves, pumps and triggers; 
attachments and tear-offs; and the 
form or shape of the packaging. For example, one industry study from the Association of Plastic Recyclers identified that full sleeve shrink labels 
on PET bottles alone could affect 
recycler economics by USD 44-88 per tonne of recycled PET produced.
72 
Input from industry experts and studies indicate that up to 15% of mixed plastic 
packaging collected is lost during 
sorting and recycling because of format design issues.
73 Assuming that format 
design improvements, excluding the changes below, can reduce material 
losses by 7.5% of plastic packaging 
collected (i.e. half of the estimated losses), this would lead to economic benefits of USD 50-70 per tonne of 
mixed plastic packaging collected.
2. Polymer choice (USD 25-40 per 
tonne). As pointed out earlier, plastic materials uncommon in packaging are rarely recycled because they do not benefit from economies of scale 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION38
in sorting and recycling, and they 
can also hinder the recycling process of more prevalent polymers. As an 
example, replacing PVC in packaging 
applications by more common polymers would remove a source of contamination in the PET recycling 
process and thus positively impact 
the yield and recycled PET price. In addition, such replacement would turn collection and disposal costs of unwanted PVC into increased recycling 
volumes and revenues. Combining 
these effects, replacing all rigid PVC (1.5%-2% of plastic packaging market) by more widely recycled polymers 
would lead to an economic benefit of 
USD 15-20 per tonne of mixed plastic packaging collected. In addition, replacing PS and EPS as packaging materials (6% of the market) with 
more common polymers would 
improve system economics in a similar way, by an estimated USD 15-20 per tonne of mixed plastic packaging 
collected. As noted earlier in this 
report, implementing this change is an acceleration of an existing evolution rather than a revolution. The shares of these materials in the global packaging 
market are already declining.
74
3. Pigment choice (USD 15-20 per tonne). 
Colouring plastics using pigments reduces the value of the recycled 
materials (up to USD 100-300 per 
tonne of recyclate).
75 Therefore, moving 
a greater share of plastic packaging from coloured or opaque materials 
to clear or light-coloured translucent 
materials would create substantial value in the after-use system. As an example, shifting an estimated three quarters 
of coloured rigid plastic packaging 
represents an economic opportunity of USD 10-15 per tonne of mixed plastic packaging collected. Werner & Mertz is one example of a company explicitly 
choosing not to colour its high-density 
polyethylene (HDPE) detergent bottles to allow the material to serve again as a bottle in its next-use cycles.
76 Also, 
phasing out the carbon black pigment in plastic packaging would reduce 
losses in the sorting process, as it is not 
detected by near-infra-red machines commonly used for automatic sorting. These sorting losses result in an avoidable cost of about USD 200 per tonne of such packaging collected for 
recycling, compared with packaging 
without carbon black. Looking at the total plastic packaging market, it is estimated that if all carbon black (used in 1.5%-2% of packaging, by weight) 
was replaced by other pigments 
already available, this would generate an economic benefit of USD 3-5 per tonne of mixed plastic packaging 
collected.
77
4. Additive choice (at least USD 5 per 
tonne). Packaging design guidelines and expert interviews highlight that 
certain additives used in plastic 
packaging have a negative impact on recycling, even though the precise extent is unclear.
78 For example, PET 
bottle-to-bottle recyclers have reported discolouration of the recycled material
79 
due to certain additives, leading to an estimated 30% decrease in 
revenues, or up to USD 300 per tonne 
of recyclate at current prices, for that specific material. If 2% of the bottle-to-bottle recycled PET is impacted in 
this way, it represents a USD 0.5-1 per 
tonne of plastic packaging collected across the board. In addition, certain additives affect the density of plastics, leading to avoidable losses during 
float-sink sorting processes.
80 For each 
tonne of plastic affected in this way, 
the additional cost to the after-use 
system is an estimated USD 300-350. 
Assuming 2% of polyolefins collected for recycling are lost in this way, replacing them by additives without 
density effects would increase the 
value by about USD 3-5 per tonne of mixed plastic packaging collected. More research is needed to understand the full effect of plastic additives, 
particularly if the recycling system 
continues to move to higher-quality processes and products.
The above estimates can be considered conservative as they provide a snapshot 
of economic opportunities from improving 
packaging design in the current after-use system, without the more complex effects and interdependencies that could lead to higher economic benefits. For example, 
the impact of certain design improvements 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION39
is likely to be more apparent in a higher-
quality recycling setting, compared with down-cycling processes that are more 
tolerant of diverse inputs and are still 
common nowadays.
To successfully implement the design 
changes above, communication between packaging designers at the front end and 
the after-use processors at the back end 
is an important enabler. Such feedback loops would also help to understand further design-improvement potential. 
AS A KEY COMPLEMENT TO DESIGN 
IMPROVEMENTS, HARMONISATION OF 
AFTER-USE SYSTEMS COULD ENHANCE RECYCLING ECONOMICS BY AN ESTIMATED USD 100-150 PER TONNE OF 
COLLECTED PLASTIC. 
Currently, collection and sorting systems 
are highly fragmented, negatively 
impacting the recycling economics. As 
discussed in more detail in The New Plastics Economy – Rethinking the future of plastics, after-use systems often operate at a small scale and with widely differing approaches, 
even within a given country or city. This 
disparity not only causes confusion for the wider public but also makes it hard for packaging designers to design for one 
target system, and it prevents the creation 
of economies of scale in the after-use system. This fragmentation also hinders delivery of consistent, high-quality material streams to recyclers, who frequently source 
materials from different collection systems 
and sorting plants. This complicates their operations and increases costs.
81
Converging after-use collection and sorting systems towards good practice could improve plastic packaging recycling 
economics by an estimated USD 80-110 
per tonne collected (USD 0.8-1.3 billion in OECD). This improvement estimate assumes that 75% of the total potential of successful 
harmonisation would be captured, including 
a range of good practices such as a cost structure in line with large-scale sorting facilities in Europe.
82 Of course, given the 
fragmented nature of the existing systems, such a harmonisation effort would take 
time. Encouragingly, multiple countries 
and regions (including British Columbia in Canada
83 and the UK84) recognise the benefits of this approach and have already started implementing a convergence agenda – a Global Plastics Protocol could play an important role in guiding this 
convergence worldwide.
At the reprocessing stage, a further 
scale-up of high-quality recycling, that is 
often low-quality today, could generate an estimated benefit of USD 30-40 per tonne collected (USD 0.3-0.5 billion in 
OECD). Increasing the share of high-quality 
recycling for plastic packaging would enable more high-value applications for the recycled material, with a corresponding increase in sales prices for recycled plastic. 
This approach has been adopted for 
PET bottle-to-bottle recycling facilities and is starting to be developed for other segments of the packaging market, 
particularly PE and PP.
85 While these two 
plastic types, compared with PET, might 
present additional challenges to achieving 
high-quality recycling (e.g., absorption of 
chemicals or odours), several companies have proven the feasibility of recycling these materials into high-quality applications 
including packaging (e.g., through the use 
of hot-washing and degassing).
86 Assuming 
that 25% of PE and PP recycling would shift to higher-quality recycling, the additional 
revenues, even minus the additional 
costs and yield losses, would generate an estimated benefit of USD 25-40 per tonne of mixed plastic packaging collected.
New technologies and approaches may 
provide further opportunities to improve the 
economics of the recycling system. There are multiple examples of such innovative technologies and approaches, even though it is too early in their development to 
quantify the potential impact. Material 
markers, such as chemical tracers or digital watermarks, are currently researched and piloted but industry views vary widely 
on their importance, feasibility and cost 
effectiveness.
87 Such markers could provide 
new sorting possibilities in regions where automatic sorting is available, resulting, for 
example, in an increasing opportunity to 
supply higher-value food grade plastics. Global convergence on marking standards would be required to maximise the impact. 
Finding a solution for sorting different types 
of flexible plastic packaging, a segment representing approximately one third of post-consumer packaging (by weight) and 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION40
a production of around 1 trillion units a year, 
could significantly increase the volume of packaging available for recycling – although 
the impact on economics remains unclear.
88 
Furthermore, depolymerisation (a chemical 
recycling process breaking down polymers 
into their monomer building blocks) could 
offer additional opportunities for high-quality recycling – a technology currently most advanced for polyesters like PET. 
Combining continued innovation with 
further harmonisation of packaging 
design and after-use systems would drive a virtuous, positive spiral for the uptake, economics and quality of plastic packaging recycling. While the direct 
economic impact of implementing a Global 
Plastics Protocol would be sizeable, making recycling economically viable would also move the system into an upward spiral. 
There would be a financial incentive to 
collect and recycle more. Higher volumes would create further economies of scale and allow separation of purer grades, which, in turn, would increase yield. 
This would set a direct incentive for yet 
more collection and an indirect incentive for better material designs. Therefore, innovation and harmonisation both of 
packaging design and after-use systems are 
mutually reinforcing and the positive thrust they could generate would close the loop for a significantly higher share of plastic packaging, including more challenging 
segments. This upward spiral would 
eventually allow leakage and economic value loss to be overcome as recyclate quality steadily converges towards virgin 
material value.
GIVEN THE CURRENT FRAGILE RECYCLING 
ECONOMICS, A DEMAND-PULL FOR 
RECYCLED PLASTICS AND OTHER SUPPORTING POLICY MEASURES IS NEEDED TO START BUILDING POSITIVE MOMENTUM IN THE NEAR TERM. 
Measures to support demand for recycled 
plastics would provide a critical incentive 
for system improvements. Voluntary industry commitments, public procurement policies and regulations can all create 
a demand-pull that can build positive 
momentum in the near term. Moreover, increased demand for higher-quality plastics, including for packaging, can be an impetus specifically for investments and improvements in the high-quality recycling processes outlined in this report. For example, the establishment of high-
quality PET bottle-to-bottle recycling is 
often attributed in part to strong demand for recycled content from beverage companies
89 and California’s Rigid Plastic 
Packaging Container Law (requiring producers of rigid containers to use at 
least 25% recycled content)
90 has been 
mentioned as a boost to HDPE recycling 
US-wide.91 Similarly, these incentives could 
have an important impact on recycled PP and PE uptake, where high-quality recycling 
supply and demand is emerging but not yet 
widely seen.
92 
A range of other supporting policy measures could help trigger progress in the short term. Next to creating a demand-
pull for recycled plastics, regulatory 
frameworks can provide other enabling conditions for enhancing the uptake, economics and quality of plastic packaging 
recycling. Such policy measures could 
include: recycling targets; levies and/or bans on landfilling and incineration; carbon or resource taxes; extended producer responsibility (EPR) schemes supporting 
after-use systems; deposit-for-recycling 
systems; and others. Within this context, it should be noted that, as part of the redesigned and reused packaging will 
lead also to recycling, the 50% mentioned 
in this chapter should not be considered as an upper limit for a recycling target. In addition, regulatory policies could specifically support the adoption of good 
design practices through, for example, 
eco-design rules or more granular (adaptive) EPR schemes with contributions differentiated per packaging design 
criteria. All these policy measures come 
with advantages and disadvantages, which would need to be carefully examined in local context before implementation. They have not been the focus of this report but 
merit further investigation.
DUE TO THEIR DIFFERENT STARTING 
POINTS, MATURE AND EMERGING 
ECONOMIES REQUIRE DISTINCT PATHS 
TOWARDS ADOPTING A GLOBAL PLASTICS PROTOCOL, BUT IMPROVING PACKAGING DESIGN IS A CRITICAL LEVER 
FOR BOTH. 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION41
Unlike mature markets, emerging 
economies often require the deployment of basic collection infrastructure as a 
critical short-term action. In most mature 
economies, the vast majority of plastic packaging gets picked up in a formal collection system, whereas in emerging 
economies, a substantial share often 
goes uncollected and ends up in natural systems or clogs urban infrastructure. In such regions, a critical first step often is deploying basic collection infrastructure. 
This report does not look in detail at the 
solutions to plastics leakage in these countries, as they have been proposed by other initiatives, including local projects 
such as the Mother Earth Foundation and 
Coastal Cleanup, both in the Philippines, and global efforts such as the Trash Free Seas Alliance®, initiated by the Ocean Conservancy.
93 
Adopting a Global Plastics Protocol that improves packaging design and after-use processes would make an important 
contribution to both mature and emerging 
economies. While the impact modelling in this report is mainly focused on OECD countries, many of its insights are relevant 
for both mature and emerging markets. 
This particularly holds true for design improvements. Various studies indicate that waste-pickers operating in the informal sector collect high-value but not low-
value plastics.
94 This means designing 
plastic packaging for increased after-use 
value would result in higher collection 
rates and possibly higher incomes for 
waste-pickers – and would improve the economics of deploying formal collection infrastructure. At the same time, adoption 
of a Global Plastics Protocol would offer 
the opportunity to ensure the use of benign materials worldwide, reducing exposure to substances of concern. 
PRIORITY ACTIONS TO ENHANCE THE 
UPTAKE, QUALITY AND ECONOMICS OF RECYCLING ARE:
• Implement design changes in plastic 
packaging to improve recycling 
quality and economics (e.g., choices of materials, additives and formats) as a first step towards a Global Plastics 
Protocol• Harmonise and adopt best practices for 
collection and sorting systems, also as part of a Global Plastics Protocol
• Scale up high-quality recycling 
processes
• Explore the potential of material 
markers to increase sorting yields and quality
• Develop and deploy innovative sorting mechanisms for post-consumer flexible films
• Boost demand for recycled plastics 
through voluntary commitments or 
policy instruments, and explore other policy measures to support recycling
• Deploy adequate collection and sorting infrastructure where it is not yet in place
Figure 7 presents an overview of the priority actions identified for global plastic value chain. These actions will mobilise the distinct transition strategies for the three 
plastic packaging categories (covering the 
entire market) as discussed in this chapter.
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION42
FIGURE 7: PRIORITY ACTIONS FOR THE GLOBAL PLASTIC PACKAGING VALUE CHAIN TO 
MOBILISE THE THREE TRANSITION STRATEGIES TOWARDS THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY
30%
 20%
 50%
FUNDAMENTAL
REDESIGN& INNOVATIONREUSERECYCLING WITHRADICALLY IMPROVEDECONOMICS & QUALITY
• Fundamentally redesign 
the packaging formats and delivery models (and after-use systems) for small-format plastic packaging, avoiding such small formats where relevant and possible• Innovate towards creative, new delivery models based on reusable packaging• Implement design changes in plastic packaging to improve recycling quality and economics (e.g. choices of materials, additives, and formats), as a first step towards a Global Plastics Protocol
• Boost material innovation in recyclable or compostable 
alternatives to the currently 
unrecyclable multi-material 
applications as described above• Replace single-use plastic carrier bags by reusable alternatives• Harmonise and adopt best practices for collection and sorting systems, also as part of a Global Plastics Protocol
• Replace PVC, PS, and EPS, as a priority, as uncommon packaging materials with alternatives (converging to a few key materials being used across most of the market, while continuing to allow for innovation)• Scale up reusable packaging in a business-to-business setting for both large rigid packaging and pallet wrap• Scale up high-quality recycling processes
• Scale up compostable packaging and related infrastructure for targeted nutrient-contaminated applications• Explore the potential of material markers to increase sorting yields and quality
• Explore the potential as well as the limitations of chemical recycling and other technologies, to reprocess currently unrecyclable plastic packaging into new plastics feedstocks• Develop and deploy innovative sorting mechanisms for post-consumer flexible films
• Boost demand for recycled 
plastics through voluntary 
commitments or policy 
instruments, and explore other policy measures to support recycling
• Deploy adequate collection and sorting infrastructure where it is not yet in place
Source: New Plastics Economy initiative analysis 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION43
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION44
THE NEW 
PLASTICS ECONOMY 
INITIATIVE: 
A CATALYST FOR CHANGE
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION45
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION46
The New Plastics Economy 
Initiative: A Catalyst for Change
The New Plastics Economy is an ambitious, 
three-year initiative to build momentum towards a plastics system that works. 
Applying the principles of the circular 
economy, the initiative brings together key stakeholders to rethink and redesign the future of plastics, starting with packaging. 
Launched in May 2016, the initiative is 
spearheaded by the Ellen MacArthur Foundation, in collaboration with a broad group of leading companies, cities, philanthropists, policy-makers, designers, 
academics, students and NGOs. The New Plastics Economy focuses on 
five interlinked and mutually reinforcing building blocks to create the enabling 
conditions for a transformative system 
shift. These building blocks are: Dialogue Mechanism; Global Plastics Protocol; Innovation Moonshots; Evidence Base; 
and Stakeholder Engagement. Since its 
inception, the initiative has made significant progress across all these key elements. Based on the analysis and insights from this report, the New Plastics Economy initiative 
has now defined a series of focus catalyst 
actions to drive further progress in 2017 (see Figure 8). 
FIGURE 8: OVERVIEW OF THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY INITIATIVE’S FIVE BUILDING BLOCKS AND 2017 CATALYST ACTIONS
NEW
PLAS TICS
ECONOMY
DIAL OGUE
MECHANISMGLOBAL 
PLAS TICS 
PRO TOCOLINNO VATION 
MOONSHOT S
STAKEHOLDER 
ENGA GEMENTEVIDENCE
BASE
CROSS-
VALUE CHAIN
PARTICIP ANT 
WORKSHOPS  
TWICE A YEARCOLLABOR ATIVE 
PIONEER 
PROJ ECTSPERSPECTIV E
ON THE T OP 
OPPORTUNITIES 
FOR PA CKAGING 
DESIGN SHIFTSMATERIALS 
INNO VATION 
CHALLENGEPACKAGING 
REDESIGN 
CHALLENGE
CLOSING
OTHER 
KNO WLEDGE 
GAPSSTUD Y ON THE 
SOCIO-EC ONOMIC 
IMPA CT OF PLAS TICS 
IN MARINE 
ENVIRONMENT S WITH 
PLYMOUTH MARINE 
LABOR ATORY
CIRCULAR 
DESIGN GUIDE, 
WITH LEADING 
GLOBAL DESIGN 
COMPANY IDEO
ENGA GING AND 
INFORMING 
POLICY MAKERS
• 2017 PLAN •
Source: New Plastics Economy initiative analysis
The Dialogue Mechanism places cross-value chain collaboration at the heart of the New Plastics Economy initiative.It brings together a group of global consumer goods companies, retailers, plastics producers and packaging 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION47
manufacturers, governments, cities and 
businesses involved in plastics collection, sorting and reprocessing. This group 
informs the other building blocks and the 
initiative’s direction more broadly, together with the joint philanthropic-business advisory board and a group of civil society 
representatives. 
Concrete actions within the Dialogue 
Mechanism include biannual participant workshops and the implementation of collaborative pioneer projects. The first two participant workshops took place in 
May 2016 and December 2016, bringing 
together a group of about 40 participant organisations and initiating the first collaborative pioneer projects. 
In 2017, the initiative will continue to host 
six-monthly participant workshops and 
drive implementation of the collaborative 
pioneer projects launched in 2016.
The Global Plastics Protocol aims to 
provide a common target, helping to overcome existing fragmentation and 
enable the creation of effective markets. 
Today’s ineffective plastics economy is the result of decades of highly fragmented, uncoordinated and incremental innovation, which has not been able to make progress 
on economic value capture and negative 
externalities. By fundamentally rethinking the system and driving convergence, the Global Plastics Protocol enables the 
creation of effective markets.
In 2016, the potential economic impact of 
a Global Plastics Protocol was assessed and the analysis clearly indicated that the implementation of changes to design and 
after-use systems as part of such a protocol 
would improve the economics of plastic packaging recycling. 
In 2017, the initiative will take the next 
step towards the concrete development of a Global Plastics Protocol. It will collaboratively determine the top 
opportunities for design changes to 
enhance recycling quality and economics, as well as material health.
The Innovation Moonshots programme 
aims to mobilise innovations that could redefine what is possible across the whole 
system and create the conditions for a 
new economy. The global economy is being rewired by digitisation, automation and artificial intelligence. Fields as disparate as biology, engineering and design 
are merging, making the time for such 
moonshots now. 
In 2016, over 100 experts from academia, 
industry, start-ups and disruptive innovators, NGOs and emerging markets were engaged 
in exploring which areas of innovation could 
be mobilised as a priority and through which mechanisms. Three key insights emerged through these consultations: 
• The Innovation Moonshots programme should initially focus primarily on 
the most challenging segment of 
the market; i.e. the 30% of plastic packaging for which currently there is no viable reuse or recycling pathway.
• Alongside innovations aimed at solving today’s priority challenges, the 
initiative should explore the potential 
of more disruptive innovations, which, if successful, could redefine the entire plastics system in the future. Just a 
few examples of such innovations 
include: 3D printing and other additive manufacturing; a universal identification system for all (packaging) materials; high-quality chemical 
recycling of complex and contaminated 
material streams; and triggers for biodegradation (e.g., like a banana skin).
• There is no one silver bullet moonshot; multiple innovations are required to further accelerate the transition to the New Plastics Economy.
In 2017, the Innovation Moonshots programme will focus on the 30% of plastic 
packaging for which fundamental redesign 
and innovation are required. It will inspire a generation of material innovators by launching a challenge to find recyclable or compostable alternatives to materials for which there is no viable reuse or recycling 
pathway today. It will ignite a programme 
of redesign by launching a contest to redesign formats and delivery models that can address, for example, some of the most 
challenging small-format packaging. 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION48
The Evidence Base offers a robust 
foundation from which to guide improvement and inform the global 
debate. It closes critical knowledge gaps 
by building an economic and scientific knowledge base from which to draw insights.
In 2016, the initiative has focused its 
Evidence Base efforts on the creation 
of this report. This included a granular, segment-by-segment analysis of the plastic packaging market to define an action plan for the global value chain that would 
accelerate the transition to the New Plastics 
Economy. This analytical work has been supported by SYSTEMIQ.
In 2017, the initiative will drive progress on 
different knowledge pieces by:
• Finalising an ongoing study, together with Plymouth Marine Laboratory, to 
understand the socio-economic impact 
of plastics in marine environments – a large-scale literature review is ongoing to extract insights, understand existing 
knowledge gaps and determine 
research priorities
• Bridge other knowledge gaps such as, for example, the potential and limitations of material markers and 
chemical recycling
Stakeholder Engagement involves a wide 
set of key players across the system to learn from, to inform and to work with on amplifying solutions. Businesses, policy-
makers, students, educators, academics, 
designers, citizens, NGOs, industry associations and other stakeholders all play a role in transitioning to a new system – the initiative learns from, informs and engages 
all these stakeholders.
In 2016, insights and recommendations from 
The New Plastics Economy – Rethinking 
the future of plastics reached millions of 
people around the world. Thousands of news articles were published across five continents highlighting the report’s insights, 
including coverage in in the Financial 
Times, USA Today, The Guardian, Times of India, CNN and Al Jazeera. High-powered individuals including US Secretary of State John Kerry, Academy Award-winning actor 
Leonardo DiCaprio, various Members of the 
European Parliament, and founder of The Huffington Post Arianna Huffington, have quoted the report publicly. Their recognition of the report indicates its contribution to 
raising awareness of plastics issues and – 
importantly – the need for solutions. The report was one of the most successful topics on social media to date of the 
World Economic Forum, with an estimated 
reach of millions of people. Members of the New Plastics Economy initiative team have presented the initiative’s vision and recommendations at over 20 conferences 
and high-level meetings, including the 
World Economic Forum Annual Meeting 2016 in Davos-Klosters, the Our Ocean 2016 conference, the UN COP22 climate 
conference in Marrakech, and multiple 
high-level industry and policy-maker events. To understand how future generations of designers and innovators could be informed and inspired at scale, the initiative piloted 
in November a prototype workshop on 
redesigning plastic packaging specifically tailored to school pupils in Scotland, who learned about the New Plastics Economy 
and participated in an immersive plastics 
packaging redesign activity.
In 2017, the initiative will continue to reach 
out to the wider stakeholder group, with a focus on designers, whose involvement is essential for successful action on each 
of the three transition strategies outlined 
in this report, and on policy-makers, who can trigger progress in the near term by setting the right enabling conditions. 
The initiative has partnered with IDEO, a 
leading design and innovation consultancy, to develop the Circular Design Guide – an inspiring, online reference point on circular design, to inspire and support designers, 
innovators and change-makers to rethink 
and redesign products, delivery models and the broader ecosystems. Being co-created and prototyped with leading universities, 
entrepreneurs and corporates, it is available 
as a freely accessible website featuring over 20 practical methods ( circulardesignguide.
com), which will be further developed in 
2017. In parallel, the initiative will build 
on the prototype workshop piloted in 
Scotland to explore how to reach an entire next generation of designers at scale. Policy-makers will be further engaged and 
informed through sharing latest insights at 
various meetings and gatherings.
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION49
How to measure success? The success 
of these actions will be measured against 
the three ambitions of the New Plastics 
Economy. A key metric to measure 
success in creating an effective after-use plastics economy – the focus ambition of this update report – is the share of 
plastic packaging going into a circular 
after-use pathway (i.e. reuse, recycling or composting). 
Regarding drastically reducing leakage 
of plastics into natural systems and other negative externalities, a key metric could 
be volume (tonnes) of plastics leaked into 
the environment. Success in reducing other negative externalities, such as the impact of substances of concern on human health 
and the environment, would need separate 
metrics. 
For decoupling plastics from fossil 
feedstocks, a key metric could be the quantity of oil and gas used as virgin feedstocks for plastic packaging. 
Decreasing this volume could be realised 
by increasing reuse and recycling rates, reducing total production volumes, and exploring and adopting renewably sourced feedstocks.
Taking the actions outlined in this report 
will contribute to achieving these ambitions, 
which together represent a systemic shift and the advent of an economically and environmentally effective plastics system – a 
New Plastics Economy.
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION50
APPENDIX: KEY 
ANALYTICAL ASSUMPTIONS
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION51
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION52
Appendix: 
Key Analytical Assumptions 
The insights described in this report are the 
result of a detailed segment-by-segment analysis of the plastic packaging landscape, 
many of which are revealed for the first 
time. By its very nature, this requires 
assumptions, which are laid out below. 
When the analysis uses existing data, the sources are mentioned. 
ANALYSIS ON “REDESIGN AND INNOVATE” 
SEGMENT (30% OF MARKET, BY WEIGHT)
Small-format packaging. The charity 
WRAP
95 found that about 12% (by 
weight) of plastic household packaging in materials recovery facilities (MRFs) ends up in the fines fraction (the samples were put on a 45mm x 45mm wire mesh and any articles that fell through the screen 
without assistance were classified as fines). 
Application of the 12% to the share of household packaging (about 70% of the plastic packaging market) in combination 
with the assumption that in business-to-
business packaging the proportion of small-format items is only a third of that used in business-to-consumer packaging, results in an estimate of 9.5% of the market 
being made up of small-format items. This 
is in the same order of magnitude as the Austrian company Denkstatt’s estimate of 7.5% based on data from Gesellschaft für 
Verpackungsmarktforschung, the German 
Society for Packaging Market Research.
96
The share of small-format plastic packaging items in the market has been estimated based on a segmentation of the plastic 
packaging market volume by packaging 
type. This has been arrived at by allocating a lower-bound and upper-bound estimated 
average weight to each of those packaging 
segments (e.g., small format 1g-3g; PET bottles 10g-15g, etc.). This resulted in an estimated 35%-50% of all plastic packaging 
items being small-format. 
Multi-material packaging. In 2011, the 
French Extended Producer Responsibility organisation, Eco-Emballages, reported that over 6% (by weight) of rigid household plastic packaging was multi-material.
 97 Assuming none of the business-to-business rigid plastic packaging is multi-material, this 
represents 3% of total plastic packaging 
market volume. For the purposes of this report, it was estimated that around 26% 
(by weight) of all flexible plastic packaging 
is multi-material, which represents 10% of the total plastic packaging market by 
weight. This estimate is based on a US 
report on the flexible packaging market produced by the Flexible Packaging Association
98 and on analysis by the New 
Plastics Economy team. This is in line with estimates made by other industry experts 
during interviews. Together, this represents 
13% of the plastic packaging market by weight. 
Uncommon packaging plastic types. 
Volumes of plastic materials other than PE, PP and PET used in rigid and flexible plastic packaging are based on Smithers Pira 
market reports.
99 100 The main uncommon 
plastic packaging materials are PS (4.7% of 
plastic packaging market by weight), PVC 
(2.5%) and EPS (1.3%). All others combined 
represent another 1.4% of the total global plastic packaging market by weight. Together, this represents around 10% of the 
plastic packaging market by weight.
Overlap. The three segments mentioned 
above overlap to some extent. A few straightforward assumptions were made when estimating this overlap, such as: share of small items is the same for uncommon 
packaging plastics and common packaging 
plastics; and all uncommon packaging plastics used in films are part of multi-layer 
films. Under these assumptions, the overall 
size of the segment requiring fundamental redesign and innovation is estimated at about 30% of the total global plastic 
packaging market by weight. 
Share of plastic packaging items. This 
category represents at least 50% of all 
plastic packaging items (and 30% of market by weight) as it includes: (a) 35%-50% of all items which are small-format packaging 
(see above); and (b) multi-material 
packaging, uncommon plastic packaging 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION53
materials and nutrient-contaminated 
packaging, which are collectively estimated to represent around 20% of the market by 
weight (taking into account the overlap 
discussed, and excluding small-format items) and at least as much in terms of number of items. The latter is based on the 
vast majority of multi-material packaging 
being flexible packaging (so low weight items), and typical applications of the other materials (e.g., PS used for yoghurt pots, PVC used for pharmaceutical blister packs, 
nutrient contamination happening in a 
takeaway food context) assumed to have at most an average packaging weight.
ANALYSIS ON “REUSE” SEGMENT (20% OF 
MARKET, BY WEIGHT)
Exchange rate. The euro to US dollar 
exchange rate used was USD 1.185 per 
EUR 1, which is the average exchange rate 
for January 2014 to October 2016.
101 This 
exchange rate has also been used for the analyses on recycling.
Personal- and home-care bottles. Analysis 
for this sector was based on confidential 
data from companies active in this segment. Numbers shown in this report assume 10 to 15 refills per bottle. The percentage savings 
from these companies’ business models 
were applied to all bottles (i.e. PET, HDPE and others) in the beauty and personal-care sector, as well as in home care, based on Euromonitor 2015 data.
102 The economic 
value opportunity depends on the type of reuse model and the underlying costs and 
revenues. The potential for refill models 
based on selling and shipping active ingredients only could go beyond personal and home-care applications, but this was 
not included in the analysis.
Carrier bags. This analysis starts from a 
global annual production of 2.5 million tonnes or around 330 billion units of single-use plastic carrier bags – an estimate based on a calibration of data from different 
sources, including: the number of carrier 
bags put on the market in the UK;
103 a 
Denkstatt report showing that plastic carrier bags represent 3.2% of after-use plastic 
packaging in the EU by weight;
104 US single-
use plastic packaging production of around 
100 billion bags;105 European single-use 
plastic packaging production of 0.77 million tonnes;106 and estimated global single-use 
carrier bag production of 500 to 1,000 billion bags a year.
107 The conversion from 
volume (tonnes) to units (bags) is based on a study by Zero Waste Scotland.
108
Beverage bottles. The starting point for this analysis was a global production figure of 12.5 million tonnes of PET beverage 
bottles.
109 In Germany, around 20%-25% 
of PET beverage bottles are refillable.110 
Acknowledging that not all regions in the 
world have the infrastructure or ability 
to organise such return-systems, the 
applicable, densely populated region was approximated by the global urbanisation rate (52%).
111 Combining these numbers, a 
reuse model is estimated to offer economic and environmental benefits for at least 10% 
of all beverage bottles worldwide, or at least 
2% of the global plastic packaging market.
Business-to-business large rigid packaging. 
The share of large rigid items in the global 
plastic packaging market is based on the 
UK share of large rigid items in the total 
non-bottle rigid business-to-business plastic packaging market (35%) applied to the share of non-bottle rigid business-to-business plastic packaging in the global 
plastic packaging market (6%).
Business-to-business pallet wrap. The 
volume of pallet wrap is based on a global 
production of stretch wrap used as pallet wrap of around 4 million tonnes (taken from HJResearch, Global Stretch Wrap Industry 
Market Research 2016). This number is then 
expanded to include stretch and shrink hoods based on the European split of pallet wrap by type (stretch wrap represents 70% 
of total pallet wrap in Europe, and stretch 
and shrink hoods the other 30%; outlined in the Applied Market Information Ltd – AMI consulting, Palletisation Films Europe 2016 report), leading to an estimated annual 
pallet wrap film production of 5 million-6 
million tonnes. 
ANALYSIS ON “RECYCLE” SEGMENT 
(REMAINING SHARE OF THE MARKET)
Baseline model. The baseline for the 
recycling analysis is calculated from EU member states (EU-28) average costs, 
yields and net greenhouse gas emissions of 
collection, sorting, recycling and disposal of plastic packaging as published by 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION54
Plastic Recyclers Europe (PRE)/Deloitte.112 
It follows the 2012 baseline inputs in that 
published model with adjustments made 
for the average price decrease in recycled 
PET since 2012. Operational costs include amortised investment costs for each stage and use EU-28 average costs of sorting and 
recycling, assuming no export of plastics for 
recycling outside the EU. All numbers are EU-28 averages and it should be noted that the economics of recycling vary significantly across countries, regions, packaging types 
and uses of packaging (e.g., consumer or 
industrial). The estimated net cost of mixed plastic packaging collection, sorting and recycling also assumes local processing 
without the export of plastics for recycling 
outside the region.
The analysis covers the costs related to 
the share of plastic packaging collected for recycling (about 40% of all plastic packaging put into the market in EU, with 
collection systems in many countries 
targeting the packaging that is easiest to recycle
113). Costs related to other plastic 
packaging items not collected for recycling (e.g., a segment of residual waste collection) 
are not part of the scope of this analysis. All 
cost-per-tonne values are costs per tonne of plastic packaging collected for recycling.
The baseline has been adapted to allow 
a more granular approach for modelling 
system improvements: by consumer versus 
industrial; by resin type; and by format (flexible, rigid). Several experts in collection, sorting and recycling have reviewed the data inputs for the baseline model.
When the costs of collection, sorting, and 
recycling are compared with collection 
and disposal of plastic packaging as part of residual waste, disposal was modelled as a 50/50 ratio between landfill and incineration with energy recovery. This gives 
an estimated average cost of collection and 
disposal of residual waste of USD 200 per tonne.
114 
Results expressed as total value for OECD have been scaled up from the EU-28 analysis, as based on the plastic packaging 
volume collected for recycling in OECD 
countries, which is estimated at 11 million tonnes a year.
115 
Lever quantification. Levers are applied to the baseline model assuming an inferred effect on cost, yield and recyclate price. To 
keep costs comparable to the baseline, no changes have been assumed in the volumes 
collected. The effect of higher capital investment costs on operational cost (which already includes amortised investment 
costs) is not incorporated in the model. 
The inputs used for quantifying the impact of these levers have been drawn from published material, case examples, expert 
interviews and assumptions as shown below. 
For calculating the effect of packaging design improvements, a synergy effect on the average price of recycled plastic (+8%) is assumed to account for the cumulative 
effect of applying design and after-use 
levers together (effect of higher-quality recycling on average plastic prices).
Format design. The report uses a top-
down estimate of the effect of improving format design specific to types of plastic 
packaging. Examples include design choices 
relating to labels, sleeves, inks and direct printing, glues, closures and closure liners, valves, pumps and triggers, attachments or 
tear-offs, and form or shape of packaging. 
Expert interviews and published reports indicate that format design changes (not including material, pigment and additive changes already considered in other design 
levers) could avoid material losses during 
sorting or recycling of up to 15% of plastic packaging collected (compared with 38% material loss in the overall sorting and 
recycling process).
116 This lever assumes that 
format design improvements would reduce 
the overall material losses by 7.5% (half of 
the material losses attributable to format 
design issues).
Material choices. 
• PVC: One percentage point increase 
in recycling yields is assumed 
for PET recycling due to avoided sorting losses prior to the extrusion 
(reprocessing) stage as the removal of 
PVC would lead to unintended losses of recyclable material. A small increase in the average price of recycled PET 
is modelled (+3%) to account for the 
effect of PVC contamination on optical and mechanical properties of recycled PET, and the substitution of rigid PVC for alternatives that are more likely to 
be recycled, reduces cost and increases 
value for the recycling system. 
• EPS/PS: It is assumed that EPS and PS in plastic packaging are not recycled in most countries because they are 
present in small volumes and do not 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION55
warrant investment in additional sorting 
equipment. The model estimates the effect of substituting EPS/PS for 
materials that are more likely to be 
recycled (e.g., PET, PE, PP resins). Recyclers also indicated that PS can affect the extrusion (reprocessing) of 
other plastics. This effect, however, is 
not included in the calculation. 
Pigment choices. Packaging with carbon black pigment cannot be detected by near-infrared (NIR) sorting equipment used in most sorting facilities. Calculations 
assume that packaging with carbon black 
is collected for recycling at the same average rate as other plastic packaging, then lost into the residual waste stream 
during sorting. The share of packaging with 
carbon black follows published estimates at 1.5%-2% of packaging.
117 This lever assumes 
all carbon black is replaced by other NIR-detectable pigments. It is assumed that 
opaque PET bottles are not to be recycled, 
based on recycler input, and for this calculation they have been switched to a recycled alternatives (assumed to be 0.25% 
of the packaging stream
118). In addition, 
calculations assume a switch from coloured 
packaging to clear or light-coloured 
translucent plastics, with an average 10%-
20% increase in price for clear or light-coloured recycled plastic (depending on the type of plastic). Share of coloured plastics 
(excluding carbon black) in the packaging 
stream is estimated at 25% based on published information.
119 This improvement 
lever assumes that three quarters of that segment could be switched.
Additive choices. A small effect of additives 
in plastics used for packaging is included in 
this model (in total, about USD 5 per tonne of mixed plastics packaging collected) to account for discolouration of recycled 
PET, and density issues causing avoidable 
losses in the recycling system (e.g., losses in float-sink separation). Calculations assume 2% of the recycled bottle PET is impacted by discolouration and 2% of 
polyolefins collected for recycling are lost 
at the reprocessing facility due to density-affecting additives. The effect of additives is a subject for further investigation and could 
become more significant in higher-quality 
recycling processes.Harmonised collection and sorting. 
Improvements are based on expert input 
on the effect of harmonising collection and sorting systems and adopting best practices. Collection and sorting 
performance are tightly linked, since 
harmonised collection makes for easier sorting. To avoid double-counting of effects the following assumptions are made:
• Sorting yields for rigid packaging increased to good-practice estimates of 
85% (rigids) and 90% (PET bottles).
• Average sorting cost is reduced to 
proven good-practice example of about USD 120 per tonne (as already achieved by large-scale sorting facilities 
in Europe
120).
• Small increase in recycling yield 
(two percentage points) to account for improved quality of inputs to 
reprocessing facilities.
• No change in collection cost is 
modelled as it is assumed that good-practice cost reductions would be 
balanced out by additional transport 
distances (since large sorting facilities would be further apart).
• For the purposes of modelling, it is estimated that good-practice effects (i.e., all assumptions listed above) are 
achieved in 75% of cases, as not all 
regions have a high enough population density to allow for large-scale sorting plants, and lower collection and 
transport costs; and for other, non-
technical (e.g., geopolitical) reasons.
• No effect on quality of recycled product is modelled, although this would be expected if the raw material supply to recyclers was improved.
Shift to high-quality recycling for PE and PP. Higher-quality polyolefin recycling would enable significant (about 50%) increases in the average sale price for 
recycled plastics, offset, however, by higher 
(by about 15%) recycling costs and reduced (by five percentage points) recycling yields due to more rigorous sorting.
121 It is assumed 
that 25% of the polyolefin market would move to higher-quality recycling under a 
good-practice model.
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION56
Acknowledgements 
and Disclaimer
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Special thanks for their multiple contributions and active involvement to the New Plastics 
Economy’s Advisory Board members; the New Plastics Economy’s participant companies and cities across the value chain (for a full list see http:/ /www.newplasticseconomy.org/); and 
the many experts from academia, industry and NGOs who contributed to the report. Special 
thanks go as well to Frans Van Houten (CEO, Philips) for his leadership of Project Mainstream during the establishment of the New Plastic Economy initiative and his ongoing support as the Chair of the World Economic Forum’s Circular Economy Leaders Network. The New Plastics 
Economy initiative is also grateful for the analytical support from SYSTEMIQ, a new kind 
of enterprise, created specifically to tackle system failures and deliver improved economic, environmental and social value.
DISCLAIMER
This report has been produced by a team from the Ellen MacArthur Foundation, which takes full responsibility for the report’s contents and conclusions. While the New Plastics Economy Advisory Board members, participants and experts consulted have provided significant input 
to the development of this report, their involvement does not necessarily imply endorsement 
of the report’s contents or conclusions.
To quote this report, please use the following reference:World Economic Forum and Ellen MacArthur Foundation, The New Plastics Economy – 
Catalysing action (2017, http:/ /www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications). 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION57
Endnotes
1 World Economic Forum, Ellen MacArthur 
Foundation and McKinsey & Company, The New Plastics Economy – Rethinking the future of plastics (2016, http:/ /www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications).
2 Ibid.
3 Earth Policy Institute and various web sources covering plastic regulation.
4 The New York Times, “California Proposition 67 – Plastic Bag Ban Veto Referendum – Results: Approved”. (2016, http:/ /www.nytimes.com/elections/results/california-ballot-measure-67-uphold-single-use-bag-ban).
5 #breakfreefromplastic: http:/ /breakfreefromplastic.org/.
6 World Economic Forum, Ellen MacArthur Foundation and McKinsey & Company, The New Plastics Economy – Rethinking the future of plastics (2016, http:/ /www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications).
7 The size of the impact on economy and society has been estimated by T. M. Attina et al., Exposure to endocrine-disrupting chemicals in the USA: a population-based disease burden and cost analysis (The Lancet Diabetes & Endocrinology, 2016); and L. Trasande et al., Estimating burden and disease costs of exposure to endocrine-disrupting chemicals in the European union (Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, Endocrine Society, 2015).
8 The development of criteria for identifying endocrine disruptors is done in the context of the implementation of the Plant Protection Product Regulation and Biocidal Products Regulation. However, specific provisions are included in several other pieces of the EU legislation that regulate the marketing and use of chemical substances, including REACH, which are relevant for substances in plastics. For more details, see European Commission website on endocrine disruptors: http:/ /ec.europa.eu/environment/chemicals/endocrine/index_en.htm and European Commission, Roadmap for defining criteria for identifying endocrine disruptors in the context of the implementation of the plant protection products regulation and the biocidal products regulation (2014).9 Carrefour committed to eliminating all free single-use carrier bags throughout its worldwide integrated store network by 2020 (http:/ /www.carrefour.com/current-news/cop22-carrefour-committed-to-eliminating-all-free-single-use-carrier-bags-throughout, 2016).
10 PlasticsEurope, EuropeanPlasticsConverters and PlasticsRecyclersEurope.
11 Ocean Conservancy and McKinsey Center for Business and Environment, Stemming the Tide: Land-based strategies for a plastic-free ocean (2015); World Business Council for Sustainable Development, World Resources Forum, and Empa, Informal approaches towards a circular economy (2016).
12 ARCADIS, Marine Litter study to support the establishment of an initial quantitative headline reduction target – SFRA0025 (2015). European Environment Agency, Top marine litter items on the beach (http:/ /www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/daviz/marine-litter-items-on-the-beach, 2015). The Litter Monitoring Body, TOBIN Consulting Engineers, System results 2014 (2014).
13 Both in their “realistic” and “very optimistic” scenario Denkstatt estimated the maximum recycling potential of small packaging items to be zero. Denkstatt, Criteria for eco-efficient (sustainable) plastic recycling and waste management – Fact based findings from 20 years of Denkstatt studies, Background report for associated presentation (2014).
14 
 Expert interviews; size of mazes confirmed 
by following sources: Triple/S Dynamics, Inc., The place of the trommel in resource recovery (http:/ /www.sssdynamics.com/news/articles/2015/10/26/the-place-of-the-trommel-in-resource-recovery, 1992), Redwave, Case studies (http:/ /www.redwave.at/en/download/case-studies/), Plazma, Material Recovery Facility (http:/ /www.plazma.com.tr/our-products/material-revocery-facility-mrf.html); UK Environment Agency, Waste Pre-Treatment: A Review (2002); PlasticsNews, APR studying ways to recycle small containers (http:/ /www.plasticsnews.com/article/20161103/NEWS/161109933/apr-studying-ways-to-recycle-small-containers#utm_medium=email&utm_source=pn-sustain&utm_campaign=pn-sustain-20161103&email_sustain, 2016).
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION58
15 Multiple experts confirmed they are not 
aware of any sorting facilities recovering small-format plastic items from the fines fraction. Also Denkstatt estimated the maximum eco-efficient material recycling rate to be zero for this segment, even in their “very optimistic scenario” (Denkstatt, Criteria for eco-efficient (sustainable) plastic recycling and waste management: Fact based findings from 20 years of Denkstatt studies, Background report for associated presentation, 2014).
16 PVC 2.5% of global plastic packaging market; EPS 1.3%; PS 4.7%; other less common packaging plastic together 1.4%. New Plastics Economy Analysis based on Smithers Pira, The Future of Global Rigid Plastic Packaging to 2020 (2015) and Smithers Pira, The Future of Global Flexible Packaging to 2018 (2013).
17 VinylPlus reported that 24,371 tonnes of PVC rigid films were recycled in EU-28 (including Norway and Switzerland) in 2015 (VinylPlus, Progress report 2016 (2016)). Comparing this with the 433,000 tonnes of rigid PVC packaging consumption and an estimated amount of 150,000 to 250,000 tonnes of PVC in flexible packaging in Western Europe (both based on Smithers Pira, The Future of Global Rigid Plastic Packaging to 2020 (2015)), results in a recycling rate of approximately 4%. This is likely an overestimation, given the denominator only includes Western Europe and the numerator might include non-packaging rigid PVC film.
18 Expert interviews with owners of sorting facilities, experts in sorting technology and producer responsibility organisations.
19 Ibid.
20 Plastic Recycling Machine, Professional Manufacturer of PET Bottle Washing Lines (http:/ /www.petbottlewashingline.com/pvc-in-pet-bottle-recycling/); some of the world’s biggest soft drinks companies even request PVC contamination levels below 0.001%. Waste Management World, Tackling Complex Plastic Recycling Challenges (2015); expert interviews with sorters and recyclers.
21 Phthalates – most commonly used as a plasticiser in PVC – raise concerns about adverse effects on human health and the environment: A. C. Gore et al., Executive Summary to EDC-2: The Endocrine Society’s Second Scientific Statement on Endocrine-Disrupting Chemicals (Endocrine Reviews 37, 2015); S. H. Swan et al., First trimester 
phthalate exposure and anogenital distance in newborns (Human Reproduction, Oxford Journals, 2015); Y. J. Lien et al., Prenatal exposure to phthalate esters and behavioral syndromes in children at 8 years of age: Taiwan Maternal and Infant Cohort Study (Environmental Health Perspectives, 2015); L. López-Carrillo et al., Exposure to Phthalates and Breast Cancer Risk in Northern Mexico (Environmental Health Perspectives 118, 2010).
22 http:/ /www.merged-vertices.com/portfolio/nephentes/
23 http:/ /www.disappearingpackage.com/
24 Rick Lingle, Tyson Foods debuts the first 100 percent recyclable stand-up pouch (Packaging Digest, http:/ /www.packagingdigest.com/flexible-packaging/tyson-foods-debuts-first-100-percent-recyclable-stand-pouch, 2013).
25 Experts indicate there is a risk regarding substances of concern (e.g. pyrolysis produces filtrates containing a range of substances), even though perceived lower than for incineration (e.g. generation of 
gaseous substances of concern is generally 
lower). As explained, further detailed research is needed and falls outside the scope of this report.
26 Saperatec delaminates composite materials using micro-emulsions. It plans to build a first industrial-scale plant for multi-material packaging in 2017 (http:/ /www.saperatec.de).
27 Lab-scale activities to delaminate multi-layer film indicated that it is possible to separate the layers and remove the ink that was between them (http:/ /cadeldeinking.com/en/).
28 APK dissolves one polymer (at a time), which may be present in one or more layers. It has one industrial-scale plant in operation today (https:/ /www.apk-ag.de/en/).
29 Alternatives for common PVC, EPS and PS packaging applications (not exhaustive): World Economic Forum, Ellen MacArthur Foundation and McKinsey & Company, 
The New Plastics Economy – Rethinking 
the future of plastics (2016, http:/ /www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications).
30 Smithers Pira, The Future of Global Rigid Plastic Packaging to 2020 (2015); Smithers Pira, The Future of Global Flexible Packaging to 2018 (2013). Examples include: Unilever has already largely phased out PVC from their packaging (source: Unilever website) and also Walmart is avoiding PVC where possible (source: Walmart, Sustainable Packaging Playbook (2016)). Marks & Spencer has done the same with PVC and PS (source: Marks & Spencer, Food Packaging Charter, Plan A (2008); Liz Gyeke, M&S meets “Plan 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION59
A” packaging target (PackagingNews, http:/ /
www.packagingnews.co.uk/news/marks-and-spencer-packaging-target-08-06-2012, 2012)); McDonald’s began to phase out its iconic clamshell foam hamburger box in 1990 and is now phasing out styrofoam beverage cups. Alternatives exist for EPS, for example, as shipment protection (e.g., Ecovative’s mushroom-based Myco Foam, see http:/ /www.ecovativedesign.com/) or for fish boxes (e.g. CoolSeal Packaging, see www.coolseal.co.uk).
31 http:/ /www.splosh.com
32 http:/ /www.myreplenish.com
33 New Plastics Economy analysis based on confidential data provided by Splosh and Replenish.
34 See Appendix.
35 New Plastics Economy analysis based on confidential data provided by Replenish.
36 http:/ /www.sodastream.com
37 http:/ /www.makeitmio.com
38 Conservative estimate based on comparison of different sources. See Appendix.
39 CalRecycle, 2009 Statewide Recycling Rate for Plastic Carryout Bags (http:/ /calrecycle.ca.gov/plastics/atstore/AnnualRate/2009Rate.htm, 2009). Recycling.co.uk, Recycling carrier bags (http:/ /www.recycling.co.uk/carrier-bags); EU Commission, Impact Assessment for a Proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 94/62/EC on packaging and packaging waste to reduce the consumption of lightweight plastic carrier bags (2013); EU Parliament, Directive (EU) 2015/720 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2015 amending Directive 94/62/EC as regards reducing the consumption of lightweight plastic carrier bags (2015).
40 Ocean Conservancy and McKinsey Center for Business and Environment, Stemming the Tide: Land-based strategies for a plastic-free ocean (2015).
41 ARCADIS, Marine Litter study to support the establishment of an initial quantitative headline reduction target – SFRA0025 (2015); European Environment Agency, Top marine litter items on the beach (http:/ /www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/daviz/marine-litter-items-on-the-beach, 2015).
42 Earth Policy Institute, The Downfall of the Plastic Bag: A Global Picture (2014).43 http:/ /www.carrefour.com/current-news/cop22-carrefour-committed-to-eliminating-all-free-single-use-carrier-bags-throughout
44 Department of Housing, Planning, Community and Local Government, Plastic bag levy (http:/ /www.housing.gov.ie/environment/waste/plastic-bags/plastic-bag-levy, 2016); Zero Waste Scotland, Carrier Bag Charge “one year on” report (2015); in Ireland, the share of plastic bags of the total visible litter items instantly decreased from 5.0% to 0.32%. Source: The Litter Monitoring Body, TOBIN Consulting Engineers, System results 2014 (2014).
45 Zero Waste Scotland, Carrier Bag Charge “one year on” report (2015).
46 SmithersPira, Demand for PET Packaging Material to reach USD 60 billion by 2019 (2014, http:/ /www.smitherspira.com/news/2014/april/demand-for-pet-packaging-material-in-2019); Transparency Market Research, Plastic Packaging Market: Global Industry Analysis, Size, Share, Growth, Trends and Forecast, 2014-2020 (2015).
47 In Europe, the collection-for-recycling rate of PET bottles is around 60% (PETCore, http:/ /www.petcore-europe.org/news/over-66-billion-pet-bottles-recycled-europe-2014). Expert interviews reported around 20%-25% yield losses during recycling and average reduction in value between recycled and virgin PET of 0% for bottle-to-bottle, around 20% for bottle-to-fibre to sheet and around 30% for bottle-to-strapping. According to Project MainStream analysis, globally only around 7% of PET bottles are recycled back into bottle-quality PET; in Germany this is 32%, according to IK Industrievereinigung Kunststoffverpackungen e.V.
48 For more details, see Ellen MacArthur Foundation, Towards a Circular Economy – Opportunities for the consumer goods sector (2013; http:/ /www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications/).
49 Ibid.
50 Transparency Market Research, Reusable Water Bottle Market – Global Industry Analysis and Forecast 2016–2024 (2016).
51 Based on expert interviews.
52 The study reports that this reusable tray is beneficial versus single-use cardboard boxes as of 12 use cycles from an economic perspective and as of 20 use cycles from an environmental point of view. Source: Schoeller Allibert, Returnable transit containers prove their green credentials (https:/ /logismarketuk.cdnwm.com/ip/
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION60
linpac-allibert-maxinest-stacking-nesting-
produce-trays-carbon-footprint-research-proves-that-maxinest-has-the-potential-to-deliver-significant-environmental-savings-for-every-customer-745278.pdf).
53 Expert interviews and confidential data.
54 World Economic Forum, Ellen MacArthur Foundation and McKinsey & Company, The New Plastics Economy – Rethinking the future of plastics (2016, http:/ /www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications)
55 Volume of pallet wrap is based on global production of stretch wrap used as pallet wrap from HJResearch, Global Stretch Wrap Industry Market Research 2016 (2016) and expanded to include stretch and shrink hoods based on European split of palletisation wrap by type from Applied Market Information Ltd – AMI consulting, Palletisation Films Europe 2016 (2016).
56 Expert interviews.
57 Packaging Revolution, Reusable Wraps and Strap Systems Help Eliminate Need for Stretch Wrap (http:/ /packagingrevolution.net/lids-straps-wraps/, 2010).
58 http:/ /www.loadhoglids.com
59 Company websites: http:/ /www.reusawraps.com; http:/ /www.envirowrapper.com/product-overview.php; http:/ /www.dehnco.com/palletwraps/reusable-stretch-film-alternative.cfm; http:/ /www.palletwrapz.com.
60 http:/ /www.modulushca.eu
61 http:/ /www.originalrepack.com
62 World Economic Forum, Ellen MacArthur Foundation and McKinsey & Company, The New Plastics Economy – Rethinking the future of plastics (2016, http:/ /www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications).
63 This is the additional cost of collection, sorting and recycling over the cost of collection and disposal of plastic packaging as part of residual waste. The cost of collection, sorting and recycling plastic packaging and of disposal of residues and contamination minus the sales of recycled plastics is around USD 325-485 per tonne collected, assuming all sorting and recycling activities take place in OECD (i.e., no export to non-OECD countries). The cost of collection and disposal of plastic packaging as part of residual waste results in a net cost of around USD 170-250 per tonne collected, assuming disposal consists of a 50/50 ratio between landfill and incineration with energy recovery. All cost figures are averages across very different collection, sorting, recycling and disposal systems in EU countries and across different packaging types, and, therefore, could differ significantly for specific countries or packaging types. See Appendix for more details.
64 Calculation for greenhouse gas emissions avoided based on Deloitte, Increased EU Plastics Recycling Targets: Environmental, Economic and Social Impact Assessment – Final Report (2015). A 50/50 ratio between landfill and incineration with energy recovery is assumed.
65 United Nations Environment Programme, Valuing Plastic: The Business Case for Measuring, Managing and Disclosing Plastic Use in the Consumer Goods Industry (2014). A social cost of USD 113 per metric tonne of CO
2e was used to value greenhouse gas 
emissions, which is the value identified in the UK government’s Stern report as the central, business-as-usual scenario.
66  The price trend differs per plastic type, grade and geography and refers to US price data on specified dates each year from 2012-2013 to 2016. Statement on recycled PET refers to average historical recycled PET prices in the US, published by plasticnews.com and highlighted in industry media including Recycling Today (http:/ /www.recyclingtoday.com/article/paper-plastics-recycling-conference-pet-reclaimers/, 2016).
67 This is the total benefit divided by the tonnage of all plastic packaging collected for recycling. The benefit per tonne collected is much higher for the specific segment(s) impacted.
68 Assuming non-recyclable item gets collected for recycling and is removed at recycling facility and incurs cost of collection, sorting, residual waste disposal, and estimated one third of recycling cost (for recycler to sort out the material). Cost of treatment is compared to a substitute item that follows average cost and yield for collection, sorting and recycling plastic packaging. Average cost and yield data based on Deloitte, Increased EU Plastics Recycling Targets: Environmental, Economic and Social Impact Assessment – Final Report (2015).
69 Cotrep, The impact of the increase in white opaque PET on the recycling of PET packaging (http:/ /www.cotrep.fr/fileadmin/contribution/mediatheque/avis-generaux/anglais/packaging-and-additives/20131205-Note_introductive_PET_opaque_EN_publi%C3%A9e.pdf, 2013).
70 Assuming between 50% and 75% of PET bottles are collected for recycling in France.
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION61
71 Numbers in this and following sections have 
been rounded for ease of communication; this explains small difference between economic benefit of individual levers, and total economic benefit.
72 APR Shrink Label Working Group (2014, http:/ /www.plasticsrecycling.org/resources/reports/sleeve-label-study).
73 Estimate for design-related material losses in plastics packaging recycling stream (from collection to reprocessing) is based on overall average of 38% material loss (from Deloitte, Increased EU Plastics Recycling Targets: Environmental, Economic and Social Impact Assessment – Final Report (2015)); recycler feedback and published reports including RRS, MRF Material Flow Study (2015); WRAP, Design of Rigid Packaging for Recycling (2013).
74 Price difference for coloured versus clear or light-coloured translucent recyclate is dependent on the resin, market and application. Estimated range is based on interviews with recyclers.
75 Ibid.
76 Werner & Mertz website states: “colouring of the plastic is avoided as this is the only way to continue maintaining a recyclate in the technical cycle and make sure the used bottles can serve as raw material source for new bottles”. (http:/ /wmprof.com/en/int/news_7/2016/world_innovation__first_pe_bottle_based_on_100___pcr__hdpe/world_innovation__first_pe-bottle_based_on_100___pcr__hdpe.html).
77 WRAP, Development of NIR Detectable Black Plastic Packaging (2011).
78 Interviewed recyclers; APR, Design guidelines from the Association of Plastic Recyclers (2016) mentions negative impact of certain additives on recycling and recyclate quality. (http:/ /www.plasticsrecycling.org/images/pdf/design-guide/Full_APR_Design_Guide.pdf).
79 Interviewed recyclers; APR, Design guidelines from the Association of Plastic Recyclers (2016) state: “Of particular concern are additives which cause the rPET to discolour or haze after remelting or solid stating since rPET with poor haze or discolouration is greatly devalued and has limited markets.”
80 APR, Design guidelines from the Association of Plastic Recyclers (2016) state: “Of particular concern are…dense additives that increase the density of the blend making it sink, thus rendering the package unrecyclable per APR definition.”81 Interviews with European plastics recyclers consistently highlight the challenge of diverse, variable and contaminated source materials.
82 See Appendix for more details.
83 Multi-Material British Columbia, a non-profit organisation, is financed by industry to manage residential packaging recycling programmes. For more details, see World Economic Forum, Ellen MacArthur Foundation and McKinsey & Company, The New Plastics Economy –  Rethinking the future of plastics (2016, http:/ /www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications).
84 WRAP, A framework for greater consistency in household recycling in England (2016, http:/ /www.wrap.org.uk/content/consistency).
85 By way of example, according to experts, only a handful of polyolefin recycling plants have hot-washing processes in place, while this is the standard for high-quality PET 
recycling. Recently, companies like QCP 
(http:/ /www.qcpolymers.com) started to deploy these processes for PE and PP as well, aiming to produce high-quality polyolefin recyclates ready for use in packaging again.
86 Werner & Mertz has recently launched a 100% post-consumer recycled HDPE bottle (Werner & Mertz Professional presents its first PE-bottle based on 100% Post-Consumer-Recycled (PCR) HDPE (http:/ /wmprof.com/en/int/news_7/2016/world_innovation__first_pe_bottle_based_on_100___pcr__hdpe/world_innovation__first_pe-bottle_based_on_100___pcr__hdpe.html, 2016)); QCP is another example of a recently founded recycling company aiming for high-quality recycling of PE and PP (interviews, http:/ /www.qcpolymers.com).
87 A broad range of interviews with industry experts highlights varied opinions on the potential benefits, feasibility and economic viability of material markers, tracers or watermarks for plastics packaging – highlighting the importance of further work on this topic.
88 Euromonitor International, Smaller is Better as Global Packaging Growth is Shaped by Variation in Pack Sizes (http:/ /blog.euromonitor.com/2016/06/smaller-is-better-as-global-packaging-growth-is-shaped-by-variation-in-pack-sizes.html, 2016); The REFLEX Project (http:/ /www.reflexproject.co.uk).
89 Interviews with industry experts highlighted the role of demand from beverage companies in driving higher-quality PET.
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION62
90 Law requires mandatory share of recycled 
content or meeting one of the other compliance options such as source reduction, refillable packaging or reusable packaging (source: website of California’s Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery, http:/ /www.calrecycle.ca.gov/).
91 Interview with Container Recycling Institute.
92 QCP is an example of a recently founded recycling company aiming for high-quality recycling of PE and PP (interviews, http:/ /www.qcpolymers.com); Werner & Mertz has recently launched a 100% post-consumer recycled HDPE bottle (Werner & Mertz Professional presents its first PE-bottle based on 100% Post-Consumer-Recycled (PCR) HDPE (http:/ /wmprof.com/en/int/news_7/2016/world_innovation__first_pe_bottle_based_on_100___pcr__hdpe/world_innovation__first_pe-bottle_based_on_100___pcr__hdpe.html, 2016)); Several companies, including Unilever, IKEA, Walmart and Colgate, announced recycled content targets for their packaging, which will likely require significant high-quality recycled PE and PP.
93 http:/ /www.oceanconservancy.org/our-work/trash-free-seas-alliance
94 For example, in the Philippines, waste-pickers collected up to 90% of certain types of plastic bottles with high after-use value. Low-value plastic items, in contrast, are neglected; collection rates are close to 0%. Source: The Ocean Conservancy and McKinsey Center for Business and the Environment, Stemming The Tide: Land-based strategies for a plastic-free ocean (2015).
95 WRAP, WRAP Plastics Compositional Analysis 
at MRFs (2015).
96 Denkstatt, Criteria for eco-efficient (sustainable) plastic recycling and waste management: Fact based findings from 20 years of Denkstatt studies, Background report for associated presentation (2014).
97 Eco-emballages, Amélioration de la recyclabilité des emballages en plastique autres que bouteilles et flacons (2013).
98 Flexible Packaging Association, Flexible Packaging Industry Segment Profile Analysis (2013).
99 Smithers Pira, The Future of Global Rigid Plastic Packaging to 2020 (2015).
100 Smithers Pira, The Future of Global Flexible Packaging to 2018 (2013).
101 Historical exchange rates from www.usforex.com102 Euromonitor International, Data exported on September 29
th, 2016.
103 WRAP, Plastic packaging composition 2011 (2013).
104 Denkstatt, Criteria for eco-efficient (sustainable) plastic recycling and waste management – Fact based findings from 20 years of Denkstatt studies, Background report for associated presentation (2014).
105 US International Trade Commission, Polyethylene Retail Carrier Bags from 
Indonesia, Taiwan, and Vietnam
 (2009);  
Conserving Now,  Plastic Bag Consumption 
Facts  (https:/ /conservingnow.com/plastic-
bag-consumption-facts/) .
106 European Commission, Impact Assessment 
for a proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 94/62/EC on packaging and packaging waste to reduce the consumption of lightweight plastic carrier bags (2013).
107 SeatlePi, Plastic left holding the bag as environmental plague (2004).
108 Zero Waste Scotland, Carrier Bag Charge “one year on” report (2015).
109  Smithers Pira, Demand for PET Packaging Material to reach USD 60 billion by 2019 (http:/ /www.smitherspira.com/news/2014/april/demand-for-pet-packaging-material-in-2019, 2014).
110 Reloop, Beverage Sales By Container Type, Germany 2000-2015 (http:/ /reloopplatform.eu/beverage-sales-by-container-type-in-austria-4/)
111 World Urbanization Prospects – 2011 Revision.
112 Deloitte, Increased EU Plastics Recycling Targets: Environmental, Economic and Social Impact Assessment – Final Report (2015).
113 Deloitte, Increased EU Plastics Recycling Targets: Environmental, Economic and Social Impact Assessment – Final Report (2015). The approximate 40% often includes the easiest to recycle items; for example, Belgium only collecting bottles, many regions not collecting household flexible packaging. Sources: Fostplus website (www.fostplus.be); summary of plastic film collection in Europe studies by WRAP (WRAP, Film reprocessing technologies and collection schemes (2012)).
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION63
114 Source for the disposal cost: Deloitte, 
Increased EU Plastics Recycling Targets: Environmental, Economic and Social Impact Assessment – Final Report (2015). The collection cost for residual waste is based on an analysis of EU datasets and expert interviews.
115 EPA, US collection-for-recycling volumes from Environmental Protection Agency Report (2013); Japan from Packaging Waste Management Institute Report (2014); EU-28 from Plastic Recyclers Europe/Deloitte report (2015); APC, Australia from Packaging Covenant Report (2014-2015); other collection volumes are extrapolated from web research and population data.
116 Examples: RRF, MRF Material Flow Study (2015) (http:/ /www.plasticsrecycling.org/images/pdf/resources/MRF-material-flow-study-FINAL.pdf); Container Recycling Institute, Bottled Up (2013) (http:/ /www.container-recycling.org/index.php/publications/2013-bottled-up-report; Material loss of 38% from collection to recycled plastic production is based on Deloitte, Increased EU Plastics Recycling Targets: Environmental, Economic and Social Impact Assessment – Final Report (2015).117 WRAP, Development of NIR Detectable Black Plastic Packaging (2011).
118 Cotrep, The impact of the increase in white opaque PET on the recycling of PET packaging (http:/ /www.cotrep.fr/fileadmin/contribution/mediatheque/avis-generaux/anglais/packaging-and-additives/20131205-Note_introductive_PET_opaque_EN_publi%C3%A9e.pdf, 2013)
119 WRAP, Plastics Compositional Analysis at MRFs (2015); WRAP, Design of Rigid Packaging for Recycling (2013); WRAP, Development of NIR detectable black plastic packaging (2011); Cotrep, Preliminary note on the impact of the increase in white opaque PET on the recycling of PET packaging (2013).
120 Expert interviews.
121 Estimates for price, cost and yield impacts of higher-quality polyolefin recycling processes are from industry interviews.
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION64
About the 
Ellen MacArthur Foundation
The Ellen MacArthur Foundation was established in 2010 with the aim of accelerating the 
transition to the circular economy . Since its creation the charity has emerged as a global 
thought leader, establishing the circular economy on the agenda of decision makers across 
business, government and academia. With the support of its Core Philanthropic Funder, SUN, 
and Knowledge Partners (Arup, IDEO, McKinsey & Company, and SYSTEMIQ), the Foundation’s 
work focuses on five interlinking areas:
EDUCATION
Inspiring learners to re-think the future through the circular economy framework
The Foundation has created global teaching, learning and training platforms built around 
the circular economy framework, encompassing both formal and informal education. With an emphasis on online learning, the Foundation provides cutting edge insights and content 
to support circular economy education, and the systems thinking required to accelerate a 
transition.
Our formal education work includes Higher Education programmes with partners in Europe, 
the U.S., India, China and South America, international curriculum development with schools and colleges, and corporate capacity building. Our informal education work includes the global, online Disruptive Innovation Festival.
BUSINESS AND GOVERNMENT
Catalysing circular innovation and creating the conditions for it to reach scale
Since its launch, the Foundation has emphasised the real-world relevance of the circular 
economy framework, recognising that business innovation sits at the heart of economic transitions. The Foundation works with its Global Partners (Cisco, Danone, Google, H&M, 
Intesa Sanpaolo, NIKE Inc., Philips, Renault, and Unilever) to develop scalable circular business 
initiatives and to address challenges to implementing them.
The Circular Economy 100 programme brings together industry leading corporations, emerging 
innovators, affiliate networks, government authorities, regions and cities, to build circular 
capacity, address common barriers to progress, understand the necessary enabling conditions, and pilot circular practices, in a collaborative, pre-competitive environment.
INSIGHT AND ANALYSIS
Providing robust evidence about the benefits and implications of the transition
The Foundation works to quantify the economic opportunity of a more circular model and to 
develop approaches for capturing its value. Our insight and analysis feeds into a growing body of economic reports highlighting the rationale for an accelerated transition towards the circular 
economy, and exploring the potential benefits across stakeholders and sectors.
The circular economy is an evolving framework, and the Foundation continues to widen its 
understanding by working with international experts, key thinkers and leading academics.
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION65
SYSTEMIC INITIATIVES
Transforming key material flows to scale the circular economy globally
Taking a global, cross-sectoral approach to material flows, the Foundation is bringing together 
organisations from across value chains to tackle systemic stalemates that cannot be overcome in isolation. Plastics was identified through initial work by the Foundation with the World 
Economic Forum and McKinsey & Company as one of the value chains most representative of 
the current linear model, and is therefore the focus of the Foundation’s first Systemic Initiative. Applying the principles of the circular economy, the New Plastics Economy initiative, launched in May 2016, brings together key stakeholders to rethink and redesign the future of plastics, 
starting with packaging.
COMMUNICATIONS
Engaging a global audience around the circular economy
The Foundation communicates cutting edge ideas and insight through its circular economy 
research reports, case studies and book series, using multiple channels, web and social media platforms. It uses relevant digital media to reach audiences who can accelerate the transition, 
globally. The Foundation aggregates, curates, and makes knowledge accessible through 
Circulate , an online information source dedicated to providing the latest news and unique 
insight on the circular economy and related subjects. 
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION66

THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION67
THE NEW PLASTICS ECONOMY CATALYSING ACTION68
© ELLEN MACARTHUR FOUNDATION 2017
Charity Registration No. 1130306 • OSCR Registration No. SC043120 • EU transparency register N°389996116741-55
 
 
 
 
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  
July 18, 2017  
 
Contact:  
Amanda Reykdal , Washington Coordinator  – coordinator@productstewardship.net  - (425) 445- 4759  
 
First -in-the-nation legislation  requiring manufacturers to recycle  used solar 
units  signed into law  
The Solar Incentives Job Bill requires manufacturers to  manage and finance the safe recycling of 
solar units  at end of life, at no cost to  the owner of the product  
  
Olympia, WA — The Solar  Incentives Job Bill (ESSB 5939)  was signed into law by Gov. J ay Inslee  of 
Washington State on July 7,  requiring manufacturers to finance and manage a product stewardship  
program  that ensures used solar units are recycled. This is a significant step toward  a truly sustainable  
and responsible  solar energy industry , and the stewardship requirement is the first of its kind for solar 
modules in the U nited States .  
 “This legislation establishes Washington State as a leader in sustainability and stewardship of this 
technology ,” said State Rep. Norma Smith  (R-Clinton) , who championed the product stewardship 
requirement. “We included the product stewardship element in this bill as part of a comprehensive 
approach to solving ou r state’s most pressing environmental issues. It would be shortsighted to 
introduce a bill that expands the number of solar units in our state, and not have a strategy for safe 
recycling  when they’re no longer functional.”  
 “The Solar Incentives Job  Bill sets a precedent for future solar legislation  to include a recycling program ,” 
explains  Heather Trim, Executive Director at Zero Waste Washington. Zero Waste Washington worked 
with the Northwest Product Stewardship Council in drafting policy language. “This  requirement models 
a producer responsibility approach as a component to include as other states expand  solar programs .”  
 In Washington, the stewardship requirement is part of larger bill that incentivizes solar unit ownership 
and creates solar jobs locally.  The stewardship requirement states  that manufacture rs who sell solar 
units in the state of Washington after July 1, 2017 , are responsible for financing and providing a 
recycling  program for their units. Manufacturers who do not provide a recycling  program cannot sell 
solar modules after Jan uary  1, 2021. This recycling requirement covers :  
· Solar modules used on or in buildings  
· Freestanding off -grid power generation systems s uch as water pumping stations  
· Electric vehicle charging stations  
· Solar fencing , solar- powered signs and solar- powered street lights.  
It does not include small solar- powered consumer electronics such as watches and calculators.  

 
 
Smith contends that “we need to be responsible stewards for each and every one of these technologies.” Solar modules contain hazardous materials, rare earth ele ments, and other materials that 
have to be recycled properly.  “As we pursue our conservation goals, it is critical that we pay the cost of 
our own consumption and not leave that to another generation.”  
 By law, t he stewardship program must provide regional take back locations where solar modules can be 
delivered for proper recycling at no cost to the last owner . Manufacturers have the flexibility to collect 
discarded modules individually or collectively with other companies. The Department of Ecology will 
provide guidance to manufacturers on developing their programs.  
 New solar module recycling jobs and businesses are expected as a result of the legislation. Washington 
State already has job -producing stewardship laws for electronics  and mercury lighting
.  Four counties 
have stewardship laws for leftover medicine . 
 
Learn more about NWPSC ’s work on the NWPSC  website , or contact Amanda Reykdal  at (425) 445 -4759 .   
 
 
About the Northwest Product Stewardship Council   
The Northwest Product Stewardship Council (NWPSC ) is a coalition of government organizations in 
Washington and Oregon that operates as an unincorporated association of members and is comprised 
of a Steering Committee, Associates and C ommittees. NWPSC's mission is to enhance Washington’s and 
Oregon’s reuse, r ecycling and waste management systems by working with the waste and recycling 
industry, consumers, manufacturers and others to connect producers with the costs associated with the end-of-life management of their products to provide incentives for reducing waste, increasing 
recyclability, and reducing the toxicity of their products.  
Follow us on Twitter @StewardshipNW
.  
  
It’s time to plan for solar panel recycling in the 
United States  
By Kelly Pickerel  | April 2, 2018  
End-of-life panels might not need recycling for another 15 years, but that doesn’t mean we should ignore the 
growing issue today.  
In 2017, the United States installed 10.6 GW of new solar energy. Using rough math (if every panel was 300 
W), that’s 35.3 mil lion new solar panels installed last year. In about 30 years, a wave of 35.3 million panels 
may reach the end of their lifespans, not counting the hundreds of millions of panels that flooded the U.S. 
market in the last decade that may need to be disposed o f sooner.  
 
What to do with this future solar waste has been bothering many in the industry, especially Sam Vanderhoof, 
owner of consulting firm Solar CowboyZ and former president of Schott Solar.  
 “I’ve been working in solar since 1976. I’ve been doing it a long time, and that’s part of my guilt. I’ve been 
involved with millions of solar panels going into the field, and now they’re getting old ,” he said. “The industry 
seems to think —myself included —that there isn’t a problem yet. The reality is that there is a problem now, and 
it’s only going to get larger, rapidly expanding as the PV industry expanded 10 years ago.”  
Solar panel disposal and re cycling isn’t a huge issue right now in 2018 because there isn’t a big enough volume 
to cause concern. Solar panels are warrantied to perform more than 25 years, and once the warranty expires, 
panels will still produce energy, albeit not at their advertise d peak. Solar installations in the United States didn’t 
really take off until 2010. Any influx of panels needing replaced today happens after freak weather events or 
other accidents.  
But where are those damaged panels going now? With no dedicated national program or requirement to safely 
dispose of solar panels, some unfortunately find their way to landfills. If the system owner is green -minded and 
has the money, panels may get shipped to a recycling facility. Other industry players are warehousing damaged 
or old panels until a practical recycling program is established.  
That’s why Vanderhoof and a few colleagues recently started a new recycling program in the United States —
Recycle PV —modeled after Europe’s succ essful program. The program is still in its early stages, but 
Vanderhoof hopes his efforts will start a movement.  
“Who is responsible for it? In the U.S., nobody is,” he said of solar panel recycling guidelines. “It is important 
for the industry to step up to address it. Solar is supposed to be renewable and clean energy, but there is this 
dirty side to it. There is a  waste stream after time that hasn’t been addressed.”  
Vanderhoof isn’t alone in these concerns. There are many U.S. players trying to get plans in place before safe 
panel disposal becomes a national issue. Determining guidelines now will make things easier  when panels reach 
the end of their useful lives.  
Economics vs. regulations  
Cara Libby, senior technical leader of solar energy at the Electric Power Research Institute ( EPRI ), has been 
doing solar PV recycling research on behalf of the organization’s utility members. Libby said utilities asked for 
EPRI’s help understanding the feasibility of recycling in the United States since many own solar arrays 
approaching 20 years old. Libby and her research partners have been looking at various recycling technologies, 
whether modules should be classified as hazardous waste and how other countries have already approached 
recycling regulations.  
“It’s still a little premature for dedicated  PV recycling facilities [in the United States],” Libby said. “In the 
future, maybe around 2030, there will be a surge in PV waste volumes. Then we’ll have to start thinking about a 
better way to collect and recycle efficiently.”  
 
EPRI found that most panel recycling in Europe through the Waste Electrical and Electronic 
Equipment  (WEEE) Directive —which est ablished rules for solar panel recycling in 2012 —happens at glass 
recyclers. Panels are crushed or shredded and then glass and metals are separated. Other chemical and thermal 
processes may be used to recover high -value material like silver or copper.  
System owners recycle their panels in Europe because they are required to. Panel recycling in an unregulated 
market (like the United States) will only work if there is value in the product. The International Renewable 
Energy Agency (IRENA) detailed solar panel  compositions in a 2016  report  and found that c -Si modules 
contained about 76% glass, 10% polymer (encapsulant and backsheet), 8% aluminum (mostly t he frame), 5% 
silicon, 1% copper and less than 0.1% of silver, tin and lead. As new technologies are adopted, the percentage 
of glass is expected to increase while aluminum and polymers will decrease, most likely because of dual -glass 
bifacial designs and frameless models.  
CIGS thin -film modules are composed of 89% glass, 7% aluminum and 4% polymers. The small percentages of 
semiconductors and other metals include copper, indium, gallium and selenium. CdTe thin -film is about 97% 
glass and 3% polymer, with o ther metals including nickel, zinc, tin and cadmium telluride.  
There’s just not a large amount of money -making salvageable parts on any type of solar panel. That’s why 
regulations have made such a difference in Europe.  
“In Europe, we’ve seen that when it’s  mandated, it gets done,” Libby said. “Either it becomes economical or it 
gets mandated. But I’ve heard that it will have to be mandated because it won’t ever be economical.”  
There’s nothing yet mandated at a national level, but there are a few states tryi ng to get the required recycling 
ball moving. In July 2017, Washington became the first state to pass a solar stewardship bill (ESSB 5939), 
requiring manufacturers selling solar products into the state to have end -of-life recycling programs for their own 
products. Manufacturers that do not provide a recycling program or outline will not be able to sell solar modules 
into the state after Jan. 1, 2021. Regional takeback locations will be set up to accept solar panels at no cost to 
the system owner, and the st ate may charge manufacturers for the program. Final plans are still being decided.  
Washington -based solar panel manufacturer  Itek Energy assisted with the bill’s writing.  
“Most of us here at the company feel strongly about being strong environmental stew ards,” said Evan Bush, 
special programs coordinator at Itek. “It’s important to spearhead these efforts before there’s a big volume that 
will need to be disposed. With this in place, we’ll be more prepared.”  
Itek’s modules are already in compliance with th e new bill; the company uses a recycling partner in Idaho to 
take damaged panels and manufacturing scrap. Itek has been accepting back other brands of modules just to 
keep them out of landfills.  
“There are reasons beyond just doing the right thing that sho uld encourage others to [recycle panels],” Bush 
said. “Given the value of the component materials in modules, this shouldn’t be a burden to us or other 
participants.”  
New York has a similar bill on the Senate calendar this year. Bill S2837A would require s olar panel 
manufacturers to collect end -of-life panels for recycling. Critics argue that panel manufacturers should not bear 
the burden of recycling panels alone, although that is how the WEEE Directive works in Europe.  
California SB 489 passed in 2015 and  encourages safe disposition of old panels. California designates end -of-
life solar panels as universal waste, a type of hazardous waste that is widely used in homes and businesses (like 
TVs or batteries). By California law, universal waste cannot be trash ed or landfilled, but no guidelines are given 
on the proper way to recycle solar panels.  
A U.S. recycling veteran  
One U.S. company that has recycling figured out is CdTe thin -film module manufacturer  First Solar . In 2005, 
the company made a commitment to extended producer responsibility. First Solar execs understood that in order 
for a renewable energy technology to truly be green, it was important to consider its end -of-life management. 
First Sola r’s recycling program was established at the beginning of production to responsibly recycle 
manufacturing scrap, warranty returns and end -of-life panels. This environmental decision also had a financial 
perspective —tellurium doesn’t just grow on trees.  
 “There is a finite amount of tellurium,” said First Solar global recycling director Sukhwant Raju. “They wanted 
to make sure there was a way to recover the valuable stuff so it becomes sustainable growth for First Solar. It’s 
not just about being green, bu t how do we stay sustainable in the long term?”  
First Solar recycling plants are attached to its manufacturing facilities —in Ohio, Malaysia and under 
construction in Vietnam. There’s also a stand -alone recycling plant in Germany.  
“We have the capacity to r ecycle 2 million panels globally on an annual basis,” Raju said. “As more panels start 
reaching the end of their 25 -year lifetimes, recycling will increase drastically.”  
The company only recycles CdTe panels currently, even if the panels are not manufactur ed by First Solar (other 
CdTe panel manufacturers include Calyxo of Germany and Advanced Solar Power (ASP) of China). Raju said 
the company may develop techniques to handle crystalline silicon panels.  
“We have a decade’s worth of experience in recycling, a nd we want to utilize that to broaden our efforts,” he 
said. 
The progression of First Solar recycling advancements. The first photo (top left) shows the first version of recycling, the s econd 
photo (top right) shows the second version, and finally the bottom photo shows the current recycling process used in First So lar 
facilities.  
As with the decommissioning of other energy technologies, there’s still a financial obligation on behalf of the 
system owner. The company’s initial recycling program was pre -funded. When a First Solar panel was sold, a 
portion of that money  went into a fund that could only be used for end -of-life recycling. In 2012, the company 
switched gears but continues to honor historical commitments under the prefunded module collection and 
recycling program.  
“We realized we were not doing anyone any fa vors by charging customers 20 to 30 years in advance for end of 
life recycling,” Raju said. “The better approach was to do pay -as-you-go since it is more cost -efficient to 
finance PV recycling through later -year project cash flows instead of upfront fundin g. Now when we sell our 
panels, we offer a global recycling services agreement. Customers have the option to use our services when the 
panels get to the end of life stage. We’ll do the recycling, and they’ll pay the price at that time.”  
This customer -funde d recycling effort is dependent on system owners willing to pay the price to do the right 
thing. Raju thinks that as volume increases, recycling costs will come down and the greener option will be more 
attractive than just throwing panels away. First Solar  is also taking steps to reduce recycling costs to ensure 
recycling becomes the preferred end -of-life management approach.  
“Limited land availability and regulatory requirements will only increase the costs of landfilling,” he said. 
“Meanwhile, recycling c osts will continue to go down. While customers may only be sending 100 panels today 
for recycling, by the time most of their panels get to end of life, our cost ratio will be way lower. They see the 
value in getting on the recycling bandwagon.  
“But at the end of the day,” Raju continued, “there is nothing to force them, other than in places where there are 
regulations.”  
The need for crystalline recycling  
For c -Si modules needing recycling now in the United States, there are a few scattered options. Various glass 
and electronics recyclers have taken on solar panel recycling, but usually not on dedicated lines or on a grand 
scale. Industry advocacy group SEIA has begun organizing recycling efforts through its  PV Recycling Working 
Group . SEIA will choose preferred recycling partners that offer benefits to SEIA members.  ECS 
Refining  and Cleanlites  Recycling  have recently been approved as SEIA recycling partners.  
Cleanlites began in the early 1990s as a light bulb recycler, taking on other items like batteries and electronics, 
until it found a niche with “difficult to recycle” items. It has been cat ering to a solar crowd for the last few years 
and recycled 1.5 million lbs of solar panels last year (again, using rough math of 50 lbs per panel, that’s 30,000 
panels).  
“I saw the impending need for solar panel [recycling]. Those coming out of commission from now to the next 
10 years is astronomical,” said Tim Kimmel, Cleanlites vice president.  
Cleanlites uses optical, magnetic and hand sorting to separate aluminum, other metals and electronics from c -Si 
solar panels at its Cincinnati -based facility. The company is hesitant to accept other types of panels right now 
until it can determine safe pro cesses. The leftover glass and silicon wafers (which may also have copper and 
silver mixed in) are sent to a smelter for further extraction. The process works for now, but it could be 
improved.  
“We’re looking to put a new process line in that will be able to separate all the components and recover the 
silicon wafers and recycle the units 100%,” Kimmel said. “The goal is to avoid landfilling all these units, which 
is going to be a vast number here shortly.”  
As solar panels are processed on the current lines,  Cleanlites collects the scrap and sends 45,000 -lb loads out at 
a time.  
“At times, we get thousands of panels in a month, and on those times, we process twice a week, making the 
material and sending to the smelter on a consistent basis,” Kimmel said. “Othe r times, they come in slowly and 
we build them up until we are able to process a whole shipment.”  
It costs money to send “solar scrap” to a smelter, and Cleanlites incorporates that cost and the cost of 
transportation into its recycling prices.  
“There is a  cost, so you have to weigh… do you want to be an environmentally sustainable company, or do you 
want to landfill thousands of pounds of material and have that show up?” Kimmel said. “The benefit of sending 
it to us, we’re able to receive it, ensure that t he metals are recovered, and we recycle it. You’re not creating any 
waste or hazardous waste.”  
A solar panel’s level of hazardous waste is up for debate. If panels are just old, there are usually no reasons to 
worry. EPRI research found the chance of chemi cal leaching grows if panels are damaged.  
“We’ve conducted some toxicity testing on modules, and we have seen results showing that the presence of lead 
is higher than the threshold allowed by the TCLP (toxicity characteristic leaching procedure). There is a lot of 
variation between module types,” Libby said. “There is a potential for leaching of toxic materials such as lead in 
landfill environments. If modules are intact, it’s a low risk, but as soon as they’re broken or crushed, then the 
potential for leaching is increased.”  
Recycling panels is th e safest way to dispose of them, and SEIA and recycling centers are trying to make it easy 
to do the right thing.  
Planning for future volume  
There are clearly recycling options available now to U.S. solar owners, but their fragmented nature is what led 
Vanderhoof to form Recycle PV.  
“There’s a little effort for sure, but it’s not concentrated. The information isn’t out there,” he said. “There’s not 
a good, simple flow of information and processes and procedures to deal with the waste stream.”  
Recycle PV wen t straight to the pros, partnering with  PV Cycle  (the successful non -profit organization that 
offers waste management help to solar companies in Europe) and German panel refurbisher  Rinovasol  for the 
U.S. market. Slightly damaged or underperforming panels can find a second life on the refurbished market. 
Rinovasol will take care of those, and PV Cycle sets up memberships to get recyclable panels to partner 
facilities. Thus far , Recycle PV has shipped two containers of panels to Germany for recycling, which is 
expensive but the only way to fully take advantage of the PV Cycle process right now.  
The plan for Recycle PV is to get volumes large enough to build a dedicated solar rec ycling plant in the United 
States. Vanderhoof said once Recycle PV is processing 10,000 panels a month, a U.S. facility will make more 
sense.  
“It’s not an outrageous goal,” he said. “Right now in Europe, they can recycle that much a day, but it’s been 
going on for a long time already.”  
It’s a lofty goal for Vanderhoof and his partners to start a brand new operation, but he felt he had to do 
something.  
“We’ve gone to a lot of waste management and EPA meetings. You look around the room and it’s all waste 
mana gement people, not solar people,” he said. “Those guys are in there trying to work on the policies that 
affect all of us, and they’d like it to be a more expensive policy because they make more money off it. The solar 
guys aren’t as engaged as they could b e.” 
The most promising solution for the United States is if SEIA can successfully tap into the PV Cycle model and 
pick up recycling plants across the nation willing to invest in solar processing. If more states adopt 
Washington’s requirements to have all p anels backed by recycling programs, national recycling plans might 
automatically form. A big solar name may be willing to forgo Washington sales, but it’d have a harder time 
losing out on California sales just because it doesn’t have a recycling plan in pl ace. 
Time is ticking. The United States has about 15 years before solar panel recycling becomes a major issue. 
Plenty of time to figure out the best course of action, but also plenty of time to procrastinate. Here’s hoping we 
set early deadlines.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR  
 
 
Comments  
1. Neal Collier  
February 7, 2019 at 8:55 p m 
Many PV panels can be recycled in the form of reuse. I am up to about 10kw of reliable PV power 
from recycled panels, most of which have cracked cells because they were stomped and thrown 
off the roof! I have a good many panels that have broken glass and  put out just fine. In one 
experiment, I took a 280 watt panel that had been bashed by a tractor hard enough to dismount 
it. It still made useful power. Checking a friend’s claim that they’ll work with a hole in them, I shot 
it repeatedly with a pistol and  a shotgun. It still puts out enough to charge a battery. Solar cells 
are merely rocks with wires. Repairing broken wires and burnt diodes is not usually a big deal.  
I’ve traveled thousands of miles in my solar boat, using “B” panels, with no problem. My f riend, 
John Kimball, of Sun Electronics, in Miami, has repurposed tens of thousands of modules 
removed from old solar farms and other sources. “Scratch and dent” panels at bargain prices 
allow people on smaller budgets to provide their own power.  
I’d say t he best recycling of old PV modules is reuse. Consider that before crushing to reclaim 
materials.  
Reply  
2. Jenni fer Woolwich  
December 28, 2018 at 2:52 pm  
My name is Jennifer Woolwich. I am the founder and was CEO of pv recycling, llc in the United 
States. We were based in Arizona with an office in San Jose, CA. I was surprised to see this article 
with no reference to the 5 years of work that my company did related to national regulation 
development, international relations, logistics, process engineering and everything else involved 
in commercializing a start -up. Figures that women’s history in the solar industry will be made 
non-existent.  
Reply  
o Kelly Pickerel  
January 2, 2019 at 7:52 am  
Jennifer, I reached out to you several times for comments but did not receive a response. Of 
course, we are very supportive of women here at Solar Power World. I do hope to hear more of 
your work within solar in the coming years.  
Reply  
3. Hassan Yarpezeshkan  
December 9, 2018 at 10:06 pm  
Kelly,  
Very useful information hope the politician taking PV recycling seriously, thank you I learn a lot 
from this article  
Reply  
4. Jack Melson  
December 7, 2018 at 4:18 pm  
You shou ld look Into a company called WellPower. They repurpose old solar panels to power 
solar water filtration systems in the developing world. Reusing should always come before 
recycling. Their website is  http://www.wellpower.tech  
Reply  
5. Stuart.  
October 8, 2018 at 3:53 pm  
Excellent that the EU is again taking a lead on sustainability and showing Uncle Sam how not to 
behave. Any new technology should have not just R&D but an entire life cycle analysis. Really 
hope solar (and wind – composite blades are difficult to recycle t oo) doesn’t become the next big 
plastic issue.  
Reply  
6. Eric Stikes  
April 5, 2018 at 2:15 pm  
Nice report Kelly, and good work Sam! Once again you’re leading the charge. For non -damaged, 
old PV modules and still functioning equipment, our non -profit, Good Sun Solar 
(www.goodsun.life) accepts donations and re -purposes this equipment for utility off -set and 
educational projects at schools, other non -profits, and LMI households. We’re helping to 
increase solar access to those that have trouble affording the tech., and we are focused on 
education: helping the up -coming generations to learn about and rec eive hands -on training on 
renewable energy and sustainable technology. We also generate revenue through our local 
projects that helps support international projects in the developing world, where the need for 
clean power is dire. Visit our website to learn  more about donating used PV equipment and 
helping others.  
EXTENSIVE 
SUBSIDIES FOR 
RENEWABLE ENERGY 
TECHNOLOGIES
March 2018
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Across the United States, the federal government and many state and local governments have prioritized 
what they claim are clean energy programs that will help combat climate change. Financial incentives 
have been introduced in order to encourage commercial and residential customers to use technology that 
does not increase fossil fuel use. In 2016, according to the Congressional Budget Office, $13.6 billion was 
spent by the federal government on tax expenditures related to renewable energy and energy efficiency.1 
These technologies include using solar, geothermal, and wind power to generate electricity rather than 
more traditional methods like coal or oil. Many of these programs overlap with one another and thus are a 
redundant waste of taxpayer money. In addition, the introduction of so many financial incentives for clean 
energy program artificially alters the market for these technologies, effectively subsidizing the products. This 
puts the government in the role of picking winners and losers in the marketplace.   
There appear to be so many programs offering direct and indirect subsidies to renewable energy that it is 
very difficult to catalogue them all. In an attempt to capture a great number of these programs in one place, 
America Rising Squared (AR2) examined a database of incentives at North Carolina State University, the 
North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center’s Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency 
(DSIRE). This examination revealed roughly 1,000 programs in the United States that offer financial incentives 
to promote “renewable energy technologies” for residential and commercial customers. The financial 
incentives include rebate programs, tax credits, as well as loan and financing options. All fifty states and the 
District of Columbia offer some type of program in addition to seventeen different federal programs.2
Minnesota has more programs than any other state in the country with 96 different programs, despite being 
only 22nd in the United States in population. The most populated state in the country, California, has 53 
different programs 3 
Twenty-nine different states have renewable portfolio standards and eight states have renewable energy 
goals. The standards require utilies to sell a specific percentage or amount of renewable electricity.4  President 
Barack Obama was very active in encouraging federal agencies to obtain a greater percentage of their 
energy from green sources by adopting renewable portfolio standards. In 2013, he signed an executive order 
mandating that federal agencies replace at least 20 percent of their electricity with renewable energy by 2020. 
The order had the effect of essentially tripling the use of renewable energy by the federal government.5 
In several states, three different levels of government offer separate programs for solar or geothermal 
technology. State government, county government, and municipal governments all operate individual 
programs with their own financial incentives independent of the other government programs. For example, in 
California, property tax reductions are given to home owners who use solar energy systems on their own even 
though several different municipalities including Palo Alto and San Francisco have similar programs.6
Overwhelmingly, these state clean energy programs cater to multiple technologies within solar or geothermal 
energy. For example, many states offer rebates or loans on solar water heat, solar photovoltaics, biomass, or 
geothermal heat pumps all within one program. There are eleven programs 
1. Terry Dinan, “Federal Support For Developing, Producing, And Using Fuels And Energy Technologies,” Congressional Budget Office , 3/29/17  
2. Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University , Accessed 11/29/17
3. Ibid.
4. “State Renewable Portfolio Standards And Goals,” National Conference Of State Legislatures , Accessed 2/5/18
5. Cheryl K. Chumley, “Executive Order: Obama Ups Green-Energy Mandate On Feds To 20 Percent,” The Washington Times , 12/5/13   
6. Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University , Accessed 11/29/17
nationally that cater exclusively to wind technology in addition to hundreds that include wind as part of their 
larger renewable energy programs. 
At the federal level, Congress over the last decade has offered tax credits for commercial and residential solar 
projects that can offset more than 30 percent of the price. In 2014, solar companies and homeowners claimed 
almost $3 billion in solar tex credits.7 The wind industry also benefits from production tax credits that award 
credit for every kilowatt-hour of energy produced by wind projects. Orginally, the tax incentives for the solar 
and wind industry were due to expire in 2007, but they have been extended several times and once again 
were extended in the recent tax reform bill passed by Congress.8 The tax incentives originally were given to 
both industries to help the industries mature and develop but have not been scaled back or altered as both 
industries have grown in size.     
There are 86 programs that exclusively offer incentives for solar photovoltaic programs, including 25 just 
in California.9 These programs provide benefits for residential and commercial customers to use solar 
technology to generate electricity from light. The solar panels necessary to incorporate this technology would 
be significantly more expensive for customers without the government subsidies, making it difficult for other 
industries to compete against subsidized technologies.10
State bureaucrats have also built extensive systems to support clean energy through the use of taxpayer 
money to encourage electric vehicle purchases and expanded generation of solar and wind power. However, 
there is limited discussion of the actual environmental cost “clean technology” comes with, the largest of 
which comes in the manufacturing of these products and the need for abundant sources of rare earth metals.  
Rare earth elements are not only hard to find, but also energy intensive to extract and refine. Used in 
solar panels, electric vehicles (EVs) and wind turbines, these technologies present geopolitical issues, 
environmental impact and concerns over labor standards.11 
As far back as 2010, the growing demand for rare earth metals Indium, Gallium And Tellurium used primarily 
in solar cell manufacturing has concerned the Department of Energy.12 From magnets used in wind turbines 
to lithium needed in electric vehicle batteries, rare earth is a significant factor required in clean energy 
manufacturing. Whether its lithium mined in the deserts of South America, crushing rock in Australia for 
lithium, or the processing of lithium in China, the environmental footprint throughout the whole of the supply 
chain is concerning.13 The Union of Concerned Scientists has noted lithium-ion batteries are a particularly 
energy-intensive material to produce.14 Lithium batteries are crucial to producing electric vehicles limiting, 
any environmental impact electric cars could have on the environment due to the environmental costs 
of producing them. Lithium is also a key component of wind turbines and solar panels used for power 
generation.15 Another issue with rare earth is that recycling of these materials is quite limited, with as little as 
about one percent of potentially critical rare earth metals being recycled, stressing supply chains and adding 
to the environmental impact of rare earth.16  Environmental activists and the state leaders advocating for these 
programs fail to confront the fundamental realities that surround supposedly clean technologies. 
7.   “What Is The Solar Investment Tax Credit,” Institute For Energy Research , Accessed 2/7/18
8.   Ari Natter and Chris Martin, “Tax Tool Crucial To Wind, Solar Appears Spared In GOP Deal,” Bloomberg , 12/14/17
9.   Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University , Accessed 11/29/17
10.   “Mineral Commodity Summaries: Rare Earths,” U.S. Geological Survey , 1/16
11.   “U.S. Department Of Energy Critical Materials Strategy,” Energy.gov , 12/10
12.   “Ibid.
13.   Henry Sanderson, “Electric Car Growth Sparks Environmental Concerns,” Financial Times , 7/7/17
14.   “Cleaner Cars from Cradle to Grave (2015),” Union Of Concerned Scientists , 2015
15.   Jessica Shankleman, Tom Biesheuvel, Joe Ryan, And Dave Merrill, “We’re Going To Need More Lithium,” Bloomberg , 9/7/17
16.  Saleem H. Ali, Damien Giurco, Nicholas Arndt, et al, “Mineral Supply For Sustainable Development Requires Resource Governance,” Nature , 3/16/17
Cap-and-trade is the cornerstone of the plan in California to reduce greenhouse gas emissions after the 
Global Warming Solutions Act was passed in 2005. The California Air Resources Board (CARB) in California is 
responsible for developing a plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions across the state.17 In order to comply 
with environmental regulations, businesses can either reduce their emissions to levels below those set by the 
CARB or buy carbon allowances from the state which allows them to pay a fee for their emissions above the 
permissible level. These allowances can also be bought and sold on the secondary market meaning that the 
prices of these allowances can fluctuate over time. However, the number of allowances made available by the 
state each year decreases and the level of permissible emissions also decreases putting more pressure on 
businesses to comply with the regulations set by the state.18
There is limited evidence that cap-and-trade is behind the drop in greenhouse gas emissions in California in 
recent years since the recession forced companies to adopt more efficient methods and look to cut costs. 
Emissions would have dropped by a similar rate anyway as economic output decreased.19 In addition, there 
are concerns that some businesses have saved up enough allowances over several years allowing them to 
maintain their emissions at the same level and defeating the purpose of the program. The allowances don’t 
expire over time so companies have the option of purchasing an abundance of them to be used in the future 
when emissions targets become harder to meet. 20
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 created a federal tax credit for any purchaser of an 
electric vehicle up to $7,500. The size of the credit depends on the size of the vehicle’s battery, encouraging 
consumers to buy cars with larger vehicles.21 The tax credit artificially inflates the market for electric vehicles 
by making it cheaper for consumers while not providing traditional cars with the same credit putting them at a 
disadvantage. Additionally in 2016, the Obama Administration announced several executive actions designed 
to increase electric vehicle use through expanding the infrastructure for charging electric vehicles. $4.5 billion 
was announced in loan guarantees and public-private partnerships were also encouraged by the Obama 
Administration to boost the production of batteries and charging stations.22 
In California, there are also state-level incentives designed to encourage purchases of electric vehicles 
in addition to federal incentives. Owners of electric vehicles are given permits to drive in carpool lanes 
regardless of how many passengers are in the car and low income reidents are given financial incentives for 
trading in cars with higher level of emissions in exchange for electric vehicles.23
17.   Dana Hull, “13 Things To Know About California’s Cap-And-Trade Program,” Bloomberg , 11/29/12
18.   Michael Hiltzik, “California’s Cap-And-Trade Program Has Cut Pollution. So Why Do Critics Keep Calling It A Failure,” Los Angeles Times , 7/29/16
19.   Michael Hiltzik, “Emissions Cap-And-Trade Program Is Working Well In California,” Los Angeles Times , 6/12/15
20.   Michael Hiltzik, “No Longer Termed A ‘Failure,’ California’s Cap-And-Trade Program Faces A New Critique: Is It Too Successful,” Los Angeles Times , 1/12/18
21.   “Effects Of Federal Tax Credits For The Purchase Of Electric Vehicles,” Congressional Budget Office , 9/1/12 
22.   Fred Lambert, “White House Unlocks $4.5 Billion For Electric Vehicle Infrastructure And Announces New EV Programs,” Electrek , 7/21/16   
23.   Marisa Lagos, “Brown Signs Several Clean-Air Vehicle Bills,” San Francisco Chronicle , 9/22/14
 FEDERAL Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
U.S. Internal Revenue Service Modified Accelerated Cost-Recovery System (MACRS) Corporate Depreciation Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Microturbines 1/11/16 1/26/86 N/A 
U.S. Internal Revenue Service Business Energy Investment Tax Credit (ITC) Corporate Tax Credit Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Tidal, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Microturbines 2/20/17 N/A N/A U.S. Internal Revenue Service Renewable Electricity Production Corporate Tax Credit Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, 9/22/17 N/A N/A 
Tax Credit (PTC) Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Municipal Solid Waste, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) U.S. Internal Revenue Service Residential Energy Conservation Subsidy Exclusion (Corporate) Corporate Tax Exemption Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Yes; specific technologies not identified 5/26/16 N/A N/A 
U.S. Department of Energy Tribal Energy Program Grant Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Siding, Roofs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, Wind (Small) 3/3/17 N/A N/A USDA Rural Utilities Service USDA - High Energy Cost Grant Program Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Yes; specific technologies 6/9/16 1/26/15 N/A 
not identified, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) US Department of Agriculture USDA - Repowering Assistance Biorefinery Program Grant Program Biomass, Municipal Solid Waste, Landfill Gas 3/18/16 N/A N/A 
U.S. Department of Agriculture USDA - Rural Energy for America Program (REAP) Grants Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Hydrogen, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Microturbines 2/11/16 N/A N/A U.S. Internal Revenue Service Clean Renewable Energy Bonds (CREBs) Loan Program Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Municipal Solid Waste, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Anaerobic Digestion 4/16/15 9/1/10 N/A N/A Energy-Efficient Mortgages Loan Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Daylighting, Yes; specific technologies not identified 6/24/15 N/A N/A N/A FHA PowerSaver Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Air 3/7/16 1/26/15 N/A 
conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 
U.S. Internal Revenue Service Qualified Energy Conservation Bonds (QECBs) Loan Program Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Municipal Solid Waste, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Anaerobic Digestion 6/16/16 N/A N/A 
U.S. Department of Energy U.S. Department of Energy - Loan Guarantee Program Loan Program Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Daylighting, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 8/18/16 N/A N/A US Department of Agriculture USDA - Biorefinery Assistance Program Loan Program Biomass, Municipal Solid Waste, Landfill Gas 3/3/17 N/A N/A U.S. Department of Agriculture USDA - Rural Energy for America Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, 2/11/16 N/A N/A 
(REAP) Loan Guarantees Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Hydrogen, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Microturbines U.S. Internal Revenue Service Residential Renewable Energy Tax Credit Personal Tax Credit Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 3/17/17 1/1/06 N/A U.S. Internal Revenue Service Residential Energy Conservation Subsidy Exclusion (Personal) Personal Tax Exemption Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Yes; specific technologies not identified 5/26/16 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)   
ALABAMA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Abundant Power AlabamaSAVES Revolving Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Biomass, Hydroelectric, Combined Heat & Power, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Steam-system upgrades, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Other EE, Hydroelectric (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 5/3/17 N/A N/A 
Alabama Department of Economic and Community Affairs Local Government Energy Loan Program Loan Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Daylighting, Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Energy Mgmt. 7/25/14 N/A N/A 
Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Siding, Roofs, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Other Distributed Generation Technologies South Alabama Electric Cooperative South Alabama Electric Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors 4/1/15 N/A N/A Tennessee Valley Authority TVA Partner Utilities - Energy Right Heat Pump Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps 6/17/15 N/A N/A Tennessee Valley Authority TVA - Green Power Providers Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 6/2/15 10/1/12 N/A Tennessee Valley Authority TVA - Mid-Sized Renewable Standard Offer Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Anaerobic Digestion 6/18/15 10/10/10 N/A N/A TVA - Solar Solutions Initiative Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, 6/4/15 N/A N/A 
Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Siding, Roofs N/A Wood-Burning Heating System Deduction Personal Tax Deduction Biomass 7/23/14 N/A N/A 
Alabama Department of Revenue Local Option- Property Tax Exemption for Renewable Energy Faclities Property Tax Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Municipal Solid Waste, Tidal, Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion 11/16/16 N/A 12/31/18 Alabama Gas Corporation Alabama Gas Corporation - Residential Natural Gas Rebate Program Rebate Program Water Heaters, Furnaces, Air conditioners 1/21/16 N/A N/A Central Alabama Electric Cooperative Central Alabama Electric Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 4/1/15 N/A N/A 
N/A TVA Partner Utilities - eScore Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Windows, Doors, Insulation 8/31/17 N/A N/A Wiregrass Electric Cooperative, Inc. Wiregrass Electric Cooperative - H2O Plus Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters 4/1/15 N/A N/A Alabama Department of Revenue Local Option- Sales Tax Abatement for Renewable Energy Facilities Sales Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Municipal Solid Waste, Tidal, 11/16/16 N/A N/A 
Ocean Thermal, Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)   
 ALASKA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Alaska Energy Authority Renewable Energy Grant Program Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 8/17/16 N/A 6/30/23 
The Division of Economic Development, Department of Commerce, Community, and Economic Development Alternative Energy Conservation Loan Fund Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Furnaces, Boilers, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Custom/Others pending approval, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Other Distributed Generation Technologies 12/17/15 N/A N/A Alaska Industrial Development and Export Authority Power Project Loan Fund Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Hydroelectric, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Custom/Others pending approval, 12/16/15 N/A N/A 
Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) Golden Valley Electric Association Golden Valley Electric Association - Sustainable Natural Alternative Power (SNAP) Program Performance-Based Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 6/18/15 N/A N/A 
N/A Local Option - Property Tax Exemption for Renewable Energy Systems Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Other Distributed Generation Technologies 12/16/15 N/A N/A N/A New Home Rebate Rebate Program Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 12/16/15 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)   
ARIZONA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Arizona Department of Revenue Non-Residential Solar & Wind Tax Credit (Corporate) Corporate Tax Credit Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Daylighting, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small) 11/1/16 1/1/06 12/31/18 
Arizona Department of Revenue Renewable Energy Production Tax Credit (Corporate) Corporate Tax Credit Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas 11/1/16 12/31/10 12/31/20 N/A Renewable Energy Tax Credit for International Operations Centers (Corporate) Corporate Tax Credit Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 5/30/17 7/24/14 12/31/25 
City of Scottsdale City of Scottsdale - Green Building Incentives Green Building Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Photovoltaics, Daylighting, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Siding, Roofs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Fuel Cells 11/17/16 N/A N/A 
using Renewable Fuels, Tankless Water Heater Sulphur Springs Valley Electric Cooperative Sulphur Springs Valley EC - Residential Energy Efficiency Loan Program Loan Program Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Siding, Roofs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE 3/1/16 N/A N/A 
Arizona Department of Revenue Non-Residential Solar & Wind Tax Credit (Personal) Personal Tax Credit Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Daylighting, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small) 11/1/16 1/1/06 12/31/18 
Arizona Department of Revenue Renewable Energy Production Tax Credit (Personal) Personal Tax Credit Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas 11/1/16 12/31/10 12/31/20 N/A Renewable Energy Tax Credit for International Operations Centers (Personal) Personal Tax Credit Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 5/30/17 7/24/14 12/31/25 AZ Department of Revenue Residential Solar and Wind Energy Systems Tax Credit Personal Tax Credit Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Daylighting, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small) 11/1/16 1/1/95 N/A N/A Qualifying Wood Stove Deduction Personal Tax Deduction Biomass 3/21/17 1/1/94 N/A Arizona Department of Revenue Energy Equipment Property Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, 5/24/17 N/A N/A 
Tax Exemption Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Daylighting, Solar Pool Heating, Other EE, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion Arizona Department of Revenue Property Tax Assessment for Renewable Energy Equipment Property Tax Incentive Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric 5/24/17 N/A 12/31/40 APS APS - Energy Efficiency Solutions for Business Rebate Program Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Windows, Doors, Motors, Motor VFDs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, Data Center Equipment, Pool Pumps, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 8/10/17 N/A N/A 
Duncan Valley Electric Cooperative Duncan Valley Electric Cooperative Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small) 6/18/15 N/A N/A 
- SunWatts Rebate Program Mohave Electric Cooperative Mohave Electric Cooperative - Renewable Energy Incentive Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small) 6/18/15 N/A N/A 
Salt River Project SRP - Solar Water Heating Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 8/10/17 N/A N/A Trico Electric Cooperative, Inc. Trico Electric Cooperative  - SunWatts Incentive Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 6/29/15 N/A N/A Department of Revenue Solar and Wind Equipment Sales Tax Exemption Sales Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Daylighting, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small) 8/15/17 1/1/97 N/A 
(Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)    
 ARKANSAS Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Arkansas Economic Development Commission Wind Energy Manufacturing Tax Incentive Industry Recruitment/Support Wind (All), Wind (Small) 6/4/15 1/1/08 12/31/33 
First Electric Cooperative First Electric Cooperative - Home Improvement Loans Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Other EE 6/9/15 N/A N/A 
Arkansas Building Authority, Arkansas Energy Office Sustainable Building Design Revolving Loan Fund Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Steam-system upgrades, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Motor VFDs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval 6/8/15 1/8/10 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)    
CALIFORNIA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date N/A LADWP - Feed-in Tariff (FiT) Program Feed-in Tariff Solar Photovoltaics 2/2/17 2/1/13 N/A 
N/A Renewable Market Adjusting Tariff (ReMAT) Feed-in Tariff Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Municipal Solid Waste, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 7/21/16 2/14/08 N/A 
City of Burbank Burbank Water & Power - Business Bucks Energy Efficiency Grant Program Grant Program Refrigerators/Freezers, Lighting, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Siding, Roofs, Motors, Custom/Others pending approval 3/4/16 N/A N/A 
Pacific Power Pacific Power - Blue Sky Community Project Funds Grant Program Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Tidal, Wave, Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 3/16/16 N/A N/A Department of General Sevices School Facility Program - Modernization Grants Grant Program Yes; specific technologies not identified 1/4/16 N/A N/A Rebates Burbank Water & Power - Green Building Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, 3/31/16 N/A N/A 
Green Building Incentive Program Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) City of San Diego Development Services City of San Diego - Sustainable Building Expedited Permit Program Green Building Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 5/27/16 5/20/03 N/A County of San Diego San Diego County - Green Building Program Green Building Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 3/11/16 N/A N/A 
State Treasurer's Office Sales and Use Tax Exclusion for Advanced Transportation and Alternative Energy Manufacturing Program Industry Recruitment/Support Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Municipal Solid Waste, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 2/18/16 3/24/10 1/1/21 City of Santa Clara Water & Sewer Utility Santa Clara Water & Sewer - Solar Water Heating Program Leasing Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Pool Heating 5/19/15 N/A N/A California Energy Commission Energy Efficiency Financing for Public Sector Projects Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics, Combined Heat & Power, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, 5/25/16 N/A N/A 
Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Building Insulation, Motors, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Wind (Small), Other Distributed Generation Technologies 
CPUC Renewable Auction Mechanism (RAM) Other Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Municipal Solid Waste, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 5/17/16 N/A N/A 
FIGTREE Energy Financing California Enterprise Development Authority (Figtree PACE)  - Statewide PACE Program PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Steam-system upgrades, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Doors, Motor VFDs, Wind (Small), Pool Pumps, Tankless 1/13/16 N/A N/A 
Water Heater, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
Renewable Funding CaliforniaFIRST PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Roofs, Other EE, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Reflective Roofs, Tankless Water Heater 3/11/16 N/A N/A 
N/A City of San Francisco - GreenFinanceSF PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows 3/1/16 4/12/10 N/A N/A Los Angeles County - Commercial PACE PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Lighting, 1/13/16 N/A N/A 
Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Windows, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 
N/A Sonoma County - Energy Independence Program PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Solar Pool Heating, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Roofs, Motors, Other EE, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Reflective Roofs, Pool Pumps, LED Lighting 1/13/16 N/A N/A 
N/A Western Riverside Council of Governments - Home Energy Renovation Opportunity (HERO) PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable 11/3/16 N/A N/A 
Financing Program Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Roofs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Wind (Small), LED Lighting 
N/A Western Riverside Council of Governments - Large Commercial PACE PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Roofs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Wind (Small), Pool Pumps, LED Lighting 3/31/16 N/A N/A City of Palo Alto Utilities City of Palo Alto Utilities - Palo Alto CLEAN (Clean Local Energy Accessible Now) Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 6/17/15 4/2/12 N/A 
Marin Clean Energy Marin Clean Energy - Feed-In Tariff Performance-Based Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Municipal Solid Waste, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Ocean 6/17/15 N/A N/A 
Thermal, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels California State Board of Equalization Property Tax Exclusion for Solar Energy Systems Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 5/25/16 N/A 12/31/24 N/A Bear Valley Electric Service - Solar Initiative Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 6/29/15 1/1/15 12/31/22 N/A Burbank Water and Power - Solar Water Heater Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 6/29/15 N/A N/A N/A California Solar Initiative - Low-Income Solar Water Heating Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 6/30/15 3/29/12 N/A GRID Alternatives California Solar Initiative - Single-Family Affordable Solar Housing (SASH) Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 3/9/17 7/1/09 12/31/21 California Energy Commission CEC - New Solar Homes Partnership Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 5/25/16 N/A N/A City of Healdsburg City of Healdsburg - PV Incentive Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 5/29/15 N/A N/A City of Lompoc Utilities City of Lompoc Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 6/3/15 N/A N/A 
Utilities - PV Rebate Program City of Palo Alto Utilities City of Palo Alto Utilities - PV Partners Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 3/11/16 7/1/07 N/A Center for Sustainable Energy City of Palo Alto Utilities - Solar Water Heating Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 5/19/15 N/A N/A San Francisco Public Utilities Commission City of San Francisco - Solar Energy Incentive Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 5/27/16 12/11/07 N/A City of Shasta Lake Electric Utility City of Shasta Lake Electric Utility - PV Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 6/3/15 N/A N/A Corona Department of Water & Power Corona Department of Water & Power - Solar Partnership Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 5/26/15 N/A N/A Glendale Water and Power Glendale Water and Power - Solar Solutions Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 7/1/15 N/A N/A Imperial Irrigation District IID Energy - Commercial Rebate Program Rebate Program Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval 6/15/15 N/A N/A Imperial Irrigation District IID Energy - PV Solutions Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 6/3/15 N/A N/A Lassen Municipal Utility District Lassen Municipal Utility District - PV Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 7/1/15 N/A N/A 
Public Benefits Specialist Lassen Municipal Utility District - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, LED Lighting 2/23/16 N/A N/A Merced Irrigation District Merced Irrigation District - PV Buydown Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 6/3/15 N/A N/A PV Program Coordinator Modesto Irrigation District - Photovoltaic Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 7/1/15 N/A N/A Moreno Valley Electric Utility Moreno Valley Electric Utility - Solar Electric Incentive Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 7/1/15 N/A N/A 
Pacific Power Pacific Power - wattsmart Business Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Building Insulation, Windows, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Food Service Equipment, Personal Computing Equipment, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 8/26/15 N/A N/A Pasadena Water and Power Pasadena Water and Power - Solar Power Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 3/9/17 N/A N/A 
Installation Rebate 
Plumas-Sierra REC Plumas-Sierra REC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Heat pumps, Building Insulation, Windows, Custom/Others pending approval, LED Lighting 1/19/16 N/A N/A Riverside Public Utilities Riverside Public Utilities - Residential PV Incentive Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 6/17/15 N/A N/A Roseville Electric Roseville Electric - Residential New Construction Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 4/23/15 N/A N/A Roseville Electric Roseville Electric - Solar Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 8/15/16 N/A N/A California Public Utilities Commission Self-Generation Incentive Program Rebate Program Wind (All), Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 4/18/17 1/1/01 1/1/21 
Silicon Valley Power Silicon Valley Power - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others 1/12/16 N/A N/A 
pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Data Center Equipment, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
Sacramento Municipal Utility District SMUD - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Custom/Others pending approval, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, Commercial Cooking Equipment, Personal Computing Equipment, Data Center Equipment, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 6/6/16 N/A N/A Sacramento Municipal Utility District SMUD - PV Residential Retrofit Buy-Down Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 5/24/16 N/A N/A Sacramento Municipal Utility District SMUD - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, 5/17/16 N/A N/A 
Building Insulation, Windows, Roofs, Other EE, Reflective Roofs, Pool Pumps, LED Lighting Sacramento Municipal Utility District SMUD - Solar Water Heater Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 5/19/15 N/A N/A 
Truckee Donner Public Utility District Truckee Donner Public Utility District - Energy Conservation Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Windows, LED Lighting 2/4/16 N/A N/A City of Ukiah Ukiah Utilities - PV Buydown Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 11/3/16 N/A N/A California State Board of Equalization Partial Sales and Use Tax Exemption for Agricultural Solar Power Facilities Sales Tax Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 3/31/16 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)     
COLORADO Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date N/A EZ Investment Tax Credit Refund for Renewable Energy Projects Corporate Tax Credit Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Landfill Gas, Anaerobic Digestion 10/30/15 1/1/15 12/31/20 Boulder County ClimateSmart City of Boulder - Solar Grant Program Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 2/12/16 N/A N/A 
Elevations Credit Union Boulder County - Elevations Energy Loans Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Roofs, Motors, Motor VFDs, Food Service Equipment, Personal Computing Equipment, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 7/23/15 N/A N/A 
Elevations Credit Union City and County of Denver - Elevations Energy Loans Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, 9/28/15 N/A N/A 
Windows, Doors, Motors, Food Service Equipment, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment Energy Smart Colorado Eagle, Garfield, Gunnison, Lake, and Pitkin Counties - Energy Smart Colorado Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Tankless Water Heater 2/24/16 N/A N/A 
N/A Fort Collins Utilities - Home Efficiency Loan Program Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Tankless Water Heater 7/8/15 N/A N/A Colorado Housing Finance Authority Green Colorado Credit Reserve Loan Program Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Other Distributed Generation Technologies 5/19/16 N/A N/A 
Colorado Energy Office Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency for Schools Loan Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Equipment Insulation, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Other Distributed Generation Technologies 3/15/17 N/A N/A N/A Xcel Energy - Commercial Loan Program Comprehensive Measures/Whole 6/14/17 N/A N/A 
Energy Efficiency Financing Building, Yes; specific technologies not identified 
Sustainable Real Estate Solutions, Inc C-PACE: Colorado Commercial Property Assessed Clean Energy PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Other EE, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Other Distributed Generation Technologies 6/10/16 N/A N/A Black Hills Energy Black Hills Energy - Solar Power Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 3/25/16 7/1/06 N/A Xcel Energy Xcel Energy - Solar*Rewards Community Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 3/15/16 8/15/12 N/A Xcel Energy Xcel Energy - Solar*Rewards Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 6/27/16 3/1/06 N/A N/A Property Tax Exemption for Community Solar Gardens Property Tax Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 7/21/15 1/1/15 12/31/20 Division of Property Taxation / Local Assessors Property Tax Exemption for Residential Renewable Energy Equipment Property Tax Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 7/23/15 N/A N/A Department of Local Affairs Renewable Energy Property Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, 10/7/15 1/1/09 N/A 
Property Tax Assessment Wind (All), Biomass, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 
Boulder County Public Health Boulder County - EnergySmart Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Dishwasher, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Furnaces, Boilers, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Windows, Motors, Motor VFDs, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, Commercial Cooking Equipment, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 5/11/16 N/A N/A 
N/A Boulder County - EnergySmart Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Other EE 1/25/16 N/A N/A 
City of Aspen City of Aspen - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Custom/Others pending approval, LED Lighting 7/21/15 N/A N/A Colorado Springs Utilities Colorado Springs Utilities - Renewable Energy Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 2/9/17 1/1/06 N/A 
Rebate Program Delta-Montrose Electric Association Delta-Montrose Electric Association - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, LED Lighting 3/15/17 N/A N/A Walking Mountains Science Center Eagle County - Energy Smart Colorado Renewable Energy Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 5/21/15 N/A N/A 
N/A Efficiency Works - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program (Offered by 5 Utilities) Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Insulation, LED Lighting, Tankless Water Heater 7/8/15 N/A N/A Gunnison County Electric Association, Inc. Gunnison County Electric - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, LED Lighting 6/22/16 N/A N/A 
Holy Cross Holy Cross Energy - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motor VFDs, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 11/19/15 N/A N/A 
La Plata Electric Association La Plata Electric Association - Energy Efficient Equipment Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Other EE, LED Lighting 4/17/17 N/A N/A La Plata Electric Association La Plata Electric Association - Renewable Generation Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 10/31/16 N/A N/A Cloud City Conservation Center Lake County - Energy Smart Colorado Renewable Energy Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 3/3/15 N/A N/A Morgan County Rural Electric Association Morgan County REA - Efficiency Credit/Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Other EE, LED Lighting 3/25/15 N/A N/A Mountain View Electric Association, Inc. Mountain View Electric Association, Inc - Energy Efficiency Rebates Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Motors, Other EE, LED Lighting 10/8/15 N/A N/A Community Office for Resource Efficiency (CORE) Roaring Fork Valley - Energy Smart Colorado Renewable Energy Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Hydroelectric (Small) 5/20/15 N/A N/A 
San Isabel Electric Association San Isabel Electric Association - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, Other EE, LED Lighting 12/4/15 N/A N/A 
N/A San Miguel Power Association - Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Motors, Other EE, LED Lighting 12/8/15 N/A N/A San Miguel Power Association San Miguel Power Association - Renewable Energy Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small) 3/3/15 N/A N/A United Power & Tri-State Generation and Transmission United Power - Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Other EE, LED Lighting 7/2/15 N/A N/A United Power United Power - Renewable Energy Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (Small) 3/15/17 N/A N/A Xcel Energy Xcel Energy - Home Performance Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, 6/22/16 N/A N/A 
with ENERGY STAR Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Motors, Other EE, LED Lighting, Tankless Water Heater 
Xcel Energy Xcel Energy (Electric) - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, Tankless Water Heater 6/16/16 N/A N/A Boulder County ClimateSmart City of Boulder - Solar Sales and Use Tax Rebate Sales Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Solar Pool Heating 1/25/16 N/A N/A 
N/A Sales and Use Tax Exemption for Renewable Energy Equipment Sales Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 7/21/15 7/1/06 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)    
CONNECTICUT Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Connecticut Department of Revenue Sales and Use Taxes for Items Used in Renewable Energy Industries Industry Recruitment/Support Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use 12/12/14 1/1/10 N/A 
Connecticut Housing Investment Fund Energy Conservation Loan Loan Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Windows, Siding, Roofs, Other EE, Wind (Small) 12/15/14 N/A N/A 
Connecticut Housing Investment Fund Inc. Energy Efficiency Fund (Electric and Gas) - Residential Energy Efficiency Financing Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Windows, Siding, Roofs, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Tankless Water Heater 5/26/16 N/A N/A 
CT Green Bank Low-Income Multifamily Energy Loan Program Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Windows 9/1/17 N/A N/A CT Electric distrubition company and Banc of America Low-Interest Loans for Customer-Side Distributed Resources Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Lighting, Other EE, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 5/12/15 N/A N/A CT Green Bank Multifamily Navigator Pre-Development Energy Loan Program Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Windows 9/1/17 N/A N/A CT Green Bank Multifamily Sherpa Pre-Development Energy Loan Program Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Windows 9/1/17 N/A N/A CT Green Bank in partnership with Energize Connecticut Smart-E loans Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Windows 6/7/17 N/A N/A 
Connecticut Green Bank Local Option - Commercial PACE Financing PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells 6/6/17 N/A N/A 
using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Siding, Roofs, Motor VFDs, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Other Distributed Generation Technologies, Data Center Equipment, Reflective Roofs, LED Lighting Programs administered locally Local Option - Residential Sustainable Energy Program PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air 6/6/17 N/A N/A 
sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Siding, Roofs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small) 
Connecticut Department of Revenue Services Local Option - Property Tax Exemption for Renewable Energy Systems Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 12/12/14 N/A N/A 
Connecticut Department of Revenue Services Property Tax Exemption for Renewable Energy Systems Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Fuel 12/12/14 N/A N/A 
Cells using Renewable Fuels UI, CL&P, SCG, CNG, and Yankeegas (Electric and Gas)  Residential New Construction Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 4/20/15 N/A N/A CT Green Bank Residential Solar Investment Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 6/6/17 3/2/12 12/31/22 
Connecticut Department of Revenue Services Sales and Use Tax Exemption for Energy-Efficient Products Sales Tax Incentive Geothermal Heat Pumps, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors 12/12/14 6/1/06 N/A Connecticut Department of Revenue Services Sales and Use Tax Exemption for Solar and Geothermal Systems Sales Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Geothermal Direct-Use, Other Distributed Generation Technologies 12/12/14 7/1/07 N/A N/A Connecticut Light & Power - ZREC and LREC Long Term Contracts Solar Renewable Energy Credit Program Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Landfill Gas, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 2/23/15 5/1/12 5/1/18 N/A The United Illuminating Company - ZREC and LREC Long Solar Renewable Energy Credit Program Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Landfill Gas, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 2/23/15 5/1/12 5/1/18 
Term Contracts (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)    
DELAWARE Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Delaware Sustainable Energy Utility Sustainable Energy Utility (SEU) - Revolving Loan Fund Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Other Distributed Generation Technologies 2/23/15 N/A N/A Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control Delaware Electric Cooperative - Green Energy Program Incentives Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 5/27/15 1/26/15 N/A Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control Delmarva Power - Green Energy Program Incentives Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 3/9/16 1/26/15 N/A Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control DEMEC Member Utilities - Green Energy Program Incentives Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 2/3/16 1/26/15 N/A Joint Grant Program of Delaware Sustainable Utility (DESEU) and Delaware Department of Natural Green Grant- Solar Hot Water and Geothermal program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Heat Pumps 5/29/15 8/4/14 N/A 
Resources and Environmental Control (DNREC) N/A Solar Renewable Energy Credits (SRECs) Spot Market Program Solar Renewable Energy Credit Program Solar Photovoltaics 5/27/15 6/1/08 N/A N/A SREC Procurement Program Solar Renewable Energy Credit Program Solar Photovoltaics 4/30/15 4/2/12 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)    
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Department of the Environment Property Assessed Clean Energy Financing PACE Financing Solar Photovoltaics, Daylighting, Equipment Insulation, Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Custom/Others pending approval, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use 8/24/15 N/A N/A 
N/A Solar Energy System and Cogeneration System Personal Property Tax Credit Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Combined Heat & Power 10/21/14 7/25/12 N/A N/A Solar Renewable Energy Credits Solar Renewable Energy Credit Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 4/27/15 4/12/05 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)    
FLORIDA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Miami-Dade County, District 8 Miami-Dade County - Expedited Green Buildings Process Green Building Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Hydroelectric (Small) 8/6/15 N/A N/A Miami-Dade County, District 8 Miami-Dade County - Targeted Jobs Incentive Fund Industry Recruitment/Support Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Combined Heat & Power 7/15/15 N/A 9/30/20 City of Lauderhill City of Lauderhill - Revolving Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Air conditioners, Other EE, Tankless Water Heater 11/25/14 N/A N/A 
City of Tallahassee Utilities City of Tallahassee Utilities - Efficiency Loans Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Roofs, Other EE, Pool Pumps 5/19/16 N/A N/A City of Tallahassee Utilities City of Tallahassee Utilities - Solar Loans Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Solar Pool Heating 7/7/16 N/A N/A Clay Electric Cooperative Clay Electric Cooperative, Inc - Energy Conservation Loans Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Pool Heating, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat 9/22/15 N/A N/A 
recovery, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Roofs, Other EE, Reflective Roofs Clay Electric Cooperative Clay Electric Cooperative, Inc - Solar Thermal Loans Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Pool Heating 9/22/15 N/A N/A Orlando Utilities Commission Orlando Utilities Commission - Residential Solar Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 12/4/15 N/A N/A St. Lucie County St. Lucie County - Solar and Energy Loan Fund (SELF) Loan Program Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows 8/18/15 N/A N/A Lakeland Electric Lakeland Electric - Solar Water Heating Program Other Incentive Solar Water Heat 7/7/16 N/A N/A 
Programs administered locally Local Option - Special Districts PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydrogen, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Other EE, Wind (Small) 1/26/16 N/A N/A Miami-Dade County Miami-Dade County - PACE Financing Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar 7/21/16 N/A N/A 
Green Corridor Property Assessed Clean Energy District Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydrogen, Daylighting, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small) Orlando Utilities Commission (OUC) Orlando Utilities Commission - Solar Programs Performance-Based Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 6/8/15 N/A N/A N/A Property Tax Abatement for Renewable Energy Property Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Wind (Small) 8/8/17 7/1/13 N/A Beaches Energy Services Beaches Energy Services - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Building Insulation, Windows, Other EE 9/24/15 N/A N/A Beaches Energy Services Beaches Energy Services - Solar Water Heating Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 6/19/15 N/A N/A Longwood Community City of Longwood - Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, 9/22/15 1/18/12 N/A 
Development Services Department Raising Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Solar Pool Heating, Building Insulation, Windows, Roofs, Other EE, Tankless Water Heater City of Tallahassee Utilities City of Tallahassee Utilities - Solar Water Heating Rebate Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 6/19/15 N/A N/A City of Winter Park City of Winter Park Energy Conservation Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation 9/24/15 N/A N/A Clay Electric Cooperative Clay Electric Cooperative, Inc - Energy Smart Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Building Insulation, Windows, Other EE 9/21/15 N/A N/A Clay Electric Cooperative Clay Electric Cooperative, Inc - Energy Smart Solar Water Heater Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 6/19/15 N/A N/A Fort Pierce Utilities Authority Fort Pierce Utilities Authority - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Building Insulation, Other EE, Insulation, Tankless Water Heater 6/22/16 N/A N/A Fort Pierce Utilities Authority Fort Pierce Utilities Authority - Solar Water Heating Rebate Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 6/18/15 N/A N/A 
Gulf Power Company Gulf Power - Residential Energy Efficiency Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Roofs, Motor VFDs, Other EE, Pool Pumps 7/23/15 N/A N/A JEA JEA - Solar Incentive Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 11/9/16 4/1/02 N/A 
N/A Ocala Utility Services - Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, LED Lighting 6/22/16 N/A N/A Ocala Utility Services Ocala Utility Services - Solar Hot Water Heating Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 6/18/15 N/A N/A Orlando Utilities Commission Orlando Utilities Commission - Residential Solar Water Heater Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 6/8/15 N/A N/A Tampa Electric Tampa Electric - Residential Energy Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, 8/4/15 N/A N/A 
Efficiency Rebate Program Windows, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE Florida Department of Revenue Solar and CHP Sales Tax Exemption Sales Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Combined Heat & Power, Solar Pool Heating 5/5/15 7/1/97 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)    
GEORGIA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Georgia Interfaith Power and Light Georgia Interfaith Power and Light - Energy Improvement Grants Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, Personal Computing Equipment, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 2/2/16 N/A N/A Tennessee Valley Authority TVA Partner Utilities - Energy Right Heat Pump Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps 9/25/15 N/A N/A 
Georgia Green Loans Georgia Green Loans Save & Sustain Program Other Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Custom/Others 2/2/16 4/1/10 N/A 
pending approval, Other EE, Yes; specific technologies not identified Tennessee Valley Authority TVA - Green Power Providers Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 6/2/15 10/1/12 N/A Tennessee Valley Authority TVA - Mid-Sized Renewable Standard Offer Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Anaerobic Digestion 6/18/15 10/10/10 N/A N/A TVA - Solar Solutions Initiative Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 6/4/15 N/A N/A Blue Ridge Mountain Electric Membership Corporation Blue Ridge Mountain Electric Membership Corporation - Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 6/9/15 N/A N/A Central Georgia Electric Membership Corporation Central Georgia EMC - Photovoltaic Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 6/18/15 N/A N/A Coweta-Fayette Electric Membership Corporation Coweta-Fayette EMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, Windows, Other EE 6/16/15 N/A N/A Coweta-Fayette Electric Membership Corporation Coweta-Fayette EMC - Residential Solar Water Heater Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 2/27/15 N/A N/A Diverse Power Diverse Power - Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water 5/19/15 N/A N/A 
Energy Efficient Existing Homes Rebate Program Heaters, Heat pumps, Heat recovery, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation Diverse Power Diverse Power - Energy Efficient New Construction Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Heat recovery, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 5/19/15 N/A N/A GreyStone Power GreyStone Power - Photovoltaic Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 2/27/15 N/A N/A GreyStone Power GreyStone Power - Solar Water Heating Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 2/27/15 N/A N/A Jackson Electric Membership Corporation Jackson EMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Custom/Others pending approval 6/17/15 N/A N/A Jackson Electric Membership Corporation Jackson EMC - Right Choice for Builders Rebate Program Rebate Program Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 6/12/15 N/A N/A N/A TVA Partner Utilities - eScore Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Windows, Doors, Insulation 8/31/17 N/A N/A Walton Electric Membership Corporation Walton EMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Heat recovery, Other EE 4/3/15 N/A N/A 
Georgia Department of Revenue Biomass Sales and Use Tax Exemption Sales Tax Incentive Biomass 8/3/15 7/1/06 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)     
HAWAII Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Hawaii Green Infrastructure Authority Green Infrastructure Bonds Bond Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Ocean Thermal, Heat pumps, Custom/Others pending approval, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 9/3/14 N/A N/A Hawaii Department of Taxation Solar and Wind Energy Credit (Corporate) Corporate Tax Credit Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small) 5/29/15 7/1/09 N/A 
N/A Feed-in-Tariff Feed-in Tariff Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Municipal Solid Waste, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 6/8/15 N/A N/A 
N/A Priority Permit Processing for Green Buildings Green Building Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole 8/28/14 5/12/06 N/A 
Building, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) City and County of Honolulu City and County of Honolulu - Solar Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 9/2/14 N/A N/A Hawaii Department of Agriculture Farm and Aquaculture Alternative Energy Loan Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Wind (Small) 9/19/14 7/1/08 N/A Hawaii Community Reinvestment Corporation GreenSun Hawaii Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Refrigerators/Freezers, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Windows 9/3/14 N/A N/A County of Kauai Housing Agency KIUC - Solar Water Heating Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat 6/2/15 N/A N/A Hawaii Department of Taxation Solar and Wind Energy Credit (Personal) Personal Tax Credit Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small) 5/29/15 7/1/09 N/A City and County of Honolulu, Real Property Tax Assessment Division City and County of Honolulu - Real Property Tax Exemption for Alternative Energy Improvements Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 9/2/14 10/1/09 N/A Kauai Island Utility Coop KIUC - Solar Water Heating Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 5/29/15 N/A N/A Hawaii Energy Solar Water Heater Rebate Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 6/1/15 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)   
IDAHO Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Idaho Energy Resources Authority Renewable Energy Project Bond Program Bond Program Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Custom/Others pending approval, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 12/18/15 N/A N/A 
Idaho Falls Power Idaho Falls Power - Residential Energy Efficiency Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Insulation, LED Lighting, Tankless Water Heater 7/9/15 N/A N/A 
Office of Energy Resources Low-Interest Energy Loan Programs Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building 12/18/15 N/A N/A 
Insulation, Windows, Motor VFDs, Agricultural Equipment, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use Idaho Tax Commission Residential Alternative Energy Tax Deduction Personal Tax Deduction Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Wind (Small) 12/18/15 N/A N/A 
Idaho State Tax Commission Property Tax Exemption for Wind, Solar, and Geothermal Energy Producers Property Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All) 3/28/16 1/1/08 N/A Idaho Falls Power Idaho Falls Power - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Insulation, LED Lighting, Tankless Water Heater 7/9/15 N/A N/A 
Kootenai Electric Cooperative Kootenai Electric Cooperative - Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Water 5/19/16 N/A N/A 
Residential Efficiency Rebate Program Heaters, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building N/A Northern Lights Inc. - Energy Conservation Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Lighting, Heat pumps, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 1/4/16 N/A N/A Questar Gas Questar Gas - Residential Solar Assisted Water Heating Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Pool Heating 6/22/15 N/A N/A 
Rocky Mountain Power Rocky Mountain Power - wattsmart Residential Efficiency Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Custom/Others pending approval, Pool Pumps 8/21/15 N/A N/A 
(Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)     
ILLINOIS Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Illinois Finance Authority Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Project Financing Bond Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Daylighting, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Building Insulation, Windows, Custom/Others pending approval, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Other Distributed Generation Technologies, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 3/25/15 1/1/10 N/A SomerCor 504 Inc. City of Chicago - Small Business Improvement Fund Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Equipment Insulation, Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air 12/17/15 N/A N/A 
conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Windows, Roofs, Reflective Roofs, LED Lighting 
Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity and Smart Energy Design Assistance Center Efficient Living Energy Grant Grant Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Motor VFDs, Other EE, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting, Tankless Water Heater 2/11/16 N/A N/A 
Illinois Clean Energy Community Foundation Illinois Clean Energy Community Foundation Grants Grant Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Other Distributed Generation Technologies 12/17/15 6/30/99 N/A Chicago Center for City of Chicago - Green Building Permit Programs Green Building Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar 12/17/15 N/A N/A 
Green Technology Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity Special Assessment for Solar Energy Systems Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 12/17/15 N/A N/A Energy Services Office City Water Light and Power - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Building Insulation, Other EE 3/24/15 N/A N/A Energy Services Office City Water Light and Power - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Building Insulation 3/24/15 N/A N/A N/A ComEd - Business Instant Lighting Discounts Program Rebate Program Lighting, Other EE, LED Lighting 3/31/17 N/A N/A 
Wabash Valley Power Association Corn Belt Energy Coop - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Refrigerators/Freezers, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motor VFDs, Agricultural Equipment, Custom/Others pending approval, 7/21/15 N/A N/A 
Other EE, LED Lighting Power Moves - Wabash Valley Power Association Corn Belt Energy Coop - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Other EE, LED Lighting 3/16/17 N/A N/A 
Illinois Municipal Electric Agency Illinois Municipal Electric Agency - Electric Efficiency Program Rebate Program Daylighting, Refrigerators/Freezers, Equipment Insulation, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Building Insulation, Motors, Motor VFDs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Geothermal Direct-Use, Vending Machine Controls 6/10/16 N/A N/A 
Jo-Carroll Energy Cooperative, Inc. Jo-Carroll Energy - Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, 4/17/17 N/A N/A 
Insulation, LED Lighting 
MidAmerican Energy Company MidAmerican Energy (Electric) - Commercial EnergyAdvantage Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Refrigerators/Freezers, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Building Insulation, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 3/24/15 1/1/15 N/A MidAmerican Energy Company MidAmerican Energy (Electric) - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Other EE 5/3/17 N/A N/A 
MidAmerican Energy Company MidAmerican Energy (Gas) - Commercial EnergyAdvantage Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Windows, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food 5/3/17 N/A N/A 
Service Equipment, Commercial Cooking Equipment, LED Lighting, Tankless Water Heater, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity Public Sector Energy Efficiency Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting, Tankless Water Heater 3/26/15 6/1/08 N/A 
Wabash Valley Power Association Wabash Valley Power Association (28 Member Cooperatives) - Commercial and Industrial Energy Efficiency Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 3/22/17 N/A N/A Wabash Valley Power Association Wabash Valley Power Association (28 Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, 3/30/17 N/A N/A 
Member Cooperatives) - Residential Energy Efficiency Program Other EE, LED Lighting Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity Sales Tax Exemption for Wind Energy Sales Tax Incentive Wind (All) 12/17/15 7/1/09 N/A N/A Solar Renewable Energy Credits Solar Renewable Energy Credit Program Solar Photovoltaics 12/3/15 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)    
INDIANA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date N/A NIPSCO - Feed-In Tariff Feed-in Tariff Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Wind (Small) 10/5/15 7/13/11 N/A 
Indiana Office of Energy Development Community Conservation Challenge Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Lighting, Chillers, Boilers, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, LED Lighting 7/27/15 N/A N/A 
Department of Economic and Sustainable Development City of Bloomington - Sustainable Development Incentives Green Building Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Roofs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Other Distributed Generation Technologies 12/14/15 1/26/15 N/A Indianapolis Department of Code Enforcement City of Indianapolis - Green Building Green Building Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, 12/14/15 8/1/10 N/A 
and Office of Sustainability Incentive Program Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use Indiana Department of Local Government Finance Renewable Energy Property Tax Exemption Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use 12/11/15 3/1/10 N/A Bartholomew County REMC Bartholomew County REMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Other EE 4/6/15 N/A N/A Carroll County REMC Carroll County REMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Refrigerators/Freezers, Heat pumps 7/27/15 N/A N/A Clark County REMC Clark County REMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Other EE, LED Lighting 4/6/15 N/A N/A 
Dubois REC Dubois REC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Other EE, LED Lighting 4/8/15 N/A N/A 
Duke Energy Duke Energy - Commercial and Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, LED Lighting 1/13/16 N/A N/A 
Duke Energy Duke Energy - Residential and Builder Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 1/13/16 10/1/12 N/A Harrison REMC Harrison County REMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation 7/27/15 N/A N/A 
Indianapolis Power & Light Indianapolis Power & Light - Business Energy Incentives Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Windows, Motor VFDs, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Custom/Others pending approval, Food Service 1/13/16 N/A N/A 
Equipment, Commercial Cooking Equipment, Pool Pumps, LED Lighting Jackson County Rural Electric Membership Corporation Jackson County REMC - Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Other EE 4/8/15 N/A N/A Jasper County REMC and Power Moves Jasper County REMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps 4/9/15 N/A N/A Jay County REMC Jay County REMC - Geothermal and Air-Source Heat Pump Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps 4/6/15 N/A N/A Johnson County Rural EMC Johnson County REMC - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Motors, Motor VFDs 4/8/15 N/A N/A Johnson County Rural EMC Johnson County REMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Other EE, LED Lighting 3/10/17 N/A N/A Kosciusko REMC Kosciusko REMC - Residential Geothermal and Air-source Heat Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps 4/9/15 N/A N/A 
Pump Rebate Program 
N/A LaGrange County REMC - Business Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Motor VFDs 4/8/15 N/A N/A LaGrange County REMC and Wabash Valley Power Association LaGrange County REMC - Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Other EE, LED Lighting 4/8/15 N/A N/A Marshall County REMC Marshall County REMC - Geothermal and Heat Pump Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps 4/7/15 N/A N/A Miami-Cass REMC & WVPA Miami-Cass REMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Other EE 4/9/15 N/A N/A NineStar Connect NineStar Connect - Residential Energy Efficient Equipment Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps 4/9/15 3/15/10 N/A N/A Noble REMC - Buisness Energy Efficiency Rebate Incentives Rebate Program Geothermal Electric, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motor VFDs, LED Lighting 4/9/15 N/A N/A N/A Noble REMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Geothermal Electric, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, LED Lighting 4/9/15 N/A N/A 
Rebate Incentives Northeastern REMC Northeastern REMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps 7/27/15 N/A N/A Orange County REMC Orange County REMC - Energy Efficient Equipment Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation 7/27/15 N/A N/A Parke County REMC Parke County REMC - Energy Efficient Equipment Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps 7/27/15 N/A N/A 
Rush Shelby Energy RushShelby Energy - Residential and Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing 4/6/15 N/A N/A South Central Indiana Rural Electric Membership Corporation South Central Indiana REMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing 4/7/15 N/A N/A Southeast Indiana REMC Southeastern Indiana REMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 3/2/17 N/A N/A 
Southern Indiana Rural Electric Cooperative Southern Indiana Power - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Other EE 7/27/15 N/A N/A Tipmont REMC Tipmont REMC - Energy Efficiency Equipment Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Other EE 4/2/15 N/A N/A Utilities District of Western Indiana REMC Utilities District of Western Indiana REMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing 4/7/15 N/A N/A Wabash County REMC Wabash County REMC - Residential Geothermal and Air-source Heat Pump Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps 4/6/15 N/A N/A 
Wabash Valley Power Association Wabash Valley Power Association (28 Member Cooperatives) - Commercial and Industrial Energy Efficiency Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, LED Lighting, Commercial 3/29/17 N/A N/A 
Refrigeration Equipment White County REMC White County REMC - Residential Geothermal Heat Pump Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps 4/2/15 N/A N/A WIN Energy REMC WIN Energy REMC - Residential Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Other EE 7/27/15 N/A N/A Indiana Department of Revenue Sales and Use Tax Exemption for Electrical Generating Equipment Sales Tax Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small) 2/23/16 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)     
IOWA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Iowa Utilities Board Renewable Energy Production Tax Credits (Corporate) Corporate Tax Credit Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydrogen, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 12/9/16 6/15/05 N/A Iowa Department of Revenue Solar Energy Systems Tax Credit (Corporate) Corporate Tax Credit Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 5/24/16 1/1/12 N/A Iowa Department of Revenue Energy Replacement Generation Tax Exemption Corporate Tax Exemption Wind (All), Hydroelectric, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small) 1/29/16 N/A N/A 
Alliant Energy-Interstate Power and Light Alliant Energy Interstate Power and Light (Gas and Electric) - Low Interest Energy Efficiency Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Windows, Other EE, Vending Machine Controls, Tankless Water Heater 5/2/17 N/A N/A Iowa Energy Center Alternate Energy Revolving Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small) 2/5/16 1/26/96 N/A Iowa Economic Development Authority and IADG Energy Bank Revolving Loan Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar 2/10/16 N/A N/A 
Iowa Area Development Group Loan Program Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Other EE, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), LED Lighting Iowa Department of Natural Resources Local Option - Special Assessment of Wind Energy Devices Property Tax Incentive Wind (All), Wind (Small) 11/13/15 1/1/94 N/A Iowa Department of Natural Resources Methane Gas Conversion Property Tax Exemption Property Tax Incentive Biomass, Landfill Gas, Anaerobic Digestion 2/8/16 N/A N/A Iowa Department of Natural Resources Property Tax Exemption for Renewable Energy Systems Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Wind (Small) 2/10/16 1/1/78 N/A 
Alliant Energy-IP&L Alliant Energy Interstate Power and Light (Electric) - Business Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air 3/19/15 N/A N/A 
sealing, Building Insulation, Doors, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
Alliant Energy Alliant Energy Interstate Power and Light (Electric) - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Doors, Motors, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Insulation, Tankless Water Heater 5/3/17 N/A N/A 
Alliant Energy Alliant Energy Interstate Power and Light (Gas and Electric) - Farm Equipment Energy Efficiency Incentives Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Heat pumps, Heat recovery, Motors, Motor VFDs, Agricultural Equipment, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, LED Lighting 5/3/17 N/A N/A 
Alliant Energy Alliant Energy Interstate Power and Light (Gas and Electric) - New Home Construction Incentives Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Tankless Water Heater 5/2/17 N/A N/A Interstate Light and Power (Alliant Energy) Alliant Energy Interstate Power and Light (Gas) - Business Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Refrigerators/Freezers, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, 5/2/17 N/A N/A 
Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Steam-system upgrades, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Motors, Motor VFDs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
Alliant Energy Alliant Energy Interstate Power and Light (Gas) - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Motors, Insulation, Tankless Water Heater 5/2/17 N/A N/A 
Ames Electric Department Ames Electric Department - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, LED Lighting 7/9/15 N/A N/A Bright Energy Solutions/Missouri River Energy Services Business Energy Efficiency Rebate Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, 11/9/15 N/A N/A 
(Offered by 16 Utilities) Building Insulation, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
Cedar Falls Utilities Cedar Falls Utilities - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Motors, Motor VFDs, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting 5/12/16 N/A N/A 
Cedar Falls Utilities Energy Services Cedar Falls Utilities - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Doors, 1/28/16 N/A N/A 
Other EE, LED Lighting, Tankless Water Heater 
N/A Corn Belt Power Cooperative Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 11/12/15 N/A N/A 
Farmers Electric Cooperative Farmers Electric Cooperative (Kalona) - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, LED Lighting 10/29/15 N/A N/A Customer Service Indianola Municipal Utilities - Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Heat pumps, Air conditioners 7/9/15 N/A N/A Linn County Rural Electric Cooperative Association Linn County Rural Electric Cooperative - Agricultural Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Heat pumps, Motor VFDs, Agricultural Equipment, LED Lighting 10/28/15 N/A N/A Linn County Rural Electric Cooperative Association Linn County Rural Electric Cooperative - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Motor VFDs, 10/27/15 N/A N/A 
Rebate Program Agricultural Equipment, Custom/Others pending approval, Commercial Cooking Equipment, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment Linn County Rural Electric Cooperative Association Linn County Rural Electric Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Other EE, LED Lighting 10/28/15 N/A N/A Linn County Rural Electric Cooperative Linn County Rural Electric Cooperative - Solar Water Heater Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 6/19/15 N/A N/A 
MidAmerican Energy Company MidAmerican Energy (Electric) - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Siding, Other EE 12/3/15 N/A N/A 
MidAmerican Energy MidAmerican Energy Commercial Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Building 11/30/15 N/A N/A 
Insulation, Windows, Motors, Motor VFDs, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting 
Muscatine Power and Water Muscatine Power and Water - Commercial and Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebates Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, LED Lighting 10/29/15 N/A N/A Muscatine Power and Water Muscatine Power and Water - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebates Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners 1/28/16 N/A N/A 
Bright Energy Solutions/Missouri River Energy Services Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate (Offered by 16 Utilities) Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Building Insulation, Other EE, LED Lighting 11/9/15 N/A N/A Central Iowa Power Cooperative Rural Electric Cooperatives Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs (Offered by 12 Utilities) Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, 6/23/15 N/A N/A 
Motor VFDs, Agricultural Equipment, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment Waverly Light & Power Waverly Light & Power - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebates Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Insulation, LED Lighting 7/9/15 N/A N/A Waverly Light & Power Waverly Light & Power - Residential Solar Thermal Rebates Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 6/23/15 7/1/09 N/A 
Iowa Department of Revenue Renewable Energy Equipment Exemption Sales Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Hydroelectric, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 2/10/16 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)   
KANSAS Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Kansas Corporation Commission Renewable Energy Property Tax Exemption Property Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small) 6/8/15 N/A N/A Kansas City Board of Public Utilities Kansas City Board of Public Utilities - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Other EE 11/13/15 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)    
KENTUCKY Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Kentucky Cabinet for Economic Development (Dept. of Financial Incentives) Tax Credits for Renewable Energy Facilities Corporate Tax Credit Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Landfill Gas 6/9/16 1/1/08 N/A 
County Agricultural Development Councils, Governor's Office of Agricultural Policy On-Farm Energy Efficiency & Production Grants Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat recovery, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, Windows, Siding, Roofs, Motors, Motor VFDs, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Agricultural Equipment, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, LED Lighting, Tankless Water Heater 8/3/15 N/A N/A Kentucky Cabinet for Economic Development (Dept. of Financial Incentives) Incentives for Energy Independence Industry Recruitment/Support Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Landfill Gas 12/1/15 1/1/08 N/A 
Finance and Administration Cabinet Energy Efficiency Loans for State Government Agencies Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Clothes Washers, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting 11/30/15 N/A N/A 
Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Steam-system upgrades, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 
N/A Greater Cincinnati Energy Alliance - Residential Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows 4/15/15 N/A N/A Inter-County Energy Inter-County Energy Efficiency Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Chillers, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Other EE 11/20/15 N/A N/A Mountain Association for Community Economic Development (MACED) Mountain Association for Community Economic Development - Energy Efficient Enterprise Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling 5/29/15 N/A N/A 
Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Siding, Roofs, Agricultural Equipment, Other EE, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Reflective Roofs, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment Tennessee Valley Authority TVA Partner Utilities - Energy Right Heat Pump Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps 9/25/15 N/A N/A Tennessee Valley Authority TVA - Green Power Providers Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 6/2/15 10/1/12 N/A Tennessee Valley Authority TVA - Mid-Sized Renewable Standard Offer Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Anaerobic Digestion 6/18/15 10/10/10 N/A N/A TVA - Solar Solutions Initiative Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 6/4/15 N/A N/A 
Clark Energy Clark Energy - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 11/12/15 N/A N/A Duke Energy Duke Energy -  Residential Efficiency Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air 6/10/15 N/A N/A 
Rebate Program sealing, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, Pool Pumps Inter-County Energy Inter-County Energy Efficiency Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Other EE 1/28/16 N/A N/A Inter-County Energy Inter-County Energy Touchstone New Construction Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Insulation 5/19/16 N/A N/A 
Jackson Energy Cooperative Jackson Energy Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Heat pumps, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE 9/25/15 N/A N/A Kenergy Kenergy - Residential Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners 11/3/15 N/A N/A N/A Meade County RECC - Residential Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Heat pumps, Other EE 11/3/15 N/A N/A Salt River Electric Cooperative Salt River Electric - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, 10/6/15 N/A N/A 
Rebate Programs Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval South Kentucky Rural Electric Cooperative Corporation South Kentucky RECC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE 10/6/15 N/A N/A N/A TVA Partner Utilities - eScore Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Windows, Doors, Insulation 8/31/17 N/A N/A Office of Energy Policy Tax Exemption for Large-Scale Renewable Energy Projects Sales Tax Incentive Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Landfill Gas 6/9/16 1/1/08 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)     
LOUISIANA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Louisiana Department of Natural Resources Home Energy Loan Program (HELP) Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, Windows, Custom/Others pending approval 7/22/14 N/A N/A LA Department of Revenue Solar Energy System Exemption Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Solar Pool Heating 8/5/14 N/A N/A Entergy New Orleans New Orleans City - Energy Smart Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Lighting, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Insulation, Pool Pumps 11/10/16 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)     
MAINE Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Programs administered locally or by Efficiency Maine Trust (determined locally) Local Option - Property Assessed Clean Energy PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Landfill Gas, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Other EE, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, LED Lighting 11/3/16 4/1/10 N/A 
AFC First Financial Corporation Maine PACE Loans PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-11/3/16 4/4/11 N/A 
stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), LED Lighting 
Efficiency Maine Trust Efficiency Maine Residential Home Energy Savings Program Rebate Program Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE 10/20/16 9/11/13 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
MARYLAND Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Maryland Energy Administration Game Changer Competitive Grant Program Grant Program Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power 11/20/15 9/19/14 N/A 
N/A Maryland Smart Energy Communities Grant Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Boilers, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Other Distributed Generation Technologies, Pool Pumps 11/20/15 7/1/15 N/A Maryland Energy Administration Parking Lot Solar PV with EV Charger Grant Program Grant Program Solar Photovoltaics 11/20/15 12/1/14 N/A Baltimore City Energy Office City of Baltimore- BEI Loan Program Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics, Combined Heat & Power, Clothes Washers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Combined Heat & 8/30/16 N/A N/A 
Power, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Duct/Air sealing, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Insulation Maryland Energy Administration Jane E. Lawton Conservation Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Custom/Others pending approval, Geothermal Direct-Use 11/20/15 N/A N/A 
Maryland Energy Administration State Agency Loan Program Loan Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Solar Pool Heating, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Boilers, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Custom/Others pending approval, Wind (Small) 11/20/15 N/A N/A 
Maryland Energy Administration Clean Energy Production Tax Credit (Personal) Personal Tax Credit Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Municipal Solid Waste, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 6/2/16 1/1/06 12/31/18 Anne Arundel County Office of Finance Anne Arundel County - High Performance Dwelling Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, 7/28/15 7/1/10 N/A 
Property Tax Credit Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) Anne Arundel County Office of Finance Anne Arundel County - Solar and Geothermal Equipment Property Tax Credits Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps 5/13/15 N/A N/A 
Baltimore County Office of Budget and Finance Baltimore County - Property Tax Credit for High Performance Buildings and Homes Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Wind (Small) 7/28/15 N/A N/A Baltimore County Office of Budget and Finance Baltimore County - Property Tax Credit for Solar and Geothermal Devices Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Geothermal Direct-Use 5/13/15 N/A N/A Harford County Department of the Treasury Harford County - Property Tax Credit for Solar and Geothermal Devices Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Geothermal Direct-Use 5/13/15 N/A N/A 
Programs locally administered Local Option - Property Tax Credit for High Performance Buildings Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 7/28/15 N/A N/A 
Programs locally administered Local Option - Property Tax Credit for Renewables and Energy Conservation Devices Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Custom/Others pending approval 8/6/15 N/A N/A 
Department of Finance Montgomery County - High Performance Building Property Tax Credit Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Custom/Others pending approval, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 7/28/15 3/17/08 N/A Prince George's County Office of Finance Prince George's County - Solar and Geothermal Residential Property Tax Credit Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps 5/13/15 N/A N/A Maryland Department of Assessments and Taxation Property Tax Exemption for Solar and Wind Energy Systems Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small) 10/15/14 N/A N/A 
N/A Baltimore Gas & Electric Company (Electric) - Commercial Energy Efficiency Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Combined Heat & Power, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motor VFDs, 4/5/17 N/A N/A 
Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
N/A Baltimore Gas & Electric Company (Electric) - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Other EE, Pool Pumps, LED Lighting 5/3/17 N/A N/A 
N/A Baltimore Gas & Electric Company (Gas) - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Pool Pumps 5/3/17 N/A N/A Maryland Energy Administration (MEA) Clean-Burning Wood Stove Grant Program Rebate Program Biomass, Other EE 11/16/15 9/7/12 N/A Maryland Energy Administration Commercial Clean Energy Grant Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps 6/24/15 11/6/09 N/A Delmarva Delmarva Power - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, 3/20/17 N/A N/A 
Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Pool Pumps, LED Lighting 
FirstEnergy FirstEnergy (Potomac Edison) - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, LED Lighting 3/16/17 N/A N/A Maryland Energy Administration Geothermal Heat Pump Grant Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps 10/16/14 1/26/15 N/A 
PEPCO PEPCO - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Pool Pumps, LED Lighting 3/17/17 N/A N/A Maryland Energy Administration Residential Clean Energy Grant Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps 11/20/15 1/1/05 N/A 
Southern Maryland Electric Cooperative SMECO - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Custom/Others pending approval, 3/17/17 N/A N/A 
Other EE, Pool Pumps, LED Lighting Maryland Energy Administration Windswept Grant Program Rebate Program Wind (All), Wind (Small) 6/24/15 N/A N/A Comptroller of Maryland Sales and Use Tax Exemption for Renewable Energy Equipment Sales Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Wind (Small) 10/15/14 N/A N/A 
Comptroller of Maryland Sales and Use Tax Exemption for Residential Solar and Wind Electricity Sales Sales Tax Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (Small) 10/15/14 N/A N/A 
Comptroller of Maryland Sales Tax Holiday for Energy-Efficient Appliances Sales Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, LED Lighting 10/15/14 1/26/15 N/A N/A Wood Heating Fuel Exemption Sales Tax Incentive Biomass 10/15/14 N/A N/A N/A Solar Renewable Energy Certificates (SRECs) Solar Renewable Energy Credit Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 4/27/15 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)     
MASSACHUSETTS Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Massachusetts Department of Revenue Excise Tax Deduction for Solar or Wind Powered Systems Corporate Tax Deduction Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Wind (All) 5/24/17 N/A N/A Massachusetts Department of Revenue Excise Tax Exemption for Solar or Wind Powered Systems Corporate Tax Exemption Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Wind (All), Wind (Small) 5/24/17 N/A N/A Massachusetts Clean Energy Center Commercial Biomass Heating Grant Program Grant Program Biomass 5/23/17 N/A N/A Massachusetts Clean Energy Center (MassCEC) Commonwealth Hydropower Program Grant Program Hydroelectric, Hydroelectric (Small) 8/17/17 N/A N/A Massachusetts Clean Energy Center (MassCEC) Commonwealth Organics-to-Energy Program Grant Program Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Anaerobic Digestion 8/17/17 N/A N/A Massachusetts Clean Energy Center (MassCEC) Commonwealth Wind Program Grant Program Wind (All) 5/22/17 N/A N/A 
Massachusetts Department of Energy Resources Green Communities Grant Program Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Combined Heat & Power, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Other Distributed Generation Technologies 5/30/17 N/A N/A 
Massachusetts Department of Revenue Alternative Energy and Energy Conservation Patent Income Tax Deduction (Corporate) Industry Recruitment/Support Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Municipal Solid Waste, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 10/31/16 1/26/79 N/A 
Massachusetts Department of Revenue Alternative Energy and Energy Conservation Patent Income Tax Deduction (Personal) Industry Recruitment/Support Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Municipal Solid Waste, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 10/31/16 1/26/79 N/A Holyoke Gas and Electric Department Holyoke Gas & Electric - Commercial Energy Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, 10/15/15 N/A N/A 
Conservation Loan Program Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Other EE, Insulation 
Customer Service Holyoke Gas & Electric - Residential Energy Conservation Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Other EE, Insulation 10/15/15 N/A N/A 
MassSAVE Mass Save - HEAT Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Other EE, Tankless Water Heater 3/21/17 N/A N/A N/A Mass Solar Loan Program Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics 3/20/17 N/A N/A 
Massachusetts Development Finance Agency Local Option - Commercial PACE Financing PACE Financing Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Lighting, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air 5/31/17 11/6/16 N/A 
conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small) Programs administered locally Local Option - Energy Revolving Loan Fund PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Other EE 5/31/17 N/A N/A Massachusetts Department of Energy Resources (DOER) Residential Renewable Energy Income Tax Credit Personal Tax Credit Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small) 10/25/16 1/26/79 N/A Massachusetts Department of Revenue Renewable Energy Property Tax Exemption Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Hydroelectric, Wind (Small) 8/15/17 1/26/75 N/A 
N/A Cape Light Compact- Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, Other EE, Personal Computing Equipment, LED Lighting 6/4/15 N/A N/A Chicopee Electric Light Chicopee Electric Light - Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 8/8/17 N/A N/A 
Residential Solar Rebate Program Massachusetts Clean Energy Center Commercial Solar Hot Water Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 5/26/17 8/4/11 12/31/20 Concord Municipal Light Plant Concord Municipal Light Plant - Solar Photovoltaic Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 8/8/17 N/A N/A Hudson Light & Power Hudson Light & Power - Photovoltaic Incentive Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 5/27/15 N/A N/A 
Cape Light Compact, Unitil, National Grid, NSTAR, Western Massachusets Electric MassSAVE (Electric) - Commercial New Construction/Major Renovation Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Equipment Insulation, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, LED Lighting 7/1/15 N/A N/A MMWEC in collaboration MuniHELPS - Offered Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Clothes Washers, 6/19/15 N/A N/A 
with municipal utilities by 17 Utilities through the MMWEC Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Other EE, Tankless Water Heater Reading Municipal Light Department Reading Municipal Light Department - Residential Renewable Energy Rebates Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Combined Heat & Power, Wind (Small) 5/27/15 N/A N/A Massachusetts Clean Energy Center Residential & Small-Scale Biomass Heating Program Rebate Program Biomass 5/23/17 11/24/14 N/A Massachusetts Clean Energy Center Residential & Small-Scale Ground-Source Heat Pump Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps 5/23/17 N/A N/A Massachusetts Clean Energy Center (MassCEC) Residential & Small-Scale Solar Hot Water Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat 8/17/17 2/7/11 12/31/20 Taunton Municipal Lighting Plant (TMLP) Taunton Municipal Lighting Plant - Residential PV Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 8/8/17 1/1/10 N/A Department of Revenue Renewable Energy Sales Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, 5/25/17 N/A N/A 
Equipment Sales Tax Exemption Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Wind (Small) N/A Solar Renewable Energy Certificates (SREC-II) Solar Renewable Energy Credit Program Solar Photovoltaics 5/25/17 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
MICHIGAN Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
NextEnergy Michigan Accelerating Technologies (MATch) Energy Grant Grant Program Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Custom/Others pending approval, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 11/30/15 12/1/12 N/A N/A Renewable Energy Program Grants Grant Program Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass 9/29/15 N/A N/A 
Michigan Economic Development Corporation Nonrefundable Business Activity Tax Credit Industry Recruitment/Support Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Microturbines 7/9/15 10/17/02 N/A 
Michigan Economic Development Corporation Refundable Payroll Tax Credit Industry Recruitment/Support Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Microturbines 5/18/15 10/17/02 N/A Michigan Economic Renewable Energy Industry Recruitment/Support Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, 7/16/15 7/12/06 N/A 
Development Corporation Renaissance Zones Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Solar Pool Heating, Anaerobic Digestion 
The Economic Development Corporation City of Detroit - SmartBuildings Detroit Green Fund Loan Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Steam-system upgrades, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Roofs, Custom/Others pending approval, Geothermal Direct-Use, Other Distributed Generation Technologies 5/19/15 N/A N/A 
Michigan Saves Michigan Saves - Business Energy Financing Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Steam-system upgrades, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Siding, Roofs, 3/24/16 N/A N/A 
Custom/Others pending approval, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Food Service Equipment, LED Lighting, Tankless Water Heater, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
Michigan Saves Michigan Saves - Home Energy Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Siding, Roofs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Tankless Water Heater 3/24/16 N/A N/A 
N/A City of Ann Arbor - PACE Financing PACE Financing Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Landfill Gas, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, 6/24/15 N/A N/A 
Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Roofs, Other EE, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Reflective Roofs 
Levin Energy Partners Lean and Green Michigan PACE PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Roofs, Other EE, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use 3/7/16 N/A N/A 
N/A Local Option - Property Assessed Clean Energy PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building 5/19/15 N/A N/A 
Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Roofs, Other EE, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use Michigan Department of Agriculture Biomass Gasification and Methane Digester Property Tax Exemption Property Tax Incentive Biomass, Anaerobic Digestion 7/16/15 12/29/06 N/A 
Efficiency Smart Coldwater Board of Public Utilities - Commercial & Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 6/1/15 N/A N/A 
N/A Consumers Energy (Electric) - Commercial Energy Efficiency Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Equipment Insulation, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Windows, Motors, Motor VFDs, Processing and 7/16/15 N/A N/A 
Manufacturing Equipment, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Tankless Water Heater, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
CLEAResult Consulting Consumers Energy (Electric) - Residential Energy Efficiency Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Equipment Insulation, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Motor VFDs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, LED Lighting 7/16/15 N/A N/A 
Consumers Energy Business Solutions Consumers Energy (Gas) - Commercial Energy Efficiency Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Steam-system upgrades, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Building Insulation, Windows, Motors, Motor VFDs, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food 4/14/15 N/A N/A 
Service Equipment, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
DTE Energy DTE Energy (Electric) - Commercial and Industrial Energy Efficiency Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Steam-system upgrades, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Building Insulation, Windows, Roofs, Motor VFDs, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Agricultural Equipment, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, Reflective Roofs, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 1/14/16 N/A N/A 
N/A Energy Optimization (Electric) - Residential Efficiency Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling Fan, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, 3/21/16 N/A N/A 
Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, Motors, Other EE, Personal Computing Equipment, Pool Pumps Great Lakes Energy Great Lakes Energy - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps 4/14/15 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
MINNESOTA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Minnesota Power Minnesota Power - Power Grant Program Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Custom/Others pending approval, Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion, Other Distributed Generation Technologies 1/12/16 N/A N/A 
Xcel Energy Xcel Energy - Renewable Development Fund Grants Grant Program Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Hydrogen, Combined Heat & Power, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 3/5/15 1/26/99 N/A Rural Finance Authority Agricultural Improvement Loan Program Loan Program Wind (All), Biomass, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 3/11/15 N/A N/A Minnesota Department of Agriculture Farm Opportunities Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 3/14/17 N/A N/A Minnesota Housing Finance Agency Fix-Up Loan Loan Program Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows, 6/1/16 N/A N/A 
Doors, Roofs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Wind (Small), Other Distributed Generation Technologies 
Center for Energy and Environment Home Energy Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Custom/Others pending approval 3/14/17 N/A N/A Minnesota Department of Agriculture Methane Digester Loan Program Loan Program Biomass, Anaerobic Digestion 3/5/15 N/A N/A Minnesota Valley Electric Cooperative Minnesota Valley Electric Cooperative -Residential Energy Resource Conservation Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors 5/19/16 N/A N/A 
Otter Tail Power Company Otter Tail Power Company - DollarSmart Energy Efficiency Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Motors, Motor VFDs, Agricultural Equipment, Food Service Equipment 3/29/17 N/A N/A Rural Finance Authority Value-Added Stock Loan Participation Program Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 2/13/15 1/26/94 N/A 
N/A Rural Minnesota Energy Board PACE Program PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Geothermal Direct-Use 5/1/15 N/A N/A 
N/A Saint Paul Port Authority PACE Program PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Custom/Others pending approval, Geothermal Direct-Use, Pool Pumps, LED Lighting 5/4/15 N/A N/A Minnesota Department of Commerce Made in Minnesota Solar PV Incentive Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 9/15/16 1/1/14 12/31/23 Minnesota Department of Commerce Renewable Energy Production Incentive Performance-Based Incentive Biomass, Anaerobic Digestion 1/7/15 N/A N/A Xcel Energy Xcel Energy - Solar*Rewards Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 1/27/16 1/1/14 12/31/18 N/A Wind and Solar-Electric (PV) Systems Exemption Property Tax Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small) 3/26/15 N/A N/A 
Alexandria Light and Power Alexandria Light and Power - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building 3/11/15 N/A N/A 
Controls, Windows, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Personal Computing Equipment, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
Alexandria Light and Power Alexandria Light and Power - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Other EE, LED Lighting 7/20/16 N/A N/A Austin Utilities Austin Utilities - Solar Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 7/6/16 N/A N/A 
Austin Utilities Austin Utilities (Gas and Electric) - Commercial and Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Steam-system upgrades, Building Insulation, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, Data Center Equipment, 3/11/15 N/A N/A 
Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
Austin Utilities Austin Utilities (Gas and Electric) - Residential Conserve and Save Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Windows, Motors, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Insulation, LED Lighting, Tankless Water Heater 3/22/17 N/A N/A 
Blooming Prairie Public Utilities Blooming Prairie Public Utilities - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Other EE, LED Lighting 2/23/17 N/A N/A Brainerd Public Utilities Brainerd Public Utilities - Renewable Incentives Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 8/25/16 N/A N/A 
Connexus Energy Connexus Energy - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Motors, Motor VFDs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Vending Machine Controls, LED 3/22/17 N/A N/A 
Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment Connexus Energy Connexus Energy - Residential Efficient HVAC Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Programmable Thermostats, Pool Pumps 4/28/17 N/A N/A 
Crow Wing Power Crow Wing Power - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Other EE, LED Lighting 3/14/17 N/A N/A 
Dakota Electric Service Dakota Electric Association - Commercial and Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Agricultural Equipment, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Vending Machine Controls, Personal Computing Equipment, Data Center Equipment, LED Lighting 11/12/15 N/A N/A Dakota Electric Service Dakota Electric Association - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air 3/13/17 N/A N/A 
Rebate Program conditioners, Motors, Other EE, LED Lighting 
East Central Energy East Central Energy - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Agricultural Equipment, Other EE, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting 7/21/16 N/A N/A 
East Central Energy East Central Energy - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Other EE, LED Lighting 7/21/16 N/A N/A 
Elk River Municipal Utilities Elk River Municipal Utilities - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Other EE, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting 8/25/16 N/A N/A 
Elk River Municipal Utilities Elk River Municipal Utilities - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Other EE, Pool Pumps 3/14/17 N/A N/A 
Fairmont Public Utilities Fairmont Public Utilities - Commercial & Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Dishwasher, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 5/1/17 N/A N/A 
Fairmont Public Utilities Fairmont Public Utilities - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls 3/13/17 N/A N/A 
Grand Marais PUC Grand Marais PUC - Commercial & Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Dishwasher, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting, 4/24/17 N/A N/A 
Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
Grand Marais PUC Grand Marais PUC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Other EE, LED Lighting 4/5/17 N/A N/A 
Great River Energy Member Cooperatives Great River Energy (28 Member Cooperatives) - Commercial and Industrial Efficiency Rebates Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Motor VFDs, Yes; specific technologies not identified 3/20/17 N/A N/A 
Hutchinson Utilities Commission Hutchinson Utilities Commission - Commercial Energy Efficiency Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 6/27/16 N/A N/A Hutchinson Utilities Commission Hutchinson Utilities Commission - Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, 3/20/17 N/A N/A 
Residential Energy Efficiency Program Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, Other EE, LED Lighting, Tankless Water Heater 
Lake City Utilities Lake City Utilities - Commercial & Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting 4/14/17 N/A N/A 
Lake City Utilities Lake City Utilities - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Other EE, LED Lighting 2/26/16 N/A N/A 
Lake Country Power Lake Country Power - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Other EE, LED Lighting 2/19/16 N/A N/A Lake Region Electric Cooperative Lake Region Electric Cooperative - Residential Energy Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Refrigerators/Freezers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Other EE 3/29/17 N/A N/A 
Efficiency Rebate Program 
Litchfield Public Utilities Litchfield Public Utilities - Commercial & Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 4/5/17 N/A N/A 
Litchfield Public Utilities Litchfield Public Utilities - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Motor VFDs, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting 4/4/17 N/A N/A Minnesota Department of Commerce Made in Minnesota Solar Thermal Rebate Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Pool Heating 1/8/16 1/1/14 12/31/23 Marshall Municipal Utilities/Missouri River Energy Services Marshall Municipal Utilities - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Dishwasher, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Energy 2/18/16 N/A N/A 
Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Windows, Motors, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
Marshall Municipal Utilities Marshall Municipal Utilities - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Other EE, LED Lighting 3/13/17 N/A N/A Marshall Municipal Utilities Marshall Municipal Utilities - Solar Thermal Water Heater Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 6/23/16 N/A N/A 
Minnesota Power Minnesota Power - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Other EE, LED Lighting 1/7/16 N/A N/A 
Minnesota Power Minnesota Power - Residential New Construction Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Windows, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, LED Lighting 1/7/16 N/A N/A 
Minnesota Power Minnesota Power - SolarSense Solar Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 2/20/17 1/1/04 N/A 
Minnesota Valley Electric Cooperative Minnesota Valley Electric Cooperative - Commercial and Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Agricultural Equipment, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Vending Machine Controls 2/19/16 N/A N/A Minnesota Valley Electric Cooperative Minnesota Valley Electric Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Motors, Other EE 5/19/16 N/A N/A 
N/A Minnkota Power Cooperative (17 Utilities) - PowerSavers Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 5/4/16 N/A N/A 
N/A Minnkota Power Cooperative (17 Utilities) - PowerSavers Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, LED Lighting 5/4/16 N/A N/A 
Bright Energy Solutions/Missouri River Energy Services Missouri River Energy Services (23 Member Cooperatives) - Business Energy Efficiency Rebate Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Dishwasher, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Doors, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Commercial Cooking Equipment, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 2/5/16 N/A N/A 
Bright Energy Solutions/Missouri River Energy Services Missouri River Energy Services (23 Member Cooperatives) - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Other EE, LED Lighting 2/5/16 N/A N/A Moorhead Public Service/Bright Energy Solutions Moorhead Public Service Utility - Commercial and Industrial Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, 6/23/16 N/A N/A 
Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, Commercial Cooking Equipment, Personal Computing Equipment, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
Mora Municipal Utilities Mora Municipal Utilities - Commercial & Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Dishwasher, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 8/26/16 N/A N/A Mora Municipal Utilities Mora Municipal Utilities - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Heat pumps, 5/2/17 N/A N/A 
Rebate Program Air conditioners, Other EE, LED Lighting New Prague Utilities Commission New Prague Utilities Commission - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Other EE, LED Lighting 8/26/16 N/A N/A New Ulm Public Utilities New Ulm Public Utilities - Solar Electric Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 2/10/16 N/A N/A 
North Branch Municipal Water & Light North Branch Municipal Water & Light - Commercial & Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 3/2/17 N/A N/A North Branch Municipal Water & Light North Branch Municipal Water & Light - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Other EE, LED Lighting 2/23/17 N/A N/A Northern Municipal Power Agency Northern Municipal Power Agency - Commercial Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, 7/6/16 N/A N/A 
Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
Wild Rice Electric Northern Municipal Power Agency - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Insulation, LED Lighting 5/23/16 N/A N/A 
Customer Service Otter Tail Power Company - Commercial & Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Building Insulation, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 3/28/17 N/A N/A Customer Service Otter Tail Power Company - Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat 3/29/17 N/A N/A 
Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program pumps, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, Motors, Motor VFDs, Other EE Owatanna Public Utilities Owatanna Public Utilities - Solar Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 7/19/16 N/A N/A 
Owatonna Public Utilities/Conserve & $ave Owatonna Public Utilities - Residential Conserve and Save Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Motors, Other EE, Insulation, LED Lighting, Tankless Water Heater 6/23/16 N/A N/A 
Preston Public Utilities Preston Public Utilities - Commercial & Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Dishwasher, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 3/16/17 N/A N/A Preston Public Utilities Preston Public Utilities - Residential Energy Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, 3/16/17 N/A N/A 
Efficiency Rebate Program Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting 
Princeton PUC Princeton PUC - Commercial & Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Dishwasher, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Custom/Others pending approval, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 3/2/17 N/A N/A 
Princeton PUC Princeton PUC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Other EE, LED Lighting 3/2/17 N/A N/A 
Redwood Falls Public Utilities Redwood Falls Public Utilities - Commercial & Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food 4/18/17 N/A N/A 
Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting 
Redwood Falls Public Utilities Redwood Falls Public Utilities - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting 3/14/17 N/A N/A 
Rochester Public Utilities Rochester Public Utilities - Commercial and Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Food Service Equipment, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 2/15/17 N/A N/A 
Rochester Public Utilities Rochester Public Utilities - Residential Conserve and Save Rebate Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Custom/Others pending approval, LED Lighting 2/15/17 N/A N/A Rochester Public Utilities Rochester Public Utilities - Solar Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 2/15/17 N/A N/A 
Saint Peter Municipal Utilities Saint Peter Municipal Utilities - Commercial & Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Dishwasher, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 5/24/16 N/A N/A Saint Peter Municipal Utilities Saint Peter Municipal Utilities - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, LED Lighting 5/24/16 N/A N/A 
Shakopee Public Utilities Shakopee Public Utilities - Commercial and Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, LED Lighting 6/27/16 N/A N/A 
Spring Valley Public Utilities Spring Valley Public Utilities - Commercial & Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Dishwasher, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others 4/6/17 N/A N/A 
pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
Spring Valley Public Utilities Spring Valley Public Utilities - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Other EE, Vending Machine Controls, Commercial Cooking Equipment, LED Lighting 7/21/16 N/A N/A 
Stearns Electric Association Stearns Electric Association - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Motors, Motor VFDs, Agricultural Equipment, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, Commercial Cooking Equipment 3/22/17 N/A N/A 
Stearns Electric Association Stearns Electric Association - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Motor VFDs, Pool Pumps 5/1/17 N/A N/A Waseca Utilities Waseca Utilities - Commercial & Industrial Energy Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, 4/18/17 N/A N/A 
Efficiency Rebate Program Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
Waseca Utilities Waseca Utilities - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Other EE, LED Lighting 2/5/16 N/A N/A 
Wells Public Utilities Wells Public Utilities - Commercial & Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Dishwasher, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Doors, Motors, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 2/4/16 N/A N/A Wells Public Utilities Wells Public Utilities - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Heat pumps, 2/4/16 N/A N/A 
Air conditioners, Other EE, LED Lighting Willmar Municipal Utilities Willmar Municipal Utilities - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, LED Lighting 3/13/17 N/A N/A 
Wright-Hennepin Cooperative Electric Association Wright-Hennepin Cooperative Electric Association - Non-Residential Energy Efficient Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, LED Lighting 3/22/17 N/A N/A Wright-Hennepin Cooperative Electric Association Wright-Hennepin Cooperative Electric Association - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Pool Pumps 3/14/17 N/A N/A 
Xcel Energy Xcel Energy (Electric) - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Refrigerators/Freezers, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, LED Lighting 1/7/16 N/A N/A 
Department of Revenue Solar Energy Sales Tax Exemption Sales Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Solar Pool Heating 5/15/15 N/A N/A N/A Wind Energy Sales Tax Exemption Sales Tax Incentive Wind (All), Wind (Small) 12/9/15 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)    
MISSISSIPPI Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Mississippi Development Authority Mississippi Clean Energy Initiative Industry Recruitment/Support Solar Water Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Wind (Small) 6/15/15 7/1/10 N/A 
N/A Mississippi Power (Electric) - Residential Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE 6/15/15 N/A N/A Tennessee Valley Authority TVA Partner Utilities - Energy Right Heat Pump Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps 6/17/15 N/A N/A Tennessee Valley Authority TVA - Green Power Providers Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 6/2/15 10/1/12 N/A Tennessee Valley Authority TVA - Mid-Sized Renewable Standard Offer Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas 6/18/15 10/10/10 N/A N/A TVA - Solar Solutions Initiative Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 6/4/15 N/A N/A Coast Electric Power Association Coast Electric Power Association - Comfort Advantage Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Equipment Insulation, Heat pumps, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows, 1/7/16 N/A N/A 
Home Program Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 
Southern Company Mississippi Power - EarthCents Commercial Incentives Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Chillers, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Building Insulation, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment 6/16/15 N/A N/A 
Southern Company Mississippi Power - EarthCents New Home Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE 6/16/15 N/A N/A N/A Mississippi Power -Residential Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Other EE 6/16/15 N/A N/A Pearl River Valley Electric Power Association Pearl River Valley Electric Power Association - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE 6/17/15 N/A N/A Singing River Electric Singing River Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, 12/2/15 N/A N/A 
Power Association Electric Power Association - Comfort Advantage Home Program Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 
Southern Pine Electric Power Association Southern Pine Electric Power Association - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 6/17/15 N/A N/A N/A TVA Partner Utilities - eScore Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Windows, Doors, Insulation 8/31/17 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)    
MISSOURI Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Division of Energy Wood Energy Production Credit Corporate Tax Credit Biomass 5/13/15 1/1/97 6/30/20 N/A Columbia Water & Light - Commercial Energy Efficiency Loans Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Other EE, LED Lighting 4/14/15 6/1/10 N/A 
Columbia Water & Light Columbia Water & Light - Home Performance with ENERGY STAR Loan Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE 4/14/15 N/A N/A 
Missouri Department of Economic Development Energy Loan Program Loan Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, Windows, Motors, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Wind (Small) 9/4/15 1/26/89 N/A N/A Local Option - Clean Energy Development Boards PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, 5/5/16 N/A N/A 
Equipment Insulation, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Other Distributed Generation Technologies 
Missouri Clean Energy Funding, LLC Missouri Clean Energy District PACE Financing Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small) 3/17/16 1/1/11 N/A 
Energy Equity Funding, LLC Set the PACE St. Louis PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-1/12/16 N/A N/A 
stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, Wind (Small), Pool Pumps, Tankless Water Heater Missouri Energy Initiative (MEI) Show Me PACE PACE Financing Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Yes; specific technologies not identified 5/5/16 N/A N/A State Tax Commission of Missouri Solar Property Tax Exemption Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 5/13/15 8/28/13 N/A 
N/A Ameren Missouri (Electric) - Residential Heating and Cooling Energy Efficiency  Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors 3/24/16 3/7/16 2/15/19 City Utilities of Springfield, Missouri City Utilities of Springfield - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 10/23/15 N/A N/A Co-Mo Electric Cooperative Co-Mo Electric Cooperative - Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Other EE 6/23/15 N/A N/A 
Columbia Water & Light Columbia Water & Light - Solar Rebates Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 4/14/15 N/A N/A Cuivre River Electric Cuivre River Electric - Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Building Insulation, Other EE 7/30/15 N/A N/A N/A Empire District Electric - Solar PV Rebates Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 3/15/17 1/1/10 6/30/20 Intercounty Electric Cooperative Intercounty Electric Cooperative - Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Building Insulation 7/30/15 N/A N/A N/A Missouri Rural Electric Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners 10/12/15 N/A N/A Ozark Border Electric Cooperative Ozark Border Electric Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners 7/29/15 N/A N/A Platte-Clay Electric Cooperative Platte-Clay Electric Cooperative - Residential and Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebates Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners 1/11/16 N/A N/A Southwest Electric Cooperative Southwest Electric Cooperative - Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 7/30/15 N/A N/A White River Valley White River Valley Electric Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water 8/5/15 1/1/13 N/A 
Electric Cooperative Cooperative - Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, LED Lighting (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
MONTANA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Montana Department of Revenue Alternative Energy Investment Tax Credit Industry Recruitment/Support Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 10/27/16 1/1/02 N/A 
Montana Department of Revenue Property Tax Abatement for Production and Manufacturing Facilities Industry Recruitment/Support Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydrogen, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 10/21/14 5/25/07 N/A 
Montana Department of Environmental Quality Alternative Energy Revolving Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Landfill Gas, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Other EE, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 4/4/17 7/1/01 N/A Montana Department of Environmental Quality Residential Alternative Energy System Tax Credit Personal Tax Credit Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, 10/27/16 1/1/02 N/A 
Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels Montana Department of Environmental Quality Residential Geothermal Systems Credit Personal Tax Credit Geothermal Heat Pumps, Geothermal Direct-Use 10/27/16 1/1/02 N/A 
N/A Corporate Property Tax Reduction for New/Expanded Generating Facilities Property Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 10/22/14 N/A N/A 
N/A Generation Facility Corporate Tax Exemptions Property Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 10/22/14 N/A N/A 
N/A Renewable Energy Systems Exemption Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Municipal Solid Waste, Landfill Gas, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells 10/22/14 N/A N/A 
using Renewable Fuels Flathead Electric Cooperative Flathead Electric Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows 3/15/17 N/A N/A NorthWestern Energy NorthWestern Energy - USB Renewable Energy Fund Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (Small) 7/1/16 N/A N/A 
Yellowstone Valley Electric Cooperative Yellowstone Valley Electric Cooperative - Residential/Commercial Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps 7/22/15 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
NEBRASKA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Nebraska Energy Office Dollar and Energy Savings Loans Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Municipal Solid Waste, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling Fan, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Roofs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Wind (Small), Personal Computing Equipment, Tankless Water Heater 10/5/15 N/A N/A 
N/A Local Option - Property-Assessed Clean Energy Financing PACE Financing Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, 4/26/16 N/A N/A 
Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Daylighting, Solar Pool Heating, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Insulation, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Other Distributed Generation Technologies, Reflective Roofs, LED Lighting Nebraska Department of Revenue Property Tax Exemption for Renewable Energy Generation Facilities Property Tax Incentive Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small) 6/16/15 4/12/10 N/A N/A Lincoln Electric System - Renewable Energy Rebate Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Biomass, Landfill Gas, Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion, Other Distributed Generation Technologies 3/15/17 N/A N/A Nebraska Public Power District Nebraska Public Power District - Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy 8/26/15 N/A N/A 
Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motor VFDs, LED Lighting 
Nebraska Public Power District Nebraska Public Power District - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Building Insulation, LED Lighting 7/22/15 N/A N/A 
N/A Omaha Public Power District - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Heat pumps, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, LED Lighting 7/22/15 N/A N/A 
N/A Southern Power District - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Building Insulation, LED Lighting 7/21/15 N/A N/A Nebraska Department of Revenue Sales and Use Tax Exemption for Community Renewable Energy Projects Sales Tax Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small) 8/24/15 10/1/08 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)    
NEVADA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Nevada State Office of Energy Revolving Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use 10/28/16 N/A N/A Valley Electric Association Valley Electric Association - Solar Water Heating Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat 3/1/16 N/A N/A 
Programs administered locally Local Option - Special Improvement Districts PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Solar Pool Heating, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 3/30/16 5/28/09 N/A Public Utilities Portfolio Energy Credits Performance-Based Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, 1/22/16 2/23/06 N/A 
Commission of Nevada Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Municipal Solid Waste, Landfill Gas, Solar Pool Heating, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 
Nevada State Office of Energy Large Scale Renewable Energy Property Tax Abatement (Nevada State Office of Energy) Property Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Municipal Solid Waste, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 5/19/16 7/1/09 6/30/49 
Nevada State Office of Energy Property Tax Abatement for Green Buildings Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Wind 10/21/14 12/4/07 N/A 
(Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 
NV Department of Taxation Renewable Energy Systems Property Tax Exemption Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Municipal Solid Waste, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use 5/1/17 7/1/83 N/A NV Energy NV Energy - RenewableGenerations Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 9/3/15 N/A N/A NV Energy NV Energy (Northern Nevada) - SolarGenerations Solar Heating Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Pool Heating 3/24/15 2/1/11 N/A NV Energy NV Energy (Southern Nevada) - SolarGenerations Solar Heating Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 3/24/15 12/1/10 N/A Southwest Gas Corporation Southwest Gas Corporation - Smarter Greener Better Solar Water Heating Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 2/12/16 N/A N/A 
Nevada State Office of Energy Renewable Energy Sales and Use Tax Abatement Sales Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, 5/19/16 7/1/09 6/30/49 
Municipal Solid Waste, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
NEW HAMPSHIRE Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission Commercial & Industrial Renewable Energy Grants Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Hydrogen, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 6/7/17 N/A N/A 
New Hampshire Community Development Finance Authority Enterprise Energy Fund Loans Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Refrigerators/Freezers, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Steam-system upgrades, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Siding, Roofs, Comprehensive 5/22/17 N/A N/A 
Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Food Service Equipment, Other Distributed Generation Technologies, Personal Computing Equipment, Data Center Equipment, Reflective Roofs, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
N/A Liberty Utilities (Electric) - Commercial Energy Efficiency Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval 10/13/15 N/A N/A 
Local community Local Option - Energy Efficiency & Clean Energy Districts PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Daylighting, Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, 5/25/17 8/27/10 N/A 
Custom/Others pending approval, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use Office of Energy and Planning Local Option - Property Tax Exemption for Renewable Energy Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Wind (Small) 11/8/16 1/1/76 N/A New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission Commercial & Industrial Solar Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 5/30/17 11/1/10 N/A 
N/A Eversource - New Equipment & Construction Schools Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, LED Lighting 8/24/17 1/1/15 N/A 
Public Service of New Hampshire Eversource - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, Pool Pumps, LED Lighting 8/24/17 N/A N/A New Hampshire New Hampshire Electric Co-Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting 1/31/17 N/A N/A 
Electric Co-Op Op - Commercial and Municipal New Equipment and Construction Program Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, LED Lighting NH Public Utilities Commission Residential Bulk-Fed Wood-Pellet Central Boilers and Furnace Rebate Program Rebate Program Biomass, Furnaces, Boilers 6/7/17 4/14/10 N/A New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission Residential Small Renewable Energy Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small) 6/7/17 10/1/09 N/A New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission Residential Solar Water Heating Rebates Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat 6/7/17 4/21/10 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)     
NEW JERSEY Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
New Jersey Economic Development Authority Edison Innovation Clean Energy Manufacturing Fund - Grants and Loans Industry Recruitment/Support Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Other EE, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 1/20/16 N/A N/A 
New Jersey Economic Development Authority Edison Innovation Green Growth Fund Loans Industry Recruitment/Support Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Other EE, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 1/20/16 5/23/11 N/A Public Service Electric and Gas (PSE&G) PSE&G - Solar Loan Program Other Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 2/27/17 5/29/13 N/A 
N/A Assessment of Farmland Hosting Renewable Energy Systems Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 10/1/14 7/1/10 N/A New Jersey Department of the Treasury Property Tax Exemption for Renewable Energy Systems Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar 10/1/14 10/1/08 N/A 
Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels New Jersey Board of Public Utilities, Office of Clean Energy COOLAdvantage Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners 12/6/16 N/A N/A New Jersey Board of Public Utilities, Office of Clean Energy New Jersey Renewable Energy Incentive Program (Sustainable Biopower) Rebate Program Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 3/23/15 N/A N/A 
New Jersey Board of Public Utilities, Office of Clean Energy New Jersey SmartStart Buildings - New Construction and Retrofits Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Food Service Equipment, LED Lighting, Tankless Water Heater, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 12/2/16 N/A N/A 
New Jersey Board of Public Utilities, Office of Clean Energy NJ Clean Energy- WARMAdvantage Program (Electric and Gas) Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Other EE 12/2/16 7/1/16 N/A New Jersey Division of Taxation Solar Energy Sales Tax Exemption Sales Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Solar Pool Heating 10/1/14 N/A N/A N/A Solar Renewable Energy Certificates (SRECs) Registration Program Solar Renewable Energy Credit Program Solar Photovoltaics 2/27/17 3/1/04 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
NEW MEXICO Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
New Mexico Finance Authority Clean Energy Revenue Bond Program Bond Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Daylighting, Lighting, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 5/25/17 N/A N/A Taxation and Revenue Department Agricultural Biomass Income Tax Credit (Corporate) Corporate Tax Credit Biomass 3/22/17 1/1/11 12/31/19 New Mexico Energy, Minerals and Natural Resources Department Geothermal Heat Pump Tax Credit (Corporate) Corporate Tax Credit Geothermal Heat Pumps 11/1/16 1/1/10 12/31/20 New Mexico Taxation & Revenue Department Sustainable Building Tax Credit (Corporate) Corporate Tax Credit Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Wind (Small) 11/9/16 1/1/07 12/31/26 
New Mexico Energy, Minerals and Natural Resources Department Alternative Energy Product Manufacturers Tax Credit Industry Recruitment/Support Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Municipal Solid Waste, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 5/25/17 7/1/06 N/A New Mexico Finance Authority Drinking Water State Revolving Loan Fund Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Other Distributed Generation Technologies 3/22/17 1/26/97 N/A Programs administered locally Local Option - Renewable Energy Financing District/Solar Energy Improvement Special Assessments PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Wind (Small) 5/25/17 7/1/09 N/A 
El Paso Electric Company El Paso Electric Company - Small and Medium System Renewable Energy Certificate Purchase Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small) 11/10/16 3/1/09 N/A PNM PNM - Performance-Based Solar Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics 5/26/17 3/1/06 12/31/19 N/A Agricultural Biomass Income Tax Personal Tax Credit Biomass 3/22/17 1/1/11 12/31/19 
Credit (Personal) New Mexico Energy, Minerals and Natural Resources Department Geothermal Heat Pump Tax Credit (Personal) Personal Tax Credit Geothermal Heat Pumps 11/1/16 1/1/10 12/31/20 New Mexico Taxation & Revenue Department Sustainable Building Tax Credit (Personal) Personal Tax Credit Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Wind (Small) 11/9/16 1/1/07 12/31/26 New Mexico Energy, Minerals and Natural Resources Department Property Tax Exemption for Residential Solar Systems Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 11/2/16 1/1/10 N/A 
El Paso Electric Company El Paso Electric Company - Residential Efficiency Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, Pool Pumps 7/19/17 N/A N/A Taxation and Revenue Department Advanced Energy Gross Receipts Tax Deduction Sales Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics 5/25/17 7/1/10 N/A New Mexico Taxation & Revenue Department Biomass Equipment & Materials Compensating Tax Deduction Sales Tax Incentive Biomass, Hydrogen, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Anaerobic Digestion, Microturbines 11/8/16 6/17/05 N/A New Mexico Taxation & Revenue Department Gross Receipts Tax Exemption for Sales of Wind Sales Tax Incentive Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small) 5/26/17 N/A N/A 
and Solar Systems to Government Entities New Mexico Energy, Minerals and Natural Resources Department Solar Energy Gross Receipts Tax Deduction Sales Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics 11/8/16 7/1/07 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
NEW YORK Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date PSEG PSEG Long Island- Commercial Solar PV Feed-in Tariff Feed-in Tariff Solar Photovoltaics 2/24/17 N/A N/A PSEG Long Island PSEG Long Island- Fuel Cell Resource Feed-in Tariff Feed-in Tariff Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 2/24/17 N/A N/A New York State Energy Research and Development Authority NY-Sun Commercial and Industrial Incentive Program Grant Program Solar Photovoltaics 8/24/17 5/4/15 12/29/23 Riverhead Building Department City of Riverhead - Energy Conservation Device Permitting Fees Green Building Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Yes; specific technologies not identified 2/4/16 N/A N/A 
New York State Energy Research and Development Authority (NYSERDA) Home Performance with ENERGY STAR Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, LED Lighting 12/2/16 N/A N/A N/A NY-Sun Loan Program Loan Program Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 10/12/15 N/A N/A NY Green Bank NY Green Bank Other Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, 1/21/16 12/19/13 N/A 
Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Wave, Other EE, Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 
Programs administered locally Local Option - Municipal Sustainable Energy Programs PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows, Custom/Others pending approval, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 7/10/15 N/A N/A New York State Energy Research and Development Authority Anaerobic Digester Gas-to-Electricity Rebate and Performance Incentive Performance-Based Incentive Anaerobic Digestion 9/25/14 N/A N/A New York State Department of Taxation and Finance Residential Solar Tax Credit Personal Tax Credit Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 4/20/15 N/A N/A New York State Office of Real Property Tax Services Energy Conservation Improvements Property Tax Exemption Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Equipment 4/30/15 N/A N/A 
Insulation, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Wind (Small) 
Administered locally Local Option - Real Property Tax Exemption for Green Buildings Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 4/30/15 1/1/13 N/A 
N/A Local Option - Solar, Wind & Biomass Energy Systems Exemption Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Daylighting, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 4/30/15 N/A 1/1/25 New York City Department of Buildings New York City - Property Tax Abatement for Photovoltaic (PV) Equipment Expenditures Property Tax Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 10/7/16 8/5/08 12/31/18 N/A New York Power Authority - Energy Services Programs for Public Entities Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat 7/7/15 N/A N/A 
recovery, Steam-system upgrades, Compressed air, Duct/Air sealing, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval New York State Energy Research and Development Authority NY-Sun PV Incentive Program (Residential, Low-Income, and Small Business) Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 9/18/17 8/12/10 12/29/23 New York State Energy Research and Development Authority On-Site Wind Incentive Program Rebate Program Wind (All), Wind (Small) 4/30/15 N/A N/A 
Long Island Power Authority PSEG Long Island - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Roofs, Motors, Motor VFDs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, Reflective Roofs, LED Lighting 6/25/15 N/A N/A NYSERDA Renewable Heat NY Rebate Program Biomass 8/13/15 7/29/14 N/A N/A Local Option - Solar Sales Tax Exemption Sales Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 4/14/15 N/A N/A N/A New York City - Residential Solar Sales Sales Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 9/18/14 12/1/05 N/A 
Tax Exemption New York State Department of Taxation and Finance Residential Wood Heating Fuel Exemption Sales Tax Incentive Biomass 4/30/15 N/A N/A New York State Department of Taxation and Finance Solar Sales Tax Exemption Sales Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Solar Pool Heating 12/3/15 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
NORTH CAROLINA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Catawba County Utilities & Engineering Catawba County - Green Construction Permitting Incentive Program Green Building Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 5/26/15 N/A N/A Building Safety Department City of Asheville - Building Permit Fee Rebates Green Building Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Other EE 12/4/15 7/1/09 N/A 
N/A Local Option - Green Building Incentives Green Building Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 12/4/15 N/A N/A 
N/A Local Option - Financing Program for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydrogen, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 3/15/17 8/26/09 N/A Lumbee River Electric Membership Corporation Lumbee River EMC - Residential Weatherization Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building 5/20/15 N/A N/A 
Insulation, Windows, Doors Lumbee River EMC Lumbee River EMC - Solar Water Heating Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat 12/3/15 N/A N/A Piedmont EMC Piedmont EMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors 12/3/15 N/A N/A Piedmont EMC Piedmont EMC - Residential Solar Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors 8/8/15 N/A N/A 
Town of Carrboro Town of Carrboro - Worthwhile Investments Save Energy (WISE) Homes and Buildings Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 12/3/15 N/A N/A Tennessee Valley Authority TVA Partner Utilities - Energy Right Heat Pump Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps 9/25/15 N/A N/A N/A NC GreenPower Production Incentive Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 4/1/15 N/A N/A 
Tennessee Valley Authority TVA - Green Power Providers Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 6/2/15 10/1/12 N/A Tennessee Valley Authority TVA - Mid-Sized Renewable Standard Offer Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Anaerobic Digestion 6/18/15 10/10/10 N/A N/A TVA - Solar Solutions Initiative Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 6/4/15 N/A N/A North Carolina Solar Center Active Solar Heating and Cooling Systems Exemption Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat 12/4/15 N/A N/A N.C. Department of Revenue Property Tax Abatement for Solar Electric Systems Property Tax Incentive Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics 12/4/15 7/1/08 N/A Carteret Craven Electric Cooperative Carteret-Craven Electric Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps 6/21/16 N/A N/A Customer Service Duke Energy (Electric) - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Pool Pumps 6/30/15 N/A N/A Progress Energy Carolinas Duke Energy Progress - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Insulation, Pool Pumps 5/2/17 N/A N/A Four County EMC Four-County EMC - Residential Energy Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, 6/21/16 N/A N/A 
Efficiency Appliance Rebate Program Refrigerators/Freezers, Other EE 
N/A Jones-Onslow EMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling Fan, Heat pumps, Air conditioners 12/3/15 N/A N/A Lumbee River Electric Membership Corporation Lumbee River EMC - Residential Energy Efficiency Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation 7/22/15 N/A N/A 
South River EMC South River EMC - Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Pool Pumps, LED Lighting 6/23/16 N/A N/A South River EMC South River EMC - Solar Water Heating Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Pool Heating 12/4/15 N/A N/A 
N/A TVA Partner Utilities - eScore Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors 8/31/17 N/A N/A PSNC Energy PSNC Energy (Gas) - Green Utility Rate Discount Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar 10/5/15 N/A N/A 
Building Rate Discount Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Wind (Small) (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
NORTH DAKOTA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Northern Plains Electric Cooperative Northern Plains EC - Commercial Energy Efficiency Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors 8/10/17 N/A N/A 
Otter Trail Power Company Otter Tail Power Company - Dollar Smart Financing Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Heat recovery, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 3/29/17 N/A N/A 
North Dakota Department of Commerce Renewable Energy Property Tax Exemption Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use 10/28/16 7/1/07 N/A 
Bright Energy Solutions/Missouri River Energy Services Business Energy Efficiency Rebates (Offered by 5 Utilities) Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. 4/16/15 N/A N/A 
Systems/Building Controls, Windows, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment Otter Trail Power Company Otter Tail Power Company - Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Other EE 3/29/17 N/A N/A 
Bright Energy Solutions/Missouri River Energy Services Residential Energy Efficiency Rebates (Offered by 5 Utilities) Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Other EE, LED Lighting 8/10/17 N/A N/A 
Office of State Tax Commissioner Sales and Use Tax Exemption for Electrical Generating Facilities Sales Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Anaerobic Digestion 10/28/16 N/A N/A Office of State Tax Commissioner Sales and Use Tax Exemption for Gas Processing Facilities Sales Tax Incentive Landfill Gas 10/28/16 N/A N/A Office of State Tax Commissioner Sales Tax Exemption for Hydrogen Sales Tax Incentive Hydrogen, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 10/28/16 N/A N/A 
Generation Facilities (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
OHIO Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Butler Rural Electric Cooperative, Inc. Butler Rural Electric Cooperative - Energy Efficiency Improvement Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors 5/19/16 N/A N/A 
Ohio Treasurer of State Energy Conservation for Ohioans (ECO-Link) Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Siding, Roofs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Wind (Small) 3/15/17 9/9/09 N/A Ohio Development Services Agency Energy Loan Fund Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics, Hydroelectric, Landfill Gas, Other EE 3/15/17 12/15/11 N/A Hamilton County Department of Community Development Hamilton County - Home Improvement Program Loan Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Daylighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Siding, Roofs, Wind (Small) 12/3/15 N/A N/A 
Ohio Department of Development Air-Quality Improvement Tax Incentives Other Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Lighting, Chillers, Boilers, Air conditioners, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Custom/Others pending approval, Wind (Small) 4/30/15 N/A N/A 
N/A Local Option - Special Energy Improvement Districts PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Other EE, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion 8/27/14 10/16/09 N/A 
Navigant Consulting First Energy Ohio - Renewable Energy Credit Procurements Performance-Based Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Municipal Solid Waste, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 10/3/14 7/1/10 N/A Cincinnati Dept. of Community Development City of Cincinnati - Property Tax Abatement for Green Buildings Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Daylighting, Comprehensive 4/30/15 N/A N/A 
Measures/Whole Building, Wind (Small) Division of Neighborhood Services, Department of Community Development City of Cleveland - Residential Property Tax Abatement for Green Buildings Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Wind (Small) 5/11/15 1/1/10 N/A 
Ohio Development Services Agency Qualified Energy Property Tax Exemption for Projects 250 kW or Less Property Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 4/30/15 1/1/10 N/A 
Ohio Development Services Agency and local county commissioners Qualified Energy Property Tax Exemption for Projects over 250 kW (Payment in Lieu) Property Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 5/12/16 1/1/10 12/31/21 
AEP Ohio AEP Ohio - Commercial New Construction Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. 6/16/16 N/A N/A 
Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Agricultural Equipment, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, Commercial Cooking Equipment, Data Center Equipment, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
AEP Ohio gridSMART AEP Ohio (Electric) - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation 6/17/15 N/A N/A Butler Rural Electric Cooperative, Inc. Butler Rural Electric Cooperative - Residential Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation 5/19/16 N/A N/A Consolidated Electric Cooperative, Inc. Consolidated Electric Cooperative - Heat Pump and Water Heating Rebates Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Heat pumps 5/11/15 N/A N/A Dayton Power and Light Dayton Power and Light - Business and Government Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, 5/12/15 N/A N/A 
Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Combined Heat & Power, Compressed air, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE 
N/A Dayton Power and Light - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Other EE 5/12/15 N/A N/A Duke Energy - Smart $aver Residential Rebate Program Duke Energy (Gas & Electric) - Residential Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, Insulation, Pool Pumps 6/10/15 N/A N/A Firelands Electric Cooperative Firelands Electric Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE 12/3/15 N/A N/A Green Energy Ohio Green Energy Ohio - GEO Solar Thermal Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 3/15/17 4/1/09 N/A The Energy Cooperative The Energy Cooperative - Residential Energy Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Other EE 5/11/15 N/A N/A 
Efficiency Rebate Program 
Ohio Department of Taxation Energy Conversion and Thermal Efficiency Sales Tax Exemption Sales Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Heat recovery, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Microturbines 4/30/15 N/A N/A N/A Solar Renewable Energy Certificates Program (SRECs) Solar Renewable Energy Credit Program Solar Photovoltaics 2/5/15 1/1/09 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
OKLAHOMA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Oklahoma Tax Commission Zero-Emission Facilities Production Tax Credit Corporate Tax Credit Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Hydroelectric, Wind (Small) 5/12/15 1/1/03 12/31/20 
Oklahoma Department of Commerce Community Energy Education Management Program Loan Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Roofs, Other EE 8/24/15 N/A N/A Oklahoma Department of Commerce Energy Loan Fund for Schools Loan Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Yes; specific technologies not identified 12/3/15 N/A N/A Oklahoma Department of Commerce Higher Education Energy Loan Program Loan Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Yes; specific 12/3/15 N/A N/A 
technologies not identified 
Community Action Agency of Oklahoma City Oklahoma City - Green Home Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Roofs, Other EE, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Reflective Roofs 12/11/15 1/26/15 N/A 
N/A Oklahoma Municipal Power Authority - WISE Energy Efficiency Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Ceiling Fan, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, LED Lighting 10/13/15 N/A N/A Red River Valley Rural Electric Cooperative Red River Valley REA - Heat Pump Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps 6/23/15 N/A N/A N/A East Central Electric Cooperative - Residential Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Air conditioners 10/26/15 N/A N/A City of Edmond Utility Office Edmond Electric - Residential Heat Pump Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, Air conditioners 7/19/16 N/A N/A OGE Energy OG&E - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, 10/26/15 N/A N/A 
Rebate Programs Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Motors, Custom/Others pending approval, LED Lighting Oklahoma Electric Cooperative Oklahoma Electric Cooperative - Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, LED Lighting 3/2/17 N/A N/A 
N/A Oklahoma Municipal Power Authority - Commercial and Industrial Energy Efficiency Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Motors, Motor VFDs, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Custom/Others pending approval, Food Service Equipment, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 10/13/15 N/A N/A 
N/A Oklahoma Municipal Power Authority - WISE Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Building Insulation 10/26/15 1/1/11 N/A Verdigris Valley Verdigris Valley Electric Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water 7/30/15 N/A N/A 
Electric Cooperative Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
OREGON Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Oregon Department of Energy Energy Conservation Tax Credits - Competitively-Selected Projects (Corporate) Corporate Tax Credit Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Siding, Roofs, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Agricultural Equipment, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Yes; specific technologies not identified 9/1/16 N/A N/A Energy Trust of Oregon Custom Renewable Energy Projects Grant Program Geothermal Electric, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 10/8/15 5/1/02 N/A 
Lane Electric Cooperative Lane Electric Cooperative - Residential and Commercial Weatherization & Energy Efficiency Program Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Clothes Washers, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 3/26/15 N/A N/A 
Pacific Power Pacific Power - Blue Sky Community Project Funds Grant Program Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Tidal, Wave, Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 6/6/16 N/A N/A Portland General Electric Co PGE Renewable Development Fund Grant Program Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Tidal, Wave, Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 10/25/16 N/A N/A 
Oregon Department of Energy Renewable Energy Development Grant Program Grant Program Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion 1/6/16 1/1/12 N/A Ashland Electric Utilities Department City of Ashland - Green Building Incentive Green Building Incentive Solar - Passive, Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval 11/24/14 N/A N/A City of Ashland Ashland Electric Utility - Residential Energy Efficiency Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Heat pumps, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows 5/24/16 N/A N/A Ashland Electric Utilities Department Ashland Electric Utility - Solar Water Heater Loan Loan Program Solar Water Heat 7/12/16 N/A N/A Lane Electric Cooperative Lane Electric Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Loan Programs Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building 3/26/15 N/A N/A 
Insulation, Windows, Doors 
Oregon Department of Energy State Energy Loan Program Loan Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Water Heaters, Lighting, Chillers, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Motors, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use 3/15/17 N/A N/A Oregon Business Development Department Utility Scale Solar Incentive Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 3/18/16 N/A 1/2/23 Oregon Department of Energy Energy Conservation Tax Credits - Competitively-Selected Projects (Personal) Personal Tax Credit Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air 9/1/16 1/26/15 N/A 
conditioners, Compressed air, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Siding, Roofs, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Agricultural Equipment, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Yes; specific technologies not identified The Oregon Business Development Commission Local Option - Rural Renewable Energy Development Zones Property Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Wave, Hydroelectric (Small) 11/6/14 N/A N/A 
Oregon Department of Energy Renewable Energy Systems Exemption Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 6/20/14 N/A 7/1/18 Ashland Electric Utilities Department Ashland Electric Utility - Bright Way to Heat Water Rebate Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 6/22/15 N/A N/A 
Ashland Electric Utilities Department Ashland Electric Utility - Photovoltaic Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 5/1/17 N/A N/A City of Ashland Ashland Electric Utility - Residential Conservation Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Refrigerators/Freezers, Heat pumps, Building Insulation, Windows, Insulation 8/25/16 N/A N/A Central Lincoln People's Utility District Central Lincoln People's Utility District - Renewable Energy Incentive Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 3/2/17 N/A N/A 
Central Lincoln People's Utility District Central Lincoln People's Utility District - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Clothes Washers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), LED Lighting 3/2/17 N/A N/A 
Energy Trust of Oregon Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate for Existing Buildings Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Steam-system upgrades, Compressed air, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Building Insulation, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food 1/31/17 N/A N/A 
Service Equipment, Commercial Cooking Equipment, Personal Computing Equipment, Data Center Equipment, LED Lighting, Tankless Water Heater, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
Consumers Power, Inc. Consumers Power, Inc - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, LED Lighting 1/7/16 N/A N/A N/A Emerald PUD - Solar Electric Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 5/1/17 N/A N/A Eugene Water & Electric Board EWEB - Solar Electric Program (Rebate) Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 2/11/16 1/25/08 N/A 
Energy Trust of Oregon Home Energy Solutions for Existing Homes Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Clothes Washers, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Boilers, Heat pumps, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, Windows, Other EE, Pool Pumps 1/31/17 N/A N/A 
Lane Electric Cooperative Lane Electric Cooperative - Residential Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 2/11/16 N/A N/A 
Midstate Electric Cooperative Midstate Electric Cooperative - Residential Conservation Rebates Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, Windows, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 2/11/16 N/A N/A 
Energy Trust of Oregon New Homes Incentive Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 1/31/17 N/A N/A 
Oregon Trail Electric Cooperative OTEC - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Siding, Roofs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Insulation, Reflective Roofs 6/29/15 N/A N/A Portland General Electric Portland General Electric - Heat Pump Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps 7/28/15 N/A N/A Salem Electric Salem Electric - Photovoltaic Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 5/1/17 N/A N/A Salem Electric Salem Electric - Solar Water Heater Rebate Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 6/23/15 1/26/97 N/A 
Energy Trust of Oregon Small Wind Incentive Program Rebate Program Wind (All), Wind (Small) 1/31/17 N/A N/A Energy Trust of Oregon Solar Electric Incentive Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 8/29/17 5/1/03 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)   
PENNSYLVANIA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Department of Community and Economic Development Alternative and Clean Energy Program Grant Program Geothermal Electric, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Daylighting, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 5/4/15 5/1/09 N/A 
Department of Community and Economic Development High Performance Building Incentives Program Grant Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 5/4/15 4/1/09 N/A 
Berks County Community Foundation Metropolitan Edison Company SEF Grants (FirstEnergy Territory) Grant Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 11/24/14 N/A N/A 
Community Foundation of the Alleghenies Penelec SEF of the Community Foundation for the Alleghenies Grant Program (FirstEnergy Territory) Grant Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 11/24/14 N/A N/A 
Department of Environmental Protection Small Business Advantage Grant Program Grant Program Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Steam-system upgrades, Compressed air, Building Insulation, 1/8/16 N/A N/A 
Motor VFDs, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Custom/Others pending approval, Wind (Small), Food Service Equipment, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 
The EMS Energy Institute of Pennsylvania State University West Penn Power SEF Grant Program Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Other Distributed Generation Technologies 11/24/14 N/A N/A Department of Community and Economic Development Wind and Geothermal Incentives Program Grant Program Geothermal Electric, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use 11/21/14 1/1/09 N/A 
N/A City of Philadelphia - Streamlined Solar Permitting and Fee Reduction Green Building Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 11/19/14 N/A N/A Department of Community and Economic Development Alternative and Clean Energy Program Industry Recruitment/Support Geothermal Electric, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Municipal 11/20/14 5/1/09 N/A 
Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, LED Lighting Department of Community and Economic Development Wind and Geothermal Incentives Program Industry Recruitment/Support Geothermal Electric, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use 11/21/14 1/1/09 N/A N/A Wind and Geothermal Industry Incentives Program Industry Recruitment/Support Geothermal Electric, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use 5/4/15 1/1/09 N/A Adams Electric Cooperative Adams Electric Cooperative - Energy Efficiency Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Equipment Insulation, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Other EE 5/19/16 N/A N/A Department of Community Alternative and Clean Loan Program Geothermal Electric, Wind (All), Biomass, 11/21/14 5/1/09 N/A 
and Economic Development Energy Program Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Daylighting, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels Department of Community and Economic Development High Performance Buildings Incentive Program Loan Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 11/25/14 4/1/09 N/A Berks County Community Foundation Metropolitan Edison Company SEF Loans (FirstEnergy Territory) Loan Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, 11/21/14 N/A N/A 
Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 
Community Foundation of the Alleghenies Penelec SEF of the Community Foundation for the Alleghenies Loan Program (FirstEnergy Territory) Loan Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 11/24/14 N/A N/A Department of Community and Economic Development (DCED) and the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) Solar Energy Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics 11/22/16 11/2/16 N/A TRF Sustainable Development Fund Sustainable Development Fund Financing Program (PECO Territory) Loan Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel 11/24/14 N/A N/A 
Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Lighting, Chillers, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 
Sustainable Energy Fund of Central Eastern PA Sustainable Energy Fund (SEF) Loan Program (PPL Territory) Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Lighting, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Other EE, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Other Distributed Generation Technologies 10/14/15 N/A N/A 
The EMS Energy Institute of Pennsylvania State University West Penn Power SEF Commercial Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Yes; specific 11/24/14 N/A N/A 
technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Other Distributed Generation Technologies Department of Community and Economic Development Wind and Geothermal Incentives Program Loan Program Geothermal Electric, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use 11/21/14 1/1/09 N/A Administered at county level Property Tax Assessment for Commercial Wind Farms Property Tax Incentive Wind (All) 11/25/14 N/A N/A N/A Duquesne Light Company - Residential Solar Water Heating Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 3/15/17 N/A N/A 
Honeywell FirstEnergy (MetEdison, Penelec, Penn Power, West Penn Power)  - Residential Energy Efficiency Programs Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Other EE 1/9/16 10/29/09 N/A N/A Solar Alternative Energy Credits Solar Renewable Energy Credit Program Solar Photovoltaics 5/5/15 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
RHODE ISLAND Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Rhode Island Office of Energy Resources Residential Renewable Energy Tax Credit (Corporate) Corporate Tax Credit Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Wind (Small) 8/2/17 N/A N/A 
Rhode Island Conservation & Development Area Council Agricultural Energy Program Grant Program Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Heat pumps, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Motor VFDs, Agricultural Equipment, Wind (Small), Commercial Refrigeration Equipment, HVAC 2/3/17 N/A N/A 
Commerce RI Commercial Scale Renewable Energy Grants (Commerce RI) Grant Program Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 2/2/17 1/1/13 N/A Commerce RI Small Scale Solar Grants (Commerce RI) Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 2/2/17 1/1/13 N/A 
Commerce RI Energy Revolving Loan Fund Loan Program Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Ceiling Fan, Lighting, 12/10/14 N/A N/A 
Boilers, Building Insulation, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Other EE, Wind (Small) N/A National Grid EnergyWise Financing program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Building Insulation 5/11/15 N/A N/A N/A Local Option - Property-Assessed Clean Energy Financing PACE Financing Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 7/13/15 N/A N/A National Grid Renewable Energy Growth Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wave, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 7/13/17 4/1/16 12/31/29 Rhode Island Office of Energy Resources Local Option - Property Tax Exemption for Renewable Energy Systems Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 8/2/16 N/A N/A 
http://www.tax.ri.gov/ Property Tax Exemption for Renewable Energy Equipment Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Solar Pool Heating, Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 8/2/16 6/27/16 N/A Rhode Island Office of Energy Resources Residential Solar Energy Property Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 8/2/16 1/1/01 N/A 
Tax Reduction 
N/A Renewable Energy Products Sales and Use Tax Exemption Sales Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small) 5/6/15 7/15/05 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)    
SOUTH CAROLINA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date South Carolina Department of Revenue Biomass Energy Tax Credit (Corporate) Corporate Tax Credit Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Anaerobic Digestion 5/4/15 1/1/07 N/A South Carolina Department of Revenue Solar Energy, Small Hydropower, and Geothermal Tax Credit (Corporate) Corporate Tax Credit Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Hydroelectric (Small), Tankless Water Heater 3/28/16 1/1/06 N/A 
Berkeley Electric Cooperative Berkeley Electric Cooperative - Energy Efficiency Loan Programs Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Custom/Others pending approval 7/16/15 N/A N/A Blue Ridge Electric Cooperative Blue Ridge Electric Cooperative - Heat Pump Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps 7/1/15 N/A N/A 
South Carolina Energy Office ConserFund Loan Program Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics, Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building 1/29/16 N/A N/A 
Insulation, Windows, Doors, Roofs, Custom/Others pending approval Pee Dee Electric Cooperative Pee Dee Electric Cooperative - Energy Resource Conservation Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors 7/1/15 N/A N/A Santee Cooper Santee Cooper - Renewable Energy Resource Loans Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric (Small) 2/2/17 10/1/07 N/A 
South Carolina Jobs-Economic Development Authority SouthCarolinaSaves Green Community Loan Program Loan Program Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Furnaces, Air conditioners, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE 3/15/17 N/A N/A South Carolina Energy Office Biomass Energy Production Incentive Performance-Based Incentive Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Anaerobic Digestion 6/2/15 5/29/08 6/30/18 South Carolina Energy Office Palmetto Clean Energy (PaCE) Program Performance-Based Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Municipal Solid Waste, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 6/2/15 N/A N/A South Carolina Department of Revenue Biomass Energy Tax Credit (Personal) Personal Tax Credit Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Anaerobic Digestion 6/8/15 1/1/07 N/A 
South Carolina Department of Revenue Solar Energy, Small Hydropower, and Geothermal Tax Credit (Personal) Personal Tax Credit Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Hydroelectric (Small) 11/9/16 1/1/06 N/A Berkeley Electric Cooperative Berkeley Electric Cooperative - Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters 7/28/15 N/A N/A Duke Energy Duke Energy (Electric) - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Other EE, Pool Pumps 9/21/15 N/A N/A Progress Energy Carolinas Duke Energy Progress - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Other EE 8/31/15 N/A N/A N/A Duke Energy Progress Customer Scale Solar Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 10/12/16 N/A N/A Palmetto Electric Cooperative Palmetto Electric Cooperative - Buried Treasure Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps 9/21/15 N/A N/A Pee Dee Electric Cooperative Pee Dee Electric Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps 6/30/15 N/A N/A 
Santee Cooper Santee Cooper - Residential Energy Efficiency Existing Homes  Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, Insulation 1/25/16 N/A N/A 
Santee Cooper Santee Cooper - Rooftop Solar Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 2/2/17 11/30/16 N/A South Carolina Energy Office Sales Tax Exemption for Hydrogen Fuel Cells Sales Tax Incentive Hydrogen, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 1/29/16 10/1/07 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
SOUTH DAKOTA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Otter Tail Power Company Otter Tail Power Company - Dollar Smart Financing Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Motors, Motor VFDs, Other EE, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 3/21/17 N/A N/A Southeastern Electric Cooperative Southeastern Electric Cooperative - Electric Equipment Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Electric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors 8/10/17 N/A N/A S.D. Department of Revenue and Regulation Large Commercial Wind and Solar Alternative Taxes Property Tax Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All) 5/25/17 N/A N/A 
S.D. Department of Revenue and Regulation Renewable Energy System Exemption Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Hydrogen, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion 5/25/17 N/A N/A Black Hills Energy Black Hills Energy - Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, 5/16/17 N/A N/A 
Commercial Energy Efficiency Programs Lighting Controls/Sensors, Air conditioners, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, LED Lighting Black Hills Energy Black Hills Energy - Residential Customer Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, LED Lighting 5/16/17 N/A N/A 
Bright Energy Solutions/Missouri River Energy Services Business Energy Efficiency Rebate (Offered by 11 Utilities) Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 4/16/15 N/A N/A MidAmerican Energy Company MidAmerican Energy (Electric) - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Other EE 4/16/15 1/1/14 N/A Otter Tail Power Company Otter Tail Power Company - Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Heat pumps, Motors, Other EE 3/29/17 N/A N/A Otter Tail Power Company Otter Tail Power Company - Residential Energy Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Energy Mgmt. 3/29/17 N/A N/A 
Efficiency Rebate Program Systems/Building Controls, Other EE 
Bright Energy Solutions/Missouri River Energy Services Residential Energy Efficiency Rebates (Offered by 11 Utilities) Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Windows, Other EE, LED Lighting 4/16/15 N/A N/A Southeastern Electric Cooperative Southeastern Electric - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Heat pumps 4/16/15 N/A N/A 
Governor's Office of Economic Development Renewable Energy Facility Sales and Use Tax Reimbursement Sales Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydrogen, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 10/31/16 4/1/13 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
TENNESSEE Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Energy Efficient Schools Initiative Energy Efficient Schools Initiative - Grants Grant Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 7/13/16 7/1/08 N/A 
Energy Efficient Schools Initiative Energy Efficient Schools Initiative - Loans Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motors, Motor VFDs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Food Service Equipment 7/13/16 N/A N/A Pathway Lending Community Pathway Energy Efficiency Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics, Combined Heat & Power, Lighting, 7/13/16 8/1/10 N/A 
Development Financial Institution Loan Program Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval Tennessee Valley Authority TVA Partner Utilities - Energy Right Heat Pump Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps 9/25/15 N/A N/A Tennessee Valley Authority TVA - Green Power Providers Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 6/2/15 10/1/12 N/A Tennessee Valley Authority TVA - Mid-Sized Renewable Standard Offer Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Anaerobic Digestion 6/18/15 10/10/10 N/A N/A TVA - Solar Solutions Initiative Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 6/4/15 N/A N/A Tennessee Comptroller of the Treasury Green Energy Property Tax Assessment Property Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Hydrogen, Wind (Small) 7/31/15 6/30/10 N/A 
N/A TVA Partner Utilities - eScore Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Windows, Doors, Insulation 8/31/17 N/A N/A Tennessee Department of Revenue Sales Tax Credit for Clean Energy Technology Sales Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Wind (Small) 7/29/15 6/30/10 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)  
TEXAS Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Comptroller of Public Accounts Solar and Wind Energy Device Franchise Tax Deduction Corporate Tax Deduction Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All) 4/27/15 1/26/82 N/A Comptroller of Public Accounts Solar and Wind Energy Business Franchise Tax Exemption Industry Recruitment/Support Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All) 4/27/15 1/26/82 N/A 
City of Plano, Credit Union of Texas City of Plano - Smart Energy Loan Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Solar Pool Heating, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Custom/Others pending approval, Wind (Small) 4/17/15 N/A N/A Comptroller of Public Accounts State Energy Conservation Office (SECO) LoanSTAR Revolving Loan Program Loan Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat 4/27/15 1/26/89 N/A 
Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Building Insulation, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Wind (Small) Austin Energy Austin Energy - Commercial Solar PV Incentive Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 4/27/15 N/A N/A 
Economic Development Division of the City Finance Department City of Houston - Property Tax Abatement for Green Commercial Buildings Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Hydroelectric (Small) 6/29/16 N/A 3/30/18 
Comptroller of Public Accounts Renewable Energy Systems Property Tax Exemption Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 4/29/16 N/A N/A 
CLEAResult Consulting AEP (Central and North) - Residential Energy Efficiency Programs Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Motor VFDs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Other Distributed Generation Technologies 6/10/15 N/A N/A Frontier Associates and Clean Energy Associates AEP Texas Central Company - SMART Source Solar PV Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 4/27/15 8/1/09 N/A Frontier Associates and Clean Energy Associates AEP Texas North Company - SMART Source Solar PV Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 6/11/15 8/1/09 N/A 
Austin Energy Austin Energy - Commercial Energy Management Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, Windows, 2/23/17 N/A N/A 
Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Reflective Roofs, LED Lighting 
Austin Energy Austin Energy - Multi-Family Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Roofs, Other EE, Reflective Roofs 2/23/17 N/A N/A 
Austin Energy Austin Energy - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Other EE, Pool Pumps 2/23/17 N/A N/A Austin Energy Austin Energy - Residential Solar PV Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 3/15/17 6/1/04 N/A 
Austin Energy Austin Energy - Small Business Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Lighting, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Building Insulation, Windows, Roofs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE 2/23/17 N/A N/A Austin Energy Austin Energy - Solar Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 4/20/15 N/A N/A 
Water Heating Rebate 
CenterPoint Energy CenterPoint Energy - Commercial and Industrial Energy Efficiency Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Windows, Roofs, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Reflective Roofs, LED Lighting 4/28/15 N/A N/A City of San Marcos Electric Utility City of San Marcos - Distributed Generation Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small) 4/17/15 10/14/11 N/A City of Sunset Valley City of Sunset Valley - PV Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 4/17/15 N/A N/A City of Sunset Valley City of Sunset Valley - Solar Water Heating Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 4/17/15 N/A N/A College Station Utilities College Station Utilities - Residential Energy Back II Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, Air conditioners 4/18/17 N/A N/A CoServ CoServ - Solar Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 4/20/15 1/1/11 N/A 
Energy Rebate 
CoServe Electric Cooperative CoServ Electric Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Dishwasher, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, Pool Pumps, LED Lighting 6/8/15 9/1/09 N/A CPS Energy CPS Energy - Solar Hot Water Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 3/15/17 N/A N/A CPS Energy CPS Energy - Solar PV Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 2/1/17 N/A N/A Denton Municipal Electric Denton Municipal Electric - GreenSense Solar PV/Thermal Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 1/31/17 N/A N/A 
Denton Municipal Electric Denton Municipal Electric - Residential GreenSense Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Windows, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, Insulation 1/31/17 N/A N/A 
Farmers Electric Cooperative Farmers Electric Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows 1/26/17 N/A N/A Garland Power & Light Garland Power & Light - Solar Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 2/8/16 N/A N/A Guadalupe Valley Electric Cooperative Guadalupe Valley Electric Cooperative - Renewable Energy Rebates Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small) 4/20/15 N/A N/A 
Guadalupe Valley Electric Cooperative Guadalupe Valley Electric Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE 6/9/15 N/A N/A 
New Braunfels Utilities New Braunfels Utilities - Energy Efficiency and Water Conservation Rebate Programs Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Clothes Washers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Other EE, LED Lighting 1/31/17 N/A N/A New Braunfels Utilities New Braunfels Utilities - Residential Solar Water Heater Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 4/17/15 N/A N/A 
Rebate Program 
Oncor Electric Delivery Oncor Electric Delivery - Commercial and Industrial Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Windows, Roofs, Motor VFDs, Processing and Manufacturing Equipment, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Reflective Roofs, LED Lighting 4/20/15 N/A N/A Oncor Electric Delivery Oncor Electric Delivery - Solar Photovoltaic Standard Offer Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics 6/13/16 N/A N/A Pedernales Electric Cooperative Pedernales Electric Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps, Air conditioners 1/31/17 N/A N/A Texas Gas Service Texas Gas Service - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air 6/2/15 N/A N/A 
Rebate Program sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Other EE, Tankless Water Heater Texas Gas Service Texas Gas Service - Residential Solar Water Heating Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 4/16/15 N/A N/A 
Texas-New Mexico Power Company Texas-New Mexico Power Company - SCORE/CitySmart, Commercial Solutions, and Small Business Programs Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Roofs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, LED Lighting 11/21/16 1/1/14 N/A 
N/A TXU - Commercial Energy Efficiency Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Roofs, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Vending Machine Controls, Reflective Roofs, Tankless Water Heater 6/3/15 N/A N/A United Cooperative Services United Cooperative Services - Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Heat 6/2/15 N/A N/A 
Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program recovery, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE 
Xcel Energy Xcel Energy - Residential and Hard-to-Reach Standard Offer Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE 4/27/15 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
UTAH Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Programs are administered at the local level Local Option - Industrial Facilities and Development Bonds Bond Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Daylighting, Equipment Insulation, Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Compressed air, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Other EE, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, LED Lighting 5/9/16 N/A N/A Utah Governor's Office of Energy Development Alternative Energy Development Incentive (Corporate) Corporate Tax Credit Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Wind 3/9/16 5/12/09 N/A 
(Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 
State Energy Program, State Tax Commission Renewable Energy Systems Tax Credit (Corporate) Corporate Tax Credit Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Landfill Gas, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion 5/31/17 N/A N/A Utah Governor's Office of Economic Development Alternative Energy Manufacturing Tax Credit Industry Recruitment/Support Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 3/23/16 5/12/09 N/A 
N/A Commercial PACE Financing PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Equipment Insulation, 5/31/17 N/A N/A 
Lighting, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Roofs, Custom/Others pending approval, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Other Distributed Generation Technologies 
Utah Governor's Office of Energy Development Alternative Energy Development Incentive (Personal) Personal Tax Credit Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 3/9/16 5/12/09 N/A State Energy Program, State Tax Commission Renewable Energy Systems Tax Credit (Personal) Personal Tax Credit Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, 5/31/17 N/A N/A 
Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Landfill Gas, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use 
Questar Gas Questar Gas - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Pool Heating, Clothes Washers, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Other EE, Tankless Water Heater 2/2/16 N/A N/A 
Questar Gas Questar Gas - Residential Solar Assisted Water Heating Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Pool Heating 5/27/16 N/A N/A 
Rocky Mountain Power Rocky Mountain Power - wattsmart New Homes Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Windows, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, LED Lighting 8/21/15 N/A N/A 
Utah State Tax Commission Alternative Energy Sales Tax Exemption Sales Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Municipal Solid Waste, Fuel Cells using Non-Renewable Fuels, Wind (Small), Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 3/9/16 7/1/04 6/30/27 (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
VERMONT Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Vermont Electric Power Producers (VEPP) Inc. Standard Offer Program Feed-in Tariff Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Municipal Solid Waste, Landfill Gas, Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 5/19/16 9/30/09 N/A 
Vermont Agricultural Credit Corporation (VACC) Agricultural Energy Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Equipment Insulation, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Steam-system upgrades, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Siding, Roofs, Agricultural Equipment, Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Reflective Roofs, LED Lighting 10/28/16 N/A N/A Vermont Economic Development Authority (VEDA) Commercial Energy Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, 10/28/16 N/A N/A 
Equipment Insulation, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Steam-system upgrades, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Siding, Roofs, Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels, Reflective Roofs, LED Lighting 
Vermont Economic Development Authority (VEDA) Small Business Energy Loan Program Loan Program Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Equipment Insulation, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Steam-system upgrades, Compressed air, Programmable Thermostats, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Siding, Roofs, Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable 10/28/16 N/A N/A 
Fuels, Reflective Roofs, LED Lighting 
Programs administered locally Local Option - Property Assessed Clean Energy PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Daylighting, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat recovery, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Motors, Motor VFDs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 11/4/16 N/A N/A Green Mountain Power Corporation GMP Cow Power Performance-Based Incentive Anaerobic Digestion 8/23/17 N/A N/A Green Mountain Power GMP Solar Power Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 10/27/16 7/1/08 N/A Vermont Department of Taxes Investment Tax Credit Personal Tax Credit Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 3/16/17 1/1/09 N/A 
N/A Local Option - Property Tax Exemption Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion, 5/23/17 N/A N/A 
Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels Department of Taxes Uniform Capacity Tax and Exemption for Solar Property Tax Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 5/23/17 1/1/13 N/A Burlington Electric Department Burlington Electric Department - Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Programmable Thermostats, Other EE, Pool Pumps 4/25/17 N/A N/A Efficiency Vermont HVAC Equipment Rebate Program Rebate Program Biomass, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motor VFDs, Other EE 8/23/17 N/A N/A Efficiency Vermont Residential Heating Systems Rebate Program Rebate Program Biomass, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps 8/24/17 N/A N/A Renewable Energy Resource Center Small-Scale Renewable Energy Incentive Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Biomass 5/26/17 N/A N/A 
N/A Renewable Energy Systems Sales Tax Exemption Sales Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion, Fuel Cells using Renewable Fuels 11/10/16 1/26/99 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)     
VIRGINIA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Arlington County Arlington County - Green Building Incentive Program Green Building Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Daylighting, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 11/22/16 N/A N/A 
Virginia Department of Treasury Commonwealth's Energy Leasing Program Leasing Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Equipment Insulation, Lighting, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Siding, Motors, Custom/Others pending approval, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use, Other Distributed Generation Technologies 11/6/14 N/A N/A Virginia Resource Authority Energy Project and Equipment Financing Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal 11/7/14 N/A N/A 
Electric, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Custom/Others pending approval, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Wind (Small), Geothermal Direct-Use N/A Small Business & Non-Profit Loan Program Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All) 7/7/14 N/A N/A N/A TVA Partner Utilities - Energy Right Heat Pump Program Loan Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps 5/9/17 N/A N/A 
N/A VirginiaSAVES Green Community Loan Program Loan Program Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Clothes Washers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling Fan, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Combined Heat & Power, Compressed air, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Building Insulation, 11/2/15 9/2/15 N/A 
Agricultural Equipment, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Yes; specific technologies not identified, Insulation, Hydroelectric (Small), Food Service Equipment, Anaerobic Digestion, Other Distributed Generation Technologies, Commercial Cooking Equipment, Data Center Equipment, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment Domion Virginia Power Dominion Virginia Power - Solar Purchase Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 3/12/15 6/20/13 6/20/18 Tennessee Valley Authority TVA - Green Power Providers Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 6/2/15 10/1/12 N/A Tennessee Valley Authority TVA - Mid-Sized Renewable Standard Offer Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Anaerobic Digestion 6/18/15 10/10/10 N/A Tennessee Valley Authority TVA - Solar Solutions Initiative Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 6/4/15 N/A N/A Virginia Department of Mines, Minerals, and Energy Commercial Solar Property Tax Exemption Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Solar Pool Heating 3/18/16 N/A N/A 
Virginia Department of Mines, Minerals, and Energy Local Option - Residential Property Tax Exemption for Solar Property Tax Incentive Solar - Passive, Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics 11/7/14 N/A N/A 
N/A Local Option- Renewable Energy Machinery and Tools Property Tax Exemption Property Tax Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Municipal Solid Waste, Combined Heat & Power, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Anaerobic Digestion, Microturbines 4/9/15 7/1/15 N/A 
Dominion Dominion Virginia Power - Non-Residential Energy Efficiency Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Duct/Air sealing, Windows, Motor VFDs, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE, Vending Machine Controls, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 3/25/15 N/A N/A 
N/A TVA Partner Utilities - eScore Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Duct/Air sealing, Windows, Doors, Insulation 8/31/17 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)    
WASHINGTON Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date N/A Renewable Energy Cost Recovery Incentive Payment  Feed-in Tariff Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 5/18/17 8/31/06 6/30/20 Washington State Department of Commerce Energy Efficiency and Solar Grants Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Lighting, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, LED Lighting 8/25/16 N/A N/A Pacific Power Pacific Power - Blue Sky Community Project Funds Grant Program Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Tidal, Wave, Hydroelectric (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 3/16/16 N/A N/A 
Washington Department of Commerce Evergreen Sustainable Development Standard for Affordable Housing Green Building Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Caulking/Weather-stripping, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building 12/3/15 N/A N/A Washington Economic Development Finance Authority and Department of Commerce Renewable Energy Manufacturing Program Industry Recruitment/Support Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Hydroelectric, Municipal Solid Waste, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Ocean Thermal, Geothermal Direct-Use, Anaerobic 5/20/16 N/A N/A 
Digestion, Other Distributed Generation Technologies Clark PUD Clark Public Utilities - Solar Energy Equipment Loan Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Solar Pool Heating 2/5/16 N/A N/A Okanogon County PUD Conservation Department Okanogan PUD - Conservation Loan Program Loan Program Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Lighting, Heat pumps, Compressed air, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Doors, Motors, Other EE, LED Lighting 5/12/15 N/A N/A 
N/A WSHFC Sustainable Energy Program Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Combined Heat & Power, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Custom/Others pending approval, Wind (Small), Other Distributed Generation Technologies 3/15/17 N/A N/A Chelan County Public Utility District Chelan County PUD - Sustainable Natural Alternative Power Producers Program Performance-Based Incentive Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 6/19/15 N/A N/A Orcas Power & Light Cooperative Orcas Power & Light - MORE Green Power Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Wind (Small), Hydroelectric (Small) 6/19/15 7/1/11 N/A Clark Public Utilities Clark Public Utilities - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, 1/6/16 N/A N/A 
Rebate Program Building Insulation, Windows, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, Other EE Clark PUD Clark Public Utilities - Solar Water Heater Rebate Rebate Program Solar Water Heat 2/5/16 N/A N/A Cowlitz County Public Utility District Cowlitz County PUD - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Windows, Insulation, LED Lighting 7/8/15 N/A N/A 
Inland Power & Light Company Inland Power & Light Company - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Comprehensive Measures/Whole Building, LED Lighting 1/14/16 N/A N/A 
Pacific Power Pacific Power - wattsmart Business Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Building Insulation, Windows, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Food Service Equipment, Personal Computing Equipment, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment 8/26/15 N/A N/A Puget Sound Energy Puget Sound Energy - Residential Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, 3/24/17 N/A N/A 
Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Other EE, LED Lighting Snohomish County PUD Snohomish County PUD No 1 - Build with Energy Star Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, Heat pumps 4/22/16 N/A N/A Snohomish County PUD Snohomish County PUD No 1 - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Lighting, Heat pumps, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Other EE, LED Lighting 5/16/16 N/A N/A Snohomish County Public Utility District Snohomish County PUD No 1 - Solar Express Rebate Program Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 6/18/15 N/A N/A Washington State Department of Revenue Renewable Energy Sales and Use Tax Exemption Sales Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Tidal, Wave, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 5/18/17 7/1/09 N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
WEST VIRGINIA Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date West Virginia Division of Energy Tax Exemption for Wind Energy Generation Corporate Tax Exemption Wind (All), Wind (Small) 5/29/15 N/A N/A West Virginia Division of Energy Special Assessment for Wind Energy Systems Property Tax Incentive Wind (All), Wind (Small) 5/29/15 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)      
WISCONSIN Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date Chicago Bridge & Iron Renewable Energy Competitive Incentive Program Grant Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Thermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Anaerobic Digestion 3/15/17 N/A N/A Summit Credit Union City of Milwaukee - Milwaukee Shines Solar Financing Loan Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Photovoltaics 4/1/15 7/28/11 N/A The Wisconsin Economic Development Corporation and The Wisconsin Department of Administration Clean Energy Manufacturing Revolving Loan Fund Loan Program Biomass, Other EE, Anaerobic Digestion 4/3/15 N/A N/A 
River Falls Municipal Utilities River Falls Municipal Utilities - Renewable Energy Finance Program PACE Financing Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Geothermal Electric, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Geothermal Heat Pumps, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Wind (Small) 6/25/15 N/A N/A Madison Gas & Electric Madison Gas & Electric - Clean Power Partner Solar Buyback Program Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 7/13/15 N/A N/A River Falls Municipal Utilities River Falls Municipal Utilities - Distributed Solar Tariff Performance-Based Incentive Solar Photovoltaics 7/8/15 N/A N/A Wisconsin Department of Revenue Biogas, Solar, and Wind Energy Property Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Electric, 12/15/15 N/A N/A 
Equipment Exemption Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 
Barron Electric Cooperative Barron Electric Cooperative - ENERGY STAR Appliance and Energy Efficient Lighting Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Other EE, LED Lighting 3/30/15 N/A N/A 
Eau Claire Energy Cooperative Eau Claire Energy Cooperative - Non-Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Ceiling Fan, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Motor VFDs, Agricultural Equipment, Other EE, LED Lighting 4/6/15 N/A N/A 
Eau Claire Energy Cooperative Eau Claire Energy Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Motor VFDs, Other EE, LED Lighting 3/30/15 N/A N/A Marshfield Reward Marshfield Utilities - Heat Pump Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Heat pumps 3/30/15 N/A N/A N/A Multifamily Energy Savings Program (Existing Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, 3/15/17 N/A N/A 
Buildings and New Construction) Equipment Insulation, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Furnaces, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Building Insulation, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Vending Machine Controls, LED Lighting, Tankless Water Heater Chicago Bridge & Iron Renewable Rewards Program Rebate Program Solar Photovoltaics, Geothermal Heat Pumps 3/20/17 1/1/17 N/A 
Riverland Energy Cooperative Riverland Energy Cooperative - Commercial and Industrial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Boilers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Compressed air, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Motor VFDs, Agricultural Equipment, Other EE, LED Lighting 6/25/15 N/A N/A 
Riverland Energy Cooperative Riverland Energy Cooperative - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Dishwasher, Refrigerators/Freezers, Dehumidifiers, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. 7/7/15 N/A N/A 
Systems/Building Controls, Other EE, LED Lighting Wisconsin Department of Revenue Renewable Energy Sales Tax Exemptions Sales Tax Incentive Solar Water Heat, Solar Space Heat, Solar Thermal Process Heat, Solar Photovoltaics, Wind (All), Biomass, Landfill Gas, Solar Pool Heating, Wind (Small), Anaerobic Digestion 7/13/15 N/A N/A (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)  
WYOMING Administrator Name Type Technologies Last Updated Start Date End Date 
Black Hills Energy Black Hills Energy - Commercial Energy Efficiency Programs Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Motors, Motor VFDs, Custom/Others pending approval, LED Lighting 4/7/16 N/A N/A Black Hills Energy Black Hills Energy - Residential Customer Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Lighting, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Other EE 4/6/16 N/A N/A 
Carbon Power & Light, Inc. Carbon Power & Light - Residential and Commercial Energy Efficiency Rebate Program Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Water Heaters, Heat pumps, Motors, Other EE 10/26/15 N/A N/A 
Questar Gas Questar Gas - Residential Energy Efficiency Rebate Programs Rebate Program Solar Water Heat, Solar Pool Heating, Clothes Washers, Water Heaters, Furnaces, Boilers, Programmable Thermostats, Duct/Air sealing, Building Insulation, Windows, Other EE, Tankless Water Heater 2/2/16 N/A N/A Rocky Mountain Power Rocky Mountain Power - wattsmart Rebate Program Geothermal Heat Pumps, Clothes Washers, Refrigerators/Freezers, Water Heaters, 8/21/15 N/A N/A 
Business Program Lighting, Lighting Controls/Sensors, Chillers, Heat pumps, Air conditioners, Heat recovery, Programmable Thermostats, Energy Mgmt. Systems/Building Controls, Building Insulation, Windows, Roofs, Motors, Motor VFDs, Agricultural Equipment, Custom/Others pending approval, Other EE, Food Service Equipment, Vending Machine Controls, Reflective Roofs, LED Lighting, Commercial Refrigeration Equipment (Database Of State Incentives For Renewables & Efficiency, North Carolina Clean Energy Technology Center, North Carolina State University, Accessed 11/29/17)   
REPORT: MASSIVE SUBS IDIES BEING SHELLED OUT FOR RENEWABLE EN ERGY  
3:31 PM 04/13/2018 | ENERGY  | Jason Hopkins | Energy Investigator  
A new report reveals the billions of dollars in subsidies being quietly shelled out to 
renewable energy technologies, all on the back of the American taxpayer.  
The renewable industry’s dependence on government subsidies has been well 
documented, but a rece nt American Rising Squared  investigation  painted a more 
clear picture of just how much state and federal taxpayer money is being spe nt to 
prop up solar and wind energy companies. Among the key findings: billions in 
financial aid from the federal government and a burgeoning number of programs at 
the state level to keep otherwise -noncompetitive renewable energy companies afloat.  
At the n ational level,  U.S. taxpayers were charged over $13 billion through federal 
expenditures relating to renewable energy and energy efficiency in 2016 alone.  
Policy aimed at supporting renewable energy production has proliferated in recent 
time. Eight states have established renewable goals and nearly 30  have renewable 
portfolio standards. Minnesota tops the list when it comes to subsidy programs for 
renewable energy technologies, having more than any other state in the country. 
Additionally, there are a total  of 86 different programs offering financial incentives for 
solar energy, with California managing 25 programs alone.  
“Billions in federal and state spending for this elaborate tapestry of mismatched, 
ineffective, redundant, and short -sighted programs cont inue to move forward 
without critical or objective review. The plain fact is that America’s bureaucrats 
continue to throw billions of taxpayer dollars toward renewable energy without 
asking the hard and inconvenient questions,” an America Rising Squared 
Friday statement noted  about the findings.  
The investigation also dives into the process required to operate “clean” energy. F or 
example, the manufacturing of many renewable energy products requires the 
extraction of rare earth metals such as Gallium, Indium and Tellurium. The process to 
extract and refine rare earth materials — elements necessary in the construction of 
electric vehicle batteries, solar panels and wind turbines — is extremely energy 
intensive.  
“The process of shaping America’s energy policy, particularly when it comes to 
renewable energy and their connection to critical materials like rare earth, lacks the 
essenti al simplicity for average Americans to understand. The government’s 
objectives appear primarily political, with neither clear ‘big picture’ goals nor the 
strong leadership needed to chart a logical path forward,” the America Rising Squared 
statement contin ued.  
The findings come as more reports indicate the hidden costs of renewable energy.  
A 2017 study initiated by the Montana legislature  reve aled  net metering customers in 
the state were being overcompensated for their solar energy by about three times 
the market value — that price falling on the backs of non -net metering customers.  
The New Jersey legislature overwhelmingly passed a bill on Thu rsday allocating more 
money into the renewable energy industry,  with a goal  of making solar, wind and 
other renewables account for 50 percent of the state’s tot al energy use by 2030.  
Follow Jason on  Twitter . 
Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provi de a large 
audience . For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact  licensing@dailycallernewsfoundation.org . 
 
If Solar Panels Are So Clean,  
Why Do They Produce So Much Toxic Waste?  
 
Michael Shellenberger      Energy  I write about energy and the environment   Contributor  
Bell Labs,  1954. Solar Panel Waste, 2014  BELL LABS & PV CYCLE  
The last few years have seen growing concern over what happens to solar panels at the end of 
their life. Consider the following statements:  
 The problem of solar panel disposal “will explode with full force in two or three 
decades and wreck the environment”  because it “is a huge amount of waste and 
they are not easy to recycle.”  
 “The reality is that there is a problem now, and it’s only going to get larger, 
expanding as rapidly as the PV industry expanded 10 years ago.”  
 “Contrary to previous assumptions, pol lutants such as lead or carcinogenic cadmium 
can be almost completely washed out of the fragments of solar modules over a 
period of several months, for example by rainwater.”  
Were these statements made by the right -wing Heritage Foundation? Koch -funded glo bal 
warming deniers? The editorial board of the  Wall Street Journal ? 
None of the above. Rather, the quotes come from  a senior Chinese solar  official,  a 40-year 
veteran of the U.S. solar industry , and  research scientists  with the German  Stuttgart Institute for 
Photovoltaics.  
With few environmental journalists  willing to report on much of anythin g other than the good 
news about renewables, it’s been left to environmental scientists and solar industry leaders to 
raise the alarm.  
“I’ve been working in solar since 1976 and that’s part of my guilt,” the veteran  solar 
developer  told Solar Power World  last year. “I’ve been involved with millions of solar panels 
going into the fi eld, and now they’re getting old.”  
The Trouble With Solar Waste  
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) in 2016  estimated there was about 
250,000 metric tonnes of solar panel waste in the world at the end of t hat year.  IRENA 
projected  that this amount could reach 78  million  metric tonnes by 2050.  
Solar panels often contain lead, cadmium, and ot her toxic chemicals that cannot be removed 
without breaking apart the entire panel.  “Approximately 90% of most PV modules are made up 
of glass,”  notes  San Jose State environmental studies professor Dustin Mulvaney. “However, 
this glass often cannot be recycled as float glass due to impurities. Common problematic 
impurities in glass include plastics, lead, cadmium and antimony.”  
Researchers with the Elect ric Power Research Institute (EPRI)  undertook a study  for U.S. solar -
owning utilities to plan for end -of-life and concluded that solar panel “ disposal in “regular 
landfills [is] not recommended in case modules break and toxic materials leach into the soil” 
and so “disposal is potentially a major issue.”  
California is in the process of  determining how to  divert solar panels  from landfills, which is 
where  they currently go, at the end of their life.  
California's Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC), which is implementing the new 
regulations,  held a meeting last August  with solar and waste industry  representatives to discuss 
how to deal with the issue of solar waste. At the meeting, the representatives from industry and 
DTSC al l acknowledged how difficult it would be to test to determine whether a solar panel 
being removed  would be classified as hazardous waste or not.  
The DTSC described building a database where solar panels and their toxicity could be tracked 
by their model nu mbers, but it's not clear DTSC will do this.  
"The theory behind the regulations is to make [disposal] less burdensome," explained Rick 
Brausch of DTSC. "Putting it as universal waste eliminates the testing requirement."  
The fact that cadmium can be washed out of solar modules by rainwater  is increasingly a 
concern for local environmentalists like the Concerned Citizens of Fawn Lake in Virginia, 
where a  6,350 acre solar farm  to partly power  Microsoft data centers  is being proposed.  
“We estimate there are 100,000 pounds of cadmium contained in the 1.8 million panels,” Sean 
Fogarty of the group told me. “Leaching from broken panels damaged during natural events — 
hail sto rms, tornadoes, hurricanes, earthquakes, etc. — and at decommissioning is a big 
concern.”   
There is real -world precedent for this concern. A tornado in 2015 broke 200,000 solar modules 
at southern California solar farm Desert Sunlight.  
"Any modules that w ere broken into small bits of glass had to be swept from the 
ground,"  Mulvaney  explained, "so lots of rocks and dirt got mixed in that would not work in 
recycling plants that are designed to take modules. These were the cadmium -based modules that 
failed  [hazardous]  waste tests, so were treated at a  [hazardous] waste facility. But about 70 
percent of the modules were actually sent to recycling, and the recycled metals are in new 
panels today."  
And when Hurricane Maria hit Puerto Rico last September, the nati on’s second largest solar 
farm, responsible for 40 percent of the island’s solar energy,  lost a majority of its panels.  
Many experts urge mandatory recycling. The main finding promoted by  IRENA's in its  2016 
report  was that,  “If fully injected back into the economy, the value of the recovered material 
[from used s olar panels] could exceed USD 15 billion by 2050.”  
But IRENA’s study did not compare the value of recovered material to the cost of new 
materials and admitted that “Recent studies agree that PV material availability is not a major 
concern in the near term,  but critical materials might impose limitations in the long term.”  
They might, but today recycling costs more than the economic value of the materials recovered, 
which is why most solar panels end up in landfills. “The absence of valuable metals/materials  
produces economic losses,”  wrote a team of scientists in the  International Journal of 
Photoenergy  in their study of solar panel recycling  last year , and “Results are coherent with the 
literature.”  
Chinese and Japanese experts agree.  “If a recycling plant carries out every step by the book,” a 
Chinese expert told  The South China Morning Post , “their products can end up being more 
expensive than new raw materials.”  
Toshiba Environmental Solutions  told Nikkei Asian Review last year  that, 
Low demand for scrap and the high cost of employing workers to disassemble the aluminum 
frames and other components will make it difficult  to create a profitable business unless 
recycling companies can charge several times more than the target set by [Japan’s environment 
ministry].  
Can Solar Producers Take Responsibility?  
In 2012, First Solar  stopped putting a share of its revenues  into a fund for long -term waste 
management. "Customers have the option to use our services when the panels get to the end of 
life stage," a  spokesperson told  Solar Power World . “We’ll do the recycling, and they’ll pay the 
price at that time.”  
Or they won’t. “Either it becomes economical or it gets mandated .” said EPRI’s Cara Libby . 
“But I’ve heard that it will have to be mandated because it won’t ever be economical.”  
Last July, Washington became the first U.S. state to require manufacturers se lling solar panels 
to have a plan to recycle. But the legislature did not require manufacturers to pay a fee for 
disposal. “Washington -based solar panel manufacturer Itek Energy assisted with the bill’s 
writing,”  noted Solar Power World.  
The problem with putting the responsibility for recycling or long -term storage of solar panels on 
manufacturers, says  the insurance actuary Milliman , is that it increases the risk of more 
financial failures like the kinds that afflicted the solar industry over the las t decade.  
[A]ny mechanism that finances the cost of recycling PV modules with current revenues is not 
sustainable. This method raises the possibility of bankruptcy down the road by shifting today’s 
greater burden of ‘caused’ costs into the future. When gro wth levels off then PV producers 
would face rapidly increasing recycling costs as a percentage of revenues.  
Since 2016 , Sungevity,  Beamreach, Verengo Solar, SunEdison, Yingli Green Energy,  Solar 
World, and Suniva  have gone bankrupt.  
The result of such bankruptcies is tha t the cost of managing or recycling PV waste will be born 
by the public. “In the event of company bankruptcies, PV module producers would no longer 
contribute to the recycling cost of their products,”  notes  Milliman, “leaving governments to 
decide how to deal with cleanup.”  
Governments of poor and developing nations are often not equipped to deal with an influx of 
toxic solar waste, exp erts say. German researchers at the Stuttgart Institute for 
Photovoltaics  warned  that poor and developing nations are at  higher risk of suffering the 
consequences.  
Dangers and hazards of toxins in photovoltaic modules appear particularly large in countries 
where there are no orderly waste management systems… Especially in less developed coun tries 
in the so -called global south, which are particularly predestined for the use of photovoltaics 
because of the high solar radiation, it seems highly problematic to use modules that contain 
pollutants.  
The attitude of some solar recyclers in China appe ars to feed this concern. “A sales manager of 
a solar power recycling company,” the  South China Morning New s reported, “believes there 
could be a way to dispose of China’s solar junk, nonetheless.”  
“We can sell them to Middle East… Our customers there make it very clear that they don’t want 
perfect or brand new panels. They just want them cheap… There, there is  lots of land to install a 
large amount of panels to make up for their low performance. Everyone is happy with the 
result.”  
In other words, there are firms that may advertise themselves as "solar panel recyclers" but 
instead  sell panels to a secondary mark ets in nations with less developed waste disposal 
systems. In the past, communities living near electronic waste dumps in Ghana, Nigeria, 
Vietnam,  Bangladesh, Pakistan, and India  have been  primary e -waste destinations . 
According to  a 2015 United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) report , somewhere between 
60 and 90 percent of electronic waste is illegally traded and dumped in poor nations. Writes 
UNEP:  
[T]housands of tonnes of e -waste are falsely dec lared as second -hand goods and exported from 
developed to developing countries, including waste batteries falsely described as plastic or 
mixed metal scrap, and cathode ray tubes and computer monitors declared as metal scrap.  
Unlike other forms of imported  e-waste, used solar panels can enter nations legally before 
eventually entering e -waste streams.  As the United Nation Environment Program notes , 
“loopholes in the current W aste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) Directives allow 
the export of e -waste from developed to developing countries (70% of the collected WEEE ends 
up in unreported and largely unknown destinations).”  
A Path Forward on Solar Panel Waste  
Perhaps the  biggest  problem with solar panel waste is that there is so much of it, and that's not 
going to change any time soon, for a basic physical reason:  sunlight is dilute and diffuse  and 
thus require  large collectors to capture and convert the sun's rays into electricity. Those large 
surface areas, in tur n, require  an order of magnitude more  in materials — whether today's toxic 
combination of glass, heavy metals, and rare earth elements,  or some new material in the future 
— than other energy sources.  
All of that waste creates a large quantity of material to track, which in turn requires   
coordinated,  overlapping, and different responses at the international, national, state, and local 
levels.  
The local level is where action to dispose of electr onic and toxic waste takes place, often under 
state mandates. In the past, differing state laws have motivated the U.S. Congress to put in place 
national regulations.  Industry often prefers to comply with a single national standard rather than 
multiple dif ferent state standards. And as the problem of the secondary market for solar shows, 
ultimately there needs to be some kind of international regulation.  
The first step is a fee on solar panel purchases to make sure that the cost of safely removing, 
recyclin g or storing solar panel waste is internalized into the price of solar panels and not 
externalized onto future taxpayers.  An obvious solution would be to impose a new fee on solar 
panels that would go into a federal disposal and decommissioning fund. The f unds would then, 
in the future, be dispensed to state and local governments to pay for the removal and recycling 
or long -term storage of solar panel waste.  The advantage of this fund over extended producer 
responsibility is that it would insure that solar panels are safely decommissioned, recycled, or 
stored over the long -term, even after solar manufacturers go bankrupt.  
Second, the federal government should encourage citizen enforcement of laws to 
decommission, store, or recycle solar panels so that they d o not end up in landfills. Currently, 
citizens have the right to file lawsuits against government agencies and corporations to force 
them to abide by various environmental laws, including ones that protect the public from toxic 
waste. Solar should be no di fferent.  Given the decentralized nature of solar energy production, 
and lack of technical expertise at the local level, it is especially important that the whole society 
be involved in protecting itself from exposure to dangerous toxins.  
“We have a County and State approval process over the next couple months,” Fogarty of 
Concerned Citizens of Fawn Lake told me, “but it has become clear that local authorities have 
very little technical breadth to analyze the impacts of such a massive solar power plant.”  
Lack of technical expertise can be a problem when solar developers like Sustainable Power 
Group, or sPower,  incorrectly claim  that the cadmium in its panels is not water soluble. That 
claim has been contradicted by the previously -mentioned Stuttgart  research scientists  who 
found cadmium from solar panels “can be almost completely washed out...over a period of 
several months...by rainwater.”  
Third, the United Nations Environment Programme’s  Global Partnership for Waste 
Management , as part of its  International Environmental Partnership Center ,  should more 
strictly mo nitor e -waste shipments and encourage nations importing used solar panels into 
secondary markets to impose a fee to cover the cost of recycling or long -term management. 
Such a recycling and waste management fund could help nations address their other e -waste 
problems while supporting the development of a new, high -tech industry in recycling solar 
panels.  
None of this will come quickly, or easily, and some solar industry executives will resist 
internalizing the cost of safely storing, or recycling,  solar  panel waste, perhaps for 
understandable reasons. They will rightly note that there are other kinds of electronic waste in 
the world. But it is notable that some new forms of electronic waste, namely smartphones like 
the iPhone, have in many cases replaced th ings like stereo systems, GPS devices, and alarm 
clocks and thus reduced their contribution to the e -waste stream. And no other electronics 
industry makes being “clean” its main selling point.  
Wise solar industry leaders can learn from the past and be proa ctive in seeking stricter 
regulation in accordance with growing scientific evidence that solar panels pose a risk of toxic 
chemical contamination. “If waste issues are not preemptively addressed,”  warns Mulvaney , 
“the industry risks repeating the disastrous environmental mistakes of the electronics industry.”  
If the industry responds with foresight, Mulvaney notes, i t could end up sparking clean 
innovation including “developing PV modules without hazardous inputs and recycled rare 
metals."  And that's something everyone can get powered up about.  
 Michael Shellenberger, President, Environmental Progress.  Time Magazine "Hero of the 
Environment."  
 
ENVIRONMENTALIST SOU NDS ALARM ON COMING WAVE OF TOXIC SOLAR PANEL WASTE  
2:31 PM 05/24/2018 | ENERGY  
Jason Hopkins | Energy Investigator  
A leading activist has raised concerns over the ecological impact of solar panels — a 
renewable energy technology widely considered to be harmless to the environment.  
Michael Shellenberger — the president of Environmental Progress, a nonprofit 
organization working to promote clean energy — detailed the real life impacts of 
discarded solar installation. Solar technolog y typically contains cadmium, lead and 
other toxic chemicals that can’t be extracted without taking apart the whole panel, 
resulting in entire solar panels being considered hazardous,  Shellenberger noted in a 
Wednesday  Forbes article . 
More specifically, these toxic chemicals become an environmental threat when solar 
panels reach thei r end -of-life stage and need to be disposed. Panels left in landfills 
may break apart and release toxic waste into the ground or even enter bodies of 
water. Solar panel disposal in “regular landfills [is] not recommended in case modules 
break and toxic mat erials leach into the soil,”  Electric Power Research Institute  
determined  in a 2016 study.  
There is growing concern over the possibility of ra inwater washing cadmium out of 
panels and into the environment. In Virginia, for example, a group of locals are 
pushing back against a proposal to construct  a 6,350 acre solar farm  in Spotsylvania 
County.   
 “We estimate there are 100,000 pounds of cadmium contained in the 1.8 million 
panels,” Sean Fogarty of Concerned Citizens of Fawn Lake st ated to Shellenberger. 
“Leaching from broken panels damaged during natural events — hail storms, 
tornadoes, hurricanes, earthquakes, etc. — and at decommissioning is a big concern.”  
Instances can occur where severe weather — such as a  tornado  in California and 
a hurricane  through Puerto Rico — decimate solar panel farms, potentially leaking 
chemicals into the ground.  
Virtually no one in media cares to discuss the solar industry’s negative effects on the 
environment, Shellen berger  also noted. “With few environmental journalists willing to 
report on much of anything other than the good news about renewables, it’s been left 
to environmental scientists and solar industry leaders to raise the alarm.”  
As a suggested solution, Shellenber ger entertained the idea of an added fee with 
solar panel purchases that can go toward the recycling and disposing of 
decommissioned panels. He also encouraged greater government involvement as to 
avoid the placement of solar installation into landfills.  
Previous studies have examined the solar industries’ effect on the environment. The 
process it takes to build renewable energy technology is extremely intensive, an April 
America Rising Squared  report  determined. The production of solar panels and wind 
turbines, America Rising found, requires the extraction of rare earth metals such as 
Indium, Gallium and Tellurium. Refining these rare minerals is extrem ely energy 
intensive.  
Issues relating to solar panel waste will only worsen as more Americans utilize the 
technology. Lured with promises of long -term financial gains and environmental 
benefits, a growing number of U.S. households are purchasing rooftop so lar 
installations. On May 9, California became the first state in the U.S. to  mandate  every 
new household have a solar panel. Environmental activists, li ke billionaire Tom Steyer, 
are funding national campaigns to promote renewable energy use. Such campaigns 
and government mandates are increasing renewable portfolio standards across the 
country.  
Follow Jason on  Twitter . 
Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provi de a large 
audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact  licensing@dailycallernewsfoundation.org . 
NEWS  > SPOKANE  
Newport smelter hearing draws skeptical crowd  
UPDATED: Tue., Sept. 18, 2018, 11:09 p.m.  
 
Thubten Semkye, a Buddhist nun from Sravasti Abbey near Newport, Washington, speaks out against the 
proposed silicon smelter while testifying Tuesday, Sept. 18, 2018 at a public meeting held by the Washington 
Department of Ecology at the Spokane Convention  Center. (Jesse Tinsley / The Spokesman -Review)  
 
By Becky Kramer  beckyk@spokesman.com (509) 459 -5466  
 
Buddhist nuns from Sravasti Abbey traveled to Spokane on T uesday evening to testify about a silicon 
smelter proposed south of Newport.  
“We’re deeply concerned about the emissions the smelter will pump into the atmosphere and the 
effect on people and the environment,” said Thubten Samten, one of the nuns.  
Heavy fo g and air inversions are already common around Newport, said Thubten Semkye, another 
member of the abbey.  
“We’ve got some of the most beautiful air in the country, and EPA will give them a lot of room to 
pollute,” Semkye told state officials.  
About 100 peo ple attended the meeting at the Spokane Convention Center, which gave area residents 
a chance to tell the state Department of Ecology what they think should be included in its 
environmental review of the smelter.  
The first draft of the review is expected t o be released next year, with a final version out in late 2019.  
The review will provide details about the smelter’s effect on the environment and nearby 
communities, including possible mitigation, said Brook Beeler, an Ecology Department 
spokeswoman. The s tate’s review must be completed before the smelter can get air quality and water 
discharge permits.  
The proposed smelter is a project of PacWest Silicon, a subsidiary of HiTest Sands, of Alberta. The 
company would ship silica mined in British Columbia to t he smelter, where it would be combined 
with wood chips, coal and charcoal at high temperatures to produce the metal.  
Low electricity prices attracted the company to Northeast Washington.  PacWest plans to build the 
smelter  on 188 acres south of Newport, adjacent to the Washington -Idaho border.  
PacWest expects to produce about 73,000 tons of silicon annually for solar panels and other uses. The 
smelter proposal qualified as a “project of statewide significance” and the company received 
$300,000 in state money to defray design costs.  
PacWest offic ials say the smelter will create about 400 construction jobs and employ up to 150 people 
once it’s operating.  
Scott Holstrom, business manager for Laborers’ International Union of North America Local 238, 
spoke in favor of the smelter. The union represents  about 1,000 Eastern Washington residents who 
work in trades.  
“This is viable jobs for the Newport area,” Holstrom said. “We’re interested in the jobs going union so 
we can uphold strong safety standards and prevailing wages.”  
“This is the first review,” h e added. “When they do the ecological study, the science will come out 
about the impact of the smelter.”  
But the crowd was mostly skeptical. A number of speakers expressed concern about the smelter’s 
effect on property values, withdrawal of groundwater fro m the Little Spokane River watershed for the 
plant and air emissions.  
According to a consultant’s report, the smelter could emit up to 766,000 tons of greenhouse gases 
annually, which would rank the smelter among the state’s top 15 carbon emitters. Company  officials, 
however, say the silicon’s eventual use in solar panels would offset the greenhouse gas emissions. The 
smelter would also release nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide and sulfur dioxide – components in 
smog and acid rain.  
“I’m not someone who comes  out to protest things, but it’s not a good situation,” said Dr. Renata 
Moon, a Spokane pediatrician.  
Industrial pollutants have an outsized effect on children, the elderly and people with chronic lung and 
heart conditions, she said. With kids, “their lung s are still developing,” she said.  
The Kalispel Tribe also opposes the smelter. Last year, the tribe’s council asked Gov. Jay Inslee to 
rescind the $300,000 state grant and work with the Kalispels on other types of economic 
development for the area.  
“If Ec ology chooses to move forward, you must do a very robust (environmental review),” Deane 
Osterman, executive director for the tribe’s natural resources department, told state officials.  
The smelter proposal is “ill -defined,” lacking critical information tha t would allow the tribe and the 
public to provide meaningful input, he said.  
The review must address human health, the deposit of air pollutants on the forest and local lakes, and 
the smelter’s effect on tourism in northeast Washington, Osterman said.  
Publ ic meetings on the smelter continue this week in Newport and Priest River.   
Written comments will be accepted  through Oct . 26.  
 
 
 
 
 
Report to the Joint Standing Committee on  
the Environment and Natural Resources  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
MAINE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRO NMENTAL PROTECTION  
17 State House Station | Augusta, Maine 04333 -0017  
www.maine.gov/dep             
Annual Product Stewardship Report  
January 2019  
Contacts  
 
Paula Clark  
Director, Division of Materials Management  
207-287-7718  
paula.m.clark@maine.gov  
 
Carole Cifrino  
Supervisor, Recycling Programs  
207-485-8160  
carole.a.cifrino@maine.gov  
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
1 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
Table of Contents  
 
 Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 2  
 Background ................................................................................................................................ ............ 4  
A. Basic components included in Maine’s Framework law .............................................................. 4  
B. Addi tional elements of successful EPR programs  ....................................................................... 5  
 Recommendations for changes to existing EPR laws  ................................................................ ...... 6  
A. Framework law – 38 M.R.S. chapter 18  ......................................................................................... 6  
B. Mercury lamps – 38 M.R.S. § 1672  ................................................................................................. 6  
C. Consumer batteries – 38 M.R.S. § 2165  ......................................................................................... 8  
D. Container redemption (“Bottle bill”) law – 38 M.R.S. chapter 33  ............................................. 9  
E. Cell phones - 38 M.R.S. § 2143 ..................................................................................................... 12 
 Candidate products for new EPR programs ................................................................ ................... 13 
A. Product stewardship for packaging .............................................................................................. 13 
1) Packaging meets four candidate criteria for stewardship program  ...................................... 14 
2) Key considerations in design of a packaging stewardship program .................................... 17 
B. Pharmaceuticals  ............................................................................................................................... 20 
C. Mattresses  ......................................................................................................................................... 21 
D. Carpet  ................................................................................................................................................ 22 
E. Solar panels ...................................................................................................................................... 24 
 Implementation status for Maine’s other EPR programs ................................ ............................. 26 
A. Electronic waste - 38 M.R.S. § 1610  ............................................................................................. 26 
B. Mercury auto switches – 38 M.R.S. § 1665-A ............................................................................. 27 
C. Mercury ther mostats -  38 M.R.S. § 1665-B ................................................................................ 28 
D. Architectural paint. 38 M.R.S. § 2144  ........................................................................................... 30 
E. Plastic bags.  38 M.R.S. § 1605 ...................................................................................................... 31 
 Conclusion ................................................................................................................................ ............ 31 
Appendix A – Proposed changes to Maine’s Product Stewardship law ............................................. 33 
Appendix B – Proposed changes to Maine’s Mercury-added Lamp law ............................................ 36 
Appendix C – Proposed replace ment for Maine’s rechargeable battery recycling law  ..................... 38 
Appendix D – Proposed changes to Maine’s Bottle Bill law ................................................................ 49 
Appendix E – Proposed changes to Maine’s cellular telephone law ................................................... 56 
Appendix F – Comments received on posted report ............................................................................ 57 
 
  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
2 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
 Introduction  
 
This is a report on the current implementation of product stewardship laws in the State of Maine, 
and opportunities for new product stewardship initiatives and improvements to existing programs to 
help achieve Maine’s waste reduction and recycling goals .  Product stewardship is a policy approach 
that can be used by governments and businesses to minimize the negative impacts of products and packagi ng throughout their lifecycle.  Manufacturers (a.k.a. producers) have the greatest ability to 
affect the life -cycle impacts of products, with distributors, retailers and consumers also having a role.  
Extended producer responsibility (EPR) is the term used  to describe laws that mandate 
responsiblities for manufacturers in the end-of-life managment of their products.    
Maine currently has 9 laws related to the end -of-life management of specific  consumer products that 
may be considered to be product stewardship laws.  Additionally, in 2009 Maine enacted 38 M.R. S. Chapter 18 , Product Stewardship , which sets a framework of elements to be included in new product 
stewardship programs (as well as the requirements for this annual report to the Joint Standing Commi ttee on the Environment and Natural Resources).   The Department is recommending  
statutory changes to the Product Stewardship  framework law and to 4 of the product- specific laws  to 
improve program performance and/or create efficiencies in implementation :    
 
- Framework law.  38 M.R.S. Chapter 18, Maine’s Product Stewardship
 “framework law” delineates 
required components for new EPR programs at 38 M.R.S. § 1776, Product Stewardship Program 
Requirements .  Based on Maine’s experience in implementing its great variety of EPR laws, it is 
now apparent the framework law does not include adequate provisions to ensure 
implementation of effective programs.  The department is proposing additions to the framework law to address these deficiencies.  
 
- Mercury lamps .  38 M.R.S. § 1672, Maine’s Mercury -added lamps  law, requires manufacture rs to 
establish and operate a recycling program for mercury -added lamps (fluorescents and HIDs) 
generated by households (see section 4 of the law).  This law was enacted prior to the pr ogram 
component requirements in the Product Stewardship  framework law. The resulting program has 
consistently underperformed, with recycling rates never exceeding  13%.  Revising this law to 
address all required components for new product stewardship progra ms will help drive better 
program performance.   
 
- Beverage containers .  Maine’s Bottle Bill, 38 M.R.S. Chapter 33, Manufacturers, Distributors, and 
Dealers of Beverage Containers , (originally enacted in Title 22 in 1976) establishes responsibilities for 
the collection and recycling of most plastic, metal  and glass beverage containers sold in the s tate.  
During 2018, t he Legislature’s Office of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability 
(OPEGA)  completed a review of this  program.  The report  resulting from this review 
(http://legislature.maine.gov/doc/2316 ) includes a number of recommendations requiring 
legislative consideration.  These  include: comprehensive data reporting to assess program 
performance and inform policymaking; clarification of BABLO’s commingling status and expectations for unredeemed deposits; opportunities to improve program design; and 
clarification of the intended benefits of commingling and updates to maximize its impact.  The 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
3 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
Department is recommending changes to address many of the issues identified in the OPEGA 
report.    
 
- Dry-cell mercuric oxide, rechargeable nickel -cadmium, and rec hargeable sealed lead 
acid batteries .  38 M.R.S. § 216 5, Regulation of certain dry -cell batteries  (enacted in 1991) requires 
manufacturers of certain battery types to provide a system for the recycling of their batteries 
from certain users.  The Department recommends that this law be repealed and replaced with an 
EPR law covering  all consumer battery types.   
 
- Cellular telephones .  38 M.R.S. § 2143 Maine’s C ellular telephone recycling  law requires 
retailers to accept, at no cost, used cell phones at retail locations, and annual reporting by cellular 
telephone service providers on their recycling efforts in Maine.  The Department recommends 
repeal of the reporting requirement as the data  reported reflects only a portion of cell phone 
recycling so is not useful for assessing program performance.   
The department is not recommending statutory changes to these other current ly-implemented 
programs:  
 
- Electronic waste (e- waste) .  38 M.R.S. § 1610, Maine’s Electronic Waste  law, was initially 
enacted in 2003 to manage TVs and other electronics with video displays greater than 4” 
diagonally from households only.  It was subsequently amended to add game consoles and 
desktop printers and to manage the covered electronics from small businesses (100 or fewer 
employees)  and K- 12 schools.   
 
- Mercury auto -switches .  38 M.R.S. § 1665- A, Maine’s Motor Vehicle Components  law, set up a 
system by -which motor vehicle manufacturer s pay for the collection and proper disposal of 
mercury auto -switches as the vehicles containing them are removed from service.   
 
- Mercury thermostats .  38 M.R.S. § 1665- B, Maine’s Mercury -added Thermostats  law requires that 
manufacturers that sold mercury-added thermostats into the state pay for the collection and 
disposal of mercury-added thermostats and to  provide a financial incentive with a minimum 
value of $5 for the return of each mercury- added thermostat to an established recycling 
collection point. 
 
- Architectural paint . 38 M.R.S. § 2144, Maine’s Stewardship Program for Architectural Paint  law 
requires that manufacturers establish and maintain a statewide system to collect, transport, 
recycle and process post -consumer paint.  
 
- Plastic bags.  38 M.R.S. § 1605, Plastic bags; recycling  law requires retailers that use plastic bags to 
have a receptacle within 20 feet of their store entrance to collect used plastic bags and to ensure the bags are collected.   
 
Additionally, the report includes discussion of other products that may warrant  future  legislative 
consideration as candidates for new EPR programs, including: 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
4 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
 
- Packaging  
- Pharmaceuticals  
- Mattresses  
- Carpet  
- Solar panels 
 
 Background  
 
Product stewardship is a policy approach that can be used by governments and businesses to 
minimize the negative impacts of products throughout their lifecycle.  Manufacturers (a.k.a. 
producers) have the greatest ability to affect the life -cycle impacts of products, with distributors, 
retailers and consumers also having a role.  Extended producer responsibility (EPR) is the term used to describe laws that mandate responsiblities for manufacturers in the end-of- life managment of 
their products.     
A. Basic components included in Maine’s Framework law  
 
38 M.R.S. § 1776, Product Stewardship Program Requirements  delineates t he basic components for new 
EPR program s.  These include: 
 
• Identification of participating entities, and their roles and responsibiliti es 
• Identification of covered product(s)   
• Convenient and adequate collection system, including no fee at collection  
• Effective education and outreach  
• A sales ban on products from non-compliant manufacturers 
• Immunity from antitrust liability for participating manufacturers  
• Requirements for the program plan, including management standards and submittal  of the 
plan for review and approval by the Department  
• Program performance goals  
• Program performance monitoring and assessment 
• A financing mechanism to fund “collection, transportation and reuse, recycling or 
disposition of the relevant product” 
• A mechanism for amending the approved program  
 
Based on the Department’s experience with implementing EPR programs to date, a program plan 
design ed only to meet the basic requirements in the Product Stewardship  framewo rk law  will not be 
guaranteed to be successful , i.e., it has a good likelihood of not achiev ing substantial collection rates.  
Most notably, the Product Stewardship  framework law  does not  include meaningful standards for 
program performance , any mechanism for the Department to require  program improvements or  
improved program performance, nor any reporting or oversight agency review of annual program 
budgets. 
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
5 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
B. Additiona l elements of successful EPR  programs  
 
Based on experience in Maine and elsewhere, there are certain elements that contribute to an  EPR  
program  achieving  high rates of diversion from disposal.   The  following elements are  key to 
achieving high collection rates but currently are not included in Maine’s Product Stewardship  
framework law .  
 
1) Minimum standards for producers’ or stewardship organization staffing , e.g., a  minimum ½ -
fulltime equivalent ( FTE) to recruit, train and monitor collection sites.  For example, the 
PaintCare program has employed 1-FTE to perform these functions for its program in 
Maine and Vermont since the inception of their program.  This level of staffing has ensured 
that collection sites receive the support they need to safely and adequately implement the 
program as confirmed by Department staff field visits.      
 
2) Adequate financing for implementation and operations, including funding for regulatory oversight.  Payment into the system to  finance end -of-life management  must  be sufficient to 
cover materials management costs, consumer and collection site education, a minimum ½ -
FTE per stewardship program assigned to implement the program in Maine, on-going 
program evaluation and reporting, government oversight, and any incentives for collection.  
3) Minimum program standards for education and outreach to collection sites and to consumers , and on-going evaluation of the effectiveness of education and outreach efforts .  
No program can be successful without collection site staff and consumers knowing about the program and how it works .  Staff turnover at collection sites (often retailers and/or solid 
waste facilities)  is ongoing, as are changes in residents in Maine.  Evaluation of education 
and outreach eff orts identifies which initiatives are most effective, and where additional 
focus is needed.  Manufacturers can use the information gained to achieve cost- effective 
continuous improvement in their programs.    
4) Measurable , enforceable goals  (e.g., recycling rate, consumer awareness , convenient 
collection ), and defined consequences for non-compliance.  When manufacturers are 
responsible for paying for the recycling of collected products, they have a disincentive to 
collect or to promote the existence or ease of use of a collection system.   Minimum 
standards for locations of collection sites along with a ban on fees at collection are critical to 
counteracting the financial incentive manufacturers have to discourage consumer 
participation.  Repercussions for insufficient performance or non-participation on the part 
of manufacturers  must be practical to implement.  The Department must have the authority 
to direct program changes if the program fails to make sufficient progress toward achievi ng 
program goals.   
  
5) Financial incentives for collection site participation and for consumers to return products to 
collection sites .  Successful programs provide an incentive for collection to either consumers 
or third -party collection agents or both.  C ollections in Maine’s mercury thermostat recycling 
program increased significantly when the $5 incentive was implemented, and again when a 
$10 incentive was offered for a limited period of time.  A similar jump in collections was 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
6 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
achieved in Maine’s mercury auto switch recycling program when the $4 incentive to 
collection sites was implemented.  Maine’s Bottle Bill program consistently achieve s the 
highest return rate, with consumers motivated by the deposit/return payment system.  
 
 Recommendations for changes to e xisting EPR laws  
 
Based on reviews of Maine’s 10 product stewardship laws, the performance of each of the 
implemented programs and the staffing resources needed to provide adequate oversight, the 
Department is recommending changes to 5 of these laws.   
 
A. Framework law  – 38 M.R.S. chapter 18  
 As discussed in section II.B above, there are significant deficiencies in the framework law that would 
allow for approval of a manufacturer program plan which would not result in an effective program.   
The framework law does not include adequate program performance standards and does not 
provide the department with the authority to require changes in programs that fail to achieve 
adequate progress toward the program goals.   Legislation to address these deficiencies is included as 
Appendix A. 
 
B. Mercury lamp s – 38 M.R.S. § 1672  
 Program description:   The manufacturer requirements for recycling of mercury -added lamps 
(fluorescent, neon, black lights, UV, and high intensity di scharge - HID) from households are 
implemented by the National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA) on behalf of the 
manufacturers.   NEMA’s program provides free containers, shipping and recycling services to 
voluntarily participating retail and municipal collection sites.  The program also does some outreach to let consumers know about the program. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Approximately 150 sites sent lamps for recycling in 2016 and 2017  
   Figure 1:  
NEMA’s Household Mercury -added Lamp Recycling Rates  
  # NEMA 
collection 
sites  #  Lamps 
recycled 
by NEMA  # Lamps 
available for 
recycling  NEMA 
recycling 
rate 
2011  149 6,634  688,000  0.96%  
2012  263 50,492  708,889  7.12%  
2013  293 97,743  844,576  11.57%  
2014  300 109,337  1,042,750  10.49%  
2015  307 135,035  1,127,500  12.00%  
2016  270* 151,434  1,344,991  11.26%  
2017  244* 181,255  1,456,902  12.44%  
Total  731,930 7,213,608  10.15%  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
7 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
Current performance:   Through its product stewardship program, NEMA collected and recycled 
181,255 mercury -added lamps out of the estimated 1,456,902 mercury -added lamps available for 
collection in Maine in 2017.  The  recycling rate, i.e., the percentage recycled of lamps estimated to be 
at end of life, has been consistently low for the duration of the program , with an average recycling 
rate of 10.15%1. 
 
NEMA’s methodology to determine the number of lamps expiring each year utilizes national sales 
data and lamp life averages for HID, linear fluorescen t and compact fluorescent lamps.  This 
information provides a denominator used to calculate an overall recycling rate.  NEMA does not provide the actual numerical data for these calculations, which could be used to calculate separate 
recycling rates for each type of lamp  and determine if certain lamps are being re cycled at lower rates 
than others, allowing for more targeted outreach.  In addition, NEMA does not provide the Department with the estimated amounts of mercury recovered or available for recovery each year.  
Lamp mercury content varies significantly, rang ing from 0.01 milligrams to 1,000 milligrams.   
  Lamp companies selling in Maine 
report  data on their  mercury per 
unit and total mercury amounts to the Interstate Mercury Education 
& Reduction Clearinghouse 
(IMERC).  The IMERC database 
provides the best available data to 
estimate lamp mercury content, 
with ranges for average mercury 
content in lamps sold by type as well as the percent of lamps that 
contain a specified range of mercury.  For example, 27 percent of fluorescent lamps contain more 
than 10 but fewer than 50 milligrams of mercury.  This data allows the Department to calculate low 
and high end es timates of how much mercury is recovered.  If one assumes that  lamps are returned 
through the NEMA  program in the percentages in which they are available  in the wast e stream, it is 
also possible to estimate potential mercury recovery. While the Department does not have data on 
the NEMA lamp collections by lamp type prior to 2015, recent data highlights the significant 
amount of mercury not being recovered from waste lamps. 
 
 NEMA has failed to consistently implement the approved plan or take timely actions to improve 
program performance as proposed in its annual reports.  The Department has noted multip le 
instances of poorly handled program operations , characterized by a lack of communication with 
participating collection sites and the Department, a lack of effort to make any substantial program 
improvements  in response to Department requests , and a marked lack of resource allocation to 
ensure the program functions successfully.  The lamp law requires that NEMA provide “effective 
education and outreach, including, but not limited to, point-of-purchase signs and other materials 
provided to retail establishments without cost.”  Beginning in 2016, NEMA eliminated their budget 
allocation for staff, and in 2017 NEMA reduced “Program and Administration” costs by 43% .  As 
the entity that must pay for each bulb recycled, NEMA has an economic disincentive to effectively 
                                                 
 
1 If 2011 data is excluded due to lower collections during program implementation, the average recycling rate is 10.81%  Figure 2:  Amount of mercury collected by the NEMA 
program compared to that which was not collected  
 Low end mercury 
estimates (lbs.)   High end mercury 
estimates (lbs.)   
Year NEMA  
collections  Available  to 
collect  NEMA  
collections  Available  to 
collect  
2015  3.03 25.22  10.27  85.55  
2016  2.79 24.89  8.40 72.59  
2017  3.54 29.11  10.72  88.16  
Total  9.36 79.22  29.39 246.30  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
8 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
advertise  the recycling program.  Recovery of mercury -added lamps could be increased  through 
improved public education and outreach and through ensuring convenient collection . 
 
Recommendations :  Title 38 § 1672, Maine’s Mercury -added lamp law, was passed prior to Maine's 
Product Stewardship Framework law  and is, in many ways, inconsistent with the framework. This 
statute should be revised to better align with the Framework and with more recent, successful 
product stewardship programs implemented in Maine.  Included as Appendix B is legislation that if 
enacted would accomplish the following: 
 
1. Incorporate the standard definition of “covered entities” rather than limiting participation to 
households.  A ll references  limiting participation  to “households” and “residents” would 
change to  “covered entities” and the  definition of “covered entities” consistent with that in  
§1672(1)(E).  
2. Establish convenience standards with distribution goals to ensure access to collection sites in 
rural and urban geographic areas throughout the State. 
3. Establish  a minimum standard f or producer or stewardship organization staffing of ½- FTE 
to ensure adequate personnel resources to recruit, train and provide on- going in-person 
technical assistance to collection sites .      
4. Strengthen requirements for education and outreach. 
5. Establish goals for c onsumer awareness  of key program information.  
6. Strengthen  data requirements for annual reporting. 
 
C. Consumer batteries  – 38 M.R.S. § 2165  
 
In 1991, Maine enacted Title 38 § 2165, Regulation of certain dry cell batteries , which requires 
manufacturers of nickel cadmium and small sealed lead acid batteries to provide recycling services for these batteries at no cost to government agencies, and industrial, communications and medical 
facilities. In response to this and similar laws enacted by other states in the early 1990’s, U.S. battery 
manufacturers established the Rechargeable Battery Recycling Corporation (RBRC) in 1996.   This 
program, now known as Ca ll2Recycle, offered a free rechargeable battery recycling  program to any 
interested business, government entity and retail location interested in acting as a collection location 
until mid -2017.  Due to increases in “free riders”, i.e., collection of batter ies from primary (single -
use) and rechargeable battery manufacturers that do not financially support Call2Recycle, Call2Recycle now limits participation in its free rechargeable battery recycling program to municipal 
collection sites and businesses only as required by state laws.   The Call2Recycle program is also 
incurring new operational costs for redesigning their collection boxes with fire retarding properties and for training of collection site staff in management to prevent fires caused by improper 
management of lithium and lithium-ion batteries.  Note that Maine’s current rechargeable battery 
recycling law does not include lithium or lithium- ion batteries, new chemistries placed into the 
market subsequent to the law’s enactment.  
 Lithium ion batteries improperly disposed of in the household trash or recycling pose a significant 
fire risk. The batteries  are prone to short circuit and explode if dropped, punctured, or dented, any 
of which can easily happen during collection or processing at a traditional waste and recycling 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
9 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
facility2. This danger has been made evident by the  increasing number of Materials Recovery Facility 
(MRF) fires in recent years attributed to lithium ion batteries, including two at ecomaine’s Portland 
facility in 20173. Lithium ion ba ttery use is  growing at a rate of 1.63 batteries per person, per year4.  
Estimated costs to a MRF from  such  a fire  depends on damages, but some  have reported costs 
ranging from $8 to $10 million from a single lithium ion battery fire5. 
 In 2016, Senator Saviello introduced an amendment to LD 1578, An Act to Update Maine’s Solid Waste 
Management Laws , to establish an EPR program for small primary and rechargeable batteries of all 
chemistries.  This proposal was developed by the battery industry
6, and supported by Call2Recycle, 
Duracell, and other representatives of battery manufacturers.  Requiring all manufacturers of 
covered batteries to participate in a stewardship program would level the playing field by making all 
suppliers pay their fair sha re for the recycling of collected batteries.  LD 1578 included several other 
sections affecting other aspects of solid waste management in Maine, and ultimately did not pass the Legislature.   
 Consumer batteries are a growing problem in Maine’s waste stream.  The battery industry estimates 
more than  28 million consumer batteries (single -use and rechargeable) are sold in Maine annually.  
Maine consumers frequently contact DEP staff asking how they can recycle their batteries.  Fires caused by batteries in the waste stream are increasing, and the risk of fires continues to increase as 
the number of batteries discarded by consumers increases.  For these reasons, the Department is 
proposing the Legislature consider the draft legislation included as Appendix C to establish an 
expanded product stewardship program for small primary and rechargeable batteries.  Along with 
addressing the elements required in Maine’s Product Stewardship framework law, this draft includes 
provisions from the industry-developed model pre sented in Sen. Saviello’s 2016 amendment to LD 
1578 as amended through the committee process as well as provisions added to address Maine retailers’ concerns  with the original proposal.  The Department estimates that 0.5 new FTE would 
be needed to implement the proposed expanded program.   
D. Container redemption (“ Bottle bill ”) law – 38 M.R.S. chapter 33  
 Maine’s Manufacturers, Distributors, and Dealers of Beverage Containers , a.k.a. the “Bottle Bill” law was 
enacted in Title 22 in 1976, with the resulting beverage container redemption program initially implemented in 1978 under the purview of the Department of Agriculture.  The Legislature 
transferred responsibility  for the program to the Department effective November 1, 2015.  The 
Bottle Bill has resulted in a very successful collection program.  Estimated recovery rates fall in the 
                                                 
 
2 See EPA: Lithium Ion batteri es in the solid waste system. Michael Timpane, RRS.  
3 See Kennebec Journal: Ecomaine fire shows why putting lithium -ion batteries in trash is a really bad idea. December 21, 2017 
4 Ibid. 
5 See How industry pros deal with fires at MRFs , December 22, 2016: https://www.waste360.com/mrfs/how -industry -pros-
deal-fires-mrfs and Battery fires an 'existential' threat for industry , April 10, 2018: https://resource -
recycling.com/recycling/2018/04/10/battery-fires-an -existential -threat -for-industr y/ 
6 See Testimony of Richard Abramowitz, Director of Communications and Government Relations, Duracell Before the Joint Standing 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, February 17, 2016.  
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
10 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
75 to 87% range7 which, when compared to the national, overall recycling rate of 34% , is 
outstanding. 
 
In May 2018, the Office of Program Evaluation and Government Accountability (OPEGA) 
completed a review  of and report  on the Bottle Bill program .  The purpose of the review as stated i n 
the report was to  assess: “whether the program was operating as intended; the costs and offsets of 
the program for both the State and the initiators of deposit (IoDs); the degree to which risks of non-
compliance, fraud, and abuse were mitigated in the pr ogram; and how the program compared to the 
management of beverage containers in other states."   
 
The OPEGA report includes several recommendations for departmental and Legislative 
consideration to improve program implementation.  In response to the recommendation that the department can implement without legislative action (Recommendation #3), the department has 
refined and documented its procedures for removing non-compliant products from sale and 
completed work with Maine Revenue Services (MRS) to better  integrate the  agenc ies’ response s to 
instances of non-compliance.  Additionally, in 2018 the Department focused on other initiatives to improve administrative processes, including the continued development and implementation of an 
on-line portal for manufacturers and distributors to register the labels on all products subject to the 
law.  The information collected through product registrations is critical to apportioning 
responsibilities for recycling as well as handling fee and deposits payments to redemp tion centers. 
 Recommendation #1 in the OPEGA report provides the Department with responsibility for 
initiating legislation to require data reporting by all IoDs and by third party pick-up agents.  Quality 
data can help improve effectiveness and efficiency  in program administration, allow accurate 
quantitative assessment of program outcomes, and inform policymakers when making decisions about the program.  Appendix D contains proposed legislation which would require IoDs to report 
the number of non- refillab le beverage containers sold in the state and the number of non- refillable 
beverage containers returned by redemption value.  Along with proposing new reporting requirements, this draft legislation also seeks to respond to additional issues noted in the OPE GA 
report and by the department during its 3 years of program oversight as follows:  
• Reporting by third party pick-up agents on redemptions by IoD so that the department and 
MRS can verify self -reported redemptions by IoDs (see OPEGA Recommendation #1).  
This issue may be addressed by enacting a new subparagraph , § 3113 sub -6, as shown in 
Appendix D.  
• The Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages and Lottery Operations (BABLO) is the IoD for all 
spirits sold in Maine, efficiently handing all spirits containers collected by redemption centers 
as a commingled group.  However, the statutory criteria for approval inappropriately precludes BABLO from being categorized as a qualified commingling group (see OPEGA 
Recommendation #4).  This issue may be addressed by enactment of the changes proposed 
in the last sentence of paragraph § 3106.7(C) as shown in Appendix D .  
                                                 
 
7 Office of P rogram Evaluation and Government Accountabilit y Report No. SR -BOTTLE -17 , Maine’s Beverage Container 
Redemption Program –Lack of Data Hinders Evaluation of Program and Alternatives; Program Design Not Fully Aligned with Intended 
Goals; Compliance, Program Administration, and Commingling Issues Noted, May 2018 ( http://legislature.maine.gov/doc/2316 )  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
11 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
 
• OPEGA identified several aspects of the law that impact redemption centers and/or retailers 
and that are outdated or of limited relevance to current program operations (see OPEGA Recommendation #5).   
 
When the Bottle Bill law was enacted, it required all beverage retailers (a.k.a. “dealers”) to 
allow customers to redeem beverage containers of the brands, types and sizes sold by that 
retailer.  Since that time, a network of redemption centers independent of retailers has 
developed across the state to manage  all brands, types and sizes of containers.  To reflect 
this reality and prevent circumvention of the limit to the number of redemption centers established in Title 38 § 3113 sub - 3, the Department is proposing to eliminate the required 
redemption responsi bility for retailers with less than 5000 square feet of retail space as well 
as the limitations on the kind, size and brand of containers that must be accepted by retailers 
with more than 5000 square feet of retail space, and also to eliminate the exemptio n for food 
establishments from the limit on the number of redemption centers (which will be moot if the 5000 square foot exemption is enacted) [see proposed amendments to  § 3106 sub - 1 and 
sub- 2, and § 3113(4)(B)  respectively , as shown in Appendix D] .    
 
Removal of provisions of the law which indicate redemption centers must have agreements to provide redemption services for dealers and only need accept containers of the kind, size 
and brand sold by those dealers eliminates the administrative burden on redemption centers 
and retailers of maintaining written agreements.  It also addresses the issue of limitations on 
where consumers can redeem containers by eliminating these limitations.  The end result of 
enacting these proposed changes will be that establishments that sell beverages but have less 
than 5000 square feet of retail space will not be required to redeem containers.  Additionally, 
stand -alone redemption centers and dealers with 5000 or more square feet of retail space  
without an agreement with  a stand-alone redemption center  within 1 mile  will be required to 
redeem all beverage containers included in the deposit/redemption program. 
 
• The OPEGA report identifies on-going concerns by Bottle Bill program participants that the 
Department does not have a formal role  or authority to impose consequences on 
redemption centers that routinely present bags holding fewer than the required number of containers to pick-up agents.  In response to OPEGA’s Recommendation #7, included in 
the proposed legislation in Appendix D, the Department is proposing an additional 
subsection in Title 38 § 3109 that adds an affirmative responsibility for redemption centers 
to package containers for pick up in a manner that ensures accurate unit counts of eligible containers.  In addition, the Department is proposing to change the criteria in Title 38 § 
3113 sub -2 from criteria for rule -making to criteria for licensing.  These changes will enable 
the Department to implement standard compliance and enforcement procedures to check unit counts of containers readied for pick-up by redemption centers, and to refuse to renew 
the license of a redemption center based on its record of compliance.  
 
• OPEGA’s Recommendation #8 describes how the current commingling provisions in 
statute have become  too restrictive to meet their original intent of minimiz ing the number of 
sorts that must be implemented by redemption centers.  Due to the explosion of sizes and 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
12 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
container types for beverages other than soda, beer, wine, and water, redemption centers 
must employ significant labor and maintain large storage areas to properly sort and store 
containers that are not included in commingling groups.  To fully realize the efficiency benefits of commingling, the department recommends that the Legislature provide all IoDs 
with the opportunity to become part of a “catch-all” commingling group administered by a 
third party as delineated in proposed § 3107 sub -5 included in Appendix D.  The third- party 
program could allow redemption centers to commingle containers by material type  and allow 
assignment of responsibility by share of marketed weight , thus eliminating scores of sorts.  
In this system, m anufacturers would pay redemption centers for an assigned portion of that 
container type proportional to their share of sales based on container weights.  Such a system will significantly reduce redemption center costs for labor, as well as costs associated with the delay in receiving deposit reimbursements from the IoDs that results from the need 
to store containers of non-commingled brands for long lengths of time after paying out the 
deposits to consumers. 
 
It is important to note that under the current law, only IoDs that do not participate in a 
commingling group are required to remit unclaimed deposits to the State.  Recommendation 
#4 includes the suggestion that the Legislature consider amending the statute “to specify 
how unredeemed deposit funds should be processed and used by the State.”  This 
recommendation will become moot if the recommendation to create a “catch -all” 
commingling group is enacted and all IoDs opt to participate in a commingling group. 
 
• Additionally, this draft legislation includes amendments to consolidate the rule- making 
provisions, to integrate the redemption center licensing fees into Title 38 subchapter 2, Maine 
Environmental Protection Fund , and to set the licensing fee at $100 consistent with the standards 
Title 38 § 352, Fees  (see Section 1 of the proposed legislation in Appendix D).  The current 
annual licensing fee is $50, which is not adequate to cover costs incurred by the department 
for application review and processing.    
 
The department also recommends that the Legislature review Recommendation #6 in the OPEGA 
report to determine how the Legislature and the department should proceed to address the issues of 
program scope, deposit value, performance measurement, final disposition of redeemed materials 
and maximizing commodity values as identified by OPEGA. 
 
E. Cell phones  - 38 M.R.S. § 2143  
 
Maine’s cellular telephone recycling law (38 M.R.S. § 2143) requires retailers to accept, at no cost, 
used cell phones at retail locations, and annual reporting by cellular telephone service providers (i.e., 
carriers including Verizon, T- Mobile, USCellular, AT&T)  on their recycling efforts in Maine.  The 
Department recommends repeal of the reporting requirement as it does not provide useful data (see Appendix E for proposed statutory change).  Many consumers return cell phones to entities that pay 
for them, so the data from the service providers cannot be used to assess program performance or 
determine a recycling rate.  Also, each of the carriers provides i nformation to their customers on the 
recycling programs they offer, often in support of social welfare causes .  This information is readily 
available on their web sites.  
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
13 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
 
 Candidate products for new EPR programs  
 
Maine’s Product Stewardship Framework law i dentifies the following criteria for evaluating product 
stewardship as a mechanism to facilitate recycling:  
 
A. The product or product category is found to contain toxics that pose the risk of an adverse 
impact to the environment or public health and safet y;  
 B. A product stewardship program for the product will increase the recovery of materials for 
reuse and recycling;  
 
C. A product stewardship program will reduce the costs of waste management to local 
governments and taxpayers;  
 
D. There is success in  collecting and processing similar products in programs in other states or 
countries; and  
 
E. Existing voluntary product stewardship programs for the product in the State are not 
effective in achieving the policy of this chapter.  
 
Recycling is defined as  “the transforming or remanufacturing of an unwanted product or the 
unwanted product's components and by- products into usable or marketable materials. ‘ Recycling ’ 
does not include landfill disposal, incineration or energy recovery or energy generation by means of combusting unwanted products, components and by-products with or without other waste.” 
 
Included here are several products that may be good candidates for EPR programs in Maine in the 
future .  Some of these are products that previously have been the subject of some discussion in 
Maine, and EPR programs have been established for each of these products in other jurisdictions.
  
 
A. Product  stewardship for packaging  
 
A large portion of the current municipal waste stream is comprised of various types of consumer 
packaging.  Much of it is not recyclable.  Packaging that is readily recyclable has historically been 
managed to some extent through Maine’s existing recycling system , which is a combination of public 
and private enterprises .  However, shifts in i nternational markets for recyclables during 2018 have 
shown the vulnerability of these programs to commodity price changes and the need for investment 
in recycling infrastructure.  Stable funding provided by extended producer responsibility can prevent 
high municipal costs and diversion of these resources to disposal when material values drop, as occurred during 2018.
 8  An EPR program for packaging also can provide incentive s for producers 
to increase the recyclability of their packaging  and to use packagi ng that is more valuable at end of 
                                                 
 
8 The average value of a ton of single stream recycling in Maine, as tracked by the Maine Resource Recovery Association, 
fluctuated between a value of $2 0/ton to a cost of $30/ton between 2007 and 2017 before dropping to cost of more 
than $100/ton in 2018.   
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
14 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
life, galvanize investment in Maine’s recycling infrastructure, and relieve municipalities of much of 
the financial burden of dealing with this waste stream.   
 
1) Packaging  meets four candidate criteria for stewardship prog ram 
 Product stewardship for packaging meets four of the five criteria outlined in the Framework Law – 
all but criteria A, products containing toxics.
9   
 
Criteria B:  Increase the recovery of materials .  Alleviating eco nomic pressure on municipalities 
would prevent moves away from recycling caused by market downturns like that experienced during 2018.  In addition, the incentives provided by product stewardship can help change the make-up of 
this stream.  Currently, much packaging is not readily recyclable and therefore is destined for 
disposal.  Examples of packages that are not practical to recycle include plastic pouches, multilayered materials, and packages made from commonly recycled materials like PET that can’t be processed by 
the recycling system  because of issues with their wrappers or shapes and sizes
10.  To support the 
development of a sustainable “circular economy”, t here is a need to design packaging with recycling 
in mind.11   
 Criteria C:  Reduce the costs of waste management to local govern ments and taxpayers.   
Packaging is a large material stream, only part of which is readily recyclable.  Packaging that  is not 
readily recyclable  is being disposed of as municipal solid waste .  The portion of the stream that is 
readily recyclable can also be  problematic.  Although recycling of some packaging streams has long 
been promoted as a way to lessen the burden of waste management costs on municipalities or even 
as a money maker , recycling cost s for packaging rose sharply in 2018 when  China stopped acc epting 
                                                 
 
9 Nineteen states, including Maine, have laws governing toxics in packaging.  For more information, see the Toxics in 
Packaging Clearinghouse website a t https://toxicsinpackaging.org/  and Title 32 Chapter 26 -A, Reduction of Toxics in 
Packaging.  
10 “APR Design Guide for Plastics Recyclability”, The Association of Plastics Recyclers, 
https://plasticsrecycling.org/apr -design -guide/apr -design -guide -home   
11 The New Plas tics Economy – Catalysing Action , Ellen Macarthur Foundation, 2017  
https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/assets/downloads/New-Pl astics -Economy_Catalysing- Action_13 -1-17.pdf    
 -120.00-100.00-80.00-60.00-40.00-20.000.0020.00
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018Price
YearFigure 3 - Average annual value of one ton of single stream recyclables 
delivered to Portland
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
15 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
bales of plastic and fiber recyclables due to contamination.  Municipal transfer stations and the 
companies that manage these  material s found themselves unable to move some material s or only 
able to do so at a cost .  Single -stream programs increased  their fees, 12 while source separated 
programs stopped recycling certain material types.  The lack of data on packaging generation and 
municipal recycling and disposal costs makes price estimates of the amount of municipal resources spent handling packaging difficult to come by.  That said, triangulating a variety of imperfect 
estimates can provide a rough idea of the amount of money spent. 
 
- Using Maine tons of municipal solid waste generated in 2017
13 and applying percentages of 
packaging materials found in the University of Maine’s 2011 study14 characterizing the makeup 
of Maine municipal solid waste provides an estimate of the amount of packaging disposed of as 
waste in 2017.  This method yields an estimated 177,000 tons of material.  If Maine 
munic ipalities spent an average of $90/ton15 to transport and dispose of this material during 
2018, they spent approximately $16 million. This $16 million estimate understates the actual cost to municipalities of managing packaging because it does not include the cost of separated 
recyclables, i.e., it is only the cost of managing packaging material that is thrown out with household trash. 
 
- Using  statistics on average per capita generation of packaging from Europe
16 and subtracting the 
amount of material handled through Maine’s Bottle Bill17  provides an estimate of approximately 
194,000 tons of packaging handled through Maine municipalities annually.  Once again, assuming  Maine municipalities paid $90/ton to handle packaging  either as trash or as recycling  
                                                 
 
12 Data for Figure 3  courtesy of Victor Horton, Maine Resource Recovery Association, October 29, 2018, “Single stream 
spot market pricing paid in Maine delivered to Portland; for contract pricing add $2 -5/ton”  
13 Maine Department of Environmental Protection, “Maine Solid Waste Generation and Disposal Capacity Report  
for Calendar Year 2017”, January 2019, shows 721,646 tons of municipal solid waste generate in Maine in 2017.  
14 Criner, George; Blackmer, Travis; “2 011 Maine Residential Waste Characterization Study School of Economics Staff 
Paper #601”, available here:  https://umaine.edu/wp-c ontent/uploads/sites/2/2017/04/2011-Maine -Residential-
Waste -Characterization -Study.pdf , studied samples of municipal solid waste in Maine and identified the components, by 
material type.  Using the total percentage of plastics other than “durable plastic items”; the percentages of “tin/steel 
containers”, “redeemable aluminum beverage containers”, “non -redeemable aluminum beverage containers” in the 
metals category; the total percentage of glass other than the “remainder/composite glass” and “flat glass”; an d the 
percentages of “uncoated corrugated cardboard/kraft paper” and “remainder/composite paper”, and half of the percentage of “other recyclable” paper, we obtained an estimate of the percentage of Maine’s municipal waste stream composed of packaging wast e of 24.5%.  
15 There is not good data to support this number; tonnages of packaging resulting from each method have been 
provided so that municipalities can easily adjust estimates to reflect their costs.  The Maine Department of Environmental Protection, “ Maine Solid Waste Generation and Disposal Capacity Report for Calendar Year 2017”, 
January 2019, reports that tipping fees for municipal solid waste were between $40 and $85 during 2017, which does not 
include the cost of transportation.  Figure 3 of this report shows the average cost of single stream recycling delivered to 
Portland at over $100/ton in 2018.  
16 Eurostat, “Packaging Waste Statistics”, https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics -
explained/index.php/Packaging_waste_statistics  show the average European generated 166.3 kg or 366.6 pounds of 
packaging in 2015.  
17 51,808 tons of material or 77.3 pounds per person were recycled through Maine’s Bottle Bill program in 2017, which 
would leave approximately 290 pounds of packaging per person handled through the municipal waste stream.  
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
16 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
in 2018, the cost to Maine municipalities of managing packaging in 2018 was  approximately 
$17.5 million . 
 
- Using  estimated costs in the Canadian province of Saskat chewan  (which has 1.17 million people 
in 700 municipalities, 600 of which have fewer than 1000 residents) , where the  cost of handling 
packaging is around $14.5 million, annually18 and prorating this cost for a population of 1.34 
million yields an annual municipal cost of $16.6 million. 
Criteria D:  There has been success in other states or countries.  M any European Union 
countries and five of Canada’s provinces manage packaging through product stewardship programs.  
Years of successful implementation, per  capita r esults, and municipal savings for each of the 
Canadian stewardship programs are presented below.  Movement toward more sustainable packaging is hard to quantify based on available information, but there is an on-going pilot program 
in British Columbia test ing the recyclability of flexible packaging collected at drop -off locations and 
there have been significant decreases in the use of plastic bags in Manitoba since the initiation of a government effort that has been facilitated by the Manitoba packaging ste wardship organization.   
 
Figure 4    
Per capita results of Canada’s five EPR for Packaging and Printed Paper Programs  
PROVINCE  PROGRAM 
DURATION  PER CAPITA 
RESULTS  MUNI. SAVINGS  BOTTLE BILL 
MATERIAL*  
Ontario  15 years  65 kg recycled 
(2016) **  Reimbursed 50% 
of recycling costs  Alcohol  
Manitoba  9 years  71 kg collected 
(2017)  Reimbursed 80% 
of recycling costs  Beer 
British 
Columbia  7 years  38 kg collected 
(2017)  Municipalities don’t 
recycle  Non-milk 
Quebec  5 years  93 kg collected 
(2017)  Reimbursed 100% 
of recycling costs  Beer and carbonated 
beverages  
Saskatchewan  3 years  49 kg collected  
(2017)  Reimbursed 75% 
of recycling costs  Non-milk, non -
nutritional supplements  
*Bottle bill material is not collected through these programs so the breadth of a province’s bottle bill influences the 
amount of material available for collection.   
** Ontario’s program reports on kg recycled per person, as opposed to kg collected; more m aterial is collected than  can 
be recycled.  Ontario’s most recent data is from 2016, not 2017. 
 Criteria E:  Voluntary efforts are insufficient .  Industry efforts to assist with the management of 
packaging include the Clo sed Loop Fund and The Recycling Par tnership, which invest in recycling 
infrastructure and education at the national level.  The city of Portland received a grant of $175,000 
from The Recycling Partnership to help pay for new recycling carts in 2017.
19  The department is 
unaware of any other direct contributions by these organizations to recycling programs in Maine. 
                                                 
 
18 Steven Dribnenki, Saskatchewan Recycling, November 28, 2018:  Saskatchewan recently studied program costs and 
updated payments to municipalities, increasing them to $8.7 million, which covers approximately 60% of the cost of a 
“reasonably run” program.  
19 Harry, David, The Forecaster , “Portland set to roll out covered recycling carts”, July 31,2017, 
http://www.theforecaster.net/portland -set-to -roll-out-covered -recycling -carts/   
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
17 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
 
The Department estimates that 1 new FTE would be needed at the Department to oversee 
implementation of the program. 
 
2) Key considerations in design of  a packaging  stewardship progra m 
Maine’s Product Stewardship  framework law  provides minimum requirements for new product 
stewardship programs.  Review of the Canadian provinces’ EPR programs for packaging reveals 
additional key aspects that should be considered when formulating legislation to establish a new packaging stewardship program.  These include a) whether manufacturers are given  complete 
financial and operational responsibility for establishing and maintaining recycling systems (full manufacturer responsibility) or share that responsibility with municipalities , and b) whether the 
enabling legislation includes incentives for the use of recyclable packaging and/or disincentives for the use of non- recyclable packaging.  
 
a) Division of responsibilities between manufacturers and munici palities  
 
Whether there is a di vision of responsibilities between municipalities and producers in packaging 
stewardship programs provid es incentives for effective and efficient collection and recycling, 
streamlining of operations, and the free market economics of the recycling industry.  Canada’s existing product stewardship laws governing packaging differ in the level of financial and 
operational responsibility given to each group.  For example, British Columbia assigns 
manufacturers full responsibility while Province Quebec implements a program of shared 
responsibility.  If responsibilities are shared, legislation establishing the EPR sy stem must 
delineate the division of financial and operational responsibilities.   
Proponents of a system in which a producer organization has full  financial and operational 
responsibility for recycling point to the opportunity for efficiencies that such a system provides.  If one entity manages the recycling of all packaging (including control of the collection system), 
the collection  system  and educational programs can be standardized ; fewer, larger contracts can 
be written to reduce administrati ve costs; and the single entity managing  recycling has much 
more control over market price than do a larger number of smaller entities
20.  If managed well, 
the streamlining afforded by full producer responsibility for operations could lead to lower 
system costs, thou gh the limited available data from North America does not show this to be the 
case.21 
                                                 
 
20 Recycle BC runs the only North American packaging stewardship program that gives producers responsibility for 
recycling operations.  A common comment from local government stakeholders during the revision of Recycle BC’s 
stewardship plan is that incentive payments made by the stewardship organization to collectors are insufficient.  For instance, the City of V ancouver receives an incentive of $66 per ton for recycling collected for Recycle BC at its depots, 
while Recycle BC’s own cost study pegs the per ton cost of recycling through a depot at $301 per ton.  Because Recycle 
BC is the only buyer, it has a lot of  power to influence the price.  Data from, Recycle BC, “Consultation Report on 
Revised Packaging and Paper Product Extended Producer Responsibility Plan”, October 2018.  
21 Recycle BC performed a cost comparison of pre -program costs (2012 data) and costs 5 y ears into the program (2017).  
This cost study uses a limited sample size but is the best data available to compare costs under a free-market vs. stewardship run recycling system.  Results show that the range of kilograms of packaging diverted for recycling per 
household has shifted downward for both curbside and multifamily collections (from 48 -270kg/household to 42 -
200kg/household using curbside and from 73 -136 kg/household to 67-91kg/household using multifamily collection); 
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
18 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
 
Proponents of a shared responsibility system cite the advantage s of maintaining diverse recycling 
systems as the maintenance of free market forces in the industry and the  avoidance of stranded 
investment s in the existing system.  Competition in a free market correctly sets prices, leads to 
innovation, and drives efficiency and effectiveness elsewhere in the economy.  Distributed end -
of-life management of post -consumer pack aging also ensures that, once recycled, these 
resources are available at market prices rather than having the price controlled by a single entity.    
Maintaining municipal control of recycling also  minimizes disruption of current waste 
management, allowing municipalities to continue collecting and sorting material as they see fit and avoiding the stranding of investments and excessive consolidation in the recycling industry 
that may be experienced i f operational responsibility for recycling of packaging was removed 
from municipal MSW management systems.   This type of system design dovetails with Maine 
law that assigns each municipality responsibility for providing for management of MSW 
generated within the municipality (see 38 M.R.S. § 1305.1
).  However, in such a shared 
responsibility system, municipalities and their recycling service providers must be willing to sh are 
information with producers to ensure transparency in costs and accountability for ensuring 
materials are recycled.  
 
Division of financial responsibilities: incentives for efficient collection and recycling.  
Careful division of financial responsibility in legislative design can promote efficient collection and recycling systems.  If producers are financially responsible for the recycling of packaging yet 
municipalities have operational control of their recycling programs (i.e., producers pay 
municipalit ies for their costs of recycling packaging), system requirements should include 
incentives for municipalities to operate efficiently.  Existing Canadian programs in which 
municipalities have operational control over recycling do this by tying municipal cos ts to 
producer costs, defining what constitutes an efficient program, and providing municipalities with  
extensive producer assistance.  For example, defining reimbursable municipal costs as the 
average regional cost of municipal recycling rather than each municipality’s actual costs results in 
municipalities with higher -than average costs bear ing the cost of their premium operations.  
Conversely, municipalities with lower -than-average costs receive  a premium for their efficient 
operations .  This incentivizes cost -efficient municipal operations and dis- incentivizes premium 
operations.    
 
The legislative design of a shared responsibility system can also promote efficiency by giving 
producers the ability to lower their program costs by managing their own recycling plans.  
Producers want, and should have, the opportunity to provide new or improved recycling options 
for their packaging (some producers already provide for recycling of their packaging). 22  
                                                 
 
the change in quantity collect ed using depots is not reported.  Cost data shows a 6% increase in cost per household for 
curbside collection, a 11% increase in cost per household for multifamily collection, and a 79% increase in cost per ton 
at depots.  Cost savings were realized in the  areas of education and administration (39% and 62%, respectively), but 
these costs make up a much lower percentage of total program costs than do the costs of collection ($1.50/household 
on education, $1.60/household on administration, $43/household on cu rbside collection, $23/household on multifamily 
collection, and $301/ton on depot collection).  Data from, Recycle BC “Packaging and Paper Product Collection Costs 
Five Year Cost Study Refresh”, June 8, 2018.  
22 Letter to Elena Bertocci, Maine DEP, from Cal la Farna, Vice President Corporate Affairs, Canadian Stewardship 
Services Alliance, December 11, 2018.  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
19 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
Legislation can support the creation of new, and maintenance of current, producer recycling 
operations by providing producers the ability to offset their financial responsibility for material 
they place on the market by collecting and recycling that material through their own programs .  
For instance, ev ery pound of plastic bags a producer collects may offset a pound of plastic bags 
it marketed and the amount the producer would pay into the system.  If a producer collects as 
many pounds of plastic bags as it markets, it would not need to pay into the syst em.  With this 
design, if a material is not being handled efficiently by municipal recycling programs, producers have the incentive and the ability to create an alternative management system.   
 
Division of operational responsibilities:  incentives for effective  collection and recycling.  
In systems where municipalities are operationally responsible for recycling, when a municipality 
recycles more, it pays less for trash disposal.  When combined with a system that incentivizes 
municipalities to recycle better as described above, municipalities have strong incentives to 
recycle as much material as possible, as well as possible.23  Conversely, in systems where a 
producer or group of producers operate the only collection system, they pay more as their collection  increases (other than when the material is worth more than the cost of processing and 
transportation).
 24  In this case, the responsible entity  (producer) has an incentive to collect as 
little recycling as is allowable under the law and to recycle only to the extent the law requires. A 
legislative design that maintains municipal control over municipal recycling operations 
incentivizes effective collection for recycling.    
 b) Incentives  and disincentives to support the use of readily- recyclable packaging  
 
Legislation establishing EPR for packaging sho uld include incentives that promote the design 
and use of packaging that can be efficiently collected and reused or recycled.  Whether the 
legislation requires full producer responsibility or establishes a shared responsibility system, it 
can incentivize the use of readily recyclable packaging  by calibrating  financial responsibility 
based on the cost to recycle the packaging material as well as the amount of packaging a producer sells into Maine .  Producer costs for packaging that  has a positive recycling value 
(taking into account the cost of processing and transportation) could be limited to simp ly 
providing support for consumer recycling education.   
 
A shared responsibility system can be designed to provide producers with additional incentives 
to create new opportunities for recycling materials  that currently are not readily recyclable .  One 
                                                 
 
23 Recycle BC runs the only North American packaging stewardship program that gives producers responsibility for 
recycling operations.  The Recycle BC pro gram is criticized for its extensive limitations on eligibility for participation.  
Local governments and First Nations note that collection could be expanded if Recycle BC would loosen population and 
process restrictions that prevent many smaller, more ru ral communities from participating.  Complaints include an 
inability to drop off recycling even if a community that is not served by Recycle BC is willing to pay a hauler to bring its 
material to an existing Recycle BC depot.  Recycle BC, “Consultation Rep ort on Revised Packaging and Paper Product 
Extended Producer Responsibility Plan”, October 2018.  
24 Recycle BC runs the only North American packaging stewardship program that gives producers responsibility for 
recycling operations.  According to page 9 of i ts 2018 Packaging and Paper  Product  Extended Producer Responsibility 
Plan, “Recycle BC offers financial incentives to qualified collectors. These incentives are designed to provide collectors 
near-by with sufficient incentive to collect the amount of PPP required by Recycle BC to meet its targets.”   “Packaging 
and Paper Product Extended Producer Responsibility Plan”, Recycle BC, October 2018 revision.   As could be 
anticipated , considering the incentives and this statement, the program’s recovery rate dropped in 2017 after passing the 
mandated minimum in 2016.    
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
20 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
mechanism to accomplish this is to require producers to reimburse municipalities their costs of 
disposal for packaging ma terials that are not readily recyclable in Maine .  This eliminates any 
incentive to switch recyclable materials packaging, which may carry a cost in the system, to non -
recyclable.  It also creates a financial incentive for  producers to develop recycling pr ocesses 
and/or infrastructure to increase the  type s of packaging that are readily recyclable.  For example, 
although systems do not exist today for recycling multi -laminate pouches, producers may help 
support the development of new recycling processes and the subsequent establishment of nearby infrastructure to make multi -laminate packaging readily recyclable in Maine.  
 
B. Pharmaceuticals  
 
A pharmaceutical product stewardship program meets four of the five criteria listed in the 
framework law – all but the criterion of increasing recovery of material for reuse and recycling.  The 
most compelling of the criterion as relates to pharmaceuticals is the increasing evidence that, when 
not managed properly, they adversely impact the environment and public health and safety.   
 The public health argument for proper disposal of pharmaceuticals is strong.  A 2015 study 
published in the U.S. National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health estimates that 2 of 
3 prescriptions dispensed go unused.
25  Unused medi cations may be left sitting in medicine cabinets, 
where they contribute to accidental poisonings of children26 and are available to potential abusers – 
in 2013, 18% of Maine high school students reported having misused a prescription drug during 
their lifetime and more than 1 in 3 Maine parents felt their teen would be able to access prescription 
medications at home without parental knowledge.27   
 Common disposal options like sending unused meds to landfills or through waste water treatment 
systems result in the release of these chemicals into the environment.  A study of Seattle area 
seafood performed during the spring of 2018 detected opiates, antibiotics, anti- depressants, 
chemotherapy drugs and heart medications.  Because shellfish lack the ability to metabolize these chemicals, they can be passed on to humans that consume them.
28  In addition, an Associated Press 
investigation found pharmaceuticals including antibiotics, anti -convulsants, mood stabilizers and sex 
                                                 
 
25 Law A.V., Sakharkar P., Zargarzadeh A., Tai B.W., Hess K., Hata M., Mireles R., Ha C., Park T.J. (2014, Oct 17). 
“Taking stock of medication wastage: Unused medications in the U.S.” U.S. Natio nal Library of Medicine, National 
Institutes of Health. https://calpsc.org/mobius/cpsc -content/uploads/2015/08/Study -Taking-Stock -of-Medication -
Wastage -Unused -Medicines -in-US-Households-2015.pdf  
26 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Protect the Ones You Love:  Childhood Injuries are Preventable”, 
https://www.cdc.gov/safechild/poisoning/index.html  
27Diomede, Tim. Maine Department of Health and Human Services. “ SEOW Special Report: Heroin, Opioids, and 
Other Drugs in Maine ”.  October 2015. 
https://www. maine.gov/dhhs/samhs/osa/data/cesn/Heroin_Opioids_and_Other_Drugs_in_Maine_SEOW_Report.p
df 
28 NPR. “Traces of opioids found in Seattle area mussels”, May 25, 2018.   
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
21 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
hormones in the drinking water supplies of at least 41 million Americans.29  It is known that 
pharmaceuticals in the environment are having toxic effects on marine animals30 and fish.31 
 
The case for pharmaceutical takeback has been strengthened by the connection between 
prescription opioids and opioid abuse.  This link led the legislature to enact, “An Act to Prevent 
Opiate Abuse by Strengthening the Controlled Substances Prescription Monitoring Program” in 
March of 2017.  Since 2016, four states have enacted product stewardship laws for pharmaceuticals:  
Massachusetts and Vermont included extended producer responsibility requirements for 
pharmaceutical takeback as part of comprehensive legislation for the prevention of opioid abuse, 
while New York and Washington passed stand-alone product stewardship laws to fight prescription 
drug abuse. 
 
In response to the opioid epidemic, a number of Maine entities have begun pharmaceutical takeback 
programs .  Although these appear to be doing a good job and are fre e,32 collection sites and events 
are limited , as is money to cover the costs of education, outreach, and collection.  Establishing an 
EPR law for pharmaceuticals could guarantee on -going funding and provide for safe, convenient 
collection from consumers, extended care facilities, and medical service providers.  
 
C. Mattresses  
 Mattresses meet all 5 criteria established in Maine’s Product Stewardship  framework law for evaluating 
products to determine whether mandated product stewardship will facilitate recycling (see criteria above and at 38 M.R.S. § 1772.2
).   
 First, many mattresses contain organohalogen flame retardants (OFRs), inc luding brominated flame 
retardants (BFRs).  In September 2017, the Consumer Products Safety Commission (CPSC) issued a guidance document recommending producers to stop manufacturing mattresses containing OFRs 
and warning consumers to avoid products containing OFRs,
33 due to their potential toxicity.  Maine 
law (38 M.R.S. § 1609 ) banned the sale of mattresses and mattress pads made with  the “deca” 
mixture of polybrominated diphenyl ethers  beginning January 1, 2008.  Given these and similar 
governmental actions, the risk to public health and the environment from flame retardants in mattresses should decrease over time.  
 
                                                 
 
29 Granite State Analytical Services, June 2018 Newsletter “Pharmaceuticals in Drinking Wate r” 
30 Hernando M.D., Mezcua M., Fernandez -Alba A.R., Barcelo D. (2006). "Environmental risk assessment of 
pharmaceutical residues in wastewater effluents, surface waters and sediments.” Talanta 69: 334 -342.  
31 Corcoran, J., Winter, M.J. and Tyler, C.R. (2010 ). "Pharmaceuticals in the aquatic environment: A critical review of the 
evidence for health effects in fish.” Critical Reviews in Toxicology 40,4: 287 -304 
32 Current efforts include 59 permanent sites for collection from households only (medical and reside ntial care facilities 
cannot utilize the current system).  The permanent collection sites are located at police offices or sheriff ’s stations ; they 
offer continuous collection then store pharmaceuticals until they can access free disposal provided by the USDEA 
National Takeback Days .  Although Maine  has just 0 .4% of the country’s population,  Maine collected  3% by weight of 
total drugs turned in during  the most recent national one -day USDEA event, including unwanted pharmaceuticals 
collected at  157 tempora ry collection sites . 
33   Guidance Document on Hazardous Additive, Non -Polymeric Organohalogen Flame Retardants in Certain Consumer Products , 
Consumer Product Safety Commission, Federal Register / Vol. 82, No. 187 / Thursday, September 28, 2017 / Notices, (available at https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR -2017 -09-28/pdf/2017-20733.pdf
)  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
22 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
Mattress recycling currently occurs in Maine on an ad hoc basis at a few solid waste facilities.  In 
these cases, facility staff deconstruct mattresses into their wood, metal, foam and fabric components, 
then recycle the metal, manage the wood with other clean wood wastes, and send the foam and 
fabric for disposal.  Al though there are a few businesses that dismantle mattresses in southern New 
England, there are no such businesses in Maine.  
Currently in Maine the vast majority of discarded mattresses are sent for disposal.  The costs to 
municipalities for handling and t ransportation are relatively high compared to other waste streams 
due to their bulk; municipalities also bear the cost of disposal fees.  Mattresses cause operational challenges for landfills in that they do not compress and have a tendency to “float” to t he surface, 
potentially compromising cover systems.    
Connecticut, Rhode Island and California have all enacted EPR laws for mattresses.  The mattress 
recycling programs in these three states are administered by an industry -led nonprofit, the Mattress 
Recycling Council  (MRC) , with state government oversight.  The program is funded by a visible fee 
that is levied on new mattress purchases , which is established based upon population distribution, 
geographic considerations, and other factors .  MRC recently announced it has recycled more than 3 
million mattresses in California.  During the most recent fiscal year (July 1, 2017 – June 30, 2018), 
MRC recycled more than 180,000 mattresses, bring the total recycled in Connecticut since the 
program began in 2015 to almost ½ million.  In its second year of operation in Rhode Island, the 
MRC program (known as “Bye Bye Mattress”) collected 83,762 mattresses and recycled 1,645 tons 
of material .
34 
 There are no existing voluntary stewardship programs for mattresses in Maine.  
 The Connecticut, Rhode Island, and California EPR programs all have significantly increased the 
diversion of mattresses from disposal to recycling.  However, the fee per unit (a mattress and a box 
spring are 2 separate units) at sale in Rhode Island jumped from $11 to $16 within 2 years of 
program implementation (currently the fee is $9 in Connecticut and $10.50 in California ).  Given 
Maine’s geographic size, low population, and lack of businesses to deconstruct mattresses, enacting a law with the same financing mechanism likely would result in a per unit fee at sale even higher than 
the $16 fee in Rhode Island.  When the Legislature considered the bill to establish an EPR program 
for architectural paint, concerns were raised that a fee at sale may drive con sumers to purchase 
products outside of Maine rather than in Maine.  The higher the fee at sale, the more likely this consumer reaction may happen.  Additionally, financing an EPR program fully on revenues 
collected from a fee -at-sale provides little incent ive for manufacturers to design their products for 
recycling.  Given these dynamics, an EPR system for mattresses funded at least partially through cost internalization may be most appropriate for Maine.   
 
D. Carpet  
 Carpet meets four of the five criteria listed in the framework law for identifying stewardship 
candidate products – all but the criterion of toxics in the product.  However, it is worth noting that 
                                                 
 
34 This data and additional information on the 3 state programs are available through the Mattress Recycling Council’s 
website at https://mattressrecyclingcouncil.o rg/programs/ .  
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
23 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
although carpets generally do not meet the toxin criterion, research shows that some carpets may 
contain brominated flame retardants,35 which pose health concerns related to endocrine disruption, 
immunotoxicity, reproductive toxicity, and neurotoxicity.36 
 
In 2002, the carpet industry, several non -governmental organizations (NGOs), the EPA, and 21 
states including Maine signed onto a ten-year Memorandum of Understanding for Carpet Stewardship (“MOU”) intended to support recycling of end-of- life carpet.
37  This MOU resulted in 
the establishment of the Carpet America Recovery Effort (CARE), which was formed t o implement 
the MOU.  Barriers to the implementation of a voluntary, market -driven carpet recycling program 
included a shrinking market share for the carpet industry in the flooring market and decreasing value of carpet due to substitution of lower- value m aterials such as PET (Polyethylene Terephthalate) for 
higher- value materials such as nylon.  
 
The 2011 Product Stewardship report observed that “industry has not achieved the diversion and 
recycling goals set by the MOU,” and although a stewardship program was not proposed at that 
time, the report was clear that “the need for product stewardship legislation may change if 
significant progress is not made by the industry to establish affordable carpet recycling in Maine.”  
Since that time, minimal progress has been made with voluntary efforts to recycle carpet in Maine.  
Several states that signed the MOU have enacted or are considering carpet stewardship legislation; 
California became the first state
38 to enact a carpet stewardship law in 201039 and the New York  
Legislature is currently considering a carpet EPR bill.40   
 
CARE acknowledges the lack of recycling availability on their website, which states, “There is no 
simple, routine method in place today to recycle old carpet.  Each case is individual since there  is no 
infrastructure to handle old carpet at this time.”41  A contributing challenge to widespread carpet 
recycling is that some types of carpet currently on the market are readily recyclable and some are 
not.42  EPR has the opportunity to influence design by encouraging use of readily recyclable 
materials over those destined for disposal at end-of- life.  While a real challenge exists for recycling 
low-value carpet made from materials that are not easy to recycle, the design of the carpet is a key 
factor.  Manufacturers tasked with ensuring their products are recycled may be more likely to use high- value recyclable materials over low -value non- recyclable materials.  
 A product stewardship program for carpet will increase the recovery of materials for reuse an d 
recycling and reduce the costs of waste management to local governments and taxpayers. For a 
                                                 
 
35 Environmental concentrations and consumer exposure data for selected flame retardants (TBB, TBPH, TBBPA, ATO),  Consumer 
Product Safety Commission, 2015  
36 Gosavi RA, Knudsen GA, Birnbaum LS, Pedersen LC. 2013. Mimicking of estradiol binding  by flame retardants and 
their metabolites: a crystallographic analysis. Environ Health Perspect  121(10):1194-1199.  
37 Other states include New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New York, New Jersey,  
Pennsylvania, Delaware, North Carolina, Tennessee, South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Iowa,  
Washington, Oregon, and California.  
38 Carpet stewardship law , California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery ( CalRecycle ). 
39 Chapter 20. Product Stewardship for Carpets,  California Legislative Information.  
40 Bill Summary for S07147, New York State Assembly.  
41 FAQs, How can I recycle my old carpet?, Carpet America Recovery Effort.  
42 Carpet Fiber Types,  California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery ( CalR ecycle).  
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
24 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
successful program, it is important to incentivize reuse and recycling as well as the use of recycled 
content.  
 
Adequate funding and resource allocation is essential to establish a functional and lasting program.  
California's EPR program is funded by a consumer fee upon sale, which has increased steadily over 
time from $0.05 per square yard to $0.25 per square yard43 and wi ll increase again to $0.35 per 
square yard as of January 2019.44  During the public comment period for review and approval of 
CARE’s 2017 carpet stewardship plan, dozens of negative comments were submitted over continued 
fee increases, many from flooring businesses concerned with the impact consumer fee increases 
were having on their carpet sales , business, or livelihood .45  As with mattresses,  Maine’s large 
geographic size, low population, and lack of businesses to recycle carpet make it likely that enacting  
a law with the same financing mechanism would result in a per square yard fee at sale even higher 
than the $0.35 fee in California .  Additionally, financing an EPR program fully on revenues collected 
from a fee -at-sale provides little incentive for manufa cturers to design their products for recycling.  
Given these dynamics, an EPR system for carpet  funded at least partially through cost 
internalization may be most appropriate for Maine.    
E. Solar panels     
 Product stewardship for photovoltaic (PV) solar pa nels meets all five criteria outlined in the 
Framework Law.  There are no federal regulations to require solar panel recycling, nor are there any third-party or public recycling programs aside from "limited manufacturer take -back programs."
46  
Recycling is generally motivated by either the value of raw materials or regulations that mandate recycling.  Current technology makes it possible to extract or reuse approximately 80% of the solar 
panel materials.
47 By 2030, estimates suggest it will be technically pos sible to recover raw materials 
from waste solar panels sufficient to “ produce approximately 60 million new panels, or 18 GW of 
power- generation capacity” with an estimated value of “ up to USD 450 million (in 2016 terms) ” and 
“by 2050, the recoverable value  could cumulatively exceed USD 15 billion, equivalent to 2 billion 
panels, or 630 GW.”48 However, on an individual basis, there isn’t "a large amount of money- making 
salvageable parts on any type of solar panel," 49 and it is unlikely that sufficient economi c motivation 
exists to support voluntary development of a robust collection and recycling network. 
 
Approximately two -thirds of solar panels are crystalline -silicon (c -Si), made from 90% glass, 
polymer, and aluminum and  silver, tin, and lead .50  The remaini ng one-third of panels are thin -film, 
made from 98% glass, polymer, and aluminum with 2% copper and zinc and silicon semiconductor 
and may include indium, gallium, selenium, lead, and cadmium and tellurium in the form of 
                                                 
 
43 Public Notice: Consideration of Carpet America Recovery Effort’s California Carpet Stewardship Plan 2018 -2022.   California 
Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery ( CalRecycle ). 
44 California Carpet Stewardship Assessment to Increase on Jan uary 1, 2019, Carpet America Recovery Effort (CARE).  
45 Public Notice: Consideration of Carpet America Recovery Effort’s California Carpet Stewardship Plan 2018 -2022.   California 
Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery ( CalRecycle ). 
46 Enbar, N. PV life cycle analysis: Managing PV assets over an uncertain lifetime. Electronic Power Research Institute, 2016  
47 Ibid. 
48 End-of-life management: So lar photovoltaic panels.  IEA-PVPS Report Number: T12 -06:2016  
49 "It’s time to plan for solar panel recycling in the United States ,” April 2018, Solar Power World.  
50 End-of-life management: So lar photovoltaic panels.  IEA-PVPS Report Number: T12 -06:2016  
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
25 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
cadmium telluride (CdTe).51  Heavy metals  in solar panels including lead, tin, and cadmium can 
pollute the environment and pose threats to human health when panels are not properly managed.52  
Landfill disposal poses risks as the panels may break and leach toxics into the soil53 A recent  PV life 
cycle analysis noted that decommissioning plans for solar sites are meant to include  information on 
safe disposal for all materials, but plans "often don't specify what to do or how to do it."54 
 
Solar panels have an  average  lifetime of 25- 30 years .55  Recycling of solar panels "was not a concern 
during their first 25 years of development,” but early installations are now entering the waste stream in "considerable numbers."
56  Research  modeling projects solar  panel waste in the US may increase 
to between 170,000 to  1 million  metric tons cumulatively by  2030 and to between “7.5- 10 million 
tons in 2050.”57  The  overall proportion of waste to new installations is expected to increase over 
time from an estimated 4 -14% in 2030 and up to more than 80% in 2050.58   
 
 
 
Currently, there are approximately 4,268 solar installations powering 6,568 homes in Maine.59 Prices 
for solar installation have decreased by an estimated 43% over the last five years in Maine, and the 
number of installations increased sharply in 2017.60  Solar panel- specific treatment standards and 
collection and recycling regulations are “crucial to consistently, efficiently and profitably deal with increasing waste volumes.”
61  Given the lack of any solar panel -specific recycling program in Maine, 
muni cipalities are likely to face an increasing financial burden as solar panel waste increases. In the 
                                                 
 
51 Ibid. 
52 Xu, Y., Li, J., Tan, Q., Peters, A. and Yang, C. (2018). Global status of recycling waste solar panels: A review . Waste 
Management,  75, pp.450-458.  
53 Ibid. 
54 Enbar, N. PV life cycle analysis: Managing PV assets over an uncertain lifetime. Electronic Power Research Institute, 2016  
55 Solar Energy Industry Association, PV Recycling: https://www.seia.org/initiatives/pv -recycling  
56 End-of-life management: So lar photovoltaic panels.  IEA-PVPS Report Number: T12 -06:2016  
57 Ibid. 
58 Ibid. 
59 Installations and table from "Maine solar data current through Q3 2018," Solar Energy Industries Association, 2018.  
60Installations and table from "Maine solar data current through Q3 2018," Solar Energy Industries Association, 2018.  
61 End-of-life management: So lar photovoltaic panels.  IEA-PVPS Report Number: T12 -06:2016  
 

 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
26 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
US, the State of Washington has passed EPR legislation for solar panels.  The legislation, passed in 
2017, requires manufacturers to " finance the takeback and recycling system at no cos t to the owner 
of the PV module” by 2021.62 The law requires that the manufacturers’ plan includes  performance 
goals for “ combined reuse and recycling of collected photovoltaic modules as a percentage of the 
total weight of photovoltaic modules collected, which rate must be no less than eighty- five 
percent. ”63 The regulation was part of a larger solar incentives package and is expected to generate 
new jobs and businesses in solar panel recycling. New York ’s Legislature is currentl y considering a 
solar panel EPR bill.64 
 Proactively establishing  EPR for solar panels will allow companies to internalize recovery  costs into 
current production and sales. In addition, the increasing volume of PV waste may improve economies of scale over time.
65 Including incentives for design can also help minimize impacts on 
the environment and increase efficient use of resources for production, collection, and recycling.  
 
 Implementation status for Maine’s other EPR p rogram s  
 
A. Electronic waste  - 38 M.R.S. § 1610  
 
This law was amended by Maine’s 128th Legislature  to increase efficiency by reducing brand -sorting.  
These amendments required changes to the Department’s rule governing ele ctronics recycling; law 
and rule changes went into effect in August .   
 Because of  these changes:   
- historic manufacturers no longer register with the Department and are no longer billed for 
recycling costs;  
- all recycling costs are distribute d among current manufacturers according to a department 
determined recycling share that is based on national market share and adjusted to exempt small 
manufacturers and provide credit to manufacturers with environmentally preferable products 
and takeback p rograms;  
- program payment structure no longer discourages refurbishment; and  
- 3D printers have been added as covered products. 
                                                 
 
62 'Information for manufacturers of PV modules' Department of Ecology, State of Washington.  
63 Chapter 70.355 RCW, Photovoltaic Module Stewardship  and Takeback Program , Washington State Legislature  
64 Senate Bill S2837A , The New York State Senate.  
65 End-of-life management: So lar photovoltaic panels.  IEA-PVPS Report Number: T12 -06:2016  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
27 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
 
 
The question of appropriate product scope was also discussed during the legislative work session 
and was largely unaddressed by the change.   Another change that was not made, though it was 
suggested by program consolidators during both the legislative work session  and department 
rulemaking, was the increase or removal of the per pound cap of recycling costs that can be 
approved by the Department.  
 The department is undertaking an evaluation of the effectiveness of credits feeding into recycling 
share calculations and  payments to consolidators for refurbishment, and gathering information on 
appropriate product scope and the sufficiency of the per pound cap on recycling payments set by department rule.  Overall, e -waste collections continue to level off, likely due to light-weighting in 
the electronics industry.  
B. Mercury auto switches  – 38 M.R.S. § 1665 -A 
 There were no major changes in the implementation of this law in 2018.  This program has been in 
place since 2003, so  Department work mainly consists of telephone contact with previous 
participants to remind them of the need to collect switches and ensure they have materials and information they need to do so. Some work is still done to identify new participants using DMV Car 
Recycler records.   
 During 2017, Maine auto -recyclers co llected 4448 switches containing approximately 9.8 pounds of 
mercury.  This represents 44% of switches estimated to be available for collection and a more than 200% increase from 2016 collections.   
  - 1,000,000 2,000,000 3,000,000 4,000,000 5,000,000 6,000,000 7,000,000 8,000,000 9,000,000
2006
20072008200920102011201220132014201520162017Lbs recycled through program
YearFigure 6:  Pounds of electronic waste recycled 
through the Maine program by product type
TV
PRN
MON
MIXED CEDs
GAME
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
28 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
 The subsection of Chapter 16- B Merc ury-added products and services  that created this stewardship 
program also banned the sale of new vehicles with m ercury -auto switches.  As a result, the number 
of a switches available for collection  is decreasing .  Statute directs the department to recommend 
repeal of the program once the commissioner determines that the number of mercury switches 
available for collection is too small to warrant continued collection.  The department is not 
recommending this action at this point.   
 
End of Life Vehicle Solutions (ELVS), the non-profit entity that runs mercury auto- switch 
collection  programs for auto manufacturers nationally, currently plans to end collection in states 
where switches are collected voluntarily in 2021.  There are no available estimates of the number of 
switches available for recycling after 2017, but extrapolation of the estimates of switches available 
for collection in Maine from previous years suggest that after 2021, the number of available switches 
will be negligible .  Actual collection amounts and information from automobile recyclers in the 
coming years can bette r inform the decision of when Maine’s law should sunset but, barring the 
development of additional information to the contrary , 2021 may be the year. 
 
C. Mercury thermostats  -  38 M.R.S. § 1665 -B 
 Program description:   Maine’s Mercury -added Thermostats  law, 38 M.R.S. § 1665- B, enacted in 2005, 
established extended producer responsibility for the collection and recycling of mercury-added thermostats, and beginning in 2007 required a five- dollar ($5.00) incentive payment for each mercury 
thermostat returned.   
Current performance:   A total of 4,112 mercury thermostats were collected in 2017 (by TRC  and 
through universal waste management), down from 5,190 in 2016 (3,973 by TRC and 139 through universal waste management).  Preliminary data suggests TRC collections dropped to just under Extrapolation of available 
switches using best fit 
trend line 
Year Polynomic (best fit) 
trendline 
extrapolation of 
available switches  
2018 8,000  
2019 6,000  
  
2020 4,000  
2021 1,000  
2022 - y = -47.279x2+ 188811x - 2E+08
R² = 0.9743
050001000015000200002500030000
2000 2005 2010 2015 2020ELVS estimate of available switches
YearFigure 7:  Estimated switches available 
with trendlines for future calculation
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
29 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
3,000 mercury thermostats in 201866.  Since 2001, approximately 534 pounds of mercury has been 
recovered through thermostat recycling efforts in Maine, 86% of which was recovered through 
TRC’s program.67  
As was recommended in the Implementing Product Stewardship in Maine  report submitted to the 
Legislature in February 201 6, TRC  simplified  the manufacturers’ financial incentive payment system 
for wholesaler and contractor locations.  This new process was implemented throughout 2016 and 
2017, and has received many positive comments from collection locations.  Subsequent to the 
Department’s 2016 report, TRC also made significant improvements to data access with a  real-time 
reporting system that provides public access to  TRC’s current and historic mer cury thermostat 
recycling data.   TRC has been waiving  its standard  one- time $2 5 fee for a mercury thermostat bin  to 
encourage participation,  and has provided the Department with new promotional materials focused 
on the $5 incentive to distribute.  In addition, TRC has conducted an annual round of site visits to 
35-45 Maine collectio n locations that had not returned their mercury thermostat bin within the past 
year. 
 
 
 
From 2007- 2016, collections averaged  roughly 5, 200 thermostats per year, consistently at least 40% 
higher than rates achieved before the $5 incentive was implemented.  However, collections declined over the past two years; by 18%  in 2017 and by 25% in 2018
68. 
TRC conducted national and regional advertisi ng campaigns 2017, but campaign efforts that may 
have reached Maine residents  did not contain information about Maine’s program and the $5 
incentive.  However, TRC is currently ramping up its Maine -specific  efforts and has been working 
with the Department to improve its education and outreach campaign in Maine .  Statute requires 
that TRC provide an "analysis of program effectiveness" in its annual report. TRC provides a re cord 
                                                 
 
66 Preliminary 2018 data is based on TRC’s real-time reporting as of 12/28/2018.  
67 Department staff recently reviewed all historic data provided by TRC.  An average of 3.1 8 grams of mercury per 
thermostat was found and used in calculations for this year's report.  In previous reports, an estimate of 4 grams per 
thermostat was used to calculate the total amount of mercury collected.  
68 Preliminary 2018 data is based on TRC’s real-time reporting as of 12/28/2018.  

 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
30 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
of year -to-year collections in Maine and nationwide as well as comparisons between state collections.  
These numbers do not account for the estimated number of thermostats available for collection, nor 
do they compare annual collections to the statutory performance goal of 160 pounds of mercury per 
year (equivalent to roughly 22,822 thermostats) .  TRC reported in 2017 that declines in mercury 
thermostat collections can be explained by the fact that production was phased out by 2007 .  
However, mercury thermostats have a life expectancy of 30 -50 years , although increasing options for 
energy -saving thermostats may r esult in early replacement.  
 
The data show that millions of mercury thermostats were still being sold annually until the mid-
2000s.  In 2017, TRC reported collections of approximately 2.1 million mercury thermostats in its 20 
years of operation, equivalent to 0.00002%  of the mercury contained in thermostats sold in just the 
selective six years shown in the table below, which represent the time period during which mercury thermostats were phased out and sales were dwindling. I t is unknown how many mercury 
thermostats have been collected through other programs or remain in use.  
Without data upon which to base the claim that collections are dropping due to lack of available 
mercury thermostats, TRC and the Department do not have adequate information to assess the 
program’s performance.  The Department continues to recommend  that TRC contract an 
independent third-party study to determine the expected annual outflow of mercury-
added thermostats from Maine.  The 
results of such a study would allow the 
Department to ac hieve a more accurate 
quantitative evaluation of program performance and better target efforts to 
improve collection rates, and could serve 
as a basis for adjusting statutory goals as 
appropriate.   
 
  
D. Architectural paint . 38 M.R.S. § 2144  
 Program description:   PaintCare is a non -profit third -party organization established by the paint 
manufacturers to fulfill their responsibilities under EP R laws in effect in 8 states and the District of 
Columbia.  The costs of operating the PaintCare program are funded by a fee levied at the point of 
sale on paint. 
 
Consumers may return unwanted architectural paint  at no cost to participating retail and municipal 
collection sites, and to municipally -offered household hazardous waste (HHW) collection events 
that partner with Pain tCare .  PaintCare provides the collection sites with gaylords (boxes that are 
approximately one cubic yard in size) for collection and shipping of the paint, in-person training and a training manual, and education and outreach materials for customers. In addition, PaintCare’s 
Program Manager visits each collection location throughout the state at least once annually. 
 
                                                 
 
69 Table data is based on fact sheet: IMERC Mercury Use in Thermostats, 2015.  Figure 9 - Total mercury sold in thermostats 
(pounds)69 
Year Pounds mercury  Estimated thermostats  
2001  29,253  4,172,659  
2004  28,901  4,122,449  
2007  7,485  1,067,663  
2010  32 4,564  
2013  102 14,549  
2016  0 0 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
31 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
Current performance:   PaintCare reports on a fiscal year (July 1 – June 30) basis.  In FY 2018 (July 
1, 2017 – June 30, 2018), PaintCare collected and processed 129,907 gallons of postconsumer paint, 
76% of which was latex and 24% of which was oil -based.  The program had a recycling rate of 
approximately 59% in 2017, an increase over the 2016 recycling rate of 50%.70  90% of the oil-based 
paint was used as fuel and 10% was recycled into new paint; the percentages of oil -based paint 
recycled was slightly higher than in the pr evious reporting period.  83% of the collected latex was 
made into recycle -content paint and 1% was used as fuel; 16% was unrecyclable and sent to landfills 
for disposal .  These percentages were unchanged from the previous reporting period.  In addition, 
105 tons of consumer packaging, i.e., metal and plastic containers, were recycled.   
 PaintCare's analysis shows that its collection network provides a permanent collection site within 15 
miles of 94.2% of Maine's population, exceeding the 90% goal set in s tatute.  The current fees at sale 
are adequate to fund the program going forward in 2018, PaintCare established a separate subsidiary to operate the Maine program, keeping all funds collected in Maine for Maine program activity only.   
 In FY 2018 , PaintCa re reached out to housing authorities in Maine, ran Facebook online 
advertisements, conducted a print newspaper advertisement campaign, and provided pamphlets, posters, brochures, and other materials for collection sites.  This advertising effort was noted to be 
limited due to budget constraints as PaintCare sought to make up costs incurred prior to program 
implementation .  The program ended the fiscal year with a surplus of $270,717, and PaintCare has 
indicated that it will employ  a variety of media activi ties to grow public awareness of the program, 
including television, radio, online and newspaper advertising, as program's financial  health  improves.  
 
E. Plastic bags.  38 M.R.S. § 1605  
 
Maine’s “Plastic bags; recycling” law requires retailers that use plastic bags to have a receptacle within 20 feet of their store entrance to collect used plastic bags and to ensure the bags are collected.  
Rates of compli ance with this “self -implem enting” law are unknown.  T he Department does not 
have the resources to inspect retailers to assess compliance, but does provide technical assistance 
when complaints are received . 
 
 Conclusion   
 
Over the past 2 decades Maine and other jurisdictions in the U .S. and Canada have gained significant 
experience implementing mandatory product stewardship programs.  In this report, the Department has applied lessons learned from this experience to recommend amendments to Maine’s current 
laws to improve the effective ness of existing programs in ensuring the safe handling of products 
containing toxics and in diverting materials from disposal.  These “lessons learned”  also can  be used 
to inform  discussions as Maine develops legislative proposals for new EPR program s.  Given recent 
upheavals in recycling markets, an EPR program  for packaging  can help address the financial burden 
that municipalities bear in fulfilling their responsibilities for managing MSW while ensuring materials 
continue to be recycled .  Additionally, pharmaceuticals, mattresses, carpet and solar panels are other 
products that present end-of- life management challenges that may be addressed by carefully -
constructed EPR programs. 
                                                 
 
70 Based on the estimate that a pproximately 10% of paint sold each year is left over.  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
32 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
    
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
Appendices   
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
33 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
Appendix A  – Proposed c hanges to Maine’s Product Stewardship law  
 
An Act to Improve Maine’s Product Stewardship Law  
 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  
Sec. 1.    38 M.R.S. §1776, is amended  to read:   
A product stewardship program established for a product or product category designated by the Legislature for 
inclusion in a product stewardship program must be established and implemented in accordance with the provisions 
of this section.   
1. Program.   A producer selling a product in the State that is a designated product or that is in a designated 
product category is responsible individually, collectively or through a stewardship organization for the 
implementation and financing of a product stewardship program to manage the product at the end of the product's 
life in ac cordance with the priorities in section 2101.  
A. The program must include a collection system that is convenient and adequate to serve the needs of covered entities in both rural and urban areas , including a permanent collection site within 15 miles of 90%  of Maine 
residents within 1 year of the start of product collections unless the commissioner determines the 90% 
requirement is not practicable due to geographical constraints  or that an alternative collection system will result 
in equivalent and more efficient collection .  
B. The program must provide for effective education and outreach to promote the use of the program and to 
ensure that collection options are understood by c overed entities.   
C. A producer or stewardship organization, including a producer's or stewardship organization's officers, 
members, employees and agents that organize a product stewardship program under this chapter, is immune from liability for the producer's or stewardship organization's conduct under state laws relating to antitrust, 
restraint of trade, unfair trade practices and other regulation of trade or commerce only to the extent necessary 
to plan and implement the producer's or stewardship organi zation's chosen organized collection or recycling 
system.  
D. The program must provide for a minimum ½ -time emplouee of esch producer or stewardship organization  
dedicated to implementing the program in Maine. 
2. Requirement for sale.  One hundred eighty d ays after a product stewardship plan under subsection 5 is 
approved in accordance with subsection 8, a producer may not sell or offer for sale in the State the relevant product, unless the producer of the product participates individually, collectively or through a product stewardship program 
in accordance with an approved product stewardship plan.
 
3. No fee.   A product stewardship program may not charge a fee at the time an unwanted product is delivered or 
collected for recycling or disposal.  
4. Costs.   Producers in a product stewardship program shall finance the collection, transportation , and reuse, 
recycling or disposition of the relevant product,  effective education and outreach, program assessment, reporting, 
any incentives necessary to achieve program  collection goals , reasonable fees to the department for review of the 
program plan  and any proposed amendments , and an  annual fee to cover the actual costs for annual report review, 
oversight, administration and enforcement. The annual fee may not exceed $100,000 per year  per stewardship 
program . 
5. Requirement to submit a plan.   Within one year of a product's or product category's being designated for 
inclusion in a product stewardship program, the relevant producer or stewardship organization shall submi t a 
product stewardship plan to the department for approval. The plan must include:  
A. Identification and contact information for:  
(1) The individual or entity submitting the plan;  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
34 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
(2) All producers participating in the product stewardship program;  
(3) The  owners of the brands covered by the program; and  
(4) If using a stewardship organization, the stewardship organization, including a description of the 
organization and the tasks to be performed by the organization. The description must include information  
on how the organization is organized, including administration of the organization and management of the 
organization;   
B. A description of the collection system, including:  
(1) The types of sites or other collection services to be used;  
(2) How all produ cts covered under the product stewardship program will be collected in all counties of 
the State; and  
(3) How the collection system will be convenient and adequate to serve the needs of all entities;  
C. The names and locations of recyclers, processors and  disposal facilities that may be used by the product 
stewardship program;   
D. Information on how the product and product components will be safely and securely transported, tracked 
and handled from collection through final disposition;  
E. If possible, a  A description of the methods to be used to reuse, deconstruct or and recycle the unwanted 
product to ensure that the product components are transformed or remanufactured to the extent feasible;   
F. A description of how the convenience and adequacy of the co llection system will be monitored and 
maintained;  
G. A description of how the amount of product and product components collected, recycled, processed, reused and disposed of will be measured;  
 
H. A description of the education and outreach methods that wi ll be used to recruit, train and monitor collection 
sites, and to encourage participation  by collection sites and consumers throughout the state  on an on -going 
basis ;  
I. A description of how education and outreach methods will be evaluated , including at a  minimum an annual 
consumer awareness survey to assess consumer knowledge about product management options and collection 
locations.  The survey questions  and methodology  must be approved by the Department and the survey must be 
administered by a third party ;   
J. Any  A description of how program performance will be assessed, including  performance  goals  established by 
producers or a stewardship organization  to show success  of the program. When the performance goal is 
expressed as a recycling or diversion from disposal rate, the plan must include a description of the methodology 
and the relevant historic sales data used to develop the rate.  The department shall keep sales information 
submitted pursuant to this paragraph confidential as provided under section 1310-B.  The performance goals 
must include at least 50% of Maine residents having awareness in the third year of program implementation, or 
a recycling rate of at least  50% in the third year of program implementation and 80% in the sixth year of 
program implementation unless sufficient evidence is provided to justify alternative performance goals ; and  
K. A description of how the program will be financed. If the program is financed by a per unit assessment  paid 
by the producer to a stewardship organization  consumer at the point of sale , a plan for an annual 3rd -party audit 
to ensure revenue from the assessment does not exceed the cost of implementing the product stewardsh ip 
program must be included. , and  
L.  An anticipated budget for the program, broken down into administrative, collection, transportation, 
disposition , and communication costs .  The annual budget must be sufficient to fund a minimum ½ -time 
employee of each producer or stewardship organization  dedicated to implementing the program in Maine, and 
funds to reimburse the department fo r its costs incurred in  implementing the program.   The budget must  not 
include costs for legal fees or costs related to legislative  efforts. 
6. Plan amendments.   Changes to an approved product stewardship plan may be initiated by the responsible 
manufacturers or by the department.  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
35 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
A.  A change to an approved product stewardship plan by a manufacturer must be submitted to the department 
for review prior to the implementation of that change. If a change is not substantive, such as the addition of or a 
change to collection locations, or if an additional producer joins the product stewardship program, approval is 
not needed, but the producer or stewardship organization operating the program must inform the department of 
the change within 14 days of implementing the change. The department shall review plan amendments in accordance with subsection 8.  
B.  When the department determines that a product stewardship program has failed to make adequate progress 
toward achieving program goals, the department shall notify the responsible entities in writing of its findings 
and may direct the manufacturer to implement specific changes to the p rogram plan  within 6 months of the 
written notification .  This may include the implementation  of financial incentives or a deposit/refund system if 
appropriate for the product.  
7. Annual reporting.   By February  March 1st of the calendar year after the calendar year in which an approved 
product stewardship program is implemented, and annually thereafter, the producer or stewardship organization operating the program shall submit to the department a report on the program for the previous calendar year. The report must include, at a minimum:
 
A. The amount of each product collected by collection site per county;   
B. A description of the methods used to collect, transport and process the product;   
C. An evaluation of the program  performance, including, if possible, diversion and recycling rates together with 
certificates of recycling or similar confirmations  and an evaluation of the convenience of collection ;  
D. A description of the methods used for education and outreach efforts and an evaluation of the c onvenience 
of collection  and the effectiveness of outreach and education. Every 2 years, the report must include the results 
of an assessment of the methods used for and effectiveness of education and outreach efforts. The assessment must be completed by a 3rd party; 
 
E. If applicable, the report of the 3rd -party audit conducted to ensure that revenue collected from the 
assessment does not exceed implementation costs pursuant to subsection 5, paragraph K; and  
F. Any recommendations for changes to the product stewardship program to improve convenience of 
collection, consumer education and program evaluation ; and 
G. A financial report on the program, including: the total cost of implementing the program, as determined by 
an independent financial audit, includ ing a breakdown of administrative, collection, transportation, disposition 
and communication costs; and an anticipated budget for the next program year.  
8. Department review and approval.  Within 20 business  120 days after receipt of a proposed product 
stewardship plan, the department shall determine whether the plan complies with subsection 5  this section . If the 
plan is approved, the department shall notify the submitter in writing. If the department rejects th e plan, the 
department shall notify the submitter in writing stating the reason for rejecting the plan. A submitter whose plan is 
rejected must submit a revised plan to the department within 60 days of receiving a notice of rejection.  
 
  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
36 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
Appendix B – Proposed c hanges to Maine’s Mercury -added Lamp law  
 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  
Sec. 1.    38 M.R.S. §1 672, is amended to read:  
 
1. Definitions.   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have the 
following meanings.  
… 
E. Covered entity.  "Covered entity" means a household in this State, a business or nonprofit organization in this 
State exempt from taxation under the United States Internal Revenue Code of 1986, Section 501( c)(3) that 
employs 100 or fewer individuals, an elementary school in this State or a secondary school in this State.  
F. Proprietary information.  "Proprietary information" means information that is a trade secret or production, 
commercial or financial info rmation the disclosure of which would impair the competitive position of the 
submitter and which is  not otherwise publicly available.  
 
G. "Population center" means an urbanized area or urban cluster as defined by the United States Department of 
Commerce, Bureau of the Census to identify areas of high population density and urban land use with a 
population of 2,500 or greater.   
 
Sec. 2.    38 M.R.S. §1 672, is amended to read:  
 
4. Manufacturer recycling programs for household mercury -added lamps.   Effective January 1, 2011, each 
manufacturer of mercury -added lamps sold or distributed for household  use by covered entities  in the State on or 
after January 1, 2001 shall individually or collectively implement a department -approved program for the recy cling 
of mercury -added lamps from households covered entities.  
 
A. The recycling program required under this subsection must include , but is not limited to, the following : 
(1) Convenient collection locations adequate to serve the needs of covered entities in both rural and urban 
areas  located  throughout the State where residents covered entities  can drop off their household mercury -
added  lamps without cost, including but not limited to municipal collection sites and participating retail 
establishments;  
(a) A method to determine the number and geographic distribution of lamp collection sites based on 
the use of geographic information modeling. By January 1, 2020 t he program  must provide that at least 
90% of state residents have a permanent lamp collection sit e within a 15 -mile radius of their 
residences, unless the commissioner determines that the 90% requirement is not practicable due to 
geographical constraints. If the commissioner determines the 90% requirement is not practicable, the 
commissioner may appro ve a plan that includes a geographic distribution of lamp collection sites that 
is practicable. The distribution of lamp collection sites must include at least one additional lamp 
collection site for each 30,000 residents in a population center that is loc ated to provide convenient and 
reasonably equitable access for residents within the population center unless otherwise approved by the 
commissioner;  
(b) Identification of the ways in which the program will coordinate with existing solid waste collection 
programs and events, including strategies to reach the State's residents who do not have a permanent 
lamp collection site within a 15 -mile radius of their residences and to ensure adequate coverage of 
service center communities as defined in Title 30 -A, sec tion 4301, subsection 14- A;   
(2) Handling and recycling equipment and practices in compliance with the universal waste rules adopted 
pursuant to section 1319- O, subsection 1, paragraph F, with subsection 6 if a crushing device is used and 
with all other a pplicable requirements;  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
37 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
(3) Provision of educat ion and outreach efforts by the manufacturer  to promote the program. The education 
and outreach efforts must include strategies for reaching consumers in all areas of the State  and must ensure 
that collection options are understood by covered entities ; 
Effective  The education and outreach program , including, but not limited to,  shall, at a minimum, include 
posters, window clings,  and point -of-purchase signs and other materials provided to retail establishments  
collection locations  without cost; and that can be prominently displayed and will be easily visible to the 
consumer, and outreach to the general public including annual web, print, and radio media campaigns in 
both rural and urban areas throughout the Stat e. 
(4) Goals for consumer awareness of the requirement to recycle mercury -added lamps and lamp collection 
locations, provisions for routinely evaluating the effectiveness of education and outreach efforts; and 
procedures for improving education and outreac h efforts if goals are not achieved;  
(5) A minimum ½ -time employee of one or more manufacturers dedicated to implementing the program in 
Maine; and  
(4) (6) An annual report to the department which must, at a minimum, include the following information:  
(a) on tThe number of mercury -added lamps recycled under the manufacturer's program and 
recommendations for  program modifications to  increas e the percentage of discarded  lamps recycled 
under the recycling program;  
(b), tThe estimated percentage of mercury -added lamps available for recycling that were recycled 
under the program;  
(c) and t The methodology for estimating the number of mercury -added lamps available for recycling, 
which must include an assumption of the average li fe span by type of mercury -added lamp and number 
of lamps sold by type in the years on which the recycling calculation is based.  If the manufacturer may 
designates this a s proprietary information , the department  shall handle this information in the same 
manner as confidential information is handled under section 1310-B ;  
(d) A description of the methods used for education and outreach efforts and  an evaluation of the 
effectiveness of the recycling program,  recommendations for increasing the number of lamps recycled 
under the recycling program  education and outreach.  This must include a  description of the methods 
used for measuring consumer awareness of the requirement to recycle mercury -added lamps , and e very 
2 years the results of an assessment of consumer awareness of the program completed by an 
independent thi rd party ;  
(e) The location of and contact information for each collection point established under the program, 
and an assessment of the convenience of collection ; 
(f) Any recommendations for changes to the product stewardship program to improve convenience of 
collection, consumer education and program evaluation; and  
(g) and a An accounting of the costs associated with administering and implementing the recycling 
progr am;  
… 
F. The department may determine that a manufacturer's recycling program is in compliance with paragraph A, 
subparagraphs (1), (2) and (4) for the collection of compact fluorescent mercury -added  lamps from households 
covered entities  if the manufactur er provides adequate financial support for the collection and recycling of such 
lamps to municipalities and a conservation program established pursuant to Title 35 -A, section 10110 and 
implemented by the Efficiency Maine Trust.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
38 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
Appendix C – Proposed replacement for Maine’s rechargeable battery recycling law  
 
An Act to Establish Comprehensive Consumer Battery Recycling  
 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  
 
Sec. 1.  38 MRSA §1611 is enacted to read:  
§ 1611. Stewardship program for small batteries  
  
1.  Purpose.   It is the intent of the legislature that the cost associated with the handling, recycling, and disposal 
of used batteries be the responsibility of the producers and consumers of batteries, not the local government or their 
service providers, state government, or tax payers.  These costs should be internalized at or before the point of sale.  
 
Further, it is the intent of the legislature that materials in batteries be made available for use in new products and, 
therefore, that they should be recycled to the greatest extent possible.  Battery stewardship in this state should 
incentivize the design and marketing of batteries and battery -containing products that are more recyclable, less 
hazardous, and, in general, more environmentally sound.  
 
2. Definitions.     As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have the 
following meanings.  
  
A.  "Approved product" means:  
  
(1) A covered battery or a covered battery -containing product the producer of which participates in a 
battery stewardship program approved by the department; or  
  
(2) A covered battery -containing product that has been listed in accordance with subsection 9 as the 
product of a participant in a covered battery stewardship program.  
  
B. “Battery stewardship plan” means a plan submitted to the commissioner in accordance with 
subsection 3 by a producer or a battery stewardship organization.  
 
C. “Battery stewardship program” means a system implemented for the collection, transportation, recycling, 
and disposal of covered batteries and/or covered battery -containing products in accordance with a battery 
stewardship plan approved by the Department.  
 
D. "Brand" means a trademark, including both a registered and an unregi stered trademark, a logo, a name, a 
symbol, a word, an identifier or a traceable mark that identifies a covered battery or covered battery -
containing product and identifies as the producer of the battery or product the owner or licensee of the brand.  
  
E.  "Covered battery" means a new or unused primary battery or a small rechargeable battery.  
  
F.  "Covered battery -containing product" means a new or unused primary battery- containing product or a 
rechargeable battery -containing product, or a product containing a covered battery that is not easily removed 
from the product using common household tools . 
 
 (1) a product subject to section 1610 from which a primary battery  or a rechargeable battery  is not 
easily removed or is not intended or designed to be removed from the product other than by the 
manufacturer;  
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
39 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
(2) a medical device, as described in the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, 21 United States 
Code, Section 321(h) (2012), if, when the  device or battery within the device is discarded, it must 
be treated as biomedical waste or if changing the supplier of the battery contained in the medical 
device would trigger the need for premarket review of the device with the United Staes Food and 
Drug Administration pursuant to the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, 21 United States Code, 
Section 360 (2012), unless such device is listed as an exempt device under 21 united States Code, 
Section 360 (m)(2012) or other applicable provisions of law.  
  
 G.  "Discarded battery" means a covered battery that a user discarded, abandoned or sent for recycling.  
  
H.  "Operator" means a producer or covered battery stewardship organization that implements and 
administers a covered battery stewardship program.  
  
I.  "Participant" means a producer that establishes or participates in a covered battery stewardship program 
individually or by appointing and having that appointment accepted by a covered battery stewardship 
organization to operate the program on the produ cer's behalf. 
  
J.  "Primary battery" means a nonrechargeable battery that weighs 2 kilograms or less, including, but not 
limited to, nonrechargeable alkaline, carbon -zinc and lithium metal batteries.  
  
K.  "Producer" means, with respect to a covered battery or covered battery -containing product that is sold, 
offered for sale or distributed for sale in the State, the following:  
  
(1) The person that manufactures the covered battery or covered battery -containing product and sells or 
offers for sale in t he State that battery or product under the person's own brand;  
  
(2) If there is no person to which subparagraph (1) applies, the owner or licensee of a brand under which 
the covered battery or covered battery -containing product is sold or distributed in the State; or  
  
(3) If there is no person to which subparagraph (1) or (2) applies, a person, including, but not limited to, 
a wholesaler or retailer, that imports the covered battery or covered battery -containing product into the 
United States for sale or  distribution in the State.  
  
L.  "Proprietary information" means information that is a trade secret or production, commercial or financial 
information the disclosure of which would impair the competitive position of the submitter and would make 
available information not otherwise publicly available.  
 
M.  "Rechargeable battery" means a battery that contains one or more voltaic or galvanic cells, 
electrically connected to produce electric energy, that weighs less than 5 kilograms and that is designed to be 
recharged and to provide less than 40 volts direct current. "Rechargeable battery" does not include:  
 (1) A battery that contains electrolyte as a free liquid; or  
 (2) A battery or battery pack that employs lead -acid technology, unless the battery or battery pack is 
sealed, contains no liquid electrolyte and is intended by its manufacturer to power a handheld device or to 
provide uninterrupted backup electrical power protection for consumer covered battery -containing 
products or stationary office equipment.  
N.  "Recycling" means any process through which a discarded covered battery or its components or by -
products is transformed from its original identity or form into new usable or marketable material. "Recycling" 
does not include the incineration of a discarded covered battery or its components or by -products for energy 
recovery.  
  
O.  "Retailer" means a person that sells or offers a covered battery or covered battery -containing product for 
retail sale, as defined in Title 36, section 1752, subsection 11, in the State, including through a remote offering 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
40 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
for sale, such as a sales outlet or sales catalog or via the Internet.  
  
P. “Stewardship organization” means an organization appointed by more than one producer to design, submit 
a plan for, implement, and administer a battery stewardship program in accordance with this section.  
Q.  "Wholesaler" means a person that offers for sale or sells in the State a covered battery or covered battery -
containing product in a sale that is not a retail sale, as defined in Title 36, section 1752, subsection 11, with 
the intention that the battery or product be resold.  
  
2.  Product labeling.     By January 1, 2020, a producer that sells, offers for sale or distributes for sale in the 
State a covered battery, either as a replacement battery or packaged with or contained in a covered battery -containing 
product, shall, to the extent feasible, ensure that the covered battery is labeled in a manner identifying the chemistry 
employed in storing energy in the battery to facilitate s orting of discarded batteries by recyclers. 
  
3.  Submission of plan. No later than 6 months after the effective date of this section, except as specified in 
subsection 6 or 10, each producer of a covered battery or covered battery -containing product, indi vidually or through 
a battery stewardship organization, shall submit a plan for the establishment of a battery stewardship program to the 
commissioner for approval. The plan must include, at a minimum and where applicable:  
  
A. Identification and contact information for:  
(1) The individual or entity submitting the plan;  
(2) All producers participating in the battery stewardship program;  
(3) A listing of the brands and the owners of the brands covered by the program; and  
(4) If a stewardship organization, a  description of the organization and the tasks to be performed by the 
organization. The description must include information on how the organization is organized, including 
administration and management of the organization;  
  
B.  A description of the colle ction system, including:  
(1) The types of sites or other collection services to be used, including as applicable a description of how 
the program may use covered battery collection points that are established through other battery collection 
services;  
(2) A description of how the program will provide convenient, free statewide collection opportunities for 
discarded batteries adequate to serve the needs of all entities;  
(3) The criteria to be used by the program in determining whether an entity may serve as a collection 
location for covered batteries under the program.  The plan must allow all retailers, wholesalers, 
municipalities, solid waste management facilities and other entities that meet such criteria to voluntarily 
serve as a collection location;  and 
(4) A description of how the convenience and adequacy of the collection system will be monitored and 
maintained;  
 
C.  Information on how discarded covered batteries will be safely and securely transported, tracked and 
handled from collection through f inal disposition;  
 
D.  The names and locations of recyclers, processors and disposal facilities that may be used by the 
product stewardship program, and a description of the methods that will be used to ensure that the 
components of the discarded batteries  are recycled to the maximum extent practicable or otherwise 
responsibly managed;  
 
E. A description of how the amount of product and product components collected, recycled, processed, 
reused and disposed of will be measured;  
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
41 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
F.  A description of the educ ation and outreach methods that will be used to establish, train and monitor 
collection sites, and to encourage participation by collection sites and consumers throughout the state on an 
on-going basis;  
 
G. A description of how program performance will be assessed, including performance goals that include, at 
a minimum, at least 50% of Maine residents knowing how to recycle their covered batteries in the third year 
of program implementation and 80% in the sixth year of program implementation;  
  
H.  An anticipated budget for the program, broken down into administrative, collection, transportation, 
disposition, and communication costs.  The annual budget must fund a minimum ½ -time person dedicated to 
implementing the program in Maine, and funds to reimburse t he department for its costs incurred in 
implementing the program.  The budget must not include costs for legal fees or costs related to legislative 
efforts.  
 
I.  If the plan is submitted by an organization, a description of the financing method through whi ch 
implementation of the plan will be funded. The financing method must:  
  
(1) Allocate to producers of primary batteries and primary battery -containing products costs that are 
directly attributable to the  collection, transportation and  recycling of primary batteries, such as reclamation 
costs;  
  
(2) Allocate to producers of small rechargeable batteries and rechargeable battery -containing products 
costs that are directly attributable to the collection, transportation and recycling of rechargeable batteries, 
such as reclamation costs; and  
  
(3) Allocate all other costs on the basis of the weights of types of batteries collected or some other 
nondiscriminatory basis acceptable to participating producers of primary batteries, small rechar geable 
batteries, primary battery -containing products and rechargeable battery -containing products.  
  
4.  Approval of plan.  The commissioner shall review a plan submitted under subsection 3 and make a 
determination of whether to approve the plan within 90 days of receipt of the plan. In conducting a review of a 
submitted plan, the commissioner may consult with producers, associations representing producers, covered battery 
stewardship organizations, retailers and recyclers.  
 
A.  If the commissioner determines that a submitted plan fails to meet all applicable requirements of 
subsection 3, the commissioner shall provide to the producer or organization that submitted the plan a 
written notice of determination describing the reasons for rejecting the plan. No later than 45 days after 
receiving a written notice of determination from the commissioner rejecting a submitted plan, the producer 
or organization may amend the plan and resubmit the plan to the commissioner for reconsideration. The 
commissioner shall review an amended plan, make a determination of whether to approve the amended 
plan and provide a written notice of determination notifying the producer or organization of the 
commissioner's decision within 45 days of receipt of the amended plan. A producer or organization whose 
amended plan is rejected by the commissioner may appeal the commissioner's decision in accordance with 
section 346.  
 
B.  If the commissioner approves a submitted plan, the commissioner shall provide to the producer or 
organization that  submitted the plan a written notice of determination of the plan's approval. No later than 
30 days after receiving a written notice of determination from the commissioner approving a submitted 
plan, the producer or organization shall make the approved plan available on its publicly accessible 
website, but is not required to make available any information contained in the approved plan protected 
under the Uniform Trade Secrets Act.  
 
C.  No later than 45 days after the commissioner's approval of a submitted plan, the department shall make 
available on its publicly accessible website a list of participants in and brands of covered batteries and 
covered battery -containing products included under the approved plan or provide instructions on how to 
obtain such information as provided by the producer or organization that submitted the approved plan.  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
42 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
 
5.  Implementation of plan.  A producer or organization that submitted a plan approved by the 
commissioner under subsection 4 shall implement the plan no later than th e first day of the next calendar quarter 
after the date the plan is approved by the commissioner, except that if the period of time between the date the plan is 
approved and the first day of the next calendar quarter is less than 60 days, the producer or organization shall 
implement the plan within 60 days after the date the plan is approved.  
  
6.  Amendment of plan and termination of program.  This subsection governs amendment of a plan 
approved under subsection 4 and termination of a program established under an approved plan.  
 
A.  An approved plan under subsection 4 may be amended at the discretion of the producer or organization 
that submitted the plan without approval from the commissioner if the proposed amendments are non -
substantive and do not signi ficantly alter the likelihood that the plan will result in the successful collection 
and recycling of discarded batteries.  The producer or organization shall at the beginning of each calendar 
quarter notify the department of any amendments made to the app roved plan in the previous calendar 
quarter that are non -substantive and do not significantly alter the likelihood that the plan will result in the 
successful collection and recycling of discarded batteries.   
 
B.  If proposed amendments to an approved pla n are substantive and would significantly alter the likelihood 
that the plan will result in the successful collection and recycling of discarded batteries, including, but not 
limited to, amendments eliminating a substantial number of retail collection loca tions, adding or deleting 
battery chemistries to be collected, addressing threats to the financial viability of the organization or 
addressing disruption in transportation or service affecting the ability of the producer or organization or any 
service providers to collect or process covered batteries or covered battery -containing products, the 
producer or organization shall submit to the commissioner a revised plan describing the proposed 
amendments. The commissioner shall review the revised plan and make a determination of whether to 
approve the proposed amendments, in whole or in part, within 90 days of receipt of the revised plan. If the 
commissioner determines that the revised plan fails to meet all applicable requirements of subsection 3, the 
commission er shall provide to the producer or organization a written notice of determination describing the 
reasons for rejecting the revised plan. No later than 45 days after receiving a written notice of 
determination from the commissioner rejecting a revised plan , the producer or organization may amend and 
resubmit the revised plan to the commissioner for reconsideration. The commissioner shall review an 
amended revised plan, make a determination of whether to approve the amended revised plan and provide a 
written  notice of determination notifying the producer or organization of the commissioner's decision 
within 45 days of receipt of the amended revised plan. Review and consideration by the commissioner of a 
revised plan under this paragraph, including whether the  commissioner will hold a hearing on the revised 
plan, shall be conducted in accordance with the department’s rules concerning the processing of 
applications and other administrative matters.  A producer or organization whose revised plan is rejected by 
the commissioner may appeal the commissioner's decision in accordance with section 346.  
 
C.  A producer or organization that submitted a plan approved under subsection 4 may terminate the 
program implementing that plan no earlier than 90 days after providing  notice to the commissioner and to 
program participants of the program's termination. Prior to the termination of a program, each producer 
included in the program shall, individually or through a covered battery stewardship organization that has 
agreed to act on the producer's behalf, submit a plan for the establishment of a covered battery stewardship 
program to the commissioner for approval consistent with subsection 3 or join an existing organization.  
 
D.  A plan approved under subsection 4 remains in ef fect until a revised plan is adopted in accordance with 
paragraph B or the program implementing that plan is terminated in accordance with paragraph C by the 
producer or organization that submitted the plan.  
  
7.  Collection locations.  This subsection applies to collection locations.  
 
A.  A retailer, a wholesaler, a municipality, a solid waste management facility and any other private or 
public entity may voluntarily serve as a collection location for discarded batteries under an approved and 
implemente d program, so long as the operator of the program determines that the collection location meets 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
43 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
the criteria for collection locations established under the program’s approved plan.   
 
B.  The participants in a program must fully underwrite the costs of battery collection containers provided 
to each collection location established under the program, including the costs of all materials necessary to 
comply with the safe collection requirements of subsection 12, as well as the costs of pickup and 
transportatio n of discarded batteries from each collection location, and may not charge a collection location 
for such items or services.     
 
C.  An entity serving as a collection location shall not be required to make available more than one battery 
collection container at a single location.  
 
D.  An entity serving as a collection location may not refuse collection of batteries based on the brand or 
brands of the batteries.  The operator of the program may not refuse the pickup or transfer of collected 
batteries from a  collection location based on the brand or brands of the batteries collected.  
 
E.  An entity serving as a collection location may not charge consumers any fee relating to the collection of 
discarded batteries at the collection point.  An entity serving as a collection location may not impose any 
fee on the operator of the program as a condition of voluntarily agreeing to serve as a collection location.   
 
 8.  Sales prohibition.  This subsection governs the sale of covered batteries and covered battery -containing 
products in the State.  
 
A.  Beginning July 1, 2020, a manufacturer, dist ributor, wholesaler or retailer may not sell, offer for sale, 
distribute for sale or offer for promotional purposes in the State a covered battery or covered battery -
containing product unless the producer of the battery or product has joined an existing covered battery 
stewardship organization or submitted a plan for the establishment of a covered battery stewardship 
program that has been approved by the commissioner.  
 
B.  Notwithstanding paragraph A, a manufacturer, distributor, wholesaler or retailer may continue to sell, 
distribute for sale, offer for sale or offer for promotional purposes in the State a covered battery or covered 
battery -containing product manufactured prior to July 1, 2020, but shall:  
 
(1) By October 1, 2020, sell or otherwise divest or  dispose of its remaining stock of covered 
batteries manufactured prior to July 1, 2020 by a producer that has not joined an existing covered 
battery stewardship organization or submitted a plan for the establishment of a covered battery 
stewardship progra m that has been approved by the commissioner; and  
 
(2) By October 1, 2021, sell or otherwise divest or dispose of its remaining stock of covered 
battery -containing products manufactured prior to July 1, 2020 by a producer that has not joined 
an existing co vered battery stewardship organization or submitted a plan for the establishment of a 
covered battery stewardship program that has been approved by the commissioner.  
 
C.  Notwithstanding paragraphs A and B, beginning July 1, 2021 , a manufacturer, distribu tor, wholesaler 
or retailer of medical devices, as described in the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, 21 United States 
Code, Section 321(h) (2012), may not sell, offer for sale, distribute for sale or offer for promotional 
purposes in the State a medical device containing batteries not included in a plan approved under 
subsection 4, except that a manufacturer, distributor, wholesaler or retailer may continue to sell, distribute 
for sale, offer for sale or offer for promotional purposes in the State a medical device manufactured prior to 
July 1, 2021, but shall, by October 1, 2022, sell or otherwise divest or dispose of its remaining stock of 
medical devices containing batteries manufactured prior to July 1, 2021 by a producer that has not joined 
an existi ng covered battery stewardship organization or submitted a plan for the establishment of a covered 
battery stewardship program that has been approved by the commissioner.  Notwithstanding subsection 1, 
paragraph L, prior to July 1, 2022, a manufacturer, di stributor, wholesaler or retailer of medical devices 
shall not be considered a producer under this section.  
 
D.  Notwithstanding paragraphs A, B or C, a hospital or other health care provider may until July 1, 2027 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
44 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
continue to sell or otherwise exhaust its existing inventory of medical devices containing batteries 
manufactured prior to July 1, 2020 and not included in a plan approved under subsection 4.  
 
9.  Producer exclusions .  Notwithstanding subsection 1, paragraph K, a person that manufactures, sell s, 
offers for sale or imports for sale in the State a covered battery -containing product is not considered a producer 
under this section if, no later than 45 days after receiving a request from the commissioner or an operator, the 
person:  
 
A.  Verifies to  the commissioner or the operator that the product only contains batteries with visible, 
permanent labels clearly identifying the producer or brand of the batteries , that the battery is easily 
removed  and that the producer or brand is a participant in or c overed  under the operator’s program; and  
 
B.  Identifies the chemistry type of the batteries contained in the product and provides data on the estimated 
weight of batteries contained in the products sold in the State.  In January of each year thereafter, the 
person shall notify the commissioner or the operator as to any changes to the chemistry type of the batteries 
contained in the product or the estimated weights of batteries contained in the products sold in the State.  
 
An operator of a covered battery stewardship program that includes the covered battery contained in the person's 
covered battery -containing product shall list the person as a participant in and the product as covered under the 
operator's program.  If the producer of the covered battery contained in the person’s covered battery -containing 
product subsequently terminates its participation in a covered battery stewardship program in the State, or if the 
person ceases to use covered batteries in its covered battery -containing product that are produced by a participant in 
or are covered under an existing covered battery stewardship program in the State, the person shall be considered a 
producer under subsection 1, paragraph L, and must join an existing covered battery stewardship organization or  
submit a plan for the establishment of a covered battery stewardship program and have that plan approved by the 
commissioner.  
 
10.  New producers. A producer who seeks to sell, offer for sale or distribute for promotional purposes in the 
State a covered battery or covered battery -containing product not sold or offered for sale in the State prior to July 1, 
2020 must notify the commissioner prior to the sale, offer for sale or distribution of the covered battery or covered 
battery -containing product in the State.  
  
A.  Upon receiving notification under this subsection from a new producer, the commissioner shall list the 
producer as a new producer on the department's publicly accessible website.  
  
B.  No later than 90 days following a new producer's notification to the commissioner, the producer shall 
submit a plan to the commissioner in accordance with subsection 3 or join an existing organization operating 
under a plan approved under subsection 4.  
  
C.  If a new producer fails to submit a plan or join an existing organization within the 90 -day period under 
paragraph B, the producer may not sell a covered battery or covered battery -containing product in the State 
after the expiration of the 90 -day period and a retailer may not sell that producer's battery o r product in the 
State after 120 days following the expiration of the 90 -day period.  
  
D.  Notwithstanding paragraph C, if a new producer submits a plan within the 90 -day period under paragraph 
B and that plan is ultimately rejected by the commissioner und er subsection 4 after the expiration of the 90 -
day period, the producer may not sell the covered battery or covered battery -containing product in the State 
after 45 days following the commissioner's final determination rejecting the submitted plan and a re tailer 
may not sell the producer's battery or product in the State after 120 days following the commissioner's final 
determination rejecting the submitted plan.  
  
A new producer that fails to submit a plan that is approved by the commissioner under subsect ion 4 or to join an 
existing organization within the time limits described in this subsection may not sell, offer for sale or distribute for 
promotional purposes a covered battery or covered battery -containing product not sold or offered for sale in the St ate 
prior to July 1, 2020 until the producer submits a plan for approval consistent with subsection 3 that is subsequently 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
45 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
approved by the commissioner or joins an existing organization.  
  
11.  Return of noncompliant products. If a plan approved under subs ection 4 is subsequently determined 
by the commissioner not to be in compliance with this section, a producer who sells, offers for sale or distributes for 
sale in the State a covered battery or covered battery -containing product included in that plan shall, upon request by a 
retailer, designate a location to which the retailer may ship the battery or product for further handling and shall 
reimburse the retailer for costs incurred in shipping the battery or product to the designated location.  
  
12.  Safe collection.  Any entity that collects covered batteries in the State, has a physical presence in the 
State and is operating under or in cooperation with a covered battery stewardship program shall ensure that all 
discarded covered batteries placed in its collection containers are protected from short- circuiting in accordance with 
applicable regulations of the federal Department of Transportation, 49 Code of Federal Regulations, Subtitle B 
(2015) and other applicable laws or regulations and take reasonable steps to prevent the placement of materials other 
than properly protected discarded covered batteries into its collection containers.  
  
13. Reporting.     By March 1st of the calendar year after the calendar year in which an approved product 
steward ship program is implemented, and annually thereafter, the producer or stewardship organization operating the 
program shall submit to the department a report describing activities carried out by the program pursuant to the plan 
during the previous calendar year. The report must include, at a minimum:  
  
A.  Updated contact information for the program operator and all participating producers,  a list of the brands 
of covered batteries and covered battery containing devices for which it is responsible.  
 
B. The w eight of covered batteries collected by the program in the previous calendar year, reported to the 
extent feasible by:  
(1) amount by county or by collection site;  
(2) amount of primary batteries and amount of rechargeable batteries by chemistry type; and 
(3) amount of battery -containing products.  
  
C.  The location of and contact information for each collection point established under the program, and an 
assessment of the convenience of collection;  
  
D.  A description of the manner in which collected covered batteries and covered battery -containing products 
were sorted, consolidated and processed by the program;  
  
E.  A description of the methods and materials used for education and outreach, and an evaluation of the 
effectiveness of education and outreach efforts.  Every 2 years, the report must include the results of an 
assessment of consumer awareness of the program completed by an independent 3rd party;  
  
F.  A financial report on the program, including: the total cost of implementing the program, as de termined 
by an independent financial audit, including a breakdown of administrative, collection, transportation, 
disposition and communication costs; and an anticipated budget for the next program year; and 
 
G. Any recommendations for changes to the produc t stewardship program to improve convenience of 
collection, consumer education and program evaluation.  
 
14.  Proprietary information.   Proprietary information submitted to the department in a covered battery 
stewardship plan, in an amendment to a plan or pursuant to the reporting requirements of this section that is 
identified by the submittor as proprietary information is confidential and must be handled by the department in the 
same manner as confidential information is handled under section 1310- B. 
 
15.  Administration and enforcement of program.   The department shall enforce this section and may adopt 
rules consistent with this section as necessary for the purpose of implementing, administering and enforcing this 
section. Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
46 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
subchapter 2 -A. 
 
A.  The department shall charge a reasonable fee to be paid by an applicant for review and approval of a 
covered battery stewardship plan.  Fees established under this paragraph must be based on the actual costs 
to the department of reviewing and approving a covered battery stewardship plan and may not exceed 
$25,000.  
 
B.  The department may establish a reasonable annual fee, to be paid by the operator of each covered 
battery stewardship program, to cover th e department’s costs for annual report review, oversight, 
administration and enforcement of the program. Fees established under this paragraph must be based on the 
actual costs to the department of annual report review, oversight, administration and enforcement of the 
program and may not exceed $50,000 per year.  
  
16.  Limited private right of action.  Except as provided in paragraph D, a nonprofit covered battery 
stewardship organization recognized by the United States Internal Revenue Service as exempt fr om taxation under 
Section 501 of the United States Internal Revenue Code, as amended, that has spent at least $250,000 transporting, 
collecting and recycling covered batteries in the State in the previous calendar year, may maintain a civil action in 
Super ior Court against one or more producers not participating in the organization’s program to recover a portion of 
the organization’s costs and additional sums, as set forth in this subsection.  
 
A.  Damages recoverable under this subsection shall be a fair share of the actual costs incurred by the 
plaintiff organization in collecting covered batteries of a defendant producer discarded in the State for 
which the defendant producer was required under this section to submit and implement a covered battery 
stewar dship plan or join an existing covered battery stewardship program, as well as the plaintiff 
organization’s costs incurred in handling, transporting and recycling or properly disposing of such batteries. 
Additional amounts recoverable under this subsection  shall include an award of reasonable attorney's fees 
and court costs, including expert witness fees, and, if a defendant producer did not operate or participate in 
a covered battery stewardship program established under this section during the time period in which 
covered batteries of the defendant producer were collected in the State, transported and recycled by the 
plaintiff organization, a punitive sum of 3 times the damages award shall be assessed.  
 
B.  In an action by a plaintiff organization against a defendant producer that did not operate or participate in 
a covered battery stewardship program established under this section during the time period in which 
covered batteries of the defendant producer were collected, transported and recycled by the plaintiff, the 
plaintiff may establish the defendant’s fair share of the plaintiff’s actual costs by:  
 
(1)  Providing the court with market share data that the court finds reasonably represents the 
percentage of sales by the defendant into the State;  
 
(2)  Providing the court with data generated from discarded battery sorts involving a minimum of 
500 pounds of discarded covered batteries collected at each of 3 or more collection locations in the 
State that are found by the court to have been collected in an un biased manner and to be 
reasonably representative of the population of the State; or 
 
(3)  Through any other method that the court finds reliable in establishing the defendant’s fair 
share of the plaintiff’s actual costs.  
 
C.  In an action by a plaintiff organization against a defendant producer that operated or participated in a 
covered battery stewardship program established under this section during the time period in which covered 
batteries of the defendant producer were collected, transported and recycled by the plaintiff, the plaintiff 
may establish the defendant’s fair share of the plaintiff’s actual costs by providing the court with data 
establishing the relative weight of discarded covered batteries collected by the plaintiff for which the 
defendant  was required under this section to collect, transport and recycle under a covered battery 
stewardship program compared to the weight of other discarded covered batteries collected by the plaintiff.  
This data may be generated by the plaintiff:  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
47 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
 
(1)  Through the collection of data from discarded battery sorts involving a minimum of 500 
pounds of discarded covered batteries collected at each of 3 or more collection locations in the 
State that are found by the court to have been collected in an unbiased manner and to be 
reasonably representative of the population of the State;  
 
(2)  Through an analysis of actual collections by the organization that is found by the court to be 
reasonably representative of total actual collections in the State; or  
 
(3)  Through any other method that the court finds reliable in establishing the defendant’s fair 
share of the plaintiff’s actual costs.  
 
D.  An action may not be commenced under this subsection against any potential defendant until 60 days 
after a plaintiff provides to all potential defendants a written notice of the claim setting forth the amount of 
the claim and the basis for the calculation of that amount.  
 
E.  No action may be brought under this subsection against a retailer or franchisor of retail outlets that was 
operating or participating in a covered battery stewardship program established under this section, 
individually or on behalf of its franchisees, to recover costs or additional sums incurred during a time 
period in which covered batteries were collected, transported and recycled by the retailer or franchisor.  
 
F.  The department shall not be a party to or be required to provide assistance or otherwise participate in a 
civil action authorized under this subsection unless subject to a subpoena before a court of jurisdiction.  
  
17.  Preemption.  The State intends to occupy and preempt the entire field of legislation concerning the 
regulation of the stewardship of covered batteries and covered battery -containing products. Any existing or future 
order, ordinance, rule or regulation in this field of any political subdivision of the State is void.  
 
18.  Antitrust exclusions.  A producer, a group of producers and a covered battery stewardship 
organization, and an agent, officer, director and employee of such entities, preparing, submitting a plan for, 
implementing or administering a covered battery stewardship program in accordance with this section, and a 
wholesaler and retailer that engages in conduct authorized by this section, are granted immunity, in dividually and 
jointly, from all applicable antitrust laws of the State for the limited purpose of establishing, implementing and 
administering a covered battery stewardship program and otherwise complying with the requirements of this section, 
and any act ivity undertaken by these entities in accordance with and authorized under this section is not an unlawful 
restraint of trade, a conspiracy or other violation of any provision of any applicable antitrust law of the State.  
 
An action taken by a producer, a group of producers or an organization to increase the recycling of covered batteries 
in accordance with this section that affects the types or quantities of batteries recycled or the cost and structure of 
any covered battery stewardship program is not a violation of any provision of Title 10, chapter 201, except when 
such action constitutes an agreement establishing or affecting the price of covered batteries or the output or 
production of covered batteries or restricting the geographic area in which covered batteries will be sold or the 
customers to whom covered batteries will be sold.  
 
Sec. 2.  38 MRSA § 2165 sub -4 is repealed :  Repealed.  
4. Manufacturer responsibility.   A manufacturer of dry cell mercuric oxide or rechargeable batteries that are 
subject to  subsection 1 shall:  
A. Establish and maintain a system for the proper collection, transportation and processing of waste dry cell 
mercuric oxide and rechargeable batteries for purchasers in this State;   
B. Clearly inform each purchaser that intends to use these batteries of the prohibition on disposal of dry cell 
mercuric oxide and rechargeable batteries and of the available systems for proper collection, transportation and 
processing of these batteries;   
C. Identify a collection system through which mercu ric oxide and rechargeable batteries must be returned to the 
manufacturer or to a manufacturer- designated collection site; and   
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
48 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
D. Include the cost of proper collection, transportation and processing of the waste batteries in the sales 
transaction or agreement between the manufacturer and any purchaser.   
 
  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
49 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
Appendix D – Proposed changes to Maine’s Bottle Bill law  
 
An Act to Improve Maine’s Container Redemption Law  
 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:  
 
Sec. 1.  38 MRSA § 352. Fees  Table II  is amended to read: 
 
3109, Redemption centers  Annual Processing Fee      Annual Licensing Fee  
      $0     $100 
Sec. 2.  38 MRSA §3102 sub-13 is amended, and subs - 16-A and 17- A are enacted to read : 
13. Manufacturer.  "Manufacturer" means a person who  bottles, cans or otherwise places beverages in 
beverage containers for sale to distributors or dealers .: offers beverages for sale in or into Maine under its brand or 
label or licenses other entities to offer beverages for sale in or into Maine under its brand or label, or imports a 
beverage into the United States that is manufactured by a person without a presence in the United States; and an out -
of-state wholesaler of liquor that holds a certificate of approval in accordance with Maine law under Title 28 -A. 
16-A.  Pick -up agent.   “Pick -up agent” means the initiator of deposit, distributor, or contracted agent that 
receives and transports redeemed beverage containers from licensed redemption centers to recycling.  
17-A.  Proprietary information.   "Proprietary information" means information that is a trade secret or 
production, commercial or financial information the disclosure of which would impair the competitive position of 
the submitter and which is not otherwise publicly available. 
 
Sec. 3.  38 MRSA §3105 sub-5 is amended to read: 
5. Label registration.  An initiator of deposit shall register the container label of any beverage offered for sale 
in the State on which it initiates a deposit. Registration must be on forms or in an electronic form at provided by the 
department and must include the universal product code for each combination of beverage and container 
manufactured. The initiator of deposit shall renew a label registration annually and whenever that label is revised by 
altering the universal product code or whenever the container on which it appears is changed in size, composition or glass color. The initiator of deposit shall also include as part of the registration the method of collection for that type of container, identification of  a collection agent, identification of all of the parties to a commingling agreement that 
applies to the container and proof of the collection agreement. The department may charge a fee for registration and 
registration renewals under this subsection. Rule s adopted pursuant to this subsection that establish fees are major 
substantive rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A and subject to review by the joint standing 
committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over environmental and nat ural resources matters.  
 
Sec. 4.  38 MRSA §3106 sub-5 is amended to read: 
1. Dealer acceptance.  Except as provided in this section, a dealer operating a retail space of 5000 square feet 
or more may not refuse to accept from any consumer or other person not a dealer any empty, unbroken and 
reasonably clean beverage container  of the kind, size and brand sold by the dealer, or refuse to pay in cash the 
refund value of the returned beverage container as established by section 3103 unless that dealer has a written 
agreement with a local redemption center within 1 roadway mile to provide redemption services on behalf of that 
dealer . This section does not require an operator of a vending machine to maintain a person to accept returned 
beverage containers on the premises where the vending machine is located.   
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
50 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
2. Permissive refusal by dealer.  A dealer may refuse to accept from a consumer or other person and to pay 
the refund value on any beverage container, if the place of business of the dealer and the kind, size and brand of 
beverage container are included in an order of the department approving a redemption center under section 3109.  
… 
6. Obligation to preserve recycling value.  Notwithstanding subsection 8, a distributor or its agent may refuse 
to accept, or pay the refund value and handling costs to a dealer, redemption center or other person for, a beverage 
container that has been processed by a reverse vending machine in a way that has reduced the recycling value of the container below current market value.  This subsection may not be interpreted to prohibit a written processing 
agreement between a distributor and a dealer or redemption center and does not relieve a distributor of its obligation 
under subsection 8 to accept empty, unbroken and reasonably clean beverage containers. The department shall adopt 
rules to establish the recycling value of beverage containers under this subsection and the rules may authorize the use of a 3rd -party vendor to determine if a beverage container has been processed by a reverse vending machine in a 
manner that has reduced the recycling value below current market value. The rules must outline the method of allocating among the parties involved the payment for 3rd -party vendor costs. Rules adopted under this subsection 
are rou tine technical rules pursuant to Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. 
7. Reimbursement of handling costs.  Reimbursement of handling costs is governed by this subsection.  
 
A. In addition to the payment of the refund value, the initiator of the deposit und er section 3103, subsections 1, 
2 and 4 shall reimburse the dealer or local redemption center for the cost of handling beverage containers subject to section 3103, in an amount that equals at least 3¢ per returned container for containers picked up by the initiator before March 1, 2004, at least 3 1/2¢ for containers picked up on or after March 1, 2004 and before 
March 1, 2010 and at least 4¢ for containers picked up on or after March 1, 2010. The initiator of the deposit may reimburse the dealer or local redemption center directly or indirectly through a party with which it has entered into a commingling agreement.   
B. In addition to the payment of the refund value, the initiator of the deposit under section 3103, subsection 3 shall reimburse the dealer or local redemption center for the cost of handling beverage containers subject to section 3103 in an amount that equals at least 3¢ per returned container for containers picked up by the initiator 
before March 1, 2004, at least 3 1/2¢ for containers picked up on or after March 1, 2004 and before March 1, 
2010 and at least 4¢ for containers picked up on or after March 1, 2010. The initiator of the deposit may reimburse the dealer or local redemption center directly or indirectly through a contracted agent or t hrough a 
party with which it has entered into a commingling agreement.  
 
C. The reimbursement that the initiator of the deposit is obligated to pay the dealer or redemption center 
pursuant to paragraph A or B must be reduced by 1/2¢ for any returned contain er that is subject to managed in 
accordance with  a qualified commingling agreement that allows the dealer or redemption center to commingle 
beverage containers of like product group, material  and size . A commingling agreement is qualified for 
purposes of t his paragraph if the department determines that 50% or more of the beverage containers of like 
product group, material and size for which the deposits are being initiated in the State are covered by the 
commingling agreement or that the initiators of deposit covered by the commingling agreement are initiators of 
deposit for wine containers who each sell no more than 100,000 gallons of wine or 500,000 beverage containers 
that contain wine in a calendar year. Once the initiator of deposit has established a qu alified commingling 
agreement for containers of a like product group, material and size, the department shall allow additional brands 
to be included from a different product group if they are of like material.  The State, through the Department of 
Administr ative and Financial Services, Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages and Lottery Operations, shall make 
every reasonable effort to enter into  may operate as a qualified commingling agreement under this paragraph 
with every other initiator of deposit for  provided it  allows the commingling of  beverage containers that are of 
like product group, size and material  as the beverage containers for which the State is the initiator of deposit .  
D. Paragraphs A, B and C do not apply to a brewer who annually produces no more than 50,000 gallons of its 
product or a bottler of water who annually sells no more than 250,000 containers each containing no more than one gallon of its product. In addition to the payment of the refund value, an initiator of deposit under section 3103, subsections 1 to 4 who is also a brewer who annually produces no more than 50,000 gallons of its product 
or a bottler of water who annually sells no more than 250,000 containers each containing no more than one 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
51 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
gallon of its product shall reimburse the deale r or local redemption center for the cost of handling beverage 
containers subject to section 3103 in an amount that equals at least 3  1/2¢ per returned container.   
8. Obligation to pick up and recycle containers.  The obligation to pick up and recycle beverage containers 
subject to this chapter is determined as follows.  
A. A distributor that initiates the deposit under section 3103, subsection 2 or 4 has the obligation to pick up and 
recycle any empty, unbroken and reasonably clean beverage containers of the particular kind, size and brand 
sold by the distributor from dealers to whom that distributor has sold those beverages and from licensed 
redemption centers  designated to serve those dealers pursuant to an order entered under section 3109. A 
distributor that, within this State, sells beverages under a particular label exclusively to one dealer, which dealer 
offers those labeled beverages for sale at retail exclusively at the dealer's establishment, shall pick up any empty, unbroken and reasonably clean  beverage containers of the kind, size and brand sold by the distributor to 
the dealer only from those licensed redemption centers that enter into a written agreement to provide 
redemption services for serve  the various establishments of  the dealer , under an order entered under section 
3109. A dealer that manufactures its own beverages for exclusive sale by that dealer at retail has the obligation 
of a distributor under this section. The commissioner may establish by rule, in accordance with the Maine Admin istrative Procedure Act, criteria prescribing the manner in which distributors shall fulfill the obligations 
imposed by this paragraph. The rules may establish a minimum number or value of containers below which a distributor is not required to respond to a request to pick up empty containers. Any rules adopted under this paragraph must allocate the burdens associated with the handling, storage and transportation of empty 
containers to prevent unreasonable financial or other hardship.  
 
B. The initiator of the deposit under section 3103, subsection 3 has the obligation to pick up any empty, 
unbroken and reasonably clean beverage containers of the particular kind, size and brand sold by the initiator from dealers to whom a distributor has sold those beverages and from licensed redemption centers designated to serve those dealers pursuant to an order entered under section 3109  and to ensure the containers are recycled . 
The obligation may be fulfilled by the initiator directly or indirectly through a contracted a gent.  
C. An initiator of the deposit under section 3103, subsection 2, 3 or 4 has the obligation to pick up and recycle 
any empty, unbroken and reasonably clean beverage containers that are commingled pursuant to a commingling agreement along with any beve rage containers that the initiator is otherwise obligated to pick up pursuant to 
paragraphs A and B. 
 
D. The initiator of deposit or initiators of deposit who are members of a commingling agreement have the 
obligation under this subsection to pick up and r ecycle empty, unbroken and reasonably clean beverage 
containers of the particular kind, size and brand sold by the initiator from dealers to whom a distributor has sold 
those beverages and from licensed redemption centers  designated to serve those dealers  every 15 days. The 
initiator of deposit or initiators of deposit who are members of a commingling agreement have the obligation to make additional pickups when a redemption center has collected 10,000 beverage containers from that initiator of deposit or from the initiators of deposit who are members of a commingling agreement.  
 
The obligation s of the initiator of the deposit under this subsection may be fulfilled by the initiator directly or 
through a party with which it has entered into a commingling agre ement. A contracted agent hired to pick up 
beverage containers for one or more initiators of deposit is deemed to have made a pickup at a redemption center for those initiators of deposit when it picks up beverage containers belonging to those initiators of deposit.
 
9. Plastic bags.  A dealer or redemption center has an obligation to pick up plastic bags that are used by that 
dealer or redemption center to contain beverage containers. Plastic bags used by a dealer or redemption center and the cost allocatio n of these bags must conform to rules adopted by the department concerning size and gauge. Rules 
adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. 
 
Sec. 5.  38 MRSA §3107 is amended to read: 
 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, 2 or more initiators of deposit may enter 
into a commingling agreement through which some or all of the beverage containers for which the initiators have 
initiated deposits may be commi ngled by dealers and operators of redemption centers as provided in this section.   
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
52 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
The department shall determine that a commingling agreement is qualified for purposes of this chapter when: 
50% or more of the beverage containers of like product group, mat erial and size for which the deposits are being 
initiated in the State are covered by the commingling agreement; the initiators of deposit covered by the 
commingling agreement are initiators of deposit for wine containers who each sell no more than 100,000 gallons of 
wine or 500,000 beverage containers that contain wine in a calendar year; or commingling is implemented under the 
terms of a plan submitted and approved in accordance with paragraph 5.   
An initiator of deposit that enters into a commingling agreement pursuant to this section shall permit any other 
initiator of deposit to become a party to that agreement on the same terms and conditions as the original agreeme nt. 
Once the initiator of deposit has established a qualified commingling agreement, th e department shall allow 
additional brands to be included from a different product group if they are of like material.  
1. Commingling requirement.  If initiators of deposit enter into a commingling agreement pursuant to this 
section, commingling of beverage containers must be by all containers of like product group, material and size. An 
initiator of deposit required pursuant to section 3106, subsection 8 to pick up beverage containers subject to a commingling agreement also shall pick up all other beverage  containers subject to the same agreement. The initiator 
of deposit may not require beverage containers that are subject to a commingling agreement to be sorted separately 
by a dealer or redemption center.
 
2. Commingling of like materials.  For purposes of  this section, containers are considered to be of like 
materials if made up of one of the following:  
A. Plastic;  
B. Aluminum;   
C. Metal other than aluminum; and   
D. Glass.  
3. Commingling of like products.  For purposes of this section, like products are those that are made up of one 
of the following:  
A. Beer, ale or other beverage produced by fermenting malt, wine and wine coolers;   
B. Spirits;  
C. Soda;  
D. Noncarbonated water; and   
E. All other beverages.  
4. Registration of commingling agreements.  Not later than 48 hours following the execution or amendment 
of a commingling agreement, including an amendment that adds an additional party to an existing agreement, the 
parties shall file a copy of the commingling agreement or amendment with the department . 
 
5.  Commingling by a third party or stewardship organization.   An initiator of deposit may enter into an 
agreement for its beverage containers to be managed in a commin gling program administered by a third party or 
through a stewardship organization as defined in chapter 18, section 1771.  The third party or stewardship 
organization shall submit a plan to operate a commingling program to the department for review and approval as a 
qualified commingling agreement.   
The commingling program must require re demption centers to commingle all containers of participating 
manufacturers by like material, and shall establish containerizing standards to provide for fair apportionment of 
costs among participating manufacturers , either on the basis of  the total weight of container s marketed or by unit 
count .  An initiator of deposit shall report by the 20th day of the month following the end of March, June, September 
and December to the administrator of the commingling program its sales of beverages into Maine for the previous 
three months by brand and number of nonrefillable containers sold by product size and material type, and the 
average container weight by material type and size.  The third party or stewardship organization shall assign 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
53 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
financial responsibility to participating initiators of deposit based on each initiator of deposit’s proportion of the 
total weight of beverage containers marketed in Maine by material type or on actual unit counts.   
The third party or stewardship organization may require a participating initiator of deposit to provide financial 
assurance in the form of a deposit of no greater than the cost of beverage container deposits, container handling fees 
for redemption centers and any contractual fees for up to 4 months of anticipated sales in Maine.  The third party or 
stewardship organization shall retain the deposit funds in a s eparate account and may use the funds to pay program 
costs in the event the initiator of deposit fails to pay the third party or stewardship organization for incurred costs 
within 90 days of invoicing.     
 Sec. 6.  38 MRSA §3109 is amended to read: 
1. Establishment.  Local redemption centers may be established and operated by any person or municipality, 
agency or regional association as defined in section 1303 -C, subsection 24, subject to the approval of the 
commissioner, to serve local dealers and consumers, at which consumers may return empty beverage containers as 
provided under section 3106.  
2. Application for approval.  Application for approval of a local redemption center must be filed with the 
department. The application must state the name and address of the person responsible for the establishment and operation of the center, the kinds, sizes and brand names of beverage containers that will be accepted and  the names 
and addresses of each dealer s with whom the redemption center has entered into a written agreement to provide 
redemption services in accordance with section 3106 sub -5 be served  and their distances from the local redemption 
center , and a statement that the local redemption center will accept and manage all beverage containers registered in 
accordance with section 3105 . 
3. Approval.  The commissioner may approve the licensing of a local redemption center if the redemption 
center complies with the requirements established under section 3113. The order approving a local redemption center license must state the dealers to be served and the kinds, sizes and brand names of empty beverage containers that the center accepts.
 
4. Redemption center acceptance refund account.  A local licensed redemption center may not refuse to 
accept from any consumer or other person not a dealer any empty, unbroken and reasonably clean beverage container of the kind, size and brand sold in the state  by a dealer served by the center  as long as the label for the 
container is registered under section 3105, subsection  5 or refuse to pay in cash the refund value of the returned 
beverage container as established by section 3103. A redemption center or reverse vending machine is not obligated to count containers or to pay a cash refund at the time the beverage container i s returned as long as the amount of the 
refund value due is placed into an account to be held for the benefit of the consumer and funded in a manner that 
allows the consumer to obtain deposits due within 2 business days of the time of the return.
 
5. Posted  lists.  A list of the dealers served and the kinds, sizes and brand names of empty beverage containers 
accepted must be prominently displayed at each local redemption center.  
5-A. Beverage container handling.   A redemption center shall tender only beverage containers sold in the 
state to pick -up agents in shells, shipping cartons, bags and other containers prepared to ensure accurate eligible 
beverage container unit counts.    
6. Withdrawal of approval.  The District Court department may, in a manner consistent with the Maine 
Administrative Procedure Act, withdraw approval revoke the license  of a local redemption center if there has not 
been compliance with the approval order or if the local redemption center no longer provides a convenient service to 
the public.  
 
Sec. 7.  38 MRSA §3113 sub-1, sub-2, sub-3 and sub-4 are amended, and sub-5 and  sub-6 are 
enacted to read:  
…. 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
54 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
1. Procedures; licensing fees.  The department shall adopt rules establishing the requirements and procedures 
for issuance of licenses and annual renewals under this section, including a fee structure. Initial rules adopted 
pursuant to this subsection are routine technical rules as defi ned in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. Rules 
adopted effective after calendar year 2003 are major substantive rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 
2-A and are subject to review by the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over 
environmental and natural resources matters.  
2. Criteria for licensing rules  Licensing criteria .  In developing rules under subsection 1 for  licensing 
redemption centers, the department shall consider at least the following:  
A. The healt h and safety of the public, including sanitation protection when food is also sold on the premises;   
B. The convenience for the public, including standards governing the distribution of centers by population or by distance, or both;  
 
C. The proximity of th e proposed redemption center to existing redemption centers and the potential impact 
that the location of the proposed redemption center may have on an existing redemption center;   
D. The proposed owner's record of compliance with this chapter and rules ad opted by the department pursuant 
to this chapter; and   
E. The hours of operation of the proposed redemption center and existing redemption centers in the proximity of the proposed redemption center.  
 
3. Location of redemption centers; population requirements.  The department may grant a license to a 
redemption center if the following requirements are met:  
A. The department may license up to 5 redemption centers in a municipality with a population over 30,000;   
B. The department may license up to 3 redemption centers in a municipality with a population over 20,000 but 
no more than 30,000; and  
C. The department may license up to 2 redemption centers in a municipality with a population over 5,000 but 
no more than 20,000.   
For a municipality with a pop ulation of no more than 5,000, the department may license redemption centers in 
accordance with rules adopted by the department. Rules adopted pursuant to this subsection are routine technical 
rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A. 
4. Exceptions.  Notwithstanding subsection 3:  
A. An owner of a redemption center who is renewing the license of a redemption center licensed by the 
department as of April 1, 2009 need not comply with subsection 3;   
B. An entity that is a food establishment or  distributor licensed by or registered with the department need not 
comply with subsection 3;   
C. A reverse vending machine is not considered a redemption center for purposes of subsection 3 when it is 
located in a licensed redemption center; and   
D. The dep artment may grant a license that is inconsistent with the requirements set out in subsection 3 only if 
the applicant has demonstrated a compelling public need for an additional redemption center in the municipality.  
 
 
5.   Initiator of deposit annual report.    Each initiator of deposit shall report annually by March 1 to the 
department concerning its deposit transactions in the preceding calendar year.  The report must be in a form 
prescribed by the department and must include the number of nonrefillable beverage containers sold in Maine by 
container size, beverage type, delineated at a minimum into wine, spirits, and all other beverages, and the number of 
nonrefillable beverage containers returned by redemption value. The report required by this subsec tion is proprietary 
information and must be handled by the department in the same manner as confidential information is handled under 
section 1310- B. 
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
55 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
6.  Pick -up agent annual report.   Each third -party pick -up agent shall report annually by March 1 to the 
department on redemptions for each initiator of deposit it served in the preceding calendar year.  The report must be 
in a form prescribed by the department and must include the numbe r of nonrefillable containers returned by 
redemption value except that a third -party pick -up agent may report by the average weight and total weight of 
containers returned by material type for containers managed within a commingling agreement established i n 
accordance with section 3107 sub -5.   
 
Sec. 8.  38 MRSA §3115 is amended to read: 
 
The department shall administer this chapter and has the authority, following public hearing, to adopt necessary 
rules to carry it into effect. The department may adopt ru les governing local redemption centers that receive 
beverage containers from dealers supplied by distributors other than the distributors servicing the area in which the 
local redemption center is located in order to prevent the distributors servicing the area within which the redemption 
center is located from being unfairly penalized. Rules adopted pursuant to this chapter are routine technical rules 
pursuant to Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A except rules that establish or modify fees are major subst antive 
rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2 -A and subject to review by the joint standing committee of the 
Legislature having jurisdiction over environmental and natural resources matters.  
 
Sec. 9.  38 MRSA §3116 sub-2 is amended to read: 
2. Aggrieved applicants.  An applicant aggrieved by a decision made by the department may appeal the 
decision to the board pursuant to section 344(2- A) or by filing an appeal with the Superior Court and serving a copy 
of the appeal upon the department in accordance with the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80C. The appeal 
must be filed and served within 30 days of the mailing of the department's decision.  
  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
56 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
Appendix E – Proposed changes to Maine’s cellular telephone law  
 
§ Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows: 
Sec. 1.    38 M.R.S. §2143 is amended to read:  
1. Definitions.   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have the 
following meanings.  
A. "Cellular telephone" means a mobile wireless telephone device that is designed to send or receive 
transmissions through a cellular radiotelephone service as defined in 47 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 22.99 (2005). "Cellular telephone" does not include a wireless telephone device that  is integrated into the 
electrical architecture of a motor vehicle.  
 
B. "Cellular telephone service provider" means a provider of wireless voice or data retail service.   
C. "Retailer" means a person, firm or corporation that sells or offers to sell a cellular telephone to a consumer at 
retail.  
2. Collection system.   Effective January 1, 2008, a retailer shall accept, at no charge, used cellular telephones 
from any person. A retailer required to accept used cellular telephones under this subsection shall po st, in a 
prominent location open to public view, a notice printed in boldface type and containing the following language: 
"We accept used cellular telephones at no charge."  
3. Disposal ban.   Effective January 1, 2008, a person may not dispose of a cellular  telephone in solid waste for 
disposal in a solid waste disposal facility.  
 
4. Reports.   By January 1, 2009, and every year thereafter, a cellular telephone service provider shall report to 
the department the number of cellular telephones collected pursuan t to this section and how the collected cellular 
telephones were disposed of, reused or recycled. Annually, the department shall report on the collection system to 
the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over natural resources m atters. The report may be 
included in the report required pursuant to section 1772, subsection 1.  
  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                                                         
57 
                           Annual Product Stewardship Report, 2019   
Appendix F – Comments received on posted report  
 
 
February 1 3, 201 9 
 
Mr. Mike Karagiannes  
Director, Bureau of Land Resources  
Maine DEP  
17 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0017  
 
Mr. Karagiannes , 
  
 
On behalf of the members of the Product Management Alliance (PMA), we appreciate the 
opportunity to express the Product Management Alliances’ position on the Department of 
Environmental Protection’s  Annual Report to the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and  
Natural Resources,  Concerning the Implement of Product Stewardship in Maine.  
 
My name is Kevin Canan, and I serve as the Executive Director of the PMA. By way of 
introduction, the PMA is a coalition comprised of trade associations and corporations that 
represent a broad array of consumer products. Our mission is to support market -based extended 
producer responsibility (EPR) efforts, as well as voluntary incentives for increased recovery and 
sustainable products and package design. We were founded precisely as a response to the signing 
of LD 1631 into law in 2010, the law which comp els this report.  
 
PMA’s members have long strived to voluntarily recover the products that they manufacture. 
The PMA understands and appreciates Maine’s desire to seek ways to improve the recovery rates 
of goods. However, we believe that expanding current  EPR programs and adding additional EPR 
programs for additional products, specifically the carpet and mattress industries enumerated in 
the report, would simply add costly and unnecessary mandates for both the state government to 
implement and run this pro gram; as well as for retailers and manufacturers in Maine. These costs 
will ultimately be borne by taxpayers and consumers.  
 
Additional EPR programs would set up a confusing and bureaucratic system of recovery for the 
residents of the state with similar t ypes of products having very different end -of-life recovery 
schemes. In addition, these types of restrictive programs would likely to have a chilling effect on 
manufacturers and retailers doing business in Maine, and as a result business very well could be  
lost to neighboring states.  
 
PMA members and businesses utilize sophisticated programs in place that continue to increase 
the amounts of products recovered and recycled through voluntary initiatives. Today recovery 
rates are at record levels, and they ar e continually striving to increase these numbers. The 
existence of these efforts illustrate that new mandates on producers are not necessary to reduce 
waste and increase recycling and the use of recycled content. Thus, we urge the DEP and the 
legislature t o strongly examine voluntary, market -based recovery efforts for increased 
recovery of products and oppose any new or further expansion of EPR in the state  that are 
enumerated in the report . 
 
The members of the PMA, and the industries they represent, recognize the desire of the public 
and policymakers for environmentally responsible business practices. That is why our member 
companies are voluntarily involved in waste recovery programs, and sup port recycling where it 
is economically and logistically feasible.  
 
We hope to have a positive and constructive working relationship with you.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
Kevin C. Canan  
Executive Director  
 
Product Management Alliance  
1000 Potomac Street, NW  
Suite 200 
Washington, DC 20015  
(888) 588 -6878    
info@productmanagementalliance.org   
www.productmanagementalliance.org  
 
 
1101 K Street , N.W., Suite 700 • Washington , D.C. 2000 5 • (202) 463-2700 • afandpa.org 
 
 
AF&PA Comments on the Annual Product Stewardship Report  
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
February 2019  
The American Forest & Paper Association (AF&PA) appreciates the opportunity to comment on the 
2019 Maine Annual Product Stewardship Report. AF&PA supports voluntary paper and paper -
based packaging recovery efforts that seek to improve upon the existing recovery and recycling 
programs in Maine and the United States. AF& PA strongly believes that the voluntary recovery of 
paper and paper -based packaging is a recycling success story.  
The AF&PA serves to advance a sustainable U.S. pulp, paper, packaging, tissue and wood 
products manufacturing industry through fact -based publ ic policy and marketplace advocacy. 
AF&PA member companies make products essential for everyday life from renewable and 
recyclable resources and are committed to continuous improvement through the industry’s 
sustainability initiative — Better Practices, Better Planet 2020 . The forest products industry 
accounts for approximately four percent of the total U.S. manufacturing GDP, manufactures nearly 
$300 billion in products annually and employs approximatel y 950,000 men and women. The 
industry meets a payroll of approximately $55 billion annually and is  among the top 10 
manufacturing sector employers  in 45 states.   
In Maine, the industry employs more than 15,000 individuals,  with an annual payroll of over $8 14 
million. The estimated state and local taxes paid by the forest products industry totals $91 million 
annually.  
Comments on the Product Stewardship for Packaging Proposal  
AF&PA has concerns with the findings of the report which will be examined in more d etail below. 
We believe that the paper industry’s consistently high recovery rates, and the industry’s ongoing 
efforts to increase voluntary recovery, make mandates like an extended producer responsibility 
(EPR) program for paper and paper -based packaging unnecessary  and p otentially 
counterproductive . Along similar lines, consumer packaging is too broad to be considered a single 
product for a product stewardship program.  
Product Stewardship for Paper -based Packaging is Not a Solution  
Recent changes in mark ets for recyclable commodities due to China’s import ban have fueled 
discussion of EPR as an attractive funding mechanism for municipal recycling programs.   While on 
the surface, additional funding may be used to improve some aspects of recycling programs , there 
are multiple fallacies and negative consequences that make EPR for packaging, in particular paper 
packaging, a poor policy choice compared to the market driven system in effect today.   
The Maine DEP report asserts that a product stewardship program for  pack aging will increase the 
recovery of materials for reuse and recycling,  but this is not necessarily true. While funding could be 
raised to fund steps necessary to increase collection, EPR programs do not create end markets for 
recyclable materials.  There are successful recycling programs in the state that would be disrupted, 
AF&PA Comments on ME Product Stewardship  
February 14, 2019  
Page 2 
 
 
   rather than improved by  the implementation of EPR. Product stewardship  for packaging programs 
exist in other countries but whether they are more successful than our current system i s widely 
debated. Global demand drives paper recovery, not government mandates.  Global demand for 
recovered fiber has been growing at a rapid rate. Global recovered paper demand increased at an 
average rate of 1.3 percent a year from 2012 to 2017 and is ex pected  by RISI to increase an 
average of 1.8 percent a year from 2017 through 2022.  
Market -based paper recovery can be a model for other industries. The paper and paper -based 
packaging industry has set and met voluntary goals, and publicly reported on performance. The 
industry works with others in the private and public sectors to maximize paper recovery, the rate of 
which has doubled since 1990. EPR, though well -intentioned, falls short of the mark. Government 
can help support paper recycling’s success by avoiding mandates and arbitrary rules that disrupt 
the current market -based system.  
As history has demonstrated, the market operates efficiently whe n it comes to paper recovery and 
recycling. To impose an EPR scheme in hopes of marginal gains could be cost prohibitive and at 
the detriment of the success the industry has achieved. For paper and paper -based packaging, 
EPR could prove to be harmful and e ven counterproductive. The life path of paper -based packaging 
is not contained in one state. For instance, a box is made in one state and breakfast cereal is put 
into that box in a second state. The cereal is sold in a third state to a consumer living in a  fourth 
state. It is hard to imagine logistically how a manufacturer or brand owner could be required to pay 
fees on the products it introduces into a global commerce stream.  
Consumer Packaging is Too Broad to be Productive  
Consumer packaging is a broad ca tegory of multiple packaging materials including paper, plastic, 
glass, aluminum and steel. Each of these materials has distinct challenges, advantages, and 
economics when it comes to recovery for recycling. Solutions that may work for one material do not 
necessarily translate to other materials. Some materials may require different strategies and 
financial investments. Fee proceeds from one material should not be used to subsidize recovery 
initiatives for other materials.  Lumping all of these issues into one stewardship program makes  it 
extremely unlikely that there could be a fair program  for all participants.  
The report acknowledges the difficulties in the choice between a program that shares 
responsibilities between manufacturers and municipalities but misses in the mark in that it does not 
also explore the potential difficulties of competing materials sharing  the responsibility of managing 
recycling for the state. An EPR program holds major financial stakes for all industries impacted and 
measures to facilitate equitable representation of the products impacted by the program would be a 
necessity at minimum.  
Paper Recycling is Successful  
Paper recovery is an environmental success story, saving an average of 3.3 cubic yards of landfill 
space for each ton of paper recycled . Paper recovery has fostered a well -developed and dynamic 
marketplace that allows recovere d fiber to find its highest value end use in manufacturing new 
products. That, in turn, helps encourage more recycling  which part of why paper is the most -
recycled material in the U.S. today. According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, more 
AF&PA Comments on ME Product Stewardship  
February 14, 2019  
Page 3 
 
 
   paper (by weight) is recovered for recycling from municipal solid waste streams than glass, plastic, 
steel and aluminum combined. 96 percent of the U.S. population had access to community curbside 
and/or drop -off paper recycling services, according to the most recent (2014)  survey of 
communities . 
Based on results from the 2014 Community Access Survey, 80% of Maine residents have access to 
community curbside recycling programs for paper & paperboard and 90% have access to 
community drop -off systems. While the overall paper recovery rate is at 63% or higher for each of 
the last nine years, for OCC in particular, the recovery rate was 88.89% for 2017 and has exceeded 
80% for the last nine years.  
The paper and paper -based packaging industry’s commitment to maximizing recovery of its 
products for recycling is real and longstanding. AF&PA and its member companies have a truly 
outstanding record on paper recovery. In 1990, wh en AF&PA began setting voluntary recovery 
goals, the recovery rate was a little more than one -third (33.5 percent) of the paper consumed in the 
United States. By 2017, thanks to voluntary industry initiatives and the millions of Americans who 
recycle at ho me, work and school every day, the recovery rate has almost doubled (65.8 percent). 
The recovery rate has met or exceeded 63 percent for the past nine years.  
Impact and Market Adjustments After  China National Sword  
The current disruption in mixed paper markets is partiall y due to an unacceptable level of quality 
being generated and China’s abrupt ban on mixed paper imports. The disruption caused by China’s 
import policy has created a misperception that there is a systemic problem with the recycling 
system. In fact, the pro blem is with poor -quality recyclable materials being put into the marketplace 
by some processing facilities, in particular by mixed -waste processing facilities.  
Fortunately, recovered fiber markets are dynamic and adapting rapidly. The paper and paper -
packaging industry continues to innovate and adapt to market demands to drive future success. 
Communities that improve the quality of the recyclable materials in their recycling steams and 
improve the quality of the recovered paper bales produced by their MRFs will have greater success 
in recovered paper markets. Investing in improving consumers’ recycling behavior and improving 
collection are needed steps that were made clearer  in the wake of the implementation of China 
National Sword.  
Product stewa rdship is not the answer to China’s import policy and will  not drive increased domestic 
consumption of recovered fiber. Instead of bringing in more capacity to handle the increase volume 
available, it will add another cost to already burdened paper mills i n Maine.  
Recovered paper consumption at domestic paper and paperboard mills increased in 2017 and 
during four of the past five years, rising more than four percent from 2012 to 2017. These increases 
were achieved even while  U.S. paper and paperboard production  declined three  percent during that 
period.  The fact is that q uality matters  and r ecovered fiber that meets the grade and quality 
requirements of mills is purchased  while f iber that doesn’t meet the requirements is not. 
Opportunities to Improve Recovery  
As an alternative to a product stewardship for packaging program, Maine should focus on hard -to-
AF&PA Comments on ME Product Stewardship  
February 14, 2019  
Page 4 
 
 
   recycle materials where there may not yet be a well -developed collection infrastructure or good 
recovery results. With a well -developed infrast ructure for collecting paper and paper -based 
packaging, to increase recovery Maine should increase consumer education to drive increased 
participation across the entire supply chain.  
The industry works with others in the private and public sectors to maxi mize paper recovery, with 
the obvious result that we have doubled our recovery rate since 1990. For example, AF&PA is an 
inaugural founder of The Recycling Partnership which creates public -private partnerships that 
promote voluntary recovery and increases communities’ capability to improve the quality and 
quantity of recyclable materials produced by community materials recovery facilities. While the 
report finds the contributions (recycling carts for Portland) of the Partnership insufficient, there are 
potentially additional resources that are being underutilized by municipalities, such as the free 
Contamination kits that include tools and resources to improve the quality of what MRFs are 
collecting - facilitating behavior change through consumer education.  
AF&PA also produces our own resources on recycling better - with recycling guides specific to the 
workplace, schools and the community and a guide on shredding and recycling important 
documents. The Responsible Package is a recycling curriculum that include s classroom activities, 
family take -home materials and a family recycling pledge to raise awareness about paper and 
paper -based packaging recycling and reuse. By targeting students in fifth grade (ages 10 -11), along 
with their families and teachers, our pr ogram encourages students to be agents of change in their 
homes and schools to increase recovery through smart recycling. Jointly funded by paper -based 
packaging associations including AF&PA, the Carton Council, Fibre Box Association, PSSMA, 
TAPPI and AICC ; The Responsible Package aims to reach 525,000 students around the country in 
2019, an increase from 313,000 in 2018.  
Conclusion  
AF&PA believes responsibility for materials recovery must be shared across the entire supply chain 
and include consumers. Th e paper industry is doing its part by meeting or exceeding voluntary 
recovery goals for our products. We urge you to consider promoting increased participation in 
community recycling programs as an alternative to a product stewardship program for paper -based 
packaging. We hope that by sharing this information, any plan or legislation drafted to regulate the 
production and use of paper -based packaging will be based on sound policy to the benefit of the 
environment and best practices for doing business in the  state.  
We look forward to continuing our work with the state of Maine . Please feel free to contact Abigail 
Turner Sztein, Director, State Government Affairs, AF&PA at (202) 463 -2596 or 
abigail_sztein@afandpa. org for further information.  
 
 
 
 
 
americanchemistry.com®                                  700 Second St., NE | Washington, DC | 20002 | (202) 249- 7000                                                                       
 
February 14, 2019 
Director Paula Clark 
Division of Materials Management 
August, Maine 04333 
 
Re: American Chemistry Council comments to the Annual Product Stewardship 
Report  
 
Dear Director Clark,  
 
The American Chemistry Council (ACC) provides the following comments to the 
Annual Produce Stewardship Report to the Joint Standing Committee on the 
Environment and Natural Resources . ACC represents leading manufacturers of plastic 
resins1  and we strive to be an expert resource on innovative plastics recycling and 
recovery programs and educational and outreach programs to improve plastics 
recycling and recovery nationwide. 2 ACC has a strong interest in sustainable materials 
management (SMM), plastics sustainability and recovery.3 
 
We commend the Committee for seeking to improve the performance of its packaging 
recycling and to fully utilize the value of materials that are currently being wasted in 
landfills. At the same time, we do not believe that the mandatory extended producer 
responsibility is the best way to achieve these shared goals. Reliance on EPR can lead 
to an overemphasis on recycling to the exclusion of source reduction  and the 
implementation of a true "sustainable materials management" system that uses life 
cycle analysis to better understand environmental impacts such as waste prevention 
and the use of energy, water and greenhouse gas emissions. We welcome the 
opportunity to work with Maine to grow plastics recycling and recovery and we 
encourage the state to:  
 
1) Consider adopting a holistic sustainable materials management 
approach that incorporates life cycle analysis and accounts for source 
reduction and conversion to  fuels and energy  along with recycling ; 
2) Fully enforce Maine’s existing recycling provisions and pursue  
collaborative policy approaches;  
                                                           
1 ACC's Plastics Division represents leading manufa cturers of plastic resins. From life-saving medical devices to 
packaging that extend s shelf life , versatile plastics inspire countless innovations that help make life better, 
healthier and safer every day.  
2 See, for example, Keep America Beautiful' s I Want to be Recycled campaign, The Recycling Partnership, WRAP  
Program.  
3 Plasti cs Recovery on ACC.com  
 
 
 
 
 
americanchemistry.com®                                  700 Second St., NE | Washington, DC  20002 | (202) 249.7000                                                                       
3) Embrace voluntary plastics recycling programs and tools;  
4) Leverage national partnerships for grants, loans and assistance; and 
5) Treat all post-use plastics as valuable materials for conversion to chemical and 
plastic feedstocks and fuels.  
 
Please consider using the recommendations outlined in our detailed comments below. 
ACC would be pleased to be an ongoing partner to help reduce waste and then recycle 
and recover more of Maine 's post-use plastics. I can be reached by phone at (518) 
432-7835 or by email at margaret_gorman@americanchemistry.com for any 
questions or addit ional information.  
  
Sincerely,  
 
 
Margaret Gorman 
 
Senior Director , Northeast Region, State Affairs  
American Chemistry Council 
11 North Pearl Street, Suite 1400 
Albany, NY 12207  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
americanchemistry.com®                                  700 Second St., NE | Washington, DC  20002 | (202) 249.7000                                                                       
ACC comments to the Joint Standing Committee on the Environment and Natural 
Resources  
 
 
Plastics Contributions to Sustainable Materials Management  
 
Plastics help us to do more with less in many ways. Because plastics are  durable, 
lightweight and versatile, the use of plastics can help reduce waste and the 
consumption of energy. Lighter packaging can mean  that lighter loads or fewer trucks 
and railcars are needed to ship the same amount of product , helping to reduce 
transportation energy, decrease emissions and lower shipping costs.4 
 
Plastics Recycling Today  
 
Plastics' recycling create s economic and environmental value. The 2017 United States 
National Postconsumer Plastics Bottle Recycling Report found that the total pounds 
of plast ic bottles collected for recycling in 2015 was nearly 3 billion pounds.5 The two 
main type s of bottles that are recycled are polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and high 
density polyethylene (HDPE). PET is often found in water and soda bottles and HDPE 
is often found in milk jugs and detergent  bottle s. 
 
ACC tracks the rec ycling of plastic wraps, film, and bags. This category of plastics 
includes commercial shrink wrap, plastic wrapping around consumer products such as 
paper towels and bathroom tissue, protective packaging such as bubble wrap, and 
ordinary plastic shopping bags. The 2016 National Postconsum er Plastic Bag & Film 
Recycling Report found that 1 .3 billion pounds of postconsumer plastic film was 
recovered for recycling in 2016.6 This represents a doubling of material collected 
since 2005.7 Film, bags, and wraps can become contaminated when mixed with other 
materials , so are best not collected curbside. These materials can be collected at 
18,000+ locations including most major grocery stores and retailer s. Several years ago, 
ACC formed the Flexible Film Recycling Group (FFRG) to work to increase the 
recycling of polyethylene film. Its goal is to double polyethylene film recycling by 
2020.  
 
                                                           
4 Impact of Plastics Packaging on L ife Cycle Ene rgy Consumption & Greenhouse Gas Emissions in The United States 
and Canada. 2014 http ://plastics.americanchemistry.com/Education-Reso urces/Publications /lmpact- of­ Plastics-
Packaging.pdf  
5 The 2017 United States National Postconsumer Plastic Bottle Recycling Report. 
https://plastics.americanchemistry.com/Reports-and-Publications/National-Post-Consumer-Plastics-Bottle-
Recycling-Report.pdf  
6 The 20 16 Nati onal Postconsumer Plastic Bag & Film Recycling Report 
https://plastics.americanchemistry.com/2016-National-Post-Consumer-Plastic-Bag-and-Film-Recycling-Report.pdf    
7 lbid 
 
 
 
 
 
americanchemistry.com®                                  700 Second St., NE | Washington, DC  20002 | (202) 249.7000                                                                       
° ACC also tracks the collection of non-bottle rigid plastic s collected for recycling . 
Non-bottle rigid plastics can be found in many forms such as tubs, containers, lids, 
cups and clam shells as well as larger "bulky" items such as buckets , crates , toys, and 
laundry baskets. The 2016 National Postconsumer Non -Bottle Rigid Plastic 
Recycling Report found that over 1.46 billion  pounds of postconsumer non-bottle 
rigid plastic was recovered for recycling .8 Non-bottle rigid plastic recovered has 
increased by nearly 4.5 times since 2007.9 The emergence of many domestic markets for 
non-bottle rigid plastics has led to an increasing number of cities and counties 
collecting these plastics for recycling. The Plastics Recycling Collection National 
Reach Study: 2012 Update found that over 60% of the United States population has 
some form of access to recycle non-bottle rigid containers.10 Further, the increased 
amount of recycled material has driven increased reclamation opportunities in th e 
United States.11 
 
Programs to Increase Plastics Recycling  
 
ACC commends Maine for focusing on recycling more valuable post-use packaging 
instead of sending it to landfill. We believe Maine could benefit from leveraging ACC 
and our partners' education, outreach and technical assistance programs. Below are 
some recommendations on programs that can deliver results for increasing plastics 
recycling.  
 
1) Pursue sustainable materials management as the long term goal.  
 
Plastics are an import ant component to preventing wastes, such as food was te, from 
materializing. We recommend that the state consider an approach known as 
"sustainable materials management" that is con sistent with the approach the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) recently adopted .12 Sustainable materials 
management utili zes a holistic approach, such as life cycle analysis, as a tool to 
evaluate the full range of potential environmental impacts (e.g., greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions, energy , water , etc.) attributed to material use. ACC's life cycle 
                                                           
8 2015 National Postcons umer Non-Bottle Rigid Plasti c Recycling R eport.  
https://plastics.americanchemistry.com/2016-National-Post-Consumer-Non-Bottle-Rigid-Plastic-Recycling-Report.pdf 
9 Ibid.  
10 Plastic Recycling Collection Na tional Reach Study: 2012 Update,  
http: //plastics.americanchemistry.com/Edu cation-Reso urces/Publi cations/Plastic-Recyc ling-Collection-Nat ional­ 
Reach-Study-2012 -Update.pdf 
11 2014 Na tional Postconsumer Non-Bott le Rigid Pla stic Recyc ling R eport. 
http s://plastics.americanchemistry.com/Edu cation-Reso urces/P ublications/20 14- National-Report-on-Post­ 
Consumer-Non-Bottle-Rigid-Pla stic-Recyclin g.pdf 
12 U.S. Environmental Protection Agen cy Sustainable Materials Management. http ://www.epa.gov /smm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
americanchemistry.com®                                  700 Second St., NE | Washington, DC  20002 | (202) 249.7000                                                                       
inventories on plastics packaging13 including flexible coffee  packaging14 tuna 
packaging15, and high density polyethylene (HOPE) milk jugs16 provide examples of 
how source reductions from plastics packaging can lead to important environmental 
benefits even if the se packages are not mechanically recycled . 
 
Moreover, focusing on just the recycling rate can be counterproductive. For example , 
composting or anaerobic digestion of organic waste is often counted as recycling. And, 
because a large portion of organic waste is landfilled, increased diversion of organic 
material is often viewed as a prime opportunity to increase diversion rates. However , 
ACC encourages Maine to explore the fact that a truly sustainable materials 
management approach recognizes the critical role that sophisticated packaging plays 
in pre venti ng food from being wasted in the first place. It also recognizes the greater 
environmental benefits from preventing food waste compared to the environmental 
benefits of treating organics after foods have already spoiled.17 EPR policies ignore 
other sustainability considerations including greenhouse gas emissions and 
incentivize recycling at the expense of other environmental considerations.  
 
2) Enforce existing laws and regulations and pursue collaborative policy 
approaches.  
 
Quite simply, closing enforcement gaps and demonstrating an ability to enforce 
existing recycling laws and regulations s hould be pursued before new radical 
recycling schemes are enacted. Maine’s existing bottle deposit law presents an 
opportunity to support recycling broadly. Unlike most other states, unclaimed bottle 
deposit receipt s are not specifically earmarked to support local recycling programs or 
other statew ide environmental programs. Because of a 2003 law, unclaimed bottle 
escheats have been directed to Maine 's general fund. ACC recommends that Maine 
look to earmark its unclaimed bottle deposits to recycling activities and review how 
it spends its existing tipping fee surcharges before seeking out new sources of 
funding.   
 
                                                           
13 Impact of Plastics Pack agin g on Life Cycle Energy Consumption & Greenhouse Gas Emissions in the 
United States and Canada. http://plastics.americanc hemistry.com/Educa tion-
Resources/Publica tions/Impac t-of-Plastics­Packaging.pdf 
14 LCI for Eight Coffee Packaging Systems. http ://plastics.americanchemistry.com /LCI-Summa ry-for-8-Coffee ­ 
Packaging-Syst ems 
15 LCI Summary for Six Tuna Packa ging Systems. http://plastics.americanchemistry.com/LCI-Summary-for-6- Tuna-
Pack aging-Syste ms 
16 LCI Summary  for Four  Half-Gallon  Milk  Containers.  http://plastics.am e ricanchemistry.com /LCI-Summar y-for-4- 
Half-Gallon%20Milk%20Containers  
17 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Sustainable Management of Food. 
http s://www.epa.gov /sustainabl e­ mana gement-food /food-recovery-hierarchy  
 
 
 
 
 
 
americanchemistry.com®                                  700 Second St., NE | Washington, DC  20002 | (202) 249.7000                                                                       
3) Embrace Voluntary Plastics Recycling Programs and Tools  
 
Maine should become a WRAP partner and adopt the Plastics Recycling Terms and 
Tools. Increasing the recycling of plastic film , wraps and bags represents a major 
opportunity to help Maine meet its objectives. Clean polyethylene film is a valuable 
feedstock for manufacturers and most major retailers in the United States collect post-
consumer plastic wraps, bags and film at front- of-store locations. The WRAP program 
promotes brand owner adoption of the Sustainable Packaging Coalition's (SPC) "How 
to Recycle Label." Additionally standardizing plastics terms and images is a best 
practice for community education programs.  Maine can encourage its communities to 
fully utilize the Plastics Recycling Terms and Tools to increase collection of post-use 
plastics and align with its goal of generating more reliable tracking and measurement 
data.  
 
4) Leverage National Partnerships for Grants, Loans and Technical 
Assistance  
Communities in Maine could benefit from two significant multi-million dollar 
initiatives led by the private sector. These initiatives are directly investing in 
communities and recycling systems across the country. The Recycling Partnership 
(TRP), of which ACC is a funder and board member, recently partnered with the 
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) to reduce 
contamination and dri ve the collection of more and better material  for recycling.18 
Another important organization is the Closed Loop Fund (CLF), which was  founded 
by Walmart and nine major global brands to provide no-interest loans to communities 
and private entities. Maine should explore a direct partnership with TRP and 
encourage its communities to apply for grants or loans from TRP or CLF. Lastly,  
Maine should support the Grocery Rigid Plastic Recycling Program.19 Research has 
shown that grocery store delis, bakeries, fish markets, and pharmacies use significant 
quantities of high- value rigid plastics every day. These plastics are often larger, 
bulkier items that contain things like cake batter, frosting , and fish fillets. Growing 
the total supply of non-bottle rigid plastics available for reclamation in Maine could 
potentially help establish markets for smaller  communities as well. 
 
5) Treat All Post-Use Plastics as Valuable Materials for Conversion 
Chemical and Plastic Feedstocks and Fuels  
 
Encouraging new recovery technologies should aid Maine as it works to increase its 
total diversion rate from landfill. Unfortunately, many states have yet to recognize the 
                                                           
18 MassDEP to Collaborate with The Recycling Partners hip. http s://www.r ecyc lingtoday .com/article /ma ssde p-the­  
recycling -partn ers hip-collabo rate / 
19 Recycle Grocery Rigid Plastics webs ite. http ://www.recyclegroceryplas tics.org / 

 
 
 
 
 
americanchemistry.com®                                  700 Second St., NE | Washington, DC  20002 | (202) 249.7000                                                                       
growing range of technologies available to convert post-use resources, including 
plastics, into useful products and materials. As a result, entrepreneurial 
manufacturers who seek to convert post-use materials into valuable products such as 
new chemicals and lower carbon transportation fuels are forced into regulatory 
schemes for recycling or disposal, when neither is an appropriate fit. Consider 
pyrolysis, an oxygen free process that can convert post-use  plastics into chemical 
feedstocks for new plastic s or fuels. Many state waste and recycling regulations were 
promulgated before these pyrolysis technologies were commercially viable, and as a 
result these facilities often are mischaracterized as waste disposal.  
 
However, these facilities receive a feedstock, in this case post-use plastics, and 
produce a marketable commodity. These are manufacturing facilities, not waste 
disposal facilities. ACC developed a "Regulatory Treatment of Plastics- to-Fuel 
Facilities " document to provide permitting guidance to state and local regulators.20 It 
includes a checklist of the typical federal , state, and local permits that are required to 
operate these facilities. These technologies also have considerable environmental 
benefits compared to disposing these resources in landfill.  
 
ACC appreciated the opportunity to provide written comments to the Joint Standing 
Committee on the Environment and Natural Resources.  
 
                                                           
20 Regulatory Treatmentof Plastics- to-Fuel Facilities. http://plastics.americanchemistry.co m/Pro duct-G roups-a nd­ 
Stats/Plastics-to-Fuel/Regulatory- Treatment-o f-Plastics- to-Fuel-Fac iIities. pdf 
 
  
  
 
 
 February 14, 2019  Mike Karagiannes 
Maine DEP 
17 State House Station Augusta, ME 04333‐0017  Re: AMERIPEN Comments on Pro duct Stewardship Report, 2019 
 Dear Mr. Karagiannes and Departme nt of Environmental Protection  Staff, 
 The American Institute for Packaging and the Environment (AMERI PEN) is writing regarding the 2019 Annual 
Product Stewardship Report (the Report), and specifically on Se ction IV, A. which discusses  Product Stewardship 
for Packaging .  AMERIPEN does not support a p roduct stewardship mandate as s uggested in the report for Maine 
and notes that there are several factors that have not been con sidered in the report that should be articulated for 
full consideration of  whether a stewardship program for packaging should be required in Main e. 
 AMERIPEN – the American Institute for Packaging and the Environ ment – is a coalition of packaging producers, 
users  and  end‐of‐life  materials  managers  dedicated  to  improving  packaging  and  the  environment.  Our membership represents the entire packaging supply chain, includ ing materials suppliers, packaging producers, 
consumer packaged goods companies and end‐of‐life materials man agers.   
 
AMERIPEN supports programs and policies that improve recycling  and works collaboratively to create cleaner 
recycling streams, expand access  to recycling and increase the  types of materials that can be recycled in states.  
However, we do not support product stewardship or extended prod ucer responsibility for packaging in Maine as 
envisioned by the report, and en courage the Department to consi der the following key issues.  
 
1. Feasibility & Hidden Costs with E xtended Producer Responsibilit y/Product Stewardship for Packaging 
Extended Producer Responsibility  (EPR) or product stewardship for packaging, as reco mmended by the Report, 
requires producers to take full or partial financial and manage ment responsibility for pro ducts at the end of their 
life via product stewardship or ganizations (PSOs).  This approa ch has not been proven as feasible in the U.S., and 
EPR has primarily been used elsewhere as a funding mechanism to implement end‐of‐life materials management 
programs where no funding sourc e has been previously available.  In the European Union, for example, funding 
from EPR was used to implement the widespread implementation of  recycling programs  for packaging that had 
already been proven to be recyclable.  Most innovation funding for new recycling technology is not  coming from 
EPR fees but rather through government and private funding mech anisms and EPR does not address that 
scenario.  Maine should first co nsider and detail infrastructur e investments needed to improve recycling 
capacity before jumping to financing solutions. 
The Report supports EPR  and cites its effectiveness in achievin g three main goals (1) reduce costs to states or 
municipalities, (2) incentivize p roduct design and (3) increase  collection.  However, currently, there is no 
1000 WestGate Dr •   Suite 252   •   St. Paul MN 55114 
Phone: +1 651‐288‐3431•   Fax: +1 651‐290‐2266 
2 
 research demonstrating that EP R reduces costs to taxpayers1, and none that support EPR’s role in fostering 
packaging changes and  innovation.  While there are several reports that indicate EPR may help increase 
recycling rates, there are also  a number that indicate an incre ase in recycling rate also incurs an increase in 
contamination and costs.  In a 2015 publication2 Dr. Calvin Lakhan noted that th e Ontario BlueBox program had 
witnessed a 78% increase in fees in over a 10‐year period.  Dr.  Lakhan notes that a 1% increase in recycling rate 
corresponded with a 9.4% increase  in costs, which he attributed  mostly to fluctuating market economics and the 
introduction of hard‐to‐recycle materials.  These types of cost  increases to process mate rials should be noted as 
a potential consequence of EPR f or packaging in Maine.  Additio nally, it should be noted in the Report, that 
while paying more for PSO management of materials, local municipalities are not likely to return tax dollars or 
solid waste fees to constituents and that they will also be gen erally be paying more fo r consumer products.  
Some of these same challenges fac e take‐back programs for elect ronics which have a long history of experience 
with EPR in the U.S. These progr ams are witnessing significant increases in costs as st ates impose unattainable 
recycling targets not in line wi th material coming back through  the collection system; st ates impose convenience 
standards that may not actually result in increased collection  of e‐waste but instead increase costs for 
manufacturers; or, in some cases, states set pricing without an y market influence or co mpetition among service 
providers resulting in the highe st program comp liance costs in  the U.S. Additionally, EPR programs for 
electronics have not proven to incentivize product design. EPR  does not always result in the achievements its 
been touted to produce or at leas t not in a cost‐effective mann er for those ultimately fronting the bill. What 
started as a promising solution i s now becoming a cost‐burden o n both states and manufacturers.  
2. Market Challenges for Materials R ecovery Must be Noted in the R eport 
AMERIPEN recognizes that increased efforts toward domestic processing can be a key strategy in reducing marine debris, improving environmental outcomes and increasing  our economic competiti veness.  However, the 
Report presupposes that if manufacturers are forced to manage t he collection of packaging materials, then the 
technology and volumes of materials within the State are suffic ient with today’s existing technology.  This is 
flawed. 
Many plastic resins and mixed ma terials have a lack of end markets that makes it difficu lt to offer mechanical 
recycling solutions.  Alternative recovery strategies such as plastics‐to‐fuel or other forms of energy recovery 
may be possible but are challenged by a lack of sufficient volu me to meet their needs to process and scale, 
especially in Maine.  The Report’s belief in having all materials diverted to recycling is not likely to match the reality of capture and recovery methods and does not reflect th e challenges of today’s sc rap trade for diverted 
materials.  
There is ample evidence of this challenge: 
A. Recycle BC recently introduced a pilot program to collect and t rial recovery efforts  for multi‐material 
plastic film packages, a product which is rapidly growing in th e market. While a portion of this material 
collected has been stated to be de signated towards R&D for mech anical recycling, they are clear that 
the majority of this material will be pelletized for waste to energy.  To date there is no public reporting 
available on volumes directed towa rds R&D or pelletization or s uccess rate in R&D.  
                                                       
1 Miller, Chaz. “From Birth to Rebirth:  Will Product Stewardshi p Save Resources?” American  Bar Association. Section of 
Environment, Energy and Resources. 2011. 
2 Lakhan, Calvin. (Feb 2015) “Div ersion But At What Cost: the Ec onomic Challenges of Recyclin g in Ontario.” Resources, 
Conservation and Recycling.   
1000 WestGate Dr •   Suite 252   •   St. Paul MN 55114 
Phone: +1 651‐288‐3431•   Fax: +1 651‐290‐2266 
3 
 B. The city of Palo Alto, CA is als o in a pilot with emerging comp any BioCellection  to process hard‐to‐recycle 
plastics and films but their approach is to mix resins 2‐4 and  films in order to capt ure sufficient volumes 
for small trials.  BioCellection  is still considered an early‐stage innovator and has yet to sh ow proven 
success with recovery of this material. 
C. The Province of Nova Scotia recently partnered with  Renewology , a commercially viable plastic to fuel 
technology, to help reduce plast ic waste but this required changing Provincial statutes to permit for 
thermal recovery. 
AMERIPEN and its member companies understand there is a need to  increase the technologies available to 
process more packaging materials , but the challenges in the mar ket right now require a focus on  end market 
development  and capturing sufficient volumes to ensure scale, especially in Maine.  Many of our corporate 
members are supporting these effo rts through investments into initiatives including  The Recycling Partnership , 
REMADE, and the  Alliance to End Plastics Waste.   
However, until these investments identify new technologies or t he best means to capture increased volumes of 
resin types, the ability to succ essfully re‐process significant  volumes of plastics 3‐7 and other mixed materials 
will remain a challenge and the additional burden to collect, s ort and process materials will slow any R&D 
contributions towards this goal. 
3. Loss of Local Control and Solid Waste Management  
While the Report does discuss different versions of shared and sole manufacturer financial responsibility under 
an EPR program for packaging and envisions local incentives for  efficient municipal programs, it does not 
provide specifics on how this ba lance can truly be achieved to sustain both statewide collection of materials and 
local control. 
AMERIPEN recommends that the Repo rt clearly state that regardle ss of the approach, local municipalities may 
likely lose control and management responsibility for packaging  waste under a true EPR approach.  If PSO 
organizations are mandated to be responsible for managing packa ging materials statewide, those organizations 
are not likely to continue to co ntract and support the diversit y of Maine’s solid waste structures within all of 
municipalities and local governments and  be sustainable economically.  Efficiency will be critical, espe cially in 
today’s material markets, and an y PSO will find it difficult to  meet statewide service collection and maintain 
both local control and solid waste management jobs and responsi bilities.  Out of necessity this will result in 
statewide contracts for collectio n to those providers that can  provide service that accomplishes PSO program 
goals but minimize variation and l ocal cost issues.  If a syste m is set up without this flexibility, then the 
alternative – costly bureaucrati c duplication – is equally disr uptive and unlikely to be publicly accepted. 
4. Maine’s Bottle Bill an d EPR for Packaging   
While the Report does discuss Ma ine’s Bottle Bill program and notes where EPR and bottle  bill programs exist in 
Canada, it does not provide a vi sion for how such a program wou ld relate to EPR for packaging in Maine.  
Maine’s privatized Bottle Bill pr ogram is unique and it is diff icult to see both programs continuing to be able to 
operate and create enough volume s for either program to be succ essful – especially when the Bottle Bill in 
Maine appears to be in a crisis.  This crisis is demonstrated b y the amount of legislative interest in supporting 
the private system of the Bottle  Bill this year.  With this cri sis, moving to an EPR program for all packaging, which 
would include beverage container s, may only exacerbate the program’s current problems.   If the Department 
intends to maintain two systems,  the Report must articulate how  they both could achieve economically viable 
volumes of materials and funds. 
1000 WestGate Dr •   Suite 252   •   St. Paul MN 55114 
Phone: +1 651‐288‐3431•   Fax: +1 651‐290‐2266 
4 
 Once again, AMERIPEN appreciates the opportunity to comment on  the Annual Product Stewardship Report . 
While we do not support product stewardship as envisioned by th e report, we look forward to working with the 
Department of Environmental Prot ection to work to address proac tive policy solutions that improve access to 
recycling and find positive outcomes for recycled materials wit hin Maine and beyond.  We hope to continue a 
positive dialogue with the Department on these issues and with  the Legislature as they ar e considered this year. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Andrew Hackman Principal Lobbyist on  behalf of AMERIPEN 
 CC:  Melanie Loyzim, Deputy Commissioner, Maine DEP   Paula Clark, Director, Division  of Materials Management, Maine DEP 
  Carole Cifrino, Supervisor, Recycling Programs, Maine DEP 

 
 
February 1 4, 2019 
 
Mr. Mike Karagiannes  
Director, Bureau of Land Resources  
Maine Department of Environmental Protection   
17 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333- 0017  
 
RE: Comments – Annual Product Stewardship Report (January 2019)  
 Dear Mr. Karagiannes ,  
 On behalf of the Consumer Healthcare Products Association (CHPA) , the 137-year -old trade association 
representing the leading manufacturers of over-the -counter (OTC) medications , please accept our 
comments related to the Maine Department of Environmental Protection’s (DEP) annual report, 
Implementing Product Stewardship in Maine . 
 Our specific interest in the document falls on page 20 where pharmaceuticals are mentioned as a candid ate for a new extended producer responsibility (EPR) law  in Maine .  While EPR may make sense for 
some consumer products, it does not work for pharmaceuticals.   In fact, the report admits that one of the 
more critical components of product stewardship – increasing recovery of material for reuse and recycling 
– cannot be met with a pharmaceutical EPR law.  That being the case, we strongly recommend the State 
of Maine take alternative approaches to address concerns with pharmaceutical diversion and environment al impact.  Rather than creating an expensive, inefficient, under utilized framework for broad 
pharmaceutical product stewardship (drug take -back), CHPA encourages the state to educate consumers 
about existing disposal and safe medicine storage options.  
 Disposal Options Already Exist  
 Walgreens, in a partnership with AmerisourceBergen, Prime Therapeutics, and Pfizer (a member of CHPA) already collects unused or unwanted medications at 1,500 of its drugstores across the country.  Since the program began, more than 400 tons of medications have been collected and disposed of.   Late last year, 
Walgreens also announced it would offer drug disposal options at every single one of its stores.  Available at no cost to consumers, Walgreens will distribute a “safe medication disposal kit” upon request by any 
customer.  Both programs make the disposal of medications easier and more convenient while helping 
reduce potential drug diversion from their intended use.  
 Similarly, CVS Health accepts unused pharmaceuticals in  more than 750 of their locations, and they have 
donated more than 900 disposal kiosks to community locations such as police departments.  Together, these units have collected more than 217 tons of unwanted and unused medication.  
 
Consumer Healthcare Products Association  
Department of Environmental Protection’s Annual Report  on Product Stewardship  
February 14, 2019 - Page 2 of 3 
 
   Walmart gives pharmacy cu stomers “Dispose Rx” powder that can turn medications mixed into a pill 
bottle with warm water that is then disposed of in household trash.  Rite Aid offers mail back envelopes 
people can use to return their extra medications.   These retail efforts combine d with existing Drug 
Enforcement Agency (DEA) pharmaceutical drug take -back days, provide consumers with a plethora of 
options for medicine disposal.  Rather than re -creating a take -back system, we suggest educating the 
public about existing  options ; conce ntrating efforts on driving traffic to existing disposal sites.   
 Safe Storage vs. Safe Disposal  
 
According to national surveys, at least half of individuals who misuse medications obtain them from a 
friend or relative.  More than 60,000 young children end up in emergency rooms every year after getting into medicine while their parents or caregivers were not looking.  Medications left unattended or not safely stored, no matter if they’re expired or not, are prone to being diverted from their intended use.  As such, educating Mainers about the importance of safe medication storage has a far greater impact on 
drug diversion control than does a disposal program.  
 To remind parents and caregivers about the importance of safe m edicine storage, the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) and the CHPA Educational Foundation, in partnership with the PROTECT Initiative, launched the Up and Away and Out of Sight educational program.  The program is aimed to 
educate parents a nd caregivers about how they can prevent accidental overdoses.  It reminds them to 
store medicines safely; providing them with the information and tools to keep their child/children safe; 
and encouraging them to take action.   
 Conclusion OTC medicines play  an important role in our nation’s overall healthcare.  Our members’ products 
provide millions of Americans – including thousands of Maine residents – with safe, effective, and 
affordable therapies to treat and prevent many common ailments and diseases.  T hese medicines are 
affordably accessible to patients, and help empower families to treat conditions with trusted, Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved treatments.  According to a study by Booz and Company, for every 
dollar spent on an OTC medicine, we save the U.S. Healthcare system $6 -$7.
1  Without access to OTC 
medicine, over 60 million Americans would not seek treatment for their ailments at all.2 
For these reasons, we take very seriously any potential disruption - regulation or otherwise - to the 
affordability of OTC healthcare.  As the first and only line of defense for many Maine families, it is critical 
that state officials evaluate the opportunity cost (cost of medications vs. benefits of drug take -back) 
associated with the implementation of a mandatory, manufacturer funded drug take back program.  
CHPA recognizes the importance of safe storage, and drug disposal, but we strongly disagree that an  EPR 
program for pharmaceuticals is necessary in the State of Maine.  Thank you for considering our c oncerns  
and p lease feel free to contact me directly with any questions on our position.  
  Respectfully submitted,  
                                                 
1 The Value Of  OTC Medicine To The United States, Booz & Co., January 2012.  
2 Ibid 
Consumer Healthcare Products Association  
Department of Environmental Protection’s Annual Report  on Product Stewardship  
February 14, 2019 - Page 3 of 3 
 
    
Carlos I. Gutierrez  
Vice President, State & Local Government Affairs  
Consumer Healthcare Products Association  
cgutierrez@chpa.org  | 202- 429-3521  
 

–
 
 
 
 
February 14, 2019  
 
Mike Karagiannes  
Maine Department of Environment Protection   
17 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
Re: Comments on the Maine Department of Environmental Protection  (“DEP”) ’s 2019 
Annual Product Stewardship Report to the L egislature  (“Report”).  
 
Dear Mr. Karagiannes,  
 
Conservation Law Foundation (“CLF”) is a nonprofit, member -supported, regional environmental 
organization working to conserve natural resources, protect public health,  and promote thriving 
communities in the New England region  with an office in Portland . Our Zero Waste Project  aims 
to protect  the regions’  communities from the dangers posed by landfills and incinerators , support 
the development of a circular economy, and lift the burden of waste costs from municipalities. 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit comments on Maine DEP in the 2019 Annual Product 
Stewardship Report.  
 
CLF supports policies which strive to inc lude producers in the end-of-life management of 
the products they place on the market , including the recommendations made by Maine DEP 
in the 2019 Annual Product Stewardship R eport. Maine is a national leader in the 
implementation of extended producer res ponsibility programs,  and we hope it continue s to 
lead by expanding and adopting th e policies in the R eport.  
 
For much of the history of waste management, producers have been disconnected from end -of-life 
care for the products they sell to consumers. Companies do not have an incentive to design 
products to be recycled or use recycled content in their manufacturing , and increasingly materials 
are used which cannot be easily recycled or recovered.  Producers of hazardous waste like plastics 
and electronics flood the market and our landfills and incine rators with dangerous pollution. Sol id 
waste f acilitie s, which are overwhelmingly located in environment al justice communities, then 
expose  the most vulnerable populations to health hazards. Waste costs extend beyond 
environmental and health concerns – municipalities are responsible for cleaning up litter and  
paying for trash and recycling regardless of whether they purchased the products, costing taxpayers 
tens to hundreds of thousands of dollars each year. Extended producer responsibility (“EPR”) 
policies require producer engagement in bearing these burdens,  lifting costs from communities and 
incentivizing environmental stewardship from producers.  
 
–
 
 
 
Maine is one of two states with an extended producer responsibility framework law, which has led 
to the adoption of product stewardship programs for a long list of products, including electronic 
waste, architectural paint, and beverage containers recovered through the Bottle Bil l. CLF supports 
these programs and Maine DEP’s recommendations for improvements . However, CLF cautions 
the DEP and Legislatur e with respect to any proposed  statutory changes to the Bottle Bill. Maine’s 
beverage container redemption law is highly efficient in its current form, recovering between 75 
and 87% of all distributed beverage containers.  The program provides jobs and a clean source of 
recyclable materials, while lifting the cost of recycling from the backs of municipalities. CLF 
agrees with the Natural Resource Council of Maine’s comments on the Report that the Legislature  
should improve the program with:   
1) Better data and reporting so that we may be more certain about the collection rate —this should 
be coupled with an automatic increase in deposit amount should collection targets not be reached ;  
2) Consideration of addi ng more conta iners into the redemption model;   
3) Better ways to respon d to issues of non -compliance;  and,  
4) Review of methods  to streamline the commingling process based on input from the redemption 
center operators.  
 
The Report also includes recommenda tions for five additional programs that the Legislature may 
consider: product stewardship for packaging, pharmaceuticals, carpets, mattresses and solar 
panels. EPR laws for each of these products exist in other U.S. states, including very successful 
progr ams in Rhode Island, Connecticut and California for mattresses, and statewide product 
stewardship for pharmaceuticals in California.  
 
CLF is especially heartened by  Maine DEP’s focus on and insight into the implementation of an 
EPR program for packaging. The R eport highlights the drastic increase of recycling costs for 
municipalities in 2018, caused by China’s refusal to accept contaminated bales of mixed plastic 
and fiber. EPR programs for packaging in the European Union  and Canada have lifted all or part 
of these costs from municipalities and taxpayers while pressuring producers to make the barrage 
of products flooding communities as recyclable as possible. In id entifying program examples, 
Maine DEP describes the differences between recycling systems completely under producer 
control versus those in which municipalities maintain partial control. CLF believes that the 
Legislature should move quickly to adopt a shared  model wherein producers are responsible for 
helping cover the costs of municipal recycling. Such a program will ensure that environmental 
goals for material recovery are met and that recycling remains under control of municipal 
government, not producers c oncerned with their bottom line.  
 
While Maine may be a leader of EPR policies and programs, the  rest of New England is also 
moving forward, especially Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Rhode Island . The Zero Waste 
Project promotes EPR programs regionally, in cluding shared responsibility for packaging and 
expanded or strengthened deposit/return programs for beverage containers. EPR systems work, 
–
 
 
 
and r egional adoption of product stewardship will only increase the efficacy of these programs , so 
we will be certai n to share news of your hard work with other states .  
 
CLF thanks  Maine DEP for this thorough and motivating report, and for allowing us the 
opportunity to submit comments in support. We will urge the Legislature to vote favorably on 
EPR legislation under consideration this session, and to advocate for the future adopt ion of 
recommended programs. CLF stands ready to answer any questions or supply additi onal 
information if needed .  
 
Very truly yours,  
 
 
Kirstie L. Pecci  
Director, Zero Waste Project , CLF  
 
 
Cc: Sarah Lakeman , Susta inable Maine Project Director, Natural Resources Council of Maine  
Sean Mahoney, Executive Vice President and Director, CLF Maine, Conservation Law 
Foundation  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
February 14, 2019  
 
Mr. Mike Karagiannes  
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
17 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0017  
 
Re: Comments on 2019 Maine Product Stewardship Report  
 
Dear Mr. Karagiannes : 
 
On behalf of the membership of the Retail Association of Maine, please accept the following comments 
regarding the 2019 Maine Product Stewardship Report. As noted in the report, the department is 
recommending changes to the framework law as well as four of the nine programs that currently e xist. 
We will break our comments down in a similar fashion.  
 
Framework Law Changes:  
The report proposes a number of changes to Maine’s product stewardship law most notably in Appendix 
A. We have some concerns:  
• Each product and program is different and to m andate a permanent collection site within 15 
miles of 90% of Maine’s population within 1 year seems arbitrary. Given the majority of Maine ’s 
populat ion follows the coastline, the bill  would likely exclude collection in much of Maine 
beyond the coastal areas.  
• Requiring that a program has a minimum of a ½ time employee is not clear. Must this person be 
located in Maine or would a program operating regionally suffice?  
• The department is proposing an annual fee of up to $100,000 per year to help cover annual 
report review, oversight, administration and enforcement. With the existing nine programs this 
seems exc essive. How may DEP staff are needed to adequately monitor the programs? As the 
report demonstrates, some of the programs are operating efficiently and need very little 
ongoing oversight. Additionally, when the product stewardship law was first passed, it promised 
two things  in addition to taking certain products out of the waste stream : drive down to cost of 
landfilling certain materials and to prevent individual legislative proposals for new product 
categories. While DEP demonstrates that Maine has increa sed recycling costs, no evidence is 
provided that EPR will actually lower costs.  We believe neither of those promises have been 
kept.  

• The department is proposing an annual survey by each of the nine programs to measure 
consumer knowledge and collection methods. It would seem to be more efficient to have one 
survey that covers all of the programs. Does it need to be done annually or would bi -annually 
suffice?  
• In summary, the department is proposing a number of dramatic changes in Appendix A. We  
would recommend that a stakeholder group be formed to collaboratively work with the 
department on any necessary changes to existing programs. The stakeholders should include 
representatives from the existing product programs, retailers, and collection sit es.  
 
Mercury Lamps : 
The marketplace for lightbulbs has changed dramatically in the last decade. For consumers, we have 
moved from incandescent bulbs to CFLs to LEDs. In fact, starting January 1 , 202 0, there will be new 
requireme nts on producers and retailers regarding high efficiency la mps thanks to the 2007 Energy Act. 
It is clear the department has concerns with the existing program and we cannot comment on the 
effectiveness of NEMA’s program. However, we do think there is an opportunity for a wider discussi on 
of this issue with Efficiency Maine and whether or not there can be additional incentives to replace CFLs.  
 
Recently, Efficiency Maine ran a program that lowered the cost of LEDs lightbulbs to approximately $.50 
/ bulb. The price was so good that it in spired me to replace all of the CFLs in my house with LEDs. 
However, now I am left with a good number of still -usable CFLs and it would seem silly to recycle them 
when they still have usable life. Could Efficiency Maine or Maine DEP provide a bounty on CFL s similar to 
the mercury thermostat program? Perhaps that would help drive up redemption rates.  
 
Beverage Containers : 
The report noted that Maine’s beverage container redemption program is very successful with 
redemption rates of 75 -87% compared to the nat ional average of 34%.  
 
We have a number of concerns with some of the proposals in the report:  
• First, Mainers are well aware where they can take their bottles for redemption. Maine’s 
program has been operating for so long that there should be no confusion a s to who takes or 
does not take bottles.  
• That being said, while we support the elimination of the redemption responsibility for retailers 
of 5,000 square feet or less, we cannot support the new requirement that retailers greater than 
5,000 square feet mus t have a written agreement with a redemption center within 1 mile. As 
Mainers, we know we can take our bottles to a Clynk facility at Hannafords, or Shaws ’ 
redemption facility , or a stand -alone redemption center. We don’t expect Reny’s to redeem 
bottles. W e don’t expect Home Depot or Dick’s Sporting Goods to redeem bottles. We have 
never understood the need for retailers to maintain written agreements with redemption 
centers as we are not aware of redemption deserts in Maine. In fact, our 75 -87% redemption 
rate speaks to the success of the existing program.  
• There are a large number of bills submitted this session looking to make changes to Maine’s 
bottle redemption program so we know these issues will all get scrutinized and we welcome the 
discussion.  
 
Batt eries : 
As the report noted, there was significant discussion in 2016 regarding the expansion of the battery 
stewardship program. We agree that batteries (generally rechargeable batteries) that are a fire hazard 
should not be in the waste stream and that ad ditional efforts are needed to limit that risk.  
 
However, when the discussion includes primary batteries , we are not sure those should be included in 
the program. Primary batteries are non -toxic and can be disposed of through the normal waste stream 
with no adverse effects  and do not take up significant landfill space . Yet, consumers do not differentiate 
easily between rechargeable / recyclable batteries and primary batteries and often deposit both types in 
collection containers. In addition to the recomme nded language in the report, there is another bill title 
addressing batteries for legislative consideration. We look forward to participating in those discussions 
when those bills arise.  
 
Cellular Phones : 
We agree with the proposed changes to the cellular phone program.  
 
 
Additionally, the report discusses other products for future consideration, namely packaging, 
pharmaceuticals, mattresses, carpet and solar panels . We are aware of a couple bill titles that will 
propose legislation regarding mattresses and pharmaceuticals as those issues have been discussed 
previously . There are existing programs in other states that will provide relevant information  as to 
whether or not these products are ready for a product stewardship program in M aine.  
 
For packaging, the report highlights many of the challenges that currently exist but we wanted to 
mention a few other points.  
 
• DEP claims that other provinces have had success with EPR without providing clear before and 
after evidence of success. Furthermore, they confess to not being able to measure changes in 
sustainable packaging as a result of EPR. We support increasing the use of sustainable packaging 
and believe that the state can work with businesses to achieve that end within the existing 
recycling scheme and create incentives to encourage sustainable packaging.  
• DEP is conflating product EPR programs with EPR for packaging. The complications with creating 
an EPR scheme for packaging in Maine are significant and cannot be taken lightly. No st ate in 
the U.S. has approved an EPR law for packaging. In fact, the CT legislature directed a task force 
to study methods for reducing consumer packaging . In February 2018, that task force approved 
final recommendations that did not include EPR for packagi ng.   
• DEP raises a number of important questions about EPR for packaging in their report but does 
not provide answers. If DEP wants to explore this issue, we recomme nd they convene a 
stakeholder discussion, of which RAM  would participate, to understand the opportunities, 
complications and factors the legislature would need to consider before approving an EPR 
program for packaging.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit our comments.  
 
Since rely,  
 
 
Curtis Picard CAE, President and CEO  

Comments  on Product Stewardship  Report of Peter Welch Gaia, LLC 
 
Hello Mike, 
 It was good to meet you up in the legislature  at the time  of the plastics bill hearing  at ENRC. Please note 
that I have copied Carole  Cifrino as well.  I certainly wish to share openly my views with  her,  too, in the 
spirit  of dialo gue that she has so gener 
ously offered to me.  Please know that I view this report with an 
understanding  that  the DEP  is wanting to make  improvements  to the bottle bill & that this department  
bill is with the best of intention.  However,  the dialog ue and con cepts that are included in the 
Stewardship  proposals  fails to address the # 1 issue, handling fees. 
 Please allow this email to be my “comments”  for purposes of public  comment  on the “Stewardship 
Proposal”.  
 Handling fees have not adjusted  in nearly  a decade. Proposals  such as LD 360 do address this issue and 
the need is urgent. He
nce, the “emergency”  status is warranted.  I would  hope that the department  and 
Governor  Mills would  see the need and support its passage. I speak as a bottle bill veteran since 1981. I 
speak as a major retailer  in Maine for nearly 25 years. I speak as  a wine importer who sells to wine 
distributors  in Maine. I speak as a long‐time former Maine Liquor Agent.  I speak as an employer  who 
voted for the minimum  wage  increase. I speak as a past appointed  member by the Maine Legislature  on 
multiple “bottle  bill” study groups.  I speak as a longti me supporter  of the bottle  bill & Maine’s 
environment.  
 
Let me try to address the Stewardship  proposal in the following  prose. 
 
The “catch all” is not a panacea‐ even if it were able to be implemented????  It is not well thought out, at 
all.  Th e spirit of the idea is good. It would be somewhat  hel
pful, in theory. It would  only represent  about 
20% of the containers  in the system,  by my estimate .  
 Do you know of any entity that envisions  themselves  as the “Catch All”???? The state should be wary 
and cautious about ge
 tting stuck holding  the bag here!! 
 
However,  this section improperly  assumes that the only action and” labor” involved at a redemption  
center  is:  putting a can in a bag.  It doesn’t save any storage space, whatsoever.  And, the storage on site 
for 1000 containers  is the same no matter  how  many sorts are involved.  It may  save some  floor space 
for sorting, surely. 
 A customer  brings a container  to a redemption  clerk‐ The clerk‐  inspects for the “deposit”(  often 
difficult to find and see due to poor or out of compliance  labeling by IOD’s )‐ requires counting  the 
customers  empties by th 
ose that are .05 separate  from .15 & separating  out containers  not covered 
under the bottle bill‐ etc., etc. It does not include the labor needed  to maintain & clean the redemption  
center  and take  care of ancillary  recyclables  ( i.e.‐ cardboard  & bags of which there is a lot‐ again 
envision your
self and how  folks return empties) ‐‐ or trash‐ including the bazillion plastic bags 
consumers  return empties in. 
 
At some  point and currently & usually once a week or every 2 weeks‐ the distributor  picks up the 
containers  and verifies with the redemption  center  the number of containers.  The proposed  “catch all” 
process is mu
ch more involved than that. Also, the idea of weights is flawed‐  even if you were to get 
100% compliance  from all these IOD’s. Right  now‐  we have containers  that  have ice in the bottom  of 
them from fluid  from sitting in people’s garages.  If anyone can picture your own empties‐ or what we 
see‐‐‐‐ empties comeback  with a variety of materials  in them.  First, they often have some amount of 
fluid or ic
e in them which would  mess  up the weight concept, completely.‐  Sometimes  they have lemons 
and fruit, sometimes  cig butts‐ sometimes  straws,  in the summer  sand, etc‐ the list goes on. Also, IOD’s 
are constantly  changing and evolving  their containers  for marketing  purposes,  etc. Size, shape, and 
weight are regularly
 changing.  Just recall the testimony  at the Plastic Caps hearing about producers  
lowering  the weight of their containers.   
 
Sometimes  very unsavory  stuff is also in these containers.  Deposits  and weights don’t match up & 
cannot be reconciled  by bookkeeping.  
 Also, if the measurement  to the consumer  is a “5 cent deposit” the only way to match this up is with the 
same. I can pi 
cture a scenario whereby each and every bag that departs a redemption  center needs to 
be “weighed” ‐ OMG‐ that will take time and labor! From a bookkeeping  point of view,  I picture  an army 
of clerks and tally’s even using scanners and technolo gy. 
 Practically  speaking
‐ all these IOD’s which, in theory,  will be part of the “catch all”‐ all currently have the 
opportunity  to sell directly and “solely” to a Maine distributor  and thereby be part of those distributors  
that have a co‐mingling  group‐  (In theo ry). But they have voluntarily  decided to NOT pursue this avenue. 
Or, they have not been permitted  to join for some  reason. This is by choice, assumable.  
 Also, there has been  no oversight  or review  of the current co‐mingling  groups to verify  annually  that 
they continue to be in compliance  with law and regulation.  This sho
 uld be done. 
 More  importantly,  the existing co‐mingling  groups were envisioned  & required to allow other producers  
into their  groups under the original  enabling legislation.  If that were happening,  this issue is solved. But, 
still not a panacea! 
  There  are also some  other issues in this Stewardship  report,  too.  I am for fees to be increase d to assist 
the bottle bill and enforce
ment‐ but that MUST include IOD’s and distributors ‐ not just Redemption  
Centers. Yes, go ahead and double everyone’s  fees. I find it a little burdensome  that that the side of the 
industry with fixed revenue is being asked to carry all the weight.  
 
 I do concur with getting a “solid reporting”  regime of & for “ALL”  containers  BOTH SOLD & 
REDEMMED  IN MAINE. This is really  slack at the moment.  This should be done  for containers  subject 
to “escheat”  and containers  that are not subj
 ect to “escheat”.  “Trust & Verify”, to quote  Ronald 
Reagan. 
 As for the issue of Maine Liquor  not meeting the “test” of a qualified commingle‐  well  then‐  a “fiscal 
note” should be attached to this legislation  as the state would owe ½ penny going back for several 
years  on all the containers  run thru its system. Bec 
ause the State of Maine was envisioned  as 100% of 
the product group in the original legislation;  it was deemed compliant.  
 Unfortunately,  I see this as well‐intentioned  but way off the mark of the focus needed. That is a handling 
fee increase suc
 h as envisioned  in LD 360 and with a CPI adjustment  whenever  the CPI moves  above the 
“BASE” rate  by more than ¼ of a penny.  
 
The section on “fraud” and “under bagging” at redemption,  I see as somewhat  of a red herring. Most 
and many redemption  folks are hardworking,  honest folks and this intonation  is not fair. First, the 
distributor  or pick up agent has the right to refuse a bag if they see or believe it to be short.  Second, it 
makes no provision  for being
 overfull. The system was designed on volume counts. At that  has worked, 
well.  THERE  ARE NO IOD’S MORE THAN  100%!!!  There  is “NO” mention of unintentional  or intentional  
fraud in the system by IOD’s. I submit this is more significant ‐ due to “perhaps”  unintentional  acts‐ bu t 
still more significant.  The fact that RSI had more contract IOD’s than Maine Revenue Services had filings 
for IOD’S & “escheat”  is a bell weather. That should be a 1:1 and 100% correlation.  THE CURRENT  LAW 
REQUIRES  IT, BUT IT IS NOT ENFORCED .  
 The bottom line is that th
e bottle bill is a “User  Fee”‐ the single most effective piece  of legislation  with a 
40‐year history of success, delivering  80‐95% return rate without a “Penny” of taxpayer  money. I would 
think the Legislature  and Governor  would  support this concept, universally.  It does deliver 5%‐10% of 
Maine’s MSW dep
ending on who you talk too. If we had 5 more laws as effective as this‐ Maine would 
be at 50% recycling and meet our outdated  goal. It saves property taxpayers  and 
municipalities   “statewide ‐ rural & urban”. And BTW‐  the roads are clear of those contain ers and Maine 
DOT and towns do not need  to employ staff to do this Vital  Task in a tourist state.  We are a tourist state 
whereby  our hospitality  industry is of great importance.  
 The Maine public has endorsed  and supported  the “bottle bill” with great zest and compliance.  Twice 
rebuffing by great vote margins (85%‐15% 
) industry efforts to dismantle  and weaken the bottle bill. 
Wouldn’t  it be grand if all of Maine’s Solid Waste legislation  had this “SUCCESS”!   
 IT works!!‐  
 The crux of the issue at the moment is that all manner of costs( property tax, insurances,  utilities, 
supplies,  on and on)‐‐ have increase
d at the Redemption  Center level  since 2009 at the time of the last 
increase. 
 Significantly,  the Maine minimum  wage has rightly  risen from 7.50/hour  to 11.00/  hour  starting 
1.1.19. A 46% increase.   Starting on 1.1.20, the minimum  wage rises to 12.00/hour ‐ a whopping  60% 
increase from 2009. 
Maine stat
e government  has implemented  this minimum  wage. Maine state government  implements 
the “handling  fee”.  Raising  the “handling  fee by .01 to .02 with a CPI adjuster”  is: a matter of, 
FAIRNESS.  
 
Over the past near decade,  this amounts to less than  1/10 of 1 percent per year in crease  when  related 
to the retail price  of products such as liquor, wine,  beer, soda and water.  
 
I see the Dept. bill as perhaps well‐intentioned  but “noise” and distracting.  I believe the Dept. had as a 
prerequisite,  trying  to do something  positive‐ just so long as there  was no fee increase. He nce, all 
version of mental exercises except the single most needed advocacy.  I am certainly wishing  to make 
myself available  to and for the department  in any manner that may be of assistance.   
 Thanks for letting me portray  a point of view & providing  me the opportunity  to do so. If you would be 
so kind as 
 to confirm  receipt so that I know that I have properly delivered  these  comments;  I would be 
thankful. 
 
Sincerely yours, 
 
Peter E. Welch 
Gaia, LLC 
d/b/a Forest Avenue Redemption  Center 
897 Forest Avenue 
Portland, Maine  04103 
207.329.3248  (cell) 
pwelchoptimusimports@myfairpoint.net   
 
  
Peter E. Welch 
Optimus Imports,  LLC. 
897 Forest Avenue 
Portland, ME 04103 
207.329.3248   cell 
207.775.4422   fax 
 
 
 
501 WYTHE STREET, AL EXANDRIA, VA 22314   571.482.5428   |   WWW.SLEEPPRODUCTS.OR G 
 
 
February 14, 2019  
 
Mike Karagiannes  
Maine DEP  
17 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0017  
mike.karagiannes@maine.gov   
 
Re: Comments on January 2019 Report, Implementing Product Stewardship in Maine  
 
Dear Mr. Karagiannes,  
 
The International Sleep Products Association (ISPA) is the trade association for mattress 
manufacturers and component suppliers to the industry. ISPA has served as the voice of the 
mattress industry for over 100 years. We appreciate the opportunity to comment on the 
Department of Environmental Protection’s (DEP) January 2019 report, Implementation of 
Product Stewardship in Maine  (2019 Product Stewardsh ip Report or Report) . ISPA has concerns 
with mattresses identified as a candidate product for new Extended Producer Responsibility 
(EPR) programs as w ell as the proposed changes to the Product Stewardship  framework law.  
 
I. Mattresses as a Candidate Product for New EPR Programs  
 
As noted in the Report, California, Connecticut , and Rhode Island each have mattress recycling 
laws. Each law requires a small visible fee to be charged on each mattress and box spring sold in 
the state to fund the respective recycling programs. In order  to implement the mattress 
recycling programs required by these laws, ISPA created the non-profit organization, the 
Mattress Recycling Council (MRC) to oversee each of the programs. The Connecticut program 
launched in May 2015, California in December 2015 , and Rhode Island launch ed in May 2016.  
 
The current  fee in each  state  is as follows:  
California  - $10.50 
 Connecticut  - $9.00  
 Rhode  Island  - $16.00 
 
These  fees are per unit.  For example,  an individual  buying  a mattress  and box spring  in 
California  would  pay $21.00. Geography,  population  size and obligations  imposed  by the state  
all play a role in influencing  the level  of the fee. In each  of the existing  program  states,  multiple  
recyclers  operated  in the state  prior  to passage  of the law. Currently,  we are aware  of no 
mattress  recyclers  operating  in Maine,  meaning  that any such  program  would  have  to rely on 
out-of-state  or foreign  operators  to recycle  mattresses.  In addition  to likely  higher  processing  
costs,  transportation  costs  will be significantly  higher .  
 
2 
 In the 2019  Product  Stewardship  Report , the DEP concluded  that,  “given Maine’s geographic 
size, low population, and lack of businesses to deconstruct mattresses, enacting a law with the 
same financing mechanism likely would result in a per unit fee at sale even higher than the $16 
fee in Rhode Island.”  Instead t he DEP proposed , “an EPR system for mattresses funded at least 
partially through cost internalization may be most appropriate for Maine.”  
 
ISPA does not agree with either statement. We have no basis upon which to estimate the cost 
of recycling mattresses in Maine. It could require a fee higher or lower than the $1 6 fee 
currently collected in Rhode Island. ISPA is prepared to work with DEP or others to e xplore 
options a nd estimate the actual cost of recycling mattresses in the state.  
 
Likewise, funding mattress recycling through a combination of consumer fees and 
“internalized ” costs has many disadvantages . The disadvantages  include : 
 
• The suggested mixture of consumer fees and internalized costs wil l not save the 
consumer any money. The internalized cost will be passed along to the cons umer.  
Therefore, the consumer  will pay for the full recycling costs regardless of whether it is 
funded exclusively by a consumer fee or not.   
• In fact, the consumer may be required to pay more under the internalized cost 
approach. Collecting a fee at retail is relatively easy to impl ement and has proven highly 
successful in funding rec ycling programs in other states. If a state resident buys a 
mattress, the fee applies. This approach places all manufacturers and competitors on a 
level playing field. Under an internalized cost approach , how ever, an additional process 
will need to be established to verify whether each manufacturer is paying its proper 
share of the cost. This approach may be di fficult to impleme nt as well because a 
manufacturer that sells mattre sses to retailers operating in multiple state will not 
necessarily know where the product will actually be used. As a result, the state recycling 
program will need to incur additional administrative costs to implement an internalized 
cost approach, and th ere will be a greater risk of “free riders” not paying their share of 
the costs. For these reasons, it is in fact likely that consumer will pay more to implement 
both a consumer fee and an in ternalized cost approach. Not pursuing an internalized 
cost appr oach will be more efficient.  
• A consumer recycling fee that is collected at retail and that is clearly visible on the sales 
invoice or receipt provides the most transparent way for consumers to understand the 
cost of recycling. An internalized approach will  serve to hide some of the costs that the 
consumer is incurring as a result of the recycling program. In order to be transparent 
with Maine residents, DEP sh ould promote  a process that clearly informs its residents 
about the actual costs of recycling, and n ot adopt a funding method that only obscures 
this fact.   
 
The industry  supports  working  with  states  to determine  whether  a practical  mattress  recycling  
programs  is feasible.  We remain  concerned  about  the lack of available  infrastructure  in Maine  
to support  a program  at this time  but are open  to exploring  alternatives  for addressing  these  
3 
 issues  and options  for lowering  related  costs . ISPA remain s committed to working with the DEP 
and the Legislature to explore all options that can promote  the recycling of mattresses.  
 
II. Proposed  Changes  to the Product  Stewardship  Framework  Law  
 
ISPA objects to the following  changes that DEP has pro posed to Maine’s Product Steward ship 
framework law.  
 
1. Imposing m inimum standards for producers’ or stewardship organization staffing . 
DEP proposal:  
“Minimum standards for producers’ or stewardship organization staffing, e.g., a minimum ½ - 
fulltime equivalent (FTE) to recruit, train and monitor collection sites. For example, the 
Paint Care  program has employed 1 -FTE to perform these functions for its pro gram in Maine 
and Vermont since the inception of their program. This level of staffing has ensured that 
collection sites receive the support they need to safely and adequately implement the program 
as confirmed by Department staff field visits. ” 
 
ISPA re sponse:  
There is no basis for this recommendation.  Just because  the PaintCare program has employ ed 
a ½ FTE in Maine  does not mean that it is necessary or that it will be relevant to a new mattress 
recycling program. Not all recycling programs operate the same way. As a result, a “one size fits 
all” approach , even for a minimum,  is not warranted here . For example, some recycling 
programs involve hazardous waste, others (like mattress recycling programs) do not.  Although 
a heightened level of monitoring may be needed for more dangerous products, it is not 
warranted for others.  Likewise, the level of mo nitoring will change over time.  When a program 
first launches , staffing needs may be greater than are needed for a mature program.  
 
DEP’s recommendation may unnecessarily drive up mattress recycling costs in Maine . For these 
reasons, ISPA opposes DEP’s recommendation to impose a standard minimum cost on 
programs that do not yet exist, regar dless of whether there is a demonstrated need for such 
additional costs .  
 
2. Financing for implementation and operations, including funding for regulatory 
oversight .  
DEP proposal:  
“Adequate financing for implementation and operations, including funding for regulatory 
oversight. Payment into  the system to finance end -of-life management must be sufficient to 
cover materials management costs, consume r and collection site education, a minimum ½ - FTE 
per stewardship program assigned to implement the program in Maine, on -going program 
evaluation and reporting, government oversight, and any incentives for collection .” 
 
ISPA response:  
ISPA disagrees with this recommendation  for similar reasons. EPR programs are intended to 
make producers responsib le for the post -consumer management of products , shift ing the 
4 
 burden for dealing with discarded consumer products previously borne by state and local 
governments  to the recycling program .  
 
Although government oversight is important , stewardship  organizations and/ or producers are 
respon sible for implementing the programs . Therefore , reimbursi ng the department for its 
costs incurred in “implementing the program  functions of future recycling programs ” may 
unnecessarily drive up the program’s costs . ISPA has further concerns with the draft legislative  
language in Appendi x A that program  budgets cannot cover legal fee s or advocacy  efforts. As 
separate  legal entities , stewardship organizations are entitled  to defend themselves and 
advocate on their ow n beha lf. For these reasons , ISPA opposes reimbursing DEP for  
“implementing ” the program  and strongly opposes the language barring program budgets from 
accounting for legal and advo cacy costs .    
 
3. Minimum program standards for education and outreach, and on -going evaluation of 
the effectiveness of education and outreach efforts.  
DEP proposal:  
“No program can be successful without collection site staff and consumers knowing about the 
program and how it works. Staff turnover at collection sites (often retailers and/or solid waste 
facilities) is ongoing, as are changes in residents in Maine. Evaluation of education and outreach 
efforts identifies which initiatives are most effective, and where additional focus is neede d. 
Manufacturers can use the information gained to achieve cost -effective continuous 
improvement in their programs .” 
 
ISPA response:  
ISPA agrees that on-going education and outreach  is important to achieving a recycling 
progra m’s objectives . Nevertheless, we caution that not all recycling programs are identical.  
Different programs may require outreach to different stakeholders  and each program should 
have the latitude to plan and develop an education an outreach program  that is tailored to its 
objectives. For example, the mattress industry has found that for our products, targeted 
outreach to established collectors (retailers and solid was te facilities) and users (purchasers of 
new mattresses, families that are moving, hotels and institutions like universities, etc.) as 
opposed providing the same level of outreach to all state residents , is most effective  and 
efficient . A minimum level of education and outreach for all Maine consumers may not achieve 
desirable benefits but  could greatly increase program costs. For these reasons, ISPA opposes 
DEP’s proposed change s to existing Product Stewardship  fram ework law.  
 
4. Measurable, enforceable goals and defined consequences for non -compliance.  
DEP proposal:  
“Measurable, enforceable goals (e.g., recycling rate, consumer awareness, convenient  
collection), and defined consequences for non -compliance. When man ufacturers are  
responsible for paying for the recycling of collected products, they have a disincentive to  
collect or to promote the existence or ease of use of a collection system. Minimum  
standards for locations of collection sites along with a ban on fe es at collection are critical to  
counteracting the financial incentive manufacturers have to discourage consumer  
5 
 participation. Repercussions for insufficient performance or non -participation on the part  
of manufacturers must be practical to implement. The  Department must have the authority  
to direct program changes if the program fails to make sufficient progress toward achieving  
program goals. ” 
 
ISPA response:  
ISPA disagrees with DEP’s recommendation . Where no recycling program currently exists, and 
neither the state nor the industry has any factual basis for understanding the challenges and 
unforeseen problems that lie ahead, a degree of flexibility and good faith give and take 
between the state and the recycling program is necessary to develop and implement a 
practical, efficient , and effective recycling program. For example, many recycling program  face 
fluctuations in end markets for recycled materials. Likewise, the volume of products discarded 
may  change as the economy changes. The recycling program has no control over these external 
factors, yet they can have a substantial impact on the volume of ma terials recycled, the 
program’s total costs , and the overall efficiency of the program. A program needs the ability to 
absorb these fluctuations as they occur. While it is important that parties be held responsible 
for seeking to achieve goals that they h ave set (with input from the state), we think it would be 
impractical, unrealistic , arbitrary , and unfair to threaten a recycling progra m with a significant 
financial consequence  if it cannot achieve established goals due to fact ors outside of its control.  
We disagree with DEP’s recommendation to the extent that it appears to assume that such 
external factors either will not occur or are irrelevant to whether “conse quences” are 
appropriate.  For these reasons , ISPA opposes the inclusion of enforceable goals  in the Product 
Stewardship  framework law .  
 
5. Financial incentives for collection site participation and for consumers to retu rn 
products to collection sites.   
DEP proposal:  
“Financial incentives for collection site participation and for consumers to return products to 
collection sites. Successful programs provide an incentive for collection to either consumers or 
third -party collection agents or both. Collections in Maine’s mercury thermostat recycling 
program increased significantly when the $5 incentive was implemented, and again when a $10 
incentive was offered for a limited period of time. A similar jump in collections was achieved in 
Maine’s mercury auto switch recycling program when the $4 incentive to collection sites was 
implemented. Maine’s Bottle Bill program consistently achieves the highest return rate, with 
consumers motivated by the deposit/return payment system. ” 
 
ISPA response:  
ISPA agrees that f inancial incentives to collection site s and consumers may  increase the number 
of units that a recycling program collects.  Nevertheless, incentive program s also entail 
additional costs and challenges. Given DEP’s justified concern about whether mattress recycling 
in Maine can be achieved at a reasonable cost, ISPA would oppose changes to existing law that 
would  require all recycling programs to provide these types of incentives.  Once again, whether 
to provide incentives under a particular recycling program involves a number of factors that can 
vary significantly from one program to the next.  It would be in appropriate to amend existing 
6 
 law to adopt a “one size fits all” approach on this issue.  For these reasons, ISPA opposes a 
change to existing law that would make  financial incentives “necessary ” for all recycling 
programs  in Maine  to “achieve  program collection goals ”. Instead, we propose that a decision 
on whether to include incentives in a program should be based on a full evaluation of the 
incentive as part of an entire recycling program .  
 
* * * 
 
We look  forward  to working  with  the DEP, the Legislature  and other  stakeholders  to identify  
options for promot ing mattress recycling in Maine .  
 
Please contact the undersigned should you have any questions  regarding these comments . 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Marie Clarke  
VP, Policy and Government Relations  
International S leep Products Ass ociation  
571-482-5428 
mclarke @sleepproducts.org   



  
 
  National Electrical Manufacturers Association  
1300 North 17th Street, Suite 900 
Rosslyn, VA 22209  
703-841-3249  
Fax:  703 -841-3349  
mar_kohorst@nema.org  
 
DATE: February 14, 2019 
TO:    Mike Karagiannes  
Bureau of Remediation and Waste Management 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection 
 
FROM: The National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA)   
RE: NEMA Comments on Maine DEP “Annual Product Stewardship 
Report,” dated January 2019 
____________________________________________________________________________  
The National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA) is the primary trade association 
representing the interests of the US electrical products industry.  Our nearly 325 member 
companies manufacture products used in the generation, transmission, distribution, control, and 
end-use of electricity, constituting the very foundation of the worldwide infrastructure for 
supplying power. 
 
Most electro-industry products are long lived and used in commercial and industrial settings .  
Some, however - such as household lamps, batteries, and thermostats - are consumer oriented 
and sold primarily for residential applications.  Several of these are the focus of product 
stewardship laws in Maine and our members have a long history of working with Maine 
legislators and regulatory authorities to implement these laws and the programs they authorize.   
 
Once again, NEMA appreciates the opportunity to comment on the Maine Department of 
Environmental Protection ’s (DEP) report on Product Stewardship in Maine.   We look forward to 
continuing discussions with D EP staff on how best to maintain the success of our stewardship 
programs going forward. 
 
Our comments on the 2018 report – which focus mainly on the department’s recommendations - 
are presented below in the order in which the topics appear in the report.    
 
Framework law – 38 M.R.S. chapter 18   
 
GENERAL COMMENT 
In its report, the DEP contends that Maine’s existing “Framework Law” contains “significant 
deficiencies . . . . that would allow for approval of a manufacturer program plan which would not 
result in an effective program (sic).”   The department presents a number of recommended 
changes to address these perceived shortcomings but cites no evidence that they would 
achieve their intended effect.  The report simply contends that a “program plan designed only to 
meet the basic requirements in the Product Stewardship framework law will not be guaranteed 
to be successful.”     
 
Maine Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
February 2019 
  
 2  
In truth, no government mandated program – whether funded and operated by regulated 
stewards or the government itself – can ever be guaranteed  to be successful.  For “Extended 
Producer Responsibility” (EPR) programs such as those addressed by the report, the most 
obvious and pertinent reason for this is that behavior needed to ensure success is out of the 
control - and the authority - of the program operators ; i.e., product manufacturers.   
 
For most products, manufacturers are at least two steps removed from the parties that control 
the product at end of life and determine where and how to discard it.   Manufacturers sold the 
unit into the market years or even decades in the past, to a customer that later removes it from 
service.  The manufacturer has no involvement with or authority over that person’s decision to 
recycle or dispose, yet is held responsible by the law for the outcome nonetheless. 
 
It is therefore unproductive to focus so pointedly on the behavior of manufacturers as the key 
determinant in whether an EPR program is achieving to its “highest” potential.  Yet virtually all of 
the proposed changes to the “Framework Law” seem guided by this presumption.   
 
That being the case, the department is recommending changes that, if enacted, would create 
the most burdensome and intrusive oversight framework of any state in the U.S.  It would strip 
manufacturers and their collective stewardship organizations of independence and flexibility and 
allow virtually no limit on DEP’s requests for greater expenditure. In addition to supplying funds 
for repetitive analyses of metrics (discussed below) , the department seeks to impose highly 
specific financial directives  - e.g., an annual remittance to DEP of as much as $100,000 for 
oversight; funding a “minimum ½-time emplouee of esch producer or stewardship organization 
dedicated to implementing the program in Maine (sic) .”1 
 
Integrating these requirements into new and existing EPR programs in Maine would impose 
dramatically higher costs on the industry stewards who not only fund the programs but (in most 
cases) continue to sell the targeted products to Maine consumers.  These higher costs of 
managing old products within the state in turn would force manufacturers to raise prices of new 
products to absorb the expense, which likely would encourage cross-border purchases of lower 
priced products and loss of tax revenue. 
 
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
DEP is requesting authority to require programs to undertake potentially limitless expenditures 
towards amorphous goals such as “ effective education and outreach ” and “ consumer 
awareness, ” as determined through third-party surveys.  Mandatory “Performance Goals” that 
would become part of every program could include awareness thresholds of 50% within three 
years or recycling rates that must reach 80% within 6 years.   
 
No recycling program for any product, in any jurisdiction in the world, has achieved a collection 
rate of this level – with the exception of lead acid automobile batteries that have high intrinsic 
value and are recovered through a unique, reverse distribution framework that is not possible for 
other products.    
 
Moreover, collection rate is a questionable basis for judging a program because the amount of 
product available to be recovered in a particular jurisdiction in a given year – the denominator of 
                                                 
1 Requiring industry stewards to hire in-state employees to implement mandatory programs suggests that 
regulated parties (manufacturers) are being t asked with the responsibility of enforcing compliance with state laws.  
Enforcement is a state function and represents the state’s contribution to the “shared responsibility” framework 
supposedly embodied in Product Stewardship policies.    
Maine Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
February 2019 
  
 3  
the rate calculation – most often cannot be determined with precision.  Among other 
complications, manufacturers of widely used products sell into vast distribution systems and can 
provide only rough estimates of the number of units sold in a specific state.  Once purchased, 
products can then be stored for long periods, after which they have widely variable “lifespans” 
due to their conditions of use.    
 
For these and other reasons, collection rate figures are as much guesswork as science and do 
not constitute a sound basis for evaluating recycling programs.  They are simply one, inexact 
factor out of many that should be used to evaluate an recycling program. The Maine DEP is 
recommending, however, that it be used to judge the success of the state’s EPR programs and 
justify seemingly unfettered demands by the department to “ implement specific changes, ” such 
as financial incentives.      
 
With regard to education and outreach, NEMA does not question the need for EPR programs to 
contain an outreach component, carefully designed to focus on parties that use or dispose of 
the product.  Outreach and “education” efforts should emphasize the importance of recycling the 
product, especially  if the law is accompanied by a disposal ban that renders other management 
options illegal.   
 
The program must also strive to make the “generator” of the waste product aware of the 
collection sites and events that are available across the state, and to ensure they are sufficiently 
distributed to ensure all residents have reasonable access.  The collection network obviously 
must reflect the population distribution of the state, as it makes no sense to establish numerous 
sites in rural, sparsely populated areas, which adds significant cost but does little to raise 
collection totals.    
 
A reasonable accessibility standard is therefore a useful feature of a program plan, mainly 
because providing access is within the control of the program operators.  NEMA supports an 
accessibility metric as a way of assessing an EPR program’s value and performance.  
Education and outreach, as described above, is a necessary and complementary activity to 
providing access.    
 
Regrettably, the DEC proposes to employ “ consumer awareness ” – a vague and hard to 
measure concept that does not lend itself to objective assessment - as the key determinant of 
whether a program is performing adequately.  How does one assess this concept in an 
individual or community within an acceptable margin of error?  More importantly, to what extent 
does “awareness” translate into behavior, and at what point does the onus transfer from a 
program’s efforts to notify consumers to a generator’s responsibility to recycle?    
 
The programs established for NEMA Member products (mercury-added thermostats, mercury-
added lamps) devote substantial resources to growing awareness among relevant target 
populations.  Moreover, because mercury has been widely proclaimed for more than two 
decades as a potential threat to human health and the environment, a high percentage of 
consumers are predisposed to keeping products with mercury out of the waste stream. And 
there is no suggestion that education and outreach activities be discontinued, as long as the 
program is mandated to operate under the law. 
 
At some point, however, rising investment in “education and outreach” generates little, if any, 
return.  People who are inclined to recycle will do so while endless messaging to those who are 
not so inclined becomes a waste of time and money.  This is particularly true of long-standing 
Maine Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
February 2019 
  
 4  
programs that recover ubiquitous, broadly discussed products such as mercury-added lamps 
and consumer electronics, as well as other common household recyclables.      
     
NEMA welcomes discussion of how to drive higher recycling rates in the context of each specific 
program and product, where characteristics such as the age and history of the program, target 
audiences, market dynamics, sales and distribution channels, number of producers, and other 
factors will help determine the most promising approaches.   We urge the legislature to avoid the 
‘one-size-fits-all’ prescription that DEP seeks to integrate into Maine’s EPR programs. 
 
INCENTIVES TO RECYCLE 
Another of the DEP’s prescriptions for the state Framework Law is the authority to require the 
“implementation of financial incentives or a deposit/refund system if appropriate for the product” 
if the department determines the program has failed to “ make adequate progress ” towards its 
goals .  
 
Over the years, Maine has continually touted the impact of financial incentives in motivating 
recycling behavior in the state’s mercury thermostat program.  The department now offers this 
as rationale for potentially require all mandated programs to “finance . . . .  any incentives 
necessary to achieve program collection goals . . .”    
 
As NEMA and the industry-funded Thermostat Recycling Corporation (TRC) have consistently 
demonstrated, however, financial incentives – or “bounties” – have not shown to be effective at 
driving higher recycling rates in Maine or Vermont, the other state that requires manufacturers 
to pay $5 for each mercury thermostat returned to a collection site.  In reality, thermostat 
recycling in Maine and Vermont has followed the trend typically observed in all states/regions 
over the years.  Enactment of a disposal ban stimulates use of voluntary programs and when 
recycling becomes mandatory, compliance rises dramatically and large volumes of units that 
previously had been in storage fill collection bins.  Collection rates ultimately moderate and 
decline when no new units are sold or installed and that has been the case over time in VT and 
ME.   
 
Close inspection of year- by-year collections generally reveals that incentives reward contractors 
for behavior they were exhibiting already, and in other cases motivate them simply to switch 
collection sites.  Also, a significant portion of incentive payments in ME and VT have gone 
unclaimed  each year – if the payments truly motivated behavior, this would not happen.  
 
Finally, bounty systems are costly, complicated, and vulnerable to fraud and abuse. Artificially 
placing a value on a waste product creates the potential for illicit trade practices ( i.e., shipping 
products in from nearby states)  and transactions that result in incentives going to parties for 
whom they were not intended. We urge the legislature to examine this issue carefully before 
imposing such a requirement onto any new or existing EPR programs.  
 
Mercury Lamps – 38 M.R.S. § 1672   
 
The Maine DEP report recommends a significant modification to the statute governing the 
state’s EPR program for mercury-added lamps.  NEMA opposes these changes in part for the 
reason discussed in the previous section.  Similar to the Framework Law, DEP is seeking 
changes to the mercury-lamp statute that would greatly expand the department’s administrative 
control over the program, force manufacturers to undertake virtually limitless “investments” in 
activities that likely will produce very little return, and rely on amorphous performance standards 
that likely will be a recipe for failure. 
Maine Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
February 2019 
  
 5  
There are two additional, more substantive reasons why the DEP’s proposed changes to this 
law are objectionable.  First, the department seeks to extend the scope of “covered products” 
beyond waste lamps generated by households; thereby incorporating lamps disposed by 
commercial, industrial and institutional (CII) users.  This amendment is entirely unnecessary and 
would seriously impact the independent providers of lamp recycling services who currently 
serve those generators. 
 
The reality of the lighting market is that the vast majority of mercury-added lamps are 
purchased for and used within the CII sector.  In almost all situations, generators within that 
sector are required under Federal Universal Waste (UW ) Law t o recycle those lamps at end of 
life.2   An entire independent lamp recycling industry has been in place for nearly 20 years 
providing these services through private, individual contracts with retailers, commercial 
buildings, local governments, schools, stadiums, shopping centers, and other parties subject to 
the UW requirements (see www.ALMR.org ).  There simply is no need for the State of Maine to 
intervene in and disrupt these private service arrangements. 
 
Yet the most compelling reason against expanding Maine’s lamp recycling program is that the 
products it was most intended to capture – compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs) - are 
disappearing from the US market.  CFLs have been displaced by light emitted diode (LED) 
products that, since the law was enacted, have become widely available at comparable price 
points.  Moreover, CFL lamps no longer meet U.S. EPA ENERGY STAR specifications and thus 
no longer qualify for utility rebates. In 2018, NEMA estimates CFLS comprised approximately 
7% of the consumer light bulb market, and the industry expects them to be virtually eliminated 
within the next few years. (See Appendix I for NEMA’s latest shipment data for LED, Halogen, 
and CFL products)  
 
In summary, w hen establishing priorities among environmental initiatives during the 2019-2020 
session, revisiting the lamp recycling program in Maine rightfully should be at the bottom of the 
list.  The overwhelming portion of mercury-added lamps entering the waste stream stem from 
CII facilities that are required to recycle them under Federal Law, while the far smaller numbers 
that emanate from households will soon be gone from the market.   
 
Note also that homeowners seeking to recycle the remaining CFLs as they come out of use 
have ample access to collection sites both within and outside of the industry-funded program.  
An internet search using www.earth911.org  of Piscataquis County - Maine’s least populated 
region - produced a number of alternatives within a 20 mile radius including TruValue and other 
hardware stores as well as municipal transfer stations.      
 
The problem that Title 38 § 1672 was enacted to address has been resolving itself   in the 
intervening years.  There is nothing to be gained by “ramping up” the program at this late date 
aside from forcing manufacturers to redirect large amounts of money and resources away from 
more productive uses. 
 
Consumer Batterie s (38 M.R.S. § 2165) 
 
The NEMA Dry Battery Section encompasses the most prominent, US-based manufacturers of 
primary ( i.e., single-use) batteries including Energizer, Duracell, Panasonic, and Rayovac.  As 
noted in the DEP report, these manufacturers promoted introduction of an “all battery” recycling 
                                                 
2 Maine’s Universa l Waste regulations impose similar requirements – see 
https://www1.maine.gov/dep/waste/hazardouswaste/lamp_disposal.html 
Maine Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
February 2019 
  
 6  
bill in the Maine legislature in 2016 and supported its passage, which did not occur.   A number 
of factors over the intervening period have led the industry to change its position on the issue 
and we therefore urge the legislature not to accept DEP’s recommendation to enact all battery 
recycling legislation in the current session.  
 
The legislative framework that NEMA stood behind in 2016 would have established a fair and 
economically stable system for recycling batteries in Maine in that it required all parties that 
introduce primary batteries to the market to contribute to the cost of collection and processing, 
proportionate to their sales.  Regrettably, this “shared responsibility” approach was rejected by 
many influential stakeholders who sought to avoid this obligation through ‘carve-outs’ in the 
legislative language, thereby acting as “free-riders” and increasing the burden of cost and 
program management on the manufacturers who sponsored the law.  It became an increasingly 
untenable situation for NEMA members, who eventually withdrew their support. 
 
NEMA has no reason to believe the same scenario will not repeat itself in the current legislature.  
There are simply too many political factors at play for a fair and equitable program structure to 
emerge from the legislative process. The same dynamics have occurred in other states that 
considered this issue as well.  
 
In addition, NEMA has affirmed in the ensuing years that recycling primary batteries is in almost 
all cases a net negative for the environment, more harmful in many ways than disposing them 
in landfills.  Primary, single use alkaline batteries ( e.g., AA, AAA, C, D, and 9-volt) are classified 
as non-hazardous solid waste per applicable US EPA test protocols.3  Manufacturers eliminated 
toxic metals such as mercury and cadmium from these products in the early 1990s.   At least 
two states – Connecticut and Massachusetts - advise their citizens to put spent alkaline 
batteries in regular trash to be landfilled.       
 
A variety of studies have shown that recycling systems require conditions that virtually never 
exist for recycling primary batteries to be environmentally preferable to landfill disposal ( e.g., 
high percentage of material recovery to beneficial uses, limited transport distances).  In a recent 
evaluation by scientists affiliated with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , recycling 
scored lower than landfill disposal in seven out of ten environmental indices , including Global 
Warming Potential.4    
 
Before primary batteries reach a recovery or recycling facility, significant amounts of vehicle fuel 
and electricity are consumed during collection, sorting, storage and transportation.  Each of 
these steps generates waste products and other environmental impacts – factors that must be 
considered when assessing the life cycle of battery products in the context of alternative, end-
of-life management options. 
 
For these reasons, NEMA respectfully recommends that the legislature not enact a mandate to 
recycle primary batteries in Maine before conducting its own evaluation of whether doing so 
would constitute a net benefit for environment and public health.  NEMA members would 
appreciate the opportunity to lend their expertise to and participate in such an effort.   
 
                                                 
 
3 See https://archive.epa.gov/epawaste/hazard/web/html/batteries.html . Primary batteries do not exhibit any of 
the characteristics identified in 40 CFR part 261, subpart C.  
4 Olivetti, Elsa and Gregory, Jeremy, Camanoe Associates, March 2018 , “Life Cycle Assessment of Alkaline Battery 
Recycling, A report for the Corporation for Battery Responsibility ,” 
Maine Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
February 2019 
  
 7  
Contact 
 
Mark Kohorst       
Senior Manager, Environment, Health & Safety  
NEMA 
1300 N. 17th Street 
Suite 900 
Rosslyn, VA  22209        
703-841-3249  
202-412-3326  (Cell) 
Mar_kohorst@nema.org 
 
Maine Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
February 2019 
  
 8  
APPENDIX 1 
 
LED A-line and Halogen Lamp Shipments Increase in Third Quarter 2018 
December 2018 
 
NEMA’s A-line Lamp Index has been updated.  To appreciate the changes we have made 
please read our announcement here   
 
LED A-line shipments increased 27 percent compared to 2Q 2018 and 30.6 percent compared 
to 3Q 2017. Halogen A-line lamps posted an increase in shipments in 3Q 2018 compared to the 
previous quarter (1.7 percent), and a decrease compared to the same quarter a year ago (16.8 
percent.)  CFL A-line lamp shipments decreased compared to 2Q 2018 and 3Q 2017 (2.3 
percent and 17.3 percent, respectively.) 
  
LED A-line lamps account for 65.1 percent of the consumer lamp market, followed by halogen 
A-line lamps which account for 28.1 percent. CFLs comprised the remaining 6.7 percent of the 
A-line consumer market. 
 
  
 ' 
                                                 
The NEMA Lamp Shipments Indices are composite measures of NEMA-member companies’ U.S. shipments of 
compact fluorescent, halogen, incandescent and LED replacement lamps. Product shipments data are drawn from 
NEMA statistical surveys and are adjusted for seasonal fluctuations. 
Maine Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
February 2019 
  
 9  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact 
Laurie Miller 
Director, Statistical Operations 
Laurie.miller@nema.org  
703-841-3269  
 
                                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
1425 K Street NW, Suite 500, Washington, DC 20005  
P 202.974.5200 | plasticsindustry.org  
February 14, 2019  
Mike Karagiannes  
Maine DEP  
17 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0017  
 
Via email:  mike.karagiannes@maine.gov  
 
SUBJECT: Comments on Implementing Product Stewardship in Maine, 2019   
 
Dear Mr. Karagiannes : 
 
The Plastics Industry Association (PLASTICS) is the national trade association that represents the entire 
plastics supply chain, the t hird largest US manufacturing sector employing almost one million people, 
3,170 of whom live and work in Maine. Plastics play an important role in the Maine economy, and over 
192,200 Mainers  work in sectors dependent on plastics. We are grateful for the op portunity to comment 
on the Annual Product Stewardship Report and express our concerns about additions to the framework 
law and listing packaging as a candidate product . 
 
We support the idea that manufacturers play an important role in being good stewards of the 
environment. This is why our industry implements sustainable materials management strategies – 
concepts that consider the entire lifecycle of a product. This approach requires looking beyond just the 
end-of-life aspects of a product and giving credi t to manufacturing practices and the advantages of 
different materials which garner positive environmental benefits. We are opposed to extended producer 
responsibility (EPR) programs namely because they are an inefficient use of resources, are not flexible  to 
changing waste streams, can hurt small businesses, do not fairly represent all manufacturers, and further 
hide the cost of recycling and recovery from consumers.  Nevertheless , we would appreciate the 
opportunity to work with the Maine DEP on more impactful efforts to increase plastic s recovery in the 
state.  
 
Changes to Framework Law  
 
While we understand the intent of the changes to the framework law, we believe this would further 
complicate the law without making it operate more efficiently or effectively. For example, the law already 
requires convenient and adequate collection systems, but the recommendation attempts to further s pecify 
what that collection should look like. Other administrative burdens from the recommendations we believe 
would detract from program success. We’re also concerned with how the department would determine 
adequate progress and what specific changes it m ay direct on manufacturers.  
 
Packaging as a Candidate Product  
 
We understa nd the importance of making sure plastic packaging is recycled or reused. We also 
recognized the important role that plastic packaging serves in lowering the environmental impact of 
packaging production and protecting the products they contain from going t o waste. We also want to note 
that important environmental, social and business decisions are made  when choosing the design 
elements of packaging  – often leading to plastic being a prime candidate.  
 
In addition, the industry is already taking many importan t and valuable voluntary steps to make sure that 
plastic packaging is recovered after the end of its useful life. Some of these efforts are:  
 
• educating the public on how to properly recycle or dispose of the packaging,  
• supporting the expansion of colle ction opportunities,  
• developing new end markets that increase demand for recycled plastics,  
 
 
 
1425 K Street NW, Suite 500, Washington, DC 20005  
P 202.974.5200 | F 202.296.7005 | www.plasticsindustry.org  
• promoting the design of plastic products in a way that facilitates recovery,  
• promoting clean -ups, and  
• ensuring plastics are managed properly at manufacturin g sites through programs like Operation  
Clean Sweep and Zero Net Waste.  
 
Despite these efforts and the role of packaging, states continue to look for methods of implementing EPR 
programs for packaging, even though packaging come in many shapes, sizes and m aterials. For multiple 
reasons, they have found that EPR programs for packaging would not be sustainable. In 2017 , the state 
of Connecticut ’s Task Force to Study Methods for Reducing Consumer Packaging that Generates Solid 
Waste did not recommend implement ation of  extended producer responsibility . PLASTICS recommends 
the Maine DEP review the recommendations of that task force before pursuing packaging EPR.  
 
Additionally, we do not think that packaging meets the candidate criteria for a stewardship program , nor 
the four that are specifically mentioned in this report. Those criteria and our response are below.  
  
Criteria B: Increase the recovery of materials . Mandating added administrative costs on 
manufacturers will not alone change consumer behavior.  
 
Crite ria C: Reduce the cost of waste management to local governments and taxpayers.  The 
addition al cost to manufacturers will be passed down to consumers.  
 
Criteria D: There has been success in other states or countries.  As mentioned earlier, 
Connecticut did not determine that EPR was a viable solution; and the examples in the report are 
not representative of US consumers.  
 
Criteria E: Voluntary efforts are insufficient. The report states that voluntary efforts have not 
taken place in Maine, but this ignores th e fact that the industry is in the process of making 
successful projects scalable and replicating them in other states.  
 
PLASTICS advocates for the responsible recycling, reuse, and recovery of all plastic products. We do not  
wish to see any of our products used irresponsibly or disposed of incorrectly. While we respectfully  
oppose the listing of packaging as a candidate program, we reiterate our request to work with the Maine 
DEP to develop meaningful and p ractical solutions ensuring the responsible recovery of all plastics.  
 
Respectfully,  
 
 
 
Shannon V. Crawford  
Director, State Government Affair s 

1 
 
 
 
 
Background 
 
To: Mike Karagianees, Maine DEP 
17 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333  
 From: Newell A. Augur, Executive Director  Re:  Comments to Implementing Product Stewardship in Maine, January 2019 
 Date:  February 14, 2019  
On behalf of the Maine Beverage Association, the trade group representing Coca Cola Northern 
New England, Pepsi Beverage Company, Poland Spring and Polar Beverages - the local distributors of regular an d diet beverages, water, juices a nd sports drinks, among other refreshing 
non-alcoholic products - thank you for the opport unity to provide comment on the report, 
Implementing Product Stewardship in Maine.  Our remarks are specific to that portion of the 
report addressing Maine’s beverage  container redemption law, also  known as the bottle bill.   
 
Overview 
 
When the beverage industry first st arted to develop in this country, local distributors - on their 
own initiative - put a deposit on containers in orde r to reuse them, long before there was ever any 
legislation forcing them to do so.  In the mid 1960s , distributors realized that collecting, washing 
and reselling these containers was unsanitary and extraordinarily expensive.  They also discovered that their customers didn’t like refi llable containers.  When local distributors 
transitioned away from that model, they did so  at a time when our country was beginning to 
appreciate the importance of safeguarding clean ai r, clean water and a pris tine environment.  As 
beverage containers – which prev iously had a deposit and were bei ng returned to the distributor - 
suddenly began appearing on the side  of the road, the local distri butors became a natural target. 
 The bottle bill was passed as a means to address litte r.  In the ten remaining states that still have 
one, the bottle bill has morphed, unn aturally, into a recy cling program.   The program has been 
very successful cleaning up litter caused by beverage containe rs and recycling beverage 
containers.  But its success is limited to bevera ge containers and they make up only 4% of the 
total waste stream.   
 157 CAPITOL STREET, SUITE 3 | AUGUSTA, MAINE  04330 
P: 207-446-3430  
2 
 The bottle bill should not be classified a product stewardship program.  It is a mandate that 
forces the use of a particular delivery and pi ckup model for certain beverage packages.  The 
model is designed to replicate the operation of a refillable-based system for bottles – a delivery 
system broadly rejected by consumers nearly 40 years ago.  An authentic product stewardship 
program would include all producer s selling any beverages in a ny packages; Maine’s bottle bill 
excludes all milk and milk derivatives, certain cider and blueberry juices, a number of other 
specialty products, and several additiona l categories of beverage packaging. 
 
Moreover, product stewardship is epitomized by the flexibility it gives pr oducers to address the 
lifecycle impacts of their products.  Producers design and manage their own collection and 
processing programs to fulfill that responsibilit y.  Government sets goals and performance 
standards, and producers determin e the most cost-effective means of achieving those targets.  
Beyond that, product stewardship programs opera te with minimal government involvement.  
In marked contrast, the bottle bill is proscripti ve, not cost-effective, lim its producer flexibility, 
and has significant gove rnment involvement.  
 
Costs 
 Bottle bill handling taxes exceed $35 million dollars ev ery year.  This tax is paid directly to the 
redemption centers by the local distributors.  Distributors incur additi onal costs transporting 
containers from redemption centers , crushing and bailing those containers, and selling them in 
the materials market.  When the materials market  is robust, the amount of money a distributor 
receives from the sale of those materials can cover all other processing costs.  It has never been robust enough, however, to offset handling taxes.    We are not entirely convinced that a label registration system is the most efficient means to 
combat non-compliance given the proliferation of alternative routes to market and given the 
significant investment of time mainta ining that registry requires.  Having said that, we appreciate 
the Department’s efforts to streamline the proces s by which distributors regi ster labels for every 
beverage product sold in Maine.  Previously, distributors were required to provide photocopies 
of labels for every product sold.  The Department  has simplified this to allow distributors to 
certify that their product labels are in complia nce.  The Department also has developed an 
electronic filing system that has facilita ted the online registration of products.  
 
Fraud  
 
The MBA Commingling Group (Coca Cola Nort hern New England and Pepsi Beverages 
Company) estimates that of the 219 million cont ainers it redeemed in 2017, 24.2 million of those 
are fraudulent. Factoring the 5 cent redempti on, the 3.5 cent handling fee and a 2 cent pick up 
and processing cost on every container, fra ud costs the members of our commingling group – 
and ultimately our customers - $2.54 million each year.  
 We made a similar calculation 10 years ago as di rected by the Legislature and submitted those 
findings to the Department of Agriculture. Neither the bottle bill nor our total sales numbers have 
changed much, if at all, during the past decade so those calculations re main relatively accurate. 
There is a slight increase - fr om $2.48 to $2.54 million - that refl ects the increase in the handling 
3 
 fee - from 3 cents to  3.5 cents - in 2011. 
 
There are two primary sources of fraud: 1) co ntainers purchased out of state (usually New 
Hampshire) that are brought in to Maine and redeemed here; and 2) the shorting of bags by 
redemption centers to distributors (i.e. when a redemption center gives us a bag that ought to 
have 324 twelve ounce cans in it, but has give n us something considerably less than that. 
 A conservative estimate for the total amount of fraud in Maine's bottle bill would be $7.5 million 
per year.  The total number of containers in th e bottle bill is in the neighborhood of 900 million - 
1 billion a year, so $7.5 million discounts the experience of non alcoholic distributors.  
 We appreciate the Department’s e fforts to address bottle bill fra ud.  We believe that giving the 
Department the unqualified ability to revoke th e license of a redemption center deliberately 
shorting bags or knowingly accepting containers from  outside of Maine should lose their license 
will help address the problem.    The root of the problem, however, is identifying who those bad actors are.  Current law does not 
allow an initiator of deposit to adjust what is paid to a re demption center even if the amount of 
containers collected is substantially less than what the redemption center claims has presented 
for pick up.  Further, the Department does not have  staff or resources to visit redemption centers 
and conduct audits on a monthly or even yearly basis to determine which redemption centers are 
providing accurate count s, and which are not. 
 Given the logistical challenges of  picking up containers from more than 400 redemption centers 
across the State, catching one ba d actor one time has little if any practical impact on reducing 
fraud.  Because there are no immediate fiscal consequences for shorting bags or accepting 
foreign containers, initiators of deposit are literally power less to stop it from happening.  
 We will be presenting proposed legislation to introduce an auditing procedure for beverage 
containers pick-ups that we  believe, along with the licen sing changes proposed by the 
Department, will have a more meaningf ul impact in addressing fraud.   
 
Commingling 
 
The legislation that created commingling groups was passed in 2003.  At the time, redemption centers were advocating for an increase in th e handling fee. They also were advocating 
separately for legislation that would require lo cal distributors to allo w redemption centers to 
commingle beverage containers– as is done in Oregon and Mich igan – so as to reduce the 
number of sorts that redemption centers have to perform and save them sp ace in their facility.   
 The Legislature essentially combined the two bills.  They created a framework to allow 
distributors to establish commingling agreements and then created incentives to “encourage” distributors to enter into those agreements.  These incentives included putting a ½ handling fee 
increase on all beverage contai ners that were not commingled  and requiring distributors who 
could not commingle to remit their unclaimed deposits  to the state.  As a practical matter, the 
only distributors who were capable of comm ingling were the ones who had a significant 
employment presence in Maine.  The Legislature then gave the di stributors nine months to form 
qualified commingling groups and register those enti ties with the Department of Agriculture.   
4 
  
The investment that local distributors made – a nd continue to make today – in time and money is 
significant.  The two major exis ting commingling groups have been in existence for fourteen 
years (a third one was formed earlier in this decade) and this has prevented a considerable amount of additional sorting for redemption centers.  Our product lines continue to change, but for the most part the number of sorts the me mbers of the Maine Beverage Association are 
responsible is incredible sma ll given their total volume.  For example, the MBA Commingling 
Group sold approximately 250 million containers in 2017; all those containers  can be sorted into 
eleven boxes.   The MBA Commingling Group has brought in several smaller distributors over the past fifteen years of its existence.  The gr oup would readily admit additional members – regardless of their 
size - who can identify the number of cases that th ey sell in Maine.  We also stand ready to 
provide technical and legal assistance  to the Department’s in its effort, as set out in the report, to 
create a new commingling group fo r out of state distributors. 
 As the report notes, distributors are not required  to provide reports re garding marketed and 
recycled materials.  However, the MBA Co mmingling Group and the Polar/Poland Spring 
Commingling Group have pr ovided this information on several occasions at the request of the 
Department of Agriculture and at the reque st of the Office of Program Evaluation and 
Government Accountability as part of J une 2018 evaluation of the bottle bill.   
 
Conclusion  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comm ents.  We would be pleased to provide any 
additional information in this regard.   
 
  
 
    
 
 
February 14, 2019  
 
Mike Karagiannes  
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
17 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0017  
Via email: mike.karagiannes@maine.gov  
 
Re: Comment s on Implementing Product Stewardship in Maine  (January 2019 ) Report  
 
Dear M r. Karagiannes , 
 
The Consumer Technology Association™ (CTA) respectfully submits these written comments on the  
“Implementing Product Stewardship in Maine ” (January 201 9) report  from the  Maine Department of 
Environmental Protection (DEP).  CTA appreciates Maine DEP’s annual review of the implementation of 
product stewardship laws in Maine and opportunities to improve  existing programs.  
 
CTA is the trade association representing th e U.S. consumer technology industry, which supports more 
than 15 million U.S. jobs. For over 10 years, CTA members have participated in Maine’s product 
stewardship program for electronic waste (e -waste). CTA appreciates this opportunity to provide 
comments  and share insights on our industry’s product stewardship experience with the Maine DEP.  
 
CTA supports c ompetitive markets that drive operational efficiencies which in turn lower costs for the 
entire recycling system. CTA does not support any policy approach that stifles competition in the recycling 
market or brings the currently competitive system under government control/operation.  CTA supports 
approaches that advance the collection and recycling infrastructure in the U.S. while being responsive to 
product innovation.  
 
With that in mind, CTA would like to provide the following comments to the “Implementing Product 
Stewardship Maine” (January 2019) report.  
• Framework Law  [Section II(B), Section III(A) and Appendix X of the Report]   
There are several items of concern CTA has with the proposed changes to the framework law 
primarily centered around the inclusion of prescriptive requirements that may not be appropriate 
for all types of EPR programs.   
o Minimum Staffing Level s: The minimum staffing standards proposed are not necessary 
for all types of EPR programs. I nclusion of this language to require a  ½ time full time 
equivalent (FTE) position may be overly prescriptive given the variation in EPR program 
structures amo ng product categories and should be excluded from the recommendations.  
An option to determine and handle on a case -by-case basis based on specific program 
structure would be more appropriate.    
o Convenience Requirements: The prescriptive nature of requirin g “permanent collection 
CTA Comments on Implementing Product Stewardship in Maine  
February 14, 2019  
 
 sites within 15 miles of 90% of Maine residents” is not necessary for all product types and 
may not actually increase collection and recycling rates among residents. As consumer 
technology companies have experienced  in various state  electronics EPR programs , these 
convenience requirements lead to increased compliance costs with no specific correlation 
to increased recycling rates. Additionally, permanent collection sites are not always the 
most appropriate solution for certain geogra phical areas that might be appropriately and 
cost effectively  served by collection events. CTA recommend s removing this requirement 
from the proposed legislation.  
o Recycling Targets: Has the Maine DEP defined what diversion methods would qualify 
under a “r ecycling rate”? Does that include waste to energy? Even in EPR programs with 
high recycling targets, there is flexibility on how “recycling” is defined. Additionally, very 
few mature  EPR programs are achieving 80% recycling rates. Setting unattainable, 
perspective goals does not benefit stakeholders and may create unintended 
consequences of increas ing costs for producers as programs struggle to meet recycling 
goals. CTA recommends removing this requirement from the proposed legislation.   
o Financial Incentiv es: Financial incentives for consumers to return products should not be 
part of an EPR program. EPR programs are designed to provide end of life management 
opportunities for hard to recycle items or items where there is a negative recycling value. 
Financia l incentives send the wrong message to consumers that there is value in the 
recycling stream which is not always the case. While the proposed changes found in 
Appendix A make financial incentives optional, CTA encourages removal of this language.  
o General:   
▪ CTA disagrees with the statement “when manufacturers are responsible for 
paying for the recycling of collected products, they have a disincentive to collect 
or promote the existence or ease of use of a collection system”. We have found 
with many of our m ember companies that they readily promote collection 
infrastructure that they financially support including in states where there is no 
legal obligation for them to do so. A blanket statement such as this is 
disheartening to read when there are industries and/or companies that have 
demonstrated otherwise.  
▪ CTA is pleased to see that language was included to allow for a point of sale fee 
to be assessed to consumers as an additional funding option for further 
consideration under an EPR structure.  
• Consumer Bat teries  [Section III(C) and Appendix C] :  
CTA is concern ed with the proposed sample language for the consumer battery EPR program  
found in Appendix C . CTA’s co ncern primarily lies in the potential for duplicative and overlapping 
mandates on a product and one of its component s through two separate EPR programs . Batteries 
found in consumer electronics are captured for recycling through Maine’s manufacturer -funded 
e-waste program as device s come back through the recycling stream , thus making this proposal 
unnecessary and redundant  for batteries contained in our industry’s products .     
• Product Stewardship for Packaging  [Section IV(A)]  
CTA does not support EPR as an effective solution for managing packaging material. CTA strongly 
caution s against a state -by-state approach for packaging material which is a large, complex waste 
stream with a significant number of responsible producers.   
 
Maine is not the first state to explore a packaging stewardship program.  The state of Connecticut 
established a Task Force to Study Methods for Reducing Consumer Packaging that Generates Solid 
Waste in 2016. The Task Force released its recommendations in Febr uary 2018 after a year of 
CTA Comments on Implementing Product Stewardship in Maine  
February 14, 2019  
 
 stakeholder meetings, expert testimony, and public comments.1 The final recommendations did 
not recommend product stewardship as a means of reducing consumer packaging that generates 
solid waste. The justifications outlined by the  Task Force included concerns over the creation of a 
recycling monopoly through a product stewardship organization, pushing Connecticut recycling 
firms  out of business and forcing higher costs on the collection and recycling system as a whole. 
There was al so acknowledgement among the Task Force members that a state -by-state approach 
would not achieve the results touted under EPR programs in other countries.    
 
It is unclear what the potential economic impact and costs of a packaging stewardship program 
woul d be to  businesses operating in Maine . A full economic impact analysis is needed that 
quantifies impacts to all stakeholders (Maine DEP, producers, collectors, recyclers ) and strongly 
encouraged prior to moving forward with any mandatory policy approach . Additionally, there are 
a few aspects of the Maine eport that CTA would like to address:  
o Can Maine DEP provide reference/supporting documentation to or quantify the 
statement “a large portion of the current municipal waste stream is compromised of 
various types of consumer packaging. Much of it is not recyclable.”. How much (in terms 
of a % or tons) is a “large portion”? How does that break down among packaging material 
types? How is Maine DEP defining “recyclable”? For example, some plastics may be 
recycla ble but just don’t have readily available recycling opportunities in Maine.  
o The waste characterization study referenced in the Report is from 2011. Does Maine DEP 
intend to have an updated waste characterization study completed? Many significant 
changes h ave occurred in the municipal waste stream throughout the U.S. over the last 
several years ( commonly referenced as the “evolving ton” ). Updated waste 
characterization study data would be key to any economic impact analysis  as material 
type significantly impacts end of life management costs.   
o Regarding voluntary efforts by industry, the Report notes that DEP is “unaware of any 
other direct contributions by these organizations to recycling programs in Maine.” It is 
worth not ing that organizations like The Recycling Partnership and Closed Loop Fund do 
not provide blanket funding; rather, there is an application and evaluation process  before 
funds are dispersed . A handful of states have start ed to work in conjunction with these  
organizations to encourage local governments or industry to apply for grants or funding. 
CTA encourages Maine to explore if promotion of these programs is appropriate  for DEP .  
 
CTA supports programs and policies focused on increasing recycling of packagi ng material by the 
consumer such as Pay -As-You-Throw programs and lists of mandated recyclables; increasing 
access to recycling; and supporting public education campaigns to reduce contamination, 
provided that the policy also has support from the jurisdict ion and the infrastructure to execute 
the policy.  CTA opposes mandates that would stifle packaging innovation; impact the safe delivery 
of products in a cost -effective manner; and/or raise costs for consumers.  
• Electronic Waste  [Section V(A)]: CTA requests that the Maine DEP think about restructuring the 
following sentence in a way that captures more fully the various factors impacting the collection 
rates for electronics  under the EPR program.   
                                                           
1 The Final Report of the Connecticut Task Force to Study Methods for Reducing Consumer Packaging that Generates Solid 
Waste can be found under the “Final Report” section of the “Meetings” portion of the Connecticut General Assembly website at 
https://www.cga.ct.gov/env/taskforce.asp?TF=20170216_Task%20Force%20to%20Study%20Methods%2 0for%20Reducing%20
Consumer%20Packaging%20that%20Generates%20Solid%20Waste . Additional meeting documents including presentations, 
written comments and meeting notes can also be found under the “Meetings” portion.   
CTA Comments on Implementing Product Stewardship in Maine  
February 14, 2019  
 
 
o Original : “Overall, e -waste collection continue s to level off,  likely due to light -weighting 
in the electronics industry ”.  
o Revise d Language Proposal : “Overall, e -waste collection continues to level off, likely due 
to the success of the program in removing older, heavier electronics from the recycling 
stream and incr eased material efficiencies historically resulting in lighter weight 
electronic devices ”.  
  
Conclusion  
CTA appreciates this opportunity to provide the above comment s to the Maine DEP. CTA and its members 
strongly support responsible management of electronics and associated packaging in Maine in ways that 
are both effective and efficient . If you have any questions regarding these comments, please do not 
hesitate to con tact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Katie Reilly  
Senior Manager , Environmental and Sustainability Policy  
(703) 625 -0054  
kreilly@cta.tech    
 
cc:  Paula Clark, Director, Division of Materials Management  
 Carole Cifrino, Supervisor, Recycling Programs  
 
 
   
 
 
February 14, 2019 
 
Paula Clark 
Director, Materials Management Division  
Maine Department of Environmental Protection                                                
17 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0017 
 Carole Cifrino 
Supervisor, Recycling Programs  
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
17 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0017 
 
 
Comments on the Maine Department of Environmental Protection’s Annual Product 
Stewardship to the Legislature 
 
Dear Ms. Clark and Ms.Cifrino,  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit comments on the Department of Environmental 
Protection’s January 2019 Annual Product Stewardship Report to the Maine Legislature. The 
Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM) is a strong advocate for policies that help to create 
a more circular materials economy through product stewardship and extended-producer 
responsibility laws. We believe that businesses, governments, and consumers should work 
together to innovate and design waste out of the system so that we can sustain our resources and 
reduce our cumulative impact on our environment. It is with nearly 20 years of knowledge and 
experience relevant to the product stewardship laws and programs referred to in this report that 
we submit these  comments.  
 
Highlighting the Importance of Product Stewardship :   
 
NRCM believes that the success and expansion of our extended-producer responsibility laws 
depend upon the extent to which the Legislature and the public embrace the concept of product 
stewardship. Waste and litter management has historically been a public sector problem and 
taxpayer expense, although the public has had essentially no choice over what materials are 
thrust upon them to deal with at the end of a product’s useful life. Producers of waste are often 
reluctant to take responsibility for the design and collection systems for their products, and 
instead lay blame on the consumer by saying they are “meeting consumer demand. ” Then they 
leave the public sector to clean up the mess created by those products. The theory behind product 
stewardship is that, ideally, there would  be more shared responsibility between everyone 
involved in a products lifecycle. This includes a higher level of forethought and planning 
between design, use, and collection of materials so that we can prevent more valuable materials 
from being wasted or polluting our environment, which benefits everyone.  
 
To do this, we need to take a more preventative approach to our waste issues by looking up the 
chain at product and packaging design, and then proactively engaging producers to institute  
sustainably funded collection systems that can internalize all costs associated with the recovery 
of waste materials. Without this, we will always have piece-meal, inefficient waste management 
  
  
  
 
2 
 programs, funded by taxpayers, and our environment and future generations will continue taking 
the br
unt of the damage. Maine has been a leader in the U.S. in adopting product stewardship 
programs; our policies have served as blueprints for other states. NRCM is very supportive of 
adding many more product categories to our suite of laws. We are encouraged by the 2019 
Annual Product Stewardship Report because of the thoughtful, forward-thinking approach and 
recommendations for the expansion of our policies. We have a few specific thoughts to consider 
below.  
 
Recommendations for Changes to Existing EPR Laws 
 
For the most part, we support the each of the proposed statutory changes for  the laws regarding 
the framework of new product stewardship programs, mercury lamps, consumer batteries, 
beverage con tainers, and cell phones. We encourage the committee to move forward with 
reporting out a bill for each of these proposals in Appendices A through E, though we have a few 
points to consider:   
 
A. Framework law: The changes proposed are based on experience with implementing 
existing programs and if adopted would make new programs more effective. NRCM 
believes that each of our existing programs should also be updated to adhere to the 
framework law, as proposed.  
B. Mercury lamps: Referenced above, this is an example of a policy that should be changed 
to reflect the proposed changes to the framework law. This has been an underperforming 
program for years , primarily because there is a disincentive for the producers of mercury 
lamps to expand their outreach and encourage people to recycle. There is also a lack of a 
mechanism for DEP to request and require changes that would improve effectiveness.  
C. Consumer batteries: Consumer batteries are a big problem in our waste stream because 
they pose a risk to human health and the environment if they are not managed properly.   
Further, the Call2Recycle rechargeable battery program is experiencing problems 
because non-rechargeable batteries are ending up in the bins, but the producers who made 
them aren ’t part of the program. If the Legislature only takes one proposal forward from 
this report, then expanding the rechargeable battery law to include all consumer batteries 
should be it. Maine consumers and municipalities need a solution for recycling all 
consumer batteries, and this expansion would also solve the problem of “free riders” in 
the existing program. Since this policy language has already been vetted in the 
Legislature before, it is a strong proposal that is ready for action. We strongly encourage 
the Legislature to report out a bill with the language from Appendix C.  
D. Container Redemption: The 2018 OPEGA review of the “bottle bill” brought attention to 
some of the real or perceived inefficiencies in the program. We urge the Legislature to 
proceed with any changes with caution. Overall, the existing program is very effective 
and is working to recover the vast majority of beverage containers for recycling. This 
provides jobs and a source of clean recycled commodities. It also reduces litter, provides 
charities with a source of funds, and takes the burden of managing the containers away 
from municipalities and taxpayers. NRCM believes that there should be 1) b etter data and 
reporting so that we may be more certain about the collection rate —coupled with an 
automatic increase in deposit amount should collection targets not be reached,  2) 
consideration given to adding more containers into the redemption model, 3) b etter ways 
  
  
  
 
3 
 to respond to issues of non-compliance, and 4) review of ways to streamline the 
commingling process based on input from the redemption center operators.  
E. Cell Phones: NRCM supports DEP’s recommendation to repeal the reporting requirement 
by cell phone companies, since it does not provide useful data.  
 
Candidate Products for New EPR Programs 
 
We commend DEP for their thoughtful and forward-looking approach with the consideration of 
future product stewardship programs for packaging, pharmaceuticals, mattresses, carpets, and 
solar panels. Here are some specific thoughts on those proposals:  
 
A. Packaging: DEP did a remarkable job making the case for the consideration of packaging 
materials as a potential candidate for an extended-producer responsibility program. This 
is an extremely timely product category since it makes up 30-40% of the total MSW 
stream, and many of the municipal programs that manage these materials are currently 
facing steep increases in costs of recycling and are either abandoning or scaling back 
their programs. We appreciate that the DEP took the effort to estimate the costs to 
municipalities and taxpayers for managing packaging waste at an astounding $16-$17.5 
million each year. This type of policy is critical to moving forward with more sustainable 
and resilient recycling programs, as is shown in more than 40 jurisdictions throughout the 
world. We urge the DEP and the Legislature to move forward with urgency when 
developing policy language that would establish a new EPR program for packaging in 
Maine, and a good place to start will be to support a resolve to do just that this session.  
B. Pharmaceuticals: Since 2012, five states have established producer-funded drug take-
back programs: MA, VT, WA, NY, and CA. Twenty-three U.S. cities and counties have 
done so, too. Managing these programs costs manufacturers only pennies on a 
prescription, and does not increase medication cost to consumers. Benefits of this 
program would include decreased risk of accidental poisoning and drug overdoses by 
preventing unused medications, like opioids, from accumulating in homes and getting 
into the wrong hands; establishing an environmentally safe alternative to landfilling or 
flushing of unwanted drugs; relief for Maine communities, police stations, and others 
from the burden of organizing and staffing sporadic collection events for unused drugs, 
saving time and taxpayer money; and creation of a standard way that Maine people can 
dispose of unwanted drugs, so they know what disposal options are available throughout 
the year. We are pleased that DEP has signaled support for this policy, and we hope that 
the Legislature will pass a bill to establish this program in Maine this session.  
C. Mattresses: We agree with DEP’s assessment on why mattresses are an ideal product 
category, and also with the assessment of why establishing a program in Maine could be 
tricky. Unlike CT, RI, and CA, where mattress take-back programs are in place and 
successful, our state has more pronounced geographic constraints, low population 
density, and no facilities to process the deconstruction of mattresses. We concur with 
DEP that if we were to pursue a program in Maine, that at least some cost-internalization 
is necessary so that the per-unit fee does not overburden the consumer. However, we do 
urge DEP to consider establishing a smaller unit-fee paid at the point of sale that is used 
to help municipalities manage mattresses, similar to a bill that was considered by the 
previous Legislature.  
  
  
  
 
4 
 D. Carpet: Like mattresses, this is an ideal product category but Maine has unique limiting 
factors dealing with this bulky material. NRCM agrees with DEP that funding a program 
only through a user-fee would be overly burdensome on the consumer, and doing so 
would not incentivize a redesign of carpet to be more readily recyclable. We hope that 
over the next couple of years there will be more discussions and consideration given to 
how we can establish a carpet take-back program that makes sense for Maine.  
E. Solar pane ls: As the use of solar panels to create renewable, clean energy continues to 
rise, the disposal of older panels will begin to become more of an issue for municipalitie s 
to deal with. We like that DEP is forward thinking in its approach so that cost of 
collection can be anticipated and internalized now, rather than later. However, we are 
concerned that with lack of similar take-back programs for other forms of energy 
production such as oil tanks, this would create a disadvantage for companies providing 
our communities with a cleaner,  more sustainable form of energy. We look forward to 
working with the DEP in the future to establish a fair product stewardship program for 
solar panels.  
 
Implementation Status for Maine’s Other EPR Programs  
 
Maine’s other programs for electronic waste, mercury-containing auto switches and thermostats, 
and architectural paint are performing satisfactorily and any potential changes we may like to see 
to these programs fall low on the priority list proposals in this report. DEP does mention the 
plastic bag recycling law that requires retailers that use plastic bags to have a receptacle for 
recycling, but they do not have a recommended change. NRCM believes that a statutory change 
to this law is indeed needed since, as a result of initiatives led by concerned citizens in 
communities throughout Maine, many retailers are no longer distributing plastic bags at check-
out, but they are still selling products wrapped in plastic film. Consumers rely on these collection 
bins for recycling all film plastic, not just check-out bags. We urge the Legislature to amend the 
plastic bag law (Title 38§1605) so that  it would require retailers that  sell or provide any film 
plastic to continue to provide the recycling receptacles.  
 
Overall, this report was very well done and encouraging. We urge the Legislature to place a high 
priority on moving forward with an expansion of the consumer battery recycling program and 
moving forward with an extended-producer responsibility program for packaging. Thank you for 
the opportunity to provide these comments. We request that these comments be submitted to the 
Legislature with the 2019 report.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Sarah Lakeman 
Sustainable Maine Project Director  
Natural Resources Council of Maine  
 

February 14, 2019 
Mr. Mike Karagiannes 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection 
17 State House Station 
Augusta , Maine 
04333 
Re: Maine Department of Environmental Protection Annual Product Stewardship Report 2019 
Dear Mr. Karagiannes: 
As a follow up to our meeting with DEP staff on February 6th, PRBA - The Rechargeable 
Battery Association submits these supplemental comments on the DEP's Annual Product 
Stewardship Report (2019). Our comments below focus primarily on the DEP's 
recommendation that the existing battery collection and recycling law for nickel cadmium 
(NiCd) and small sealed lead acid (SSLA) batteries be repealed and replaced with an EPR law 
covering all consumer batteries. For the reasons we noted during our February 6th meeting with 
DEP staff and as explained in more detail below, we do not believe this is the correct approach 
for a consumer battery EPR program in Maine . 
INTRODUCTION 
PRBA was formed in 1991 to respond to the growing need for workable NiCd and SSLA battery 
collection and recycling programs in the United States . To that end, PRBA members established 
pilot battery recycling programs in several states. Based on the success of these pilot programs, 
PRBA supported establishment of a not-for-profit public education and battery recycling program 
to be implemented nationally . That program is now known as the Ca1l2Recycle ® program. 
Attached on page 5 IS a 
Ca1l2Recycle summary of the 
batteries collected in Maine in 
2018. In fact, Maine was ranked 
by Ca1l2Recycle as the 12th best 
state III terms of battery 
collection based on weight of 
batteries collected as a function 
of state population. See data on 
right. 
In the years since PRBA was formed, lithium ion batteries have replaced NiCd and SSLA 
batteries in most consumer applications. Notably , these lithium ion batteries do not contain the 
potentially-hazardous heavy metals used in predecessor products. The existing Maine consumer 
PRBA - The Rechargeable Battery Association 
1776 K Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20006 

battery law 
was, of course, designed to address environmenta l concerns with those meta ls. 
(Similarly , although PRBA does not focus on non-rechargeab le (sing le use) consumer battery 
issues, it merits note that the merc ury that historically resulted in environmenta l concerns with 
those produc ts has now been removed from them.) 
PRBA members current ly manufac ture approximately 65% of the rechargeab le lithium ion 
battery cells produced in the world today. Our mem bers also include leading man ufacturers of 
consumer , medica l, and defense products that are powered by those battery cells, battery 
recyclers, retailers, and large distrib utors of lithium batteries and equipment powered by them. 
Virtually all of our members are "stewards" with the Call2Recycle ® program and support battery 
product stewardship programs in the U.S. and Canada . 
CONSUMER BATTERIES IN THE WASTE STREAM TODAY 
Rechargeable consumer batteries constitute a miniscu le contribution to the content of Maine 's 
waste stream: the 2011 Maine Residential Waste Characterization Study (the most recent study 
available), found that all types of consumer batteries - both rechargeable and non-rechargeable , 
taken together - made up only 0.23% of the state's overall waste stream . 
As to rechargeable batteries , this low volume reflects the fact that most rechargeab le batteries 
reach consumers as components of products , and typically last as long or longer than the 
produc ts' usefu l life. This is a very different situation than existed when Maine enacted its 
existing NiCd and SSLA battery statute , when easily remova ble batteries were common. It also 
is notable that many of those produc ts (including their batteries) are collected for recycling under 
Maine 's electronic waste and used cell phone statu tes. 
Moreover , those used rechargeable batteries that are available for disposal already are collected , 
without the need for further legislative mandate , under the Call2Recycle ® program and similar 
programs operating in Maine , municipal collection sites, facility-sponsored programs 
(e.g., hospitals) , and bye-waste recyclers. 
For these reasons, if the DEP's concern is with reducing large volumes of waste entering 
landfi lls and preserving landfi ll space, products that account for significant volumes of waste 
(e.g., carpet and mattresses) would be a logical first step for new product stewardship initiatives 
to he lp achieve Maine 's waste reduction and rec ycling goals . Similarly , if the concern is to 
reduce the volume of hazardous constituents that reach landfills or incinerators , the focus need 
not be on consumer batteries. 
LITHIUM ION BATTTERIES AND PRODUCT STEWARDSHIP LEGISLATION 
Paragraph C on page 8 of the DEP report addresses a number of issues related to lithium ion 
batteries that warrant further comment to put them into proper context. 
First, the safety issues associated with the proper handl ing, transport , collection , and storage of 
lithium ion batteries have been well documented by various federal agenci es and national 
organiza tions. There are regulations and guidelines published by the U.S. Department of 
Transportation , Consumer Product Safety Commission , Occupational Safety & Health 
2 

Administration, and National Fire Protection Association , just 
to name a few, that adequately 
address these safety issues. These regulations and guidelines are frequently updated to account 
for new developments involving lithium ion batteries. We therefore do not believe a consumer 
battery EPR bill is the right vehicle to address these safety issues. 
Second , it is generally recognized that 85 -90% of lithium ion consumer batteries enter the 
marketplace installed in products like cellular phones, notebooks , tablets , e-readers , and other 
portable electronic products. According to the DEP, from January 2006 through December 
2017, Maine residents recycled more than 97 million pounds of electronics.' Many of these 
products contain lithium ion batteries that are removed bye-waste processors and recycled or 
refurbished for reuse in similar products. Moreover , the refurbishing of used lithium ion 
batteries for reuse (often referred to as "secondary use") is a relatively new phenomenon that is 
not accounted for when considering the collection and recycling of these batteries. Furthermore , 
even though Maine 's current rechargeable battery recycling law does not cover the now- 
predominant power source in consumer products, lithium ion batteries , these batteries are already 
collected in large volumes through the Ca1l2Recycle ® program , e-waste processors , and other 
battery c~llection programs in the state. 
Third , the DEP report contains in Appendix C a draft of potential consumer battery product 
stewardship legislation. PRBA did support such legislation in 2016, but we no longer do. In 
significant part, that is the result of the debate over Senator Saviello 's 2016 proposed legislation 
and similar bills in other states , which demonstrated the strength of political influences that 
would preclude the adoption of any bill that treated all suppliers equitably. We thus must 
strongly urge DEP to reconsider this approach embodied in the draft bill included in its report. 
To further explain our concern: the legislation in Appendix C, if introduced as a legislative 
proposal, will garner a significant amount of industry opposition as it did in 2016. That 
opposition always results in "carve outs" during the legislative process that are equivalent to the 
"free rider" problem Ca1l2Recycle currently struggles with under their existing program. When 
these types of carve outs are granted (as was the case in Vermont in 2016 when their primary 
battery (single use) recycling law passed) , battery suppliers and a subset of product suppliers 
ultimately incur all the costs of collecting and recycling even batteries they did not place on the 
market - which constitute the vast majority of the used rechargeable batteries collected. This is 
not fair or equitable. 
In short , at least as to batteries , the concerns reflected in the DEP report are far more comple x 
and merit much greater consideration before any specific legislative action is considered for 
introduction. Instead of moving immediately to legislation , we strongly recommend convening a 
panel of experts from the DEP, battery industry and other interested parties to brief the ENR 
committee on the history and experience of Maine and other states with battery recycling and 
e-wast e laws, and the status of battery collection and recycling in the u.S. This might be 
accompanied by the preparation of a more complete study of consumer rechargeable battery 
recycling , and subjecting it to public comment before finalization , in order to provide all 
1 See https :!!www.maine.gov!dep!waste!ewaste!#la 
3 

interested parties an opportunity to weigh in on the issues over the course of the year. The ENR 
Committee could then review the study and decide on the appropriate actions , legislative 
or 
otherwise , to pursue . 
* * * * 
We appreciate DEP's consideration of our commen ts and look forwar d to working with the 
agency and the legislature on these important issues to our members . Please contact me at 
202.719.4109 or gkerchner@wileyrein.com with any questions regarding these issues . 
Sincerely , 
George A. Kerchner 
Executive Director 
4 

call (2) recycle® 
Leading 
the charge for recycling: 
Consumer Battery Collections 
Maine - 2018 
In 2018, the Call2Recycle® program collected over 31,000 pounds of consumer batteries , single use and 
rechargeable, in Maine from 182 collection sites. Nearly 50% ofthe batteries collected were from public agency 
sites (i.e., municipal transfer stations). Below please find the summary of Call2Recycle' s batte ry collections in 
the state . 
2018 Battery Collections in Maine by Collection Site Type 
Collection Site Type Pounds of Batteries Recycled # of Participating Sites 
Retailers / Wholesalers 14,174 83 
Municipal/Public Agency 14,752 85 
Other 2,264 14 
Totals 31,190 182 
All sixteen Maine count ies have at least two collect ions sites generating batteries through the Call2Recycle® 
program. Currently , 85% of the state 's population lives within 10 miles of a Call2Recycie collection site. 
Below please find a map representing Call2Recycle's collect ions sites throughout the state . 
1000 Parkwood Circle. Suite 200. Atlanta . GA 30339 I T.618.419.9990 F. 618.419.9986 call2recycle. org 
5 

 
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  0433 2    |    207.622.4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  Maine Grocers &  
Food Producers  
Association  
PO Box 5234  
Augusta, ME 04332  
207.622.4461  
info@mgfpa.org  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
February 14, 2019  
 
Mr. Mike Karagiannes  
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
17 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0017  
 
Re: Comments on 2019 Maine Product Stewardship Report  
 
Dear Mr. Karagiannes:  
I am submitting comments on the 2019 Maine Product Stewardship Report on behalf of t he Maine Grocers & Food 
Producers Association , a business trade association representing  250 members of  Maine’s food community; main street 
businesses including independently ow ned and operated grocery stores and supermarkets, and food and beverage 
industry partners .   
The report addresses policy changes to minimize the negative impacts of products and packaging throughout their life -
cycle. We will address the Framework law as en acted in 2009 and also a sel ection of the laws related to consumer 
products and the grocer and food producer industry.  
Framework Law (38 M.R.S. Chapter 18)  
▪ Due to the large geographical size of the state, requiring collection sites within 15 miles of 90% of Maine’s 
residents would be troublesome for rural areas leaving some without an  adequate place to recycle. The varying 
size and types of materials require individual recycling site implementation.  
▪ We would like to see further clarity on the staffed employee responsibilities required to oversee each of the 
stewardship programs.  If one -full time employee is currently in place for the PaintCare program (ME&VT ), we 
have concerns that a more complex program may require additional time for full circle implementation  and vice 
versa for established programs .  
▪ To generalize annual fees across the wide,  brea dth of the program  is concerning. We would like to see a 
formalized breakout of costs to ensure fair budgeting expectations for the producers absorbing the program 
implementation .  
▪ The program performance goals are very specific in awareness and recycling rates. Is there history from other 
programs or studies to ensure these objectives can be met? Can they be applied across all products?  
We recognize the Department’s interest in making these changes to the Framework Law so that high collection rates 
may be achieved along with data to support the initiatives becomes  available. Prior to implementation, we would ask 
that you conduct additional research for feedback from all parties specifically speaking to changes in the Framework Law 
to ensure all the proposed changes are attainable. Others involved in the day to day can help provide additional insight 
on what  is working and how to address areas for needed improvements.  
   
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  04330    |    207-622-4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  
 Beverage Containers (38 M.R.S. Chapter 33)  
Our indu stry recognizes and supports efforts to help refine the Bottle Bill to make the process easier and more viable for 
our beverage manufacturers/bottlers as well as retailers selling and our partners in the redemption process.  
We are pleased that there is a 75-87% recycling rate for bottles which in comparison to the national avg. (34%) is quite 
high. We are hesitant to make drastic changes to the program that would negatively affect  any of the participating 
players caus ing additional costs, present challenge s, or have unintended consequences to the success of the program.  
▪ Data reporting requirements : we express hesitation for the additional administrative costs of reporting  the 
number of non -refillable beverage containers sold and the number of  non-refillable beverage containers 
returned by redemption value.  It may also be a challenge for larger corporations to implement these changes to 
comply with state regulations/reporting requirements in the global market of obligations.  
▪ Supportive of the remov al of the provisions of the law which indicate redemption centers must have written 
agreements to provide redemptions services for dealers and only accept containers of the kind, size brand sold 
by those dealers . This  eliminates administration burden from redemption centers.  
▪ Supportive of the elimination of redemption responsibility for retailers with less than 5,000 sq ft of retail space.  
▪ Oppose redemption -centers or dealers with 5,000 sq ft or retail space of more without an agreement (with a 
stand alon e redemption center within 1 mile) be required to redeem all beverage containers within the 
program. A one -mile radius, especially in rural Maine, is too restrictive. We would propose  a wider acceptable 
radius for a partnering redemption center. It may also  be out of certain store’s business plans to administer a 
redemption program within the storefront.  
▪ Title 22 defines a  Locally owned grocery store as   "Locally owned grocery store" means a grocery store at least 
51% of which is owned by one or more reside nts of the State and that has a gross floor area of 25,000 square 
feet or less.  Possibly the Department wants to evaluate the sq. ft threshold to exclude slightly larger store fronts 
from the redemption responsibilities.  
▪ We recognize the efficiencies that  may come with a “catch all” commingling group for redemption centers, we 
can support t he effort of sorting by like materials  to minimize  the sorting  labor . However,  the “catch all” 
commingling group would be based on manufacturers being truthful about their portion/share of sales within 
the container weights.  We would like to see a checks and balance system to ensure equality amongst 
participants.  
▪ We are not supportive of any changes in legislation t hat would require additional remittance of unclaimed 
deposits to the State as these dollars are used within the IoDs budget to remain viable.  
▪ We are supportive of compliance and enforcement procedures that ensure fairness amongst redemption 
centers and pi ck-up agents/IoDs. If manufacture rs will be held responsible for the program than redemption 
centers must be accountable for their part of the process  and honesty in full bag redemptions .  
▪ While not a substantial increase, a $50 increase for a redemption ce nter license will a dd a bit more of an 
investment into  the interest in  operating the redemption center.   
We look forward to working with the ENR Committee this session addressing the multitude of bills submitted this 
session addressing the bottle bill.  
 
Batteries (38 M.R.S. § 2165)  
 
Grocers commonly sell batteries a s a part of their  common , household item  product line .  
 
▪ A January 1, 2020 implementation date for a battery manufacturer to change their labeling may be too short. 
Most batteries are manufactured by large corporation s with big distribution networks. Less than a year may be 
difficult to comply. What would also happen to those batteries still on the shelves? Would they need to be 
   
 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association     |    PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME  04330    |    207-622-4461     |    info@mgfpa.org  
 credited back, returned, recycled without even being used? What leeway would there be for r emaining 
inventory?  
▪ There should be some concern given to manufacturers whom may opt not to comply and decide to stop offering 
their product in Maine.  
▪ Submission Plan, “the plan must allow retailers, wholesalers, municipalities,” etc to “voluntarily serve  as a 
collection location. ” We are supportive of a voluntarily option but not supportive of stricter collection site 
requirements at the point of retail.  
 
Plastic Bags (38 M.R.S. § 1605)  
 
No specific amendments were proposed to address plastic bags within the Stewardship Report. We  look forward to 
working with the ENR Committee this session on the three proposed bill titles  addressing plastic bags.  
 
Candidate products:  
Packaging  
 
As noted within the report the market for packaging is vulnerability and unpredictable. We are supportive of the 
industry’s efforts to ensure their packaging is developed in a thoughtful and environmentally friendly manner. The 
report states there is a lack of data on packaging generation and municipal recycli ng and disposal costs . The report  
references somewhat outdated information from 2011 and references statistics from Europe and Canada which may not 
be a fair comparison to the state’s actual numbers . We recognize the interest to learn more and would be sup portive of 
further studies to ensure suggestions for manufacturers would be feasible.  We would look to learn more about a 
proposed division of responsibilities between packaging producers and municipalities.  
 
Overall:  
As with any program in which the producers and manufacturers are responsible for recycling programs, the likelihood of 
increased product costs will occur and our Maine residents, the customer s, will inevitably incur the costs of the recycling 
programs. We express an overall concern for any programs that may cause an imbalance for the manufacture to comply 
while still offering quality, reasonably priced products.  
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony.   
 
 
 
Christine Cummings  
Executive Director  
christine@mgfpa.org  
207-622-4461  

Via Email  
 
February 14th, 201 9 
 
Mike Karagiannes  
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
17 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0017  
 
Re:  Thermostat Recycling Corporation’s ( TRC) Response to MEDEP 201 9 Annual Product 
Stewardship Report  to the Joint Standing Committee on the Environment and Natural Resources  
 
Dear M r. Karagiannes : 
 
Three prominent manufacturers of thermostats – Honeywell, White -Rodgers, and General Electric – voluntarily 
established the nonprofit , Thermostat Recycling Corporation (TRC) in 1998 to facilitate the proper 
management of mercury thermostats at end -of-life. TRC now has 30 corporate members and is the only U.S. 
based national  program  dedicated to recycling mercury  thermostats. We have  recycled more than 2.4 million 
mercury thermostats nationwide, thereby diverting more than 11 tons of mercury from the solid waste stream.  
In Main e, the program has recycled tens of thousands  of these units.  
TRC welcomes the opportunity to comment on the Maine Department of Environmental Protection’s January 
2019  Annual Product Stewardship Report  (Product Stewardship Report) . Our comments circle around the  
Department’s  proposed c hanges to 38 M.R.S § 1776, An Act to Improve Maine’s Product Stewardship Law , 
and are  presented below.   
THE ROLE OF MANUFACTURERS  AS PART OF  A THREE -LEGGED STOOL  
 
Mercury thermostats  are regulated under  38 M.R.S. § 1665 -B, Maine’s Mercury -added Thermostats law. The 
law requires that manufacturers who have  sold mercury -added thermostats into the state pay for the ir 
collection and disposal and  provide a financial incentive with a minimum value of $5 fo r the return of each 
mercury -added thermostat to an established recycling collection point.  This l egislation has been in place  since 
2006.  We have concerns on how t he Department characterized m anufacturers (a.k.a. producers) as having 
“the greatest ability to affect the life -cycle impacts of products ”. The Department concedes that others, 
including  distributors, retailers and consumers , also hav e a role. In our twenty years of operating, we have 
continually stressed that other stakeholders (distributors, retailers, or generators of waste) also have an 
equal, if not  more important , role in recovering this material  and the manufacturer does not bare sole 
responsibility . Yet, there is no mention of these entities (other than the passing reference) and their 
requirements to promote safe disposal or safely dispose of this material.  
 
In the Department’s proposed changes to 38 M.R.S § 1776,  the Department suggests placing increased 
requirements on  producers . Such requirements include mandates  to achieve a recycl ing rate of  50% in the 
third year  of a program  and an 80% recycling rate within the sixth year. These targets would  inequitably  place 
the responsibility for  consumer and generator  behavior directly on manufacturers. TRC does not support 
setting recycling rates based on the behavior  of others,  and TRC does not support  a framework where  there is 
no clear mechanism for the Department to regulate and enforce the actions of these actor s. The three -legged 
stool of responsibility crumbles w hen only manufacturers are responsible for the actions of the other two 
involved parties (collection networks and generators of waste) .   

Letter to ME  DEP 
February  14th, 201 9 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 
The Department also incorrectly states that “when manufacturers are responsible for paying for the recycling of 
collected products, they have a disincentive to collect or to promote the existence or e ase of use of a collection 
system ”. This is not the case  in TRC’s experience.   We promote TRC’s collection and disposal program to the 
best of our abilit y. The Department should  acknowledge a diminishing law of returns for increased efforts , and 
should base any conclusions on a  cost-benefit analysis related to program performance.  TRC believes the 
Department  should  remove this statement.    
 
SPECIFIC CHANGES TO FRAMEWORK PRODUCT STEWARDSHIP LAW  
 
As th e Product Stewardship Report  has provided, Maine currently has nine laws related to the end -of-life 
management of specific consumer products that may be considered to be product stewardship laws. The 
Department stated that, “ Maine’s experience in implementing its great variety of EPR laws, it is now apparent 
the framewor k law does not include adequate provisions to ensure implementation of effective programs ”. 
Further, the Department states that,  “there are certain elements that contribute to an EPR program achieving 
high rates of diversion from disposal ” but the Department does not cite any source s of where this has 
been the case or studies that support th e recommendation s listed in the Product Stewardship Report . 
We disagree with these characterizations and do not believe they are well supported, as evidenced by  the lack 
of cita tions in the Product Stewardship Report .   
  
TRC has concerns with  the Department’s specific recommended changes to the legislation , which include : 
 
1. A requirement that each program  maintain a minimum  standard for the producers’ or 
stewardship organization staffing : “a minimum ½ -fulltime equivalent (FTE) ” with the work 
product of working  to “recruit, train and monitor collection sites ”. It has been TRC’s experience 
that more hours of effort and resour ces do not necessarily equate to more collections. Also, this 
recommendation leaves no flexibility for other ways to cover extended producer responsibility ( EPR) 
related site collection work , such as outsourcing activities or working with the Department staff. 
Department  staff visit retailers in the state and drive economies of scale when they can ask about other 
EPR programs such as thermostat, batteries, lamps, or paint  while there . The Department is essentially 
going to burde n each collection site with up to 4  times  as many visits with representatives of 
stewardship groups. It is also our experience that Department staff have better and more impactful 
conversations with collection locations than EPR groups because of the perception  of being from the 
government.  Lastly, there is no other precedent for this in other states with EPR programs for good 
reason, since it is an inefficient use of resources . 
 
2. Measurable , enforceable goals (e.g., recycling rate, consumer awareness, convenient 
collection), and defined consequences for non -compliance. The rates will use a description of 
the methodology and the relevant historic sales data used to develop the rate.  The Department 
acknowledges anti -trust concerns  in the report. Sharing such information  such as  historic sales data 
may not be available to provid e to the Department or the Department  may not be the appropriate 
clearinghouse. TRC has consistently contended that collection targets do not make good public policy . 
Goals by themselves do little to encourage other actors to participate and p lace all of  the ownership of 
the target strictly on the manufacturer.   
 
3. Using a permanent collection site within 15 miles of 90% of Maine residents within one year of 
the start of product collections.  TRC has concerns with mandates to  place a collection site in a 
location  to simply satisfy an arbitrary  geographic  requirement. Placing collection locations in a state is 
more nuanced than choosing something arbitrary such as geography to population  or even a location in 
each county. Population centers should inform where to place collection locations and not geographic 
distance.  By this same logic , Maine should put in place hospitals or schools within  15 miles of 90% of 
the population.  Many current EPR laws define collection locations based on the  prior sales channel 
Letter to ME  DEP 
February  14th, 201 9 
Page 3 of 3 
 
they were sold through. It is possible the sales channel is not nearby and cannot possibl y satisfy such a 
prescriptive  requirement , particularly in light of sales through o nline outlets . As we mentioned above , 
this requirement would put the ownership completely on the EPR program and not on the collection site  
themselves . Whenever an EPR law defines a collection location  with a mandat e to collect , there cannot 
be an accurate way to blanket the entire state  if those o utlets do  not exist in the required regions . 
Mandating this  also stifles innovation by legislating out the possibility of other potential collection 
mechanisms such as  smaller/shippable containers or developing pick-up schemes . Further research 
and a thorough review of a ccessibility for Maine’s population should  be completed  before imposing a 
blanket approach on EPR programs related to  geographic distance and percentage  within population 
calculation .  
 
CONCLUSION  
 
TRC would caution the Department from applying a “one -size-fits-all” approach to end -of-life product 
management. TRC spends significant time with other EPR groups reviewing program matic elements  and the 
constant them e is that each EPR program is different.  These programs do not all share common 
characteristics and should not be managed in the same fashion.   
 
TRC, as one of the first EPR programs in the nation, remains available to answer questions or clarify 
components o f its collection program with  Department  staff and specifically these comments . As mentioned 
above, we applaud the Department’s willingness to have EPR groups weigh in on these proposed changes.  
Please don’t hesitate to contact me at your convenience at ryan.kiscaden@thermostat -recycle.org  or 267-513-
1727 .   
 
Sincerely , 
 
 
 
 
 
Ryan L Kiscaden  
Executive Director  
 
CC: 
Paula Clark  
Carole Cifrino  
 

Mark Ward comments on Annual Product Stewardship Report 
 I am writing to express my thoughts on the draft of the Annual Product Stewardship Report (compiled by 
the DEP in January 2019). I have reviewed this re port and commend the authors for having compiled an 
extremely thorough and thoughtful presentation of their findings and recommendations.  I strongly encourage the legislature to consider the recommendations made to modify existing Maine laws 
to strengthen the state’s current Extended Product Responsibility efforts. As the state entity responsible 
for implementing and overseeing these efforts, the DEP is uniquely positioned to understand what is and 
is not working in the laws as they are currently written. Because the recommendations are compiled as 
separate appendices, the legislature can choose to adopt all of the proposed changes or to select those that 
it deems most pressing (making sure, of course, that if it were to adopt a piecemeal approach that it 
consider the implications on the whole of Title 38,  Chapter 18  Product Stewardship).    Among the 
recommendations that I see as being especially important are the proposals to: 1) strengthen the Framework Law, 2) make the mercury lamp law mo re consistent with the framework, and 3) make 
changes to the consumer batteries section to include lithium and lithium-ion batteries to minimize the risk of fires at Materials Recovery Facilities.  I also support the recommended changes to the bottle bill (38 
M.R.S., Chapter 33) most notably the establishmen t of the “catch-all” commingling provision for 
containers of the same material type.   
In addition, I appreciate the DEP efforts to identif y candidate products for new EPR programs. I am 
especially enthusiastic about the potential to enact  a new EPR program for packaging. The analysis 
provided suggests that a packaging program in Ma ine would best be designed through a shared 
responsibility model with a carefully crafted set of municipal incentives.    
  Mark Ward, 28 Poor Farm Road, Bristol, ME 04539 
 
 
     
 
 
  
carpet-rug.org 3033 Wilson Blvd., Ste. 700, Arlington, VA 22201      703-875-0634
  
 
February 12, 2019        VIA: E ‐Mail 
 
Mr. Mike Karagiannes  
Maine DEP 
17 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333‐0017 
 Comments  Re: Implementing  Product Stewardship  in Maine, 2019 
 
The Carpet and Rug Institute, representing  carpet manufacturers  who produce over 90% of the 
carpet made in the United States, appreciates  the opportunity  to comment  on Maine’s 2019 
Product Stewardship Annual  Report and the state’s consideration  of EPR legislation. 
 
The carpet manufacturing  industry is working  independently,  and together with others,  to 
reduce the amount of carpet going  to the landfill each year.  More than 15 years ago, the carpet 
industry entered into a voluntary  agreement  with many  states, including Maine, the EPA and 
NGOs to find solutions that would facilitate the diversion of carpet from landfills.  
 
More recently, over the past two years,  CRI has collaborated  with Maine’s  Department  of 
Environmental  Protection  (DEP), the Maine Retail Association  and the Carpet Americas 
Recovery Effort (CARE) to develop voluntary  pilot programs  aimed at finding solutions for 
carpet disposal in the state. Based on our June 2018 meeting with DEP,  we look forwar
d to 
continuing  to pursue a number of ideas that would increase diversion to energy in Maine 
without a new mandate for EPR. We are particularly  interested  in the potential to connect 
installers with organizations  that utlilize carp ets in energy recovery.  Since 2002, our industry 
has invested in excess of $300M on this effort and we have had continued  to see growth  in our 
diversion numbers.    
 The carpet and rug industry is committed,  above all else, to serving our customers, our 
communities  and the millions of people who benefit  from our products  every day. Our industry 
has long been  committed  to creating sustainable  and beautiful products  for people in their 
homes, schools and commercial  spaces,  and we continue to innovate to minimize th
 e 
environmental  impact of carpet products  and manufacturing  in Maine and throughout  the U.S. 
 
The carpet industry takes a holistic approach  to sustainability  that is responsible,  proactive,  and 
seeks to balance to various  stakeholder  needs and interests.  Carpet manufacturers  focus  on 
reducing water and  energy use, strive to creat e zero waste, integrate renewable  chemistry  into 
the manufacturing  process, incorporate  recycled content  in new carpet products,  and recycle 
 
 
  
carpet-rug.org 3033 Wilson Blvd., Ste. 700, Arlington, VA 22201      703-875-0634
  
 
carpet to reduce the amount of discarded  carpet  that goes into landfills. In fact, over the past 
17 years, carpet manufacturers  have invested in creating a carpet  recycling industry that has 
diverted more  than 5 billion pounds of carpet from landfills (2017 CARE  Annual Report ). 
In recent years,  the carpet industry’s  investments  in innovation  and design have focused  on 
ensuring  that the products  we are manufacturing  today are constructed  to facilitate recycling 
and recovery.  Like many other industries,  that transition  is still under way. Carpet that  is 
reaching  its end of life today remains highly complex and challenging.  We are continuing  to 
invest both in technology  and to further  develop  a market that
 will make even broader 
adoption of carpet recycling possible. 
 
The public is best served by our continuing  to invest in solutions,  rather than unnecessary,  
distracting  and expensive  additional  regulation  that stands  to do more harm than good – 
including putting tens of thousands  of jobs at risk. It should be noted  that alternative,  non‐
legislative  options in South  Carolina,  for example, have led to steady job growth while diverting 
carpet from landfill.  
 
California,  which has a higher population  density and established  infrastructure,  enacted EPR 
legislation  in 2010 that in many ways remains a work in progress.  In addition to the very 
difficult chemistry  and market realitie
s faced in every state, Maine faces more  challenging  
infrastructure  and density challenge.  
 Carpet is an important  US‐based manufacturing  industry, with  more  than 98 percent of carpet 
used in the United States manufactured  in our country. Carpet manufacturing  is one of the last 
major industries  primarily based in the United States. More than half a million American  jobs 
depend on the U.S. carpet manufacturing  industry, in manufacturing,  transportation,  
installation,  retail  sales, recycling and more. (Pending
 results of member economic  impact 
survey.) 
 We encourage  the state of Maine to work with  us on existing voluntary  efforts and incentivize  
market‐based solutions.  The carpet industry is committed 
 to continue seeking solutions and has 
a plan  to go to the next step. Legislation  will only hinder our progress, cost jobs  in the US, and, 
will not lead to the best environmental  solutions to the challenges  we face.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
  
Jennifer 
L. Stowe  
Vice President, Government Relations 
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
50-00-0 Formaldeh yde (gas)CA Prop 65; 
IARC; IRIS; NTP 11th cance
r Group 1 B1 Knownnot a 
pesticide Jul y_2015 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011 
50-07-7 Mitom ycin C CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
50-18-0 C yclophosphamide (anh ydrous)CA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROCEU Endocrine 
Disrupto
r CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65cancer, 
developmental, reproductive Category 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Group 1 Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
50-32-8 Benzo(a)p yreneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; EPA Priorit
y PBT; CA Prop 65; 
IARC; IRIS; NTP 11th OSPAR  
Chemicals of Concern; EU PB
T PBTPBT, 
Endocrine disrupto
r cance rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Group 1 B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
50-63-51,4-pentanediamine, N(4)-(7-chloro-4-quinolinyl)-
N(1),N(1)-dieth yl-, phosphate (1:2)OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
51-79-6 Urethane (Eth yl carbamate)CA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC CA Prop 65cancer, 
developmentalGroup 
2AReasonably 
anticipate
d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
52-76-6 L ynestrenol CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
53-19-0benzene, 1-chloro-2-[2,2-dichloro-1-(4-
chlorophen yl)ethyl]-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern Canada PBiT ListEU Endocrine 
Disrupto r PBT PBiTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
53-70-3 Dibenzo(a,h)anthraceneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List; OSPAR CA Prop 65; 
IARC; IRIS; NTP 11th PB
T PBT PBT cance rGroup 2A B2Reasonably 
anticipate
d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
53-96-3 2-Acet ylaminofluoreneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
54-05-71,4-pentanediamine, N4-(7-chloro-4-quinolinyl)-
N1,N1-dieth yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
54-11-5 Nicotine CA Prop 65 developmental P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
55-18-5 N-Nitrosodieth
ylamineCA Prop 65; 
IARC; IRIS; NTP 11th cance
rGroup 
2A B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
56-23-5 Carbon tetrachlorideCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC cance
r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
56-49-5 3-Meth
ylcholanthreneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List; OSPAR CA Prop 65EU Endocrine 
Disrupto
r PBT PBT PBT cance rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
56-55-3 Benzo(a)anthraceneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; OSPAR Chemicals CA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC PB
T PBT cance r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
56-95-12,4,11,13-Tetraazatetradecanediimidamide, N,N''-
bis(4-chlorophen yl)-3,12-diimino-, diacetate Canada PBiT List PBiT P(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009TOXNET 
2011
57-14-7 1,1-Dimeth ylhydrazine (UDMH)CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d P(M)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
57-41-0 Diphen
ylhydantoin (Phen ytoin)CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC CA Prop 65cancer, 
developmentalReasonably 
anticipate
d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
57-97-6 7,12-Dimeth ylbenz(a)anthraceneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; OSPAR Chemicals CA Prop 65EU Endocrine 
Disrupto
r PBT PBT cance rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
58-14-0 P yrimethamine CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
58-38-810H-Phenothiazine, 2-chloro-10-[3-(4-methyl-1-
piperazin yl)prop yl]-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern Canada PBiT List PBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
58-89-9 Hexachloroc yclohexane, gamma-NWM  Priority 
Chemicals; OSPAR Chemicals of Canada PBiT ListCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROCOSPAR  
Chemicals of Concern; EU PB
TPBT, 
Endocrine disrupto
r PBiTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
rReasonably anticipate
d P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011
59-87-0 Nitrofurazone CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
59-89-2 N-NitrosomorpholineCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
60-09-3 p-Aminoazobenzene CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
60-11-7 4-Dimeth ylaminoazobenzeneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
60-35-5 Acetamide CA Prop 65 cancer Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
62-50-0 Eth yl methanesulfonateCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
62-53-3 AnilineCA Prop 65; 
IRIS cance r B2 Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
62-55-5 ThioacetamideCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
62-56-6 Thioure aCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
62-75-9 N-Nitrosodimeth ylamineCA Prop 65; 
IARC; IRIS; NTP 11th cance
rGroup 
2A B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
63-92-3 Phenox ybenzamine h ydrochlorideCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
63-98-9 Phenacemide CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64-17-5 Ethanol in alcoholic bevera ges IARC CA Prop 65 developmental Group 1 Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64-67-5 Dieth yl sulfateCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
rGroup 
2AReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
66-27-3 Meth yl methanesulfonateCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
rGroup 
2AReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
67-56-1 methanol NTP CERHRconcern 
[developmental P(NR)(O) Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
67-66-3 Chlorofor
mCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC cance
rB2 
(1986 GuidelReasonably 
anticipate
d P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011
67-72-1 Hexachloroethane NWM  Priority 
Chemicals; OSPAR Chemicals of CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC PB
T PBT cance rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
69-05-61,4-pentanediamine, N4-(6-chloro-2-methoxy-9-
aziridin yl)-N1,N1-dieth yl-, dih ydrochlorideOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
69-23-81-Piperazineethanol, 4-[3-[2-(trifluoromethyl)-
10H-phenothiazin-10- yl]prop yl]-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70-25-7 N-Meth yl-N'-nitro-N-nitroso guanidineCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cancer Group 
2AReasonably 
anticipate
d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70-30-4 phenol, 2,2'-meth ylenebis[3,4,6-trichloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPRIS  
2011, TOXNET 
71-43-2 BenzeneCA Prop 65; 
IARC; EU Carcino
gen; CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65cancer, 
developmental, reproductive Group 1Category 1 
carcino
genA 
(1986 Guidel Knownnot a 
pesticide Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
71-58-9 Medrox yprogesterone acetate CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65cancer, 
developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
72-54-8 benzene, 1,1'-(2,2-dichloroeth ylidene)bis[4-chloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of ConcernCA Prop 65; 
IRISEU Endocrine 
Disrupto r PBT cance rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r B2 Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
72-55-9 benzene, 1,1'-(dichloroethen ylidene)bis[4-chloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of ConcernCA Prop 65; 
IRISEU Endocrine 
Disrupto r PBT cance rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r B2 Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
72-57-1 Tr ypan blue (commercial grade) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
74-87-3 Meth yl chloride CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
74-88-4 Meth yl iodide CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
74-96-4 Bromoethane CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
75-00-3 Chloroethane (Eth yl chloride) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
75-01-4 Vin yl chlorideCA Prop 65; 
IARC; EU Carcino
gen; cance r Group 1Category 1 
carcino genA 
(1986 Guidel Known Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
75-02-5 Vin yl fluorideCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
rGroup 
2AReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
75-07-0 Acetaldeh ydeCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC cance
r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
75-09-2 Dichloromethane (Meth ylene chloride)CA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC cance
r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
75-15-0 Carbon disulfide CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65developmen tal, 
reproductive female, male P(NR)(O) Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
75-21-8 Eth
ylene oxideCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC CA Prop 65cancer, 
reproductive female Group 1 Known P(NR)(O) Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
75-25-2 Bromofor
mCA Prop 65; 
IRIS cance r B2 Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
75-26-3 2-BromopropaneCA Prop 65; EU 
Reproductive Toxicant; NTP reproductive 
female, maleCategory 1 
Reproductive Toxicantsome 
concern [reproduct Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
75-27-4 BromodichloromethaneCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC cance
r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
75-28-5isobutane (containing 0.1 % butadiene (203-450-
8))EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
75-34-3 1,1-Dichloroethane CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
75-52-5 methane, nitro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of ConcernCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC PB
T cance rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
75-55-8 2-Meth ylaziridine (Prop yleneimine)CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
75-56-9 Prop ylene oxideCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC cance
r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
75-74-1 Tetrameth
ylleadEU PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of ConcernFulfilling
 PBT criteri
a PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
76-60-8Phenol, 4,4'-(3H-2,1-benzoxathiol- 3-
ylidene)bis[2,6-dibromo-3-meth yl-, S,S-dioxide Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
77-09-8 PhenolphthaleinCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROCEU Endocrine 
Disrupto
r cance rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
rReasonably anticipate
d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
77-40-7 2,2-Bis(4-h ydroxyphen yl)-n-butan = Bisphenol BEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
77-52-1 Urs-12-en-28-oic acid, 3-h ydroxy-, (3ß)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
77-78-1 Dimeth yl sulfateCA Prop 65; 
IARC; IRIS; NTP 11th cance
rGroup 
2A B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
78-00-2 lead, tetraeth yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
78-63-7Peroxide, (1,1,4,4-tetramethyl-1,4- 
butanedi yl)bis[(1,1-dimeth ylethyl) Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
78-79-5 IsopreneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
78-87-5 1,2-Dichloropropane CA Prop 65 cance r P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011 
79-00-5 Vin yl trichloride (1,1,2-Trichloroethane) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
79-01-6 Trichloroeth yleneCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
rGroup 
2AReasonably 
anticipate d P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
79-06-1 Acr
ylamideCA Prop 65; 
IARC; IRIS; NTP 11th NTP CERHR NTP CERHR cance
rGroup 
2A B2Reasonably 
anticipate dsome concern [develop
m Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
79-34-5 1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane CA Prop 65 cance r P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
79-43-6 Dichloroacetic aci
dCA Prop 65; 
IRIS cance rLikely 
to be carcin Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
79-44-7 Dimeth ylcarbamo yl chlorideCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
rGroup 
2AReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
79-46-9 2-NitropropaneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
79-57-2 Ox ytetrac ycline (internal use) CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
79-92-5 bicyclo[2.2.1]heptane, 2,2-dimeth yl-3-meth ylene-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
79-94-7 Tetrabromobisphenol AEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; TRI PBT Chemical List; PB
T PBT PBT PBT PBT PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
79-95-8 phenol, 4,4'-(1-meth ylethylidene)bis[2,6-dichloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
80-06-8benzenemethanol, 4-chloro-.alpha.-(4-
chlorophen yl)-.alpha.-meth yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
81-15-2benzene, 1-(1,1-dimethylethyl)-3,5-dimethyl-2,4,6-
trinitro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of ConcernREACH Substances of 
Very High Concern PBT vPvB Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
81-49-2 1-Amino-2,4-dibromoanthraquinoneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
81-68-5Benzenesulfonamide, N-(4-amino-9,10-dihydro-3- 
methox y-9,10-dioxo-1-anthr acenyl)-4-meth yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
81-81-2 Warfarin CA Prop 65EU Reproductive 
Toxicant developmentalCategory 1 
Reproductive Toxicant P(A)(O) Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011
81-88-9 D&C Red No. 19 CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
81-98-1 7H-benz[de]anthracen-7-one, 3,9-dibromo-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
82-05-3 7H-benz[de]anthracen-7-oneOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
82-28-0 1-Amino-2-meth ylanthraquinoneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
83-32-9 Acenaphthene NWM  Priority 
Chemicals; OSPAR Chemicals of PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
83-66-9benzene, 1-(1,1-dimethylethyl)-2-methoxy-4-
meth yl-3,5-dinitro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
84-61-7 Dic yclohex yl phthalate (DCHP)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
84-65-1 Anthraquinone CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
84-66-2 Dieth yl phthalate (DEP)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
84-69-51,2-benzenedicarboxylic acid, bis(2-methylpropyl) 
esterOSPAR  
Chemicals of ConcernEquivalent 
level of concern Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
84-74-21,2-benzenedicarboxylic acid, dibutyl ester  (DBP) 
(phthalate)REACH  Substances 
of Very High ConcernOSPAR  
Chemicals of Concern; EU CA Prop 65; NTP 
CERHR CA Prop 65Endocrine 
disrupto
rdevelopmen tal, 
reproductive female, maleCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
rCMR  
(reproductive toxicant)some 
concern [develop
mP(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
84-75-3 Di-n-hex
yl phthalate (DnHP) CA Prop 65reproductive 
female, male Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
85-01-8 PhenanthreneNWM Priority 
Chemicals PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
85-22-3 pentabromoeth ylbenzeneOSPAR  Chemicals 
of Concern; OSPAR Chemicals PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
85-68-71,2-benzenedicarboxylic acid, butyl phenylmethyl 
ester  (BBP) (phthalate)REACH  Substances 
of Very High ConcernOSPAR  
Chemicals of Concern; EU CA Prop 65Endocrine 
disrupto
r developmentalCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
rCMR  
(reproductive toxicant) Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
85-86-9 2-Naphthalenol, 1-[[4-(phen ylazo)phen yl]azo]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
86-30-6 N-Nitrosodiphen ylamineCA Prop 65; 
IRIS cance r B2 Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
86-73-7 FluoreneNWM Priority 
Chemicals PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
86-74-8 Carbazole CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
87-10-5Benzamide, 3,5-dibromo-N-(4-bromophenyl)-2-
hydroxy- Canada PBiT List PBiT P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, Merck 
87-29-6 Cinnam
yl anthranilate CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
87-61-6 1,2,3trichlorobenzeneEU PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of Concern; Fulfilling
 PBT criteri
a PBT PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
87-62-7 2,6-X ylidine (2,6-Dimeth ylaniline) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
87-68-3 HexachlorobutadieneNWM  Priority 
Chemicals; WA PBT List; EU PBT EU PBT List Canada PBiT List PB
T PBTFulfilling
 PBT & v
PvB crite rPBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
87-82-1 benzene, hexabromo-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
87-83-2 benzene, pentabromometh yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
88-72-2 o-Nitrotoluene CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
90-04-0 o-Anisidine CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
90-43-7 o-Phen ylphenol CA Prop 65 cance r P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
90-94-8 Michler's ketoneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
91-20-3 NaphthaleneNWM Priority 
ChemicalsCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC PB
T cance rReasonably 
anticipate d P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011
91-22-5 Quinoline IRISB2 
(1986 Guidel Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
91-23-6 o-NitroanisoleCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
91-59-8 2-Naphth ylamineCA Prop 65; 
IARC; EU Carcino
gen; cance r Group 1Category 1 
carcino gen Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
91-94-1 [1,1'-biphen yl]-4,4'-diamine, 3,3'-dichloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of ConcernCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC PB
T cance r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
92-24-0 naphthaceneOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
92-67-1 4-Aminobiphen yl (4-amino-diphen yl)CA Prop 65; 
IARC; EU Carcino
gen; cance r Group 1Category 1 
carcino gen Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
92-69-3 4-H ydroxybiphen yl = 4-Phen ylphenolEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
92-72-82-Naphthalenecar boxamide, N-(5-chloro-2,4-
dimethox yphen yl)-3-h ydroxy- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
92-76-22-Naphthalenecar boxamide, N-(4-chloro-2-
meth ylphen yl)-3-h ydroxy- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
92-87-5* Benzidine [and its salts]CA Prop 65; 
IARC; EU Carcino
gen; cance r Group 1Category 1 
carcino gen A Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
92-88-6 4,4'-Dih ydroxybiphen yl = 4,4'-BiphenolEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
92-93-3 4-Nitrobiphen yl CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
93-15-2 Meth yleugenolCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
93-46-9 1,4-benzenediamine, N,N'-di-2-naphthalen
yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern Canada PBiT List PBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
94-13-3 n-prop yl p-hydroxybenzoateEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
94-13-3 n-prop
yl p-hydroxybenzoateEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
94-26-8 n-But
yl p-H ydroxybenzoateEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
94-26-8 n-But
yl p-H ydroxybenzoateEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
94-58-6 Dih
ydrosafrole CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
94-59-7 SafroleCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
94-78-0 Phenazop yridine CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
95-53-4 o-ToluidineCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
r Group 1Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
95-54-5o-Phenylenediamine an d its salts, o-
Phenylenediamine, o-Phenylenediamine dich
ydrochloride CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
95-69-2 p-Chloro-o-toluidineCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
rGroup 
2AReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
95-76-1 3,4-dichloroanilineOSPAR  
Chemicals of Concern; EU Endocrine 
disrupto
rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
95-80-7 2,4-DiaminotolueneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
95-83-0 4-Chloro-o-phen ylenediamineCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
95-94-3 1,2,4,5-TetrachlorobenzeneNWM  Priority 
Chemicals; WA PBT List; OSPAR Canada PBiT List PB
T PBT PBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
95-95-4 2,4,5-Trichlorophenol NWM  Priority 
Chemicals; OSPAR Chemicals of PB
T PBT P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
96-09-3 St
yrene oxideCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
rGroup 
2AReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
96-12-8 1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane  (DBCP)CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROCEU Endocrine 
Disrupto
rCA Prop 65; EU 
Reproductive Toxicantcancer, 
reproductive male Category 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
rCategory 1 
Reproductive ToxicantReasonably 
anticipate
d P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011
96-13-9 2,3-Dibromo-1-propanolCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
96-18-4 1,2,3-TrichloropropaneCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
rGroup 
2AReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
96-45-7 Eth ylene thioure aCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROCEU Endocrine 
Disrupto
r CA Prop 65cancer, 
developmentalCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
rReasonably anticipate
d P(M)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
96-66-2Phenol, 4,4'-thiobis[2-(1,1-dimethylethyl)-6-
meth
yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
97-18-7 phenol, 2,2'-thiobis[4,6-dichloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
97-23-4 Dichlorophene CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
97-56-3 o-AminoazotolueneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
98-07-7 BenzotrichlorideCA Prop 65; 
IARC; IRIS; NTP 11th cance
rGroup 
2A B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
98-54-4 butylphenolOSPAR  
Chemicals of ConcernEndocrine 
disrupto
r P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, Merck 
98-87-3α-
Chlorinated toluenes (benzal chloride, benzo-
trichloride, benzyl chloride) and benzoyl chloride (combined exposures) IARCGroup 
2A Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
98-88-4α-Chlorinated toluenes (benzal chloride, benzo-
trichloride, benzyl chloride) and benzoyl chloride (combined exposures) IARCGroup 
2A Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
98-95-3 NitrobenzeneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011
99-65-0 m-Dinitrobenzene CA Prop 65reproductive 
male Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
99-76-3 Meth yl p-H ydroxybenzoateEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
99-96-7 p-Hydroxybenzoic aci dEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
99-99-0 4-NitrotolueneEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
100-00-5 1-Chloro-4-nitrobenzene CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
100-25-4 p-Dinitrobenzene CA Prop 65reproductive 
male Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
100-40-3 4-Vin ylcyclohexene CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
100-41-4 Eth ylbenzene CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
100-42-5 St yreneEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
100-44-7 Benz yl chlorideCA Prop 65; 
IARC; IRIS cance rGroup 
2A B2 Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
100-75-4 N-NitrosopiperidineCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
101-14-4 4,4'-Meth ylene bis(2-chloroaniline)CA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
r Group 1Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
101-20-2 urea, N-(4-chlorophen yl)-N'-(3,4-dichlorophen yl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
101-53-1Phenyl-4-hydroxyphenylmethane = 4-
Benz ylphenol = p-Benz ylphenolEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
101-55-3 4-Bromophen yl phen yl ethe rNWM Priority 
Chemicals PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
101-61-1 4,4'-Meth ylene bis(N,N-dimeth yl)benzenamineCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC cance
r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
101-76-8 benzene, 1,1'-meth ylenebis[4-chloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
101-77-9 4,4'-Meth ylenedianilineREACH  Substances 
of Very High ConcernCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rCMR 
(carcino gen)Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
101-80-4 4,4'-Diaminodiphen yl ether (4,4'-Ox ydianiline)CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
101-81-5 benzene, 1,1'-meth ylenebis-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
101-90-6 Di glycidyl resorcinol ether (DGRE)CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
103-33-3 AzobenzeneCA Prop 65; 
IRIS cance r B2 Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
104-40-5 phenol, 4-non yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of ConcernEU Endocrine 
Disrupto r PBTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
106-46-7 p-DichlorobenzeneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
106-47-8
p-Chloroaniline CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
106-87-64-Vinyl-1-cyclohexene diepoxide (Vinyl 
cyclohexenedioxide)CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC CA Prop 65cancer, 
reproductive female, maleReasonably 
anticipate
d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
106-89-8 Epichloroh ydrinCA Prop 65; 
IARC; IRIS; NTP 11th EU Endocrine 
Disrupto
r CA Prop 65cancer, 
reproductive maleCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
rGroup 2A B2Reasonably 
anticipate
dnot a 
pesticide Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011
106-93-4 1,2-DibromoethaneCA Prop 65; 
IARC; IRIS; NTP 11th EU Endocrine 
Disrupto
r CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65cancer, 
developmental, reproductive Category 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
rGroup 2ALikely 
to be carcinReasonably 
anticipate
d P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011
106-94-5 1-BromopropaneCA Prop 65; NTP 
CERHRCA Prop 65; 
NTP CERHRdevelopmen tal, 
reproductive female, maleser
ious 
concern [develop
m Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
106-97-8 butane (containin g 0.1 % butadiene (203-450-8))EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
106-99-0 1,3-ButadieneCA Prop 65; 
IARC; EU Carcino
gen; CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65cancer, 
developmental, reproductive Group 1Category 1 
carcino
genCarcin
ogenic to Known Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
107-06-2 Eth ylene dichloride (1,2-Dichloroethane)CA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC cance
r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
107-13-1 Acr
ylonitrileCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC cance
r B1Reasonably 
anticipate d P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011
107-30-2 Chlorometh yl meth yl ether (technical grade)CA Prop 65; 
IARC; EU Carcino
gen; cance r Group 1Category 1 
carcino gen A Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
107-51-7 Trisiloxane, octameth yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
108-46-3 ResorcinolEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
108-70-3 1,3,5-trichlorobenzeneOSPAR  Chemicals 
of Concern; OSPAR Chemicals PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
108-88-3 Toluene CA Prop 65 developmental P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
109-86-4 Eth
ylene glycol monometh yl ethe r CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65developmen tal, 
reproductive male P(NR)(O) Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
110-00-9 FuranCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
110-49-6 Eth ylene glycol monometh yl ether acetate CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65developmen tal, 
reproductive male Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
110-80-5 Eth ylene glycol monoeth yl ethe r CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65developmen tal, 
reproductive male Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
110-86-1 P yridine CA Prop 65 cance r P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
111-15-9 Eth
ylene glycol monoeth yl ether acetate CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65developmen tal, 
reproductive male Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
111-44-4 Bis(2-chloroeth yl)ethe rCA Prop 65; 
IRIS cance r B2 Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
115-02-6 Azaserine CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
115-27-54,7-methanoisobenzofuran-1,3-dione, 4,5,6,7,8,8-
hexachloro-3a,4,7,7a-tetrah ydro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
115-28-6 Chlorendic aci dCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
115-39-9Phenol, 4,4'-(3H-2,1-benzoxathiol- 3-
ylidene)bis[2,6-dibromo-, S,S-dioxide Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
115-40-2Phenol, 4,4'-(3H-2,1-benzoxathiol- 3-ylidene)bis[2 -
bromo-6-meth yl-, S,S-dioxide Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
115-67-3 Paramethadione CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
115-96-8 Tris(2-chloroeth yl) phosphate CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
116-14-3 Tetrafluoroeth yleneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
116-66-51H-indene, 2,3-dihydro-1,1,3,3,5-pentamethyl-4,6-
dinitro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern Canada PBiT List PBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
117-10-2Dantron (Chrysazin; 1,8-
Dihydroxyanthraquinone)CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
117-37-3 Anisindione CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
117-79-3 2-AminoanthraquinoneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
117-81-71,2-benzenedicarboxylic acid, bis(2-ethylhexyl) 
ester  (DEHP) (DOP) (phthalate)OSPAR Chemicals 
of ConcernREACH  Substances 
of Very High ConcernCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROCOSPAR  
Chemicals of Concern; EU CA Prop 65CA Prop 65; 
NTP CERHRPBT, 
Endocrine disrupto
rcancer, developmental, reproductive Category 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r B2CMR  
(reproductive toxicant)Reasonably 
anticipate
dserious 
concern [criticall
y Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
117-84-01,2-benzenedicarboxylic acid, dioctyl ester  
(DnOP) (phthalate)OSPAR  
Chemicals of ConcernEquivalent 
level of concern Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
118-74-1 HexachlorobenzeneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; TRI PBT Chemical List; Canada PBiT ListCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROCOSPAR  
Chemicals of Concern; EU CA Prop 65 PB
T PBT PBT PBT PBTPBT, 
Endocrine disrupto
r PBiTcancer, developmentalCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, Toxnet 
119-34-6 4-Amino-2-nitrophenol CA Prop 65 cance
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
119-90-4 3,3'-Dimethox ybenzidine (o-Dianisidine)CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
119-93-7 3,3'-Dimeth ylbenzidine (ortho-Tolidine)CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
120-12-7 Anthr acene NWM  Priority 
Chemicals; EU PBT List; OSPAR PB
TFulfilling
 PBT crit
eria PBT PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
120-47-8 eth yl 4-hydroxybenzoateEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
120-71-8 p-CresidineCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
120-80-9 Catechol CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
120-82-1 1,2,4-TrichlorobenzeneNWM  Priority 
Chemicals; EU PBT List; OSPAR PB
TFulfilling
 PBT crit
eria PBT PBT P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
120-95-6
phenol, 2,4-bis(1,1-dimeth ylprop yl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
120-97-8 Dichlorphenamide CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
121-14-2 benzene, 1-meth yl-2,4-dinitro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65 PBTcancer, 
reproductive male Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
122-60-1 Phen yl glycidyl ethe r CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
122-66-7 H ydrazobenzene (1,2-Diphen ylhydrazine)CA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC cance
r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
123-91-1 1,4-DioxaneCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC cance
r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
125-02-0 Prednisolone sodium phosphate CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
125-31-5Phenol, 4,4'-(3H-2,1-benzoxathiol- 3-
ylidene)bis[2,5-dimeth yl-, S,S-dioxide Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
125-33-7 Primidone CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
125-84-8 Amino glutethimide CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
126-07-8 Griseofulvin CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
126-72-7 Tris(2,3-dibromoprop yl)phosphateCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
rGroup 
2AReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
126-99-8 ChloropreneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
127-18-4 Tetrachloroeth ylene (Perchloroeth ylene)CA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
rGroup 
2AReasonably 
anticipate d P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
128-03-0 Potassium dimeth
yldithiocarbamate CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
128-04-1 Sodium dimeth yldithiocarbamate CA Prop 65 developmental P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
128-63-2
pyrene, 1,3,6,8-tetrabromo-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
128-69-8 perylo[3,4-cd:9,10-c'd']dip yran-1,3,8,10-tetroneOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
128-83-69,10-anthracenedione, 1-amino-2-bromo-4-[(4-
meth ylphen yl)amino]-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
129-00-0 P yrene NWM  Priority 
Chemicals; OSPAR Chemicals of PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
129-15-72-Methyl-1-nitroanthraquinone (of uncertain 
purity) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
129-43-1 1-H ydroxyanthraquinone CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
129-73-7benzenamine, 4,4'-(phenylmethylene)bis[N,N-
dimeth yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
131-18-0 Di-n-pent ylphthalate (DPP) = Dipent ylphthalateEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
131-55-5Benzophenone-2 (Bp-2), 2,2',4,4'-
tetrah ydroxybenzophenoneEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
131-56-6 2,4-Dih ydroxybenzophenon = ResbenzophenoneEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
131-70-4 Mono-n-but ylphthalate   (MPB)  (MBuP)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
132-27-4 o-Phen ylphenate, sodiu m CA Prop 65 cance r P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
132-61-69H-Carbazole-3-carboxamide, N-(4-chlorophenyl)-
2-h
ydroxy- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
132-64-9 DibenzofuranNWM Priority 
Chemicals PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
132-65-0 dibenzothiopheneOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
133-49-3 PentachlorobenzenethiolEU PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of Concern EU PBT List Canada PBiT ListFulfilling
 PBT & vPvB crite
rPBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
134-29-2 o-Anisidine h ydrochlorideCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
134-32-7 1-Naphth ylamine CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
135-20-6 CupferronCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
135-63-72-Naphthalenecar boxamide, N-(5-chloro-2-
meth ylphen yl)-3-h ydroxy- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
135-91-1 benzenamine, 4,4'-meth ylenebis[N,N-dieth yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
136-35-6 DiazoaminobenzeneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
136-40-3 Phenazop yridine h ydrochlorideCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
139-13-9 Nitrilotri acetic aci dCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
139-60-61,4-benzenediamine, N,N'-bis(1-ethyl-3-
meth ylpent yl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
139-65-1 4,4'-Th iodianilineCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
139-91-35-(Morpholinomethyl)-3-[(5-nitrofurfurylidene)-
amino]-2-oxazolidinone CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
140-66-9 oct ylphenolOSPAR  Chemicals 
of Concern; OSPAR Chemicals EU Endocrine 
Disrupto
r PBT PBTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
140-67-0 Estra gole CA Prop 65 cance r P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
140-88-5 Eth
yl acrylate CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
142-04-1 An iline h ydrochloride CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
145-39-1Benzene, 1-(1,1-dimethylethyl)-3,4,5-trimethyl-2,6 -
dinitro- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
146-56-51-Piperazineethanol, 4-[3-[2-(trifluoromethyl)-
10H-phenothiazin-10- yl]prop yl]-, dih ydrochlorideOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
151-56-4 Eth yleneimine CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
153-78-6 2-Aminofluorene CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
156-10-5 p-Nitrosodiphen ylamine CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
189-55-9 Benzo(r,s,t)pentapheneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List; OSPAR CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC PB
T PBT PBT cance rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
189-64-0 Dibenzo(a,h)p yreneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; OSPAR Chemicals CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC PB
T PBT cance rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
189-64-4Dibenzo(a,h)pyrene [Polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAHs)] WA PBT List PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
191-07-1 coroneneOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
191-24-2 Benzo( g,h,i)per yleneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; TRI PBT Chemical List; PB
T PBT PBT PBT PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
191-26-4 dibenzo[def,mno]chr yseneOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
191-30-0 Dibenzo(a,i)p yreneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; OSPAR Chemicals CA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC PB
T PBT cance rGroup 2AReasonably 
anticipate
d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
192-65-4 Dibenzo(a,e)p yreneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List; OSPAR CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC PB
T PBT PBT cance rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
192-97-2 benzo[e]p yreneOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
193-39-5 Indeno(1,2,3-cd)p yreneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT ListCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC PB
T PBT cance r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
194-59-2 7H-Dibenzo(c, g)carbazoleEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT ListCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC PB
T PBT cance rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
195-19-7 benzo[c]phenanthreneOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
198-55-0Perylene [Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
(PAHs)]WA PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of Concern PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
205-82-3 Benzo( j)fluorantheneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT ListCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC PB
T PBT cance rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
205-99-2 Benzo(b)fluorantheneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT ListCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC PB
T PBT cance r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
206-44-0 Benzo( j,k)fluorene (fluoranthene)EPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List; OSPAR PB
T PBT PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
207-08-9 Benzo(k)fluorantheneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List; OSPAR CA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC PB
T PBT PBT cance r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
208-96-8 Acenaphth ylene NWM Priority 
Chemicals PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
215-58-7 benzo[b]triphen yleneOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
217-59-4 triphen yleneOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
218-01-9 Benzo(a)phenanthreneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List; OSPAR CA Prop 65; 
IRIS PB
T PBT PBT cance r B2 Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
224-41-9 dibenz[a, j]anthraceneOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
224-42-0 Dibenz(a, j)acridineEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT ListCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC PB
T PBT cance rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
226-36-8 Dibenz(a,h)acridineEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT ListCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC PB
T PBT cance rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
271-89-6 Benzofuran CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
294-62-2 C yclodod ecaneEU PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of Concern; Fulfilling
 PBT criteri
a PBT PBT PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
297-78-94,7-methanoisobenzofuran, 1,3,4,5,6,7,8,8-
octachloro-1,3,3a,4,7,7a-hexah ydro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
298-81-7 8-Methox ypsoralen with ultraviolet A therap yCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
r Group 1 Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
299-75-2 TreosulfanCA Prop 65; 
IARC cance r Group 1 Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
301-04-2 Lead acetate CA Prop 65EU Reproductive 
Toxicant cance rCategory 1 
Reproductive Toxicant Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
302-01-2 H ydrazineCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC cance
r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
303-34-4 Lasiocarpine CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
303-47-9 Ochratoxin ACA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
315-22-0 Monocrotaline CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
319-84-6 alpha-Hexachloroc yclohexane (alpha-HCH) IRIS B2 Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
319-85-7 beta-HC HOSPAR  
Chemicals of Concern; EU Endocrine 
disrupto
rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
327-98-0phosphonothioic acid, ethyl-, O-ethyl O-(2,4,5-
trichlorophen yl) este rOSPAR Chemicals of Concern PB
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
331-39-5 Caffeic aci d CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
335-57-9 heptane, hexad ecafluoro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
355-42-0 hexane, tetrad ecafluoro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
355-43-1hexane, 1,1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6-tridecafluoro-6-
iodo-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
373-02-4 Nickel acetate CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
375-72-41-butanesulfonyl fluoride, 1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,4-
nonafluoro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
423-50-71-hexanesulfonyl fluoride, 
1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,6-tridecafluoro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
427-45-2 stannane, fluorotris-p-chlorophen yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
440-17-510H-phenothiazine, 10-[3-(4-methyl-1-
piperazinyl)propyl]-2-(trifluoromethyl)-, dih
ydrochlorideOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern Canada PBiT List PBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
443-48-1 MetronidazoleCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011
465-73-6 IsodrinEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; TRI PBT Chemical List; PB
T PBT PBT PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
475-26-3benzene, 1,1'-(2,2,2-trichloroethylidene)bis[4-
fluoro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
475-71-8Benzo[h]benz[5,6]acridino[ 2,1,9,8-
klmna]acridine-8,16-dione Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
492-80-8 Auramine CA Prop 65 cance r P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011
494-03-1 2-naphthalenamine, N,N-bis(2-chloroeth yl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of ConcernCA Prop 65; 
IARC PBT cance r Group 1 Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
497-39-2 phenol, 2,4-bis(1,1-dimeth ylethyl)-5-meth yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
509-14-8 TetranitromethaneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
509-34-2Spiro[isobenzofuran-1(3H),9'-[9H]xanthen]-3-one, 
3',6'-bis(dieth ylamino)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
512-04-9 dios geninOSPAR  Chemicals 
of Concern; OSPAR Chemicals PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
512-56-1 Trimeth yl phosphate CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
513-37-1 Dimeth ylvinylchlorideCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
515-03-71-Naphthalenepropano l, α-ethenyldecahydro- 2-
hydroxy-α,2,5,5,8a-pentamethyl-, [1R-
[1α(R),2ß,4aß,8 aα]]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
527-20-8 benzenamine, 2,3,4,5,6-pentachloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
528-29-0 o-Dinitrobenzene CA Prop 65reproductive 
male Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
531-82-8 N-[4-(5-Nitro-2-fur yl)-2-thiazol yl]acetamide CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
531-85-1 benzidine dih ydrochlorideEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
540-73-8 1,2-Dimeth ylhydrazineCA Prop 65; 
IARC cance rGroup 
2A Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
540-97-6 C yclohexasiloxane, dodecameth yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
541-02-6 C yclopentasiloxane, decameth yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
542-56-3 Isobut yl nitrite CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
542-88-1 Bis(chlorometh yl)ethe rCA Prop 65; 
IARC; EU Carcino
gen; cance r Group 1Category 1 
carcino gen A Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
546-88-3 Acetoh ydroxamic aci d CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
554-13-2 Lithium carbonate CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
555-84-01-[(5-Nitrofurfurylidene)-amino]-2-
imidazolidinone CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
556-52-5 Gl ycidolCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
rGroup 
2AReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
556-67-2 C yclotetrasiloxane, octameth yl- Canada PBiT ListEU Endocrine 
Disrupto r PBiTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
559-11-5 2-propenoic acid, 2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
563-47-3 3-Chloro-2-meth ylpropeneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
569-57-3 Chlorotrianisene CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
569-61-9 C.I. Basic Red 9 monoh ydrochlorideCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
576-53-81,2,3,6,7,8 Hexachlorodibenzop-dioxin 
[Polychlorinated dibenzo-pdioxins] WA PBT List PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
592-62-1 Meth ylazox ymethanol acetate CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
593-60-2 Vin yl bromideCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
rGroup 
2AReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
598-55-0 Meth yl carbamate CA Prop 65 cance rnot a 
pesticide Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011
599-79-1 Sulfasalazine (salic ylazosulfap yridine) CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65cancer, 
reproductive male Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
602-87-9 5-Nitro acenaphthene CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
603-33-8 Bismuthine, triphen yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
603-48-5Benzenamine, 4,4',4''-methylidynetris[N,N-
dimeth yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
606-20-2 2,6-Dinitrotoluene CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65cancer, 
reproductive male Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
607-57-8 2-Nitrofluorene CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
608-71-9 phenol, pentabromo-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern Canada PBiT List PBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
608-73-1 c yclohexane, 1,2,3,4,5,6-hexachloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern IRISEU Endocrine 
Disrupto r PBTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r B2 Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
608-93-5 PentachlorobenzeneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; TRI PBT Chemical List; Canada PBiT ListEU Endocrine 
Disrupto
r PBT PBT PBT PBT PBT PBiTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
611-99-4 4,4'-Dih ydroxybenzophenonEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
612-82-8 3,3'-Dimeth ylbenzidine dih ydrochloride CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
612-83-9 3,3'-Dichlorobenzidine dih ydrochlorideCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
613-35-4 N,N'-Di acetylbenzidine CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
615-05-4 2,4-Diaminoanisole CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
615-53-2 N-Nitroso-N-meth ylurethane CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
621-64-7 N-Nitrosodi-n-prop ylamineCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC cance
r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
626-39-1 Benzene, 1,3,5-tribromo- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
630-08-0 Carbon monoxide CA Prop 65EU Reproductive 
Toxicant developmentalCategory 1 
Reproductive Toxicant Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
630-56-8 pregn-4-ene-3,20-dione, 17-[(1- oxohex yl)oxy]-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
631-64-1 Dibromo acetic aci d CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
632-79-1 1,3-isobenzofurandione, 4,5,6,7-tetrabromo-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
634-66-2 benzene, 1,2,3,4-tetrachloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern Canada PBiT List PBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
634-90-2 benzene, 1,2,3,5-tetrachloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
636-21-5 o-Toluidine h ydrochlorideCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
647-42-7 1-Octanol, 3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,8,8,8-trid ecafluoro- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
668-34-8 stann ylium, triphen yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
678-39-71-Decanol, 3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,8,8,9, 9,10,10,10-
heptadecafluoro- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
680-31-9 Hexameth ylphosphoramideCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC CA Prop 65cancer, 
reproductive maleReasonably 
anticipate
d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
684-16-2 Hexafluoro acetone CA Prop 65reproductive 
male Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
684-93-5 N-Nitroso-N-meth ylureaCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
rGroup 
2AReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
688-73-3 Stannane, tribut yl- Canada PBiT ListEU Endocrine 
Disrupto r PBiTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
712-68-5 2-Amino-5-(5-nitro-2-fur yl)-1,3,4-thiadiazole CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
732-26-3 2,4,6-tri-tert-but ylphenolOSPAR  Chemicals 
of Concern; OSPAR Chemicals Canada PBiT List PB
T PBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
759-73-9 N-Nitroso-N-eth ylureaCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
rGroup 
2AReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
764-41-0 1,4-Dichloro-2-butene CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
765-34-4 Gl ycidaldeh ydeCA Prop 65; 
IRIS cance r B2 Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
789-02-6benzene, 1-chloro-2-[2,2,2-trichloro-1-(4-
chlorophen yl)ethyl]-OSPAR Chemicals 
of ConcernEU Endocrine 
Disrupto r CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65 PBTdevelopmen tal, 
reproductive female, maleCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
793-24-8 4-(dimeth ylbutylamino)diphen ylaminOSPAR  Chemicals 
of Concern; OSPAR Chemicals PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
794-93-4 Panfuran S CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
817-09-4 Trichlormethine (Trimustine h ydrochloride) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
838-88-0 4,4'-Meth ylene bis(2-meth ylaniline) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
842-07-9 C.I. Solvent Yellow 14 CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
872-50-4 N-Meth ylpyrrolidone CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
924-16-3 N-Nitrosodi-n-but ylamineCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC cance
r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
924-42-5 N-Meth ylolacr ylamide CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
930-55-2 N-Nitrosop yrrolidineCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC cance
r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
944-61-6 Benzene, 1,2,3,4-tetrachloro-5,6-dimethox y- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1000-05-1 Tetrasiloxane, 1,1,3,3,5,5,7,7-octameth yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1022-22-6 p,p'-DDMUEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1068-27-5Peroxide, (1,1,4,4-tetramethyl-2-butyne- 1,4-
diyl)bis[(1,1-dimeth ylethyl) Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1116-54-7 N-NitrosodiethanolamineCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC cance
r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1120-71-4 1,3-Propane sultoneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1131-60-8 4-C yclohex ylphenolEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1138-52-9 phenol, 3,5-bis(1,1-dimeth ylethyl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1154-59-2Benzamide, 3,5-dichloro-N-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-
2-hydroxy- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1163-19-5Decabromodiphenyl ether [Polybrominated 
diphen yl ethers]WA PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of Concern PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1176-74-5Benzoic acid, 2-[(3,5-dibromo- 4-hydroxyp henyl) 
(3,5-dibromo-4-oxo-2,5-cyclohexadien-1-ylidene )meth
yl]-, eth yl este r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1229-55-6 2-Naphthalenol, 1 -[(2-methox yphen yl)azo]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1241-94-7 phosphoric acid, 2-eth ylhexyl diphen yl este rOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1257-78-91,2-Ethanedisulfonic acid, comp d. with 2-chloro-
10-[3-(4-methyl-1-piperazinyl)propyl]-10H-
phenothiazine (1:1)OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1271-28-9 Nickelocene CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1303-00-0 Ga llium arsenideCA Prop 65; 
IARC cance r Group 1 Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1303-28-2arsenic oxide, arsenic pentoxide, diarsenic 
pentaoxideREACH  Substances 
of Very High ConcernEU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino genCMR 
(carcino gen) P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009TOXNET 
2011
1307-96-6 Cobalt [II] oxide CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1309-64-4 Antimon y oxide (Antimon y trioxide) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1313-99-1 Nickel oxideCA Prop 65; 
EU Carcino
gen cance rCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1314-06-3 dinickel trioxideEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1314-20-1 Thorium dioxideCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
r Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
1314-62-1Vanadium pentoxide (orthorhombic crystalline 
form) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1321-64-8Pentachloronaphthalene [Polychlorinated 
naphthalenes]WA PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of Concern PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1321-65-9Trichloronaphthalene [Polychlorinated 
naphthalenes]WA PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of Concern PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1325-85-51-Naphthalenemethanol, α,α-bis[4-
(dimeth ylamino) phen yl]-4-(meth ylphen ylamino)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1325-86-61-Naphthalenemethanol, α,α-bis[4-(diethylamino) 
phenyl]-4-(eth ylamino)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1326-05-2Spiro[isobenzofuran-1(3H),9'-[9H]xanthen]-3-one, 
2',4',5',7'-tetrabromo-3',6'-dih ydroxy-, lead salt Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1326-49-4 C.I. Sulphur Oran ge 1 Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1327-53-3 arsenic trioxide, diarsenic trioxideREACH  Substances 
of Very High ConcernEU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino genCMR 
(carcino gen) P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
1332-21-4 Asbestos (amphibole forms)CA Prop 65; 
IARC; IRIS; NTP 11th cance
r Group 1 A Knownnot a 
pesticide Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011; Merck 
1333-82-0 chromium (VI) trioxideEU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino gen P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
1333-86-4Carbon black (airborne, unbound particles of 
respirable size) CA Prop 65 cance
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1335-32-6 Lead sub acetate CA Prop 65EU Reproductive 
Toxicant cance rCategory 1 
Reproductive Toxicant Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
1335-87-1Hexachloronaphthalene [Polychlorinated 
naphthalenes]WA PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of Concern PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1335-88-2Tetrachloronaphthalene [Polychlorinated 
naphthalenes]WA PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of Concern PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
1336-36-3 Pol ychlorinated Biphen yls (PCBs)EPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; TRI PBT Chemical List; Canada PBiT ListIARC ; IRIS; 
NTP 11th ROCEU Endocrine 
Disrupto
r PBT PBT PBT PBT PBT PBiTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
rGroup 2A B2Reasonably 
anticipate
d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1344-37-2C.I. Pigmen t Yellow 34 [This substance is 
identified in the Colour Index by Colour Index Constitution Number, C.I. 77603.], Lead EU Reproductive 
ToxicantCategory 1 
Reproductive Toxicant Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
1402-68-2 Aflatoxins (naturall y occurrin g mixtures of)CA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
r Group 1 Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
1460-02-2 benzene, 1,3,5-tris(1,1-dimeth ylethyl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1461-25-2 Tetrabut yltin (TTBT)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1464-53-5 Diepox ybutaneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1594-08-79,10-Anthracenedione, 1-hydroxy-4-[[4-
[(meth ylsulfon yl) oxy]phen yl]amino]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1606-67-3 1-p yrenamineOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1615-80-1 1,2-Dieth ylhydrazine CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1634-04-4 meth yl tertiar y butyl ether (MTBE)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1652-63-71-Propanaminium, 3-[[(heptadecafluorooctyl) 
sulfon yl]amino]-N,N,N-trimeth yl-, iodide Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1689-83-4 Iox ynilEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1691-99-21-octanesu lfonam ide, N-ethyl-
1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,8,8,8-heptadecafluoro-N-(2-h
ydroxyethyl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern Canada PBiT List PBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1694-09-3 Benz yl violet 4B CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1705-85-7 chr ysene, 6-meth yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1715-40-8 bromoc yleneOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1746-01-6 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxinEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; NWM Priorit
y Chemicals; CA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROCEU Endocrine 
Disrupto
r CA Prop 65 PB T PBT PBT PBTcancer, developmentalCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Group 1 Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
1763-23-1* Perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS) and its salts WA PBT List PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1806-26-4 Phenol, 4-oct yl-EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1825-21-4 pentachloroanisoleOSPAR  Chemicals 
of Concern; OSPAR Chemicals PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1836-77-7 benzene, 1,3,5-trichloro-2-(4-nitrophenox y)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1871-22-32H-Tetrazolium, 3,3'-(3,3'-dimethoxy[1,1'- 
biphen yl]-4,4'-di yl)bis[2,5-diphen yl-, dichloride Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1897-45-6 Chlorothalonil CA Prop 65 cance r P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011
1937-37-72,7-Naphthalenedisulfonic acid, 4-amino-3-[[4'-
[(2,4-diaminophenyl) azo][1,1'-biphenyl]-4-yl]azo] -
5-hydroxy -6-(phen ylazo)-, disodium salt Canada PBiT List CA Prop 65 PBiT cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1940-43-8 phenol, 2,2'-meth ylenebis[4,6-dichloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1949-07-1 dicrodenOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2051-24-3 1,1'-biphen yl, 2,2',3,3',4,4',5,5',6,6'-decachloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2058-46-0 Ox ytetrac ycline h ydrochloride (internal use) CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2092-56-0 D&C Red No. 8 CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2104-96-3phosphorothioic acid, O-(4-bromo-2,5-
dichlorophen yl) O,O-dimeth yl este rOSPAR Chemicals of Concern PB
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2134-15-8Benzoic acid, 2,3,4,5-tetrachloro-6-(2, 4,5,7-
tetrabromo-6-h ydroxy-3-oxo-3H-xanthen-9- yl) - Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2155-70-6Stannane, tributyl[(2-methyl-1-oxo-2-
propen yl)oxy]- Canada PBiT ListEU Endocrine 
Disrupto r CA Prop 65 PBiT developmentalCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
2215-35-2Zinc, bis[O,O-bis(1,3-dimethylbutyl) 
phosphorodithioato-S,S']-, (T-4)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2234-13-1 octachloronaphthaleneOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2277-92-1 benzamide, 2,3,5-trichloro-N-(3,5-dichloOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2279-76-7 Tri-n-prop yltin (TPrT)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
rnot a 
pesticide Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
2379-74-0Benzo[b]thi ophen-3(2H) -one, 6-chloro-2-(6-
chloro-4-methyl- 3-oxobenzo[b]thien-2(3H)-
ylidene)-4-meth yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2379-75-1Benzo[b]thi ophen-3(2H) -one, 5-chloro-2-(5-
chloro-4,7- dimethyl-3-oxobenzo[b]thien-2(3H)-
ylidene)-4,7-dimeth yl - Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2425-85-6 2-Naphthalenol, 1 -[(4-meth yl-2-nitrophen yl)azo]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2429-74-5 C.I. Direct Blue 15 CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2437-79-8 1,1'-biphen yl, 2,2',4,4'-tetrachloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of ConcernEU Endocrine 
Disrupto r PBTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2475-45-8 Disperse Blue 1CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2537-62-4Acetamide, N-[2-[(2-bromo-6-cyano-4- 
nitrophen yl)azo]-5-(dieth ylamino)phen yl]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2538-84-3Anthra[9,1,2-cde]benzo[rst]pentaphene-5,10-diol, 
16,17-dimethoxy-, bis(hydrogen sulfate), disodium salt Canada PBiT List PBi
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2602-46-2 Direct Blue 6 (technical grade) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
2646-17-5 Oil Oran ge SS CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2653-64-7 2-Naphthalenol, 1-(1-naphthalen ylazo)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2668-47-5 [1,1'-biphen yl]-4-ol, 3,5-bis(1,1-dimeth ylethyl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2746-81-8Heptanoic acid, 2-[4-[3-[2-(trifluorome thyl) -10H-
phenothiazin-10-yl]propyl]-1-piperazinyl]ethyl este
r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2778-42-9 Benzene, 1,3-bis(1-isoc yanato-1-meth ylethyl)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2784-94-3 HC Blue 1 CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2795-39-3Potassium salt [Perfluorooctane sulfonates 
(PFOS)] WA PBT List Canada PBiT List PBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2814-77-9 2-Naphthalenol, 1 -[(2-chloro-4-nitr ophen yl)azo]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2971-22-4 1,1,1-Trichloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophen yl)ethaneEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2971-36-0Bis-OH-Methoxychlor = 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(4-
hydroxyphen yl)ethane (HTPE)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
2973-10-6 Diisoprop yl sulfate CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3068-88-0 beta-But yrolactone CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3081-01-41,4-benzenediamine, N-(1,4-dimethylpentyl)-N'-
phenyl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3090-35-5 Stannane, tribut yl[(1-oxo-9-octad ecenyl)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3118-97-6 2-Naphthalenol, 1 -[(2,4-dimeth ylphen yl)azo]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3147-75-9phenol, 2-(2H-benzotriazol-2-yl)-4-(1,1,3,3-
tetrameth ylbutyl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3165-93-3 p-chloro-o-toluidine h ydrochlorideNTP 11th 
ROCReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3194-55-6 C yclodod ecane, 1,2,5,6,9,10-hexabromo- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3268-87-9 1,2,3,4,6,7,8,9-Octachlorodibenzo-p-dioxinEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3271-22-5 1,3,5-Triazine, 2,4-dimethox y-6-(1-p yrenyl)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3278-89-5 benzene, 1,3,5-tribromo-2-(2-propen yloxy)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3296-90-0 2,2-Bis(bromometh yl)-1,3-propanediolCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3333-67-3 Nickel carbonate CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3351-28-8 chr ysene, 1-meth yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3385-03-3 Flunisolide CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65developmen tal, 
reproductive female Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
3389-71-7bicyclo[2.2.1]hepta-2,5-diene, 1,2,3,4,7,7-
hexachloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3424-82-6benzene, 1-chloro-2-[2,2-dichloro-1-(4-
chlorophen yl)ethen yl]-OSPAR Chemicals 
of ConcernEU Endocrine 
Disrupto r PBTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3468-63-1 2-Naphthalenol, 1 -[(2,4-dinitr ophen yl)azo]- Canada PBiT List CA Prop 65 PBiT cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3555-47-3Trisiloxane, 1,1,1,5,5,5-hexamethyl-3, 3-
bis[(trimeth ylsilyl)oxy]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3563-45-91,1,1,2-Tetrachloro-2,2-bis(4-chlorophenyl)ethane 
(tetrachloro DDT)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3564-09-8 Pon ceau 3R CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3570-75-0 2-(2-Form ylhydrazino)-4-(5-nitro-2-fur yl)thiazole CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3687-67-03H-Indol-3-one, 5-bromo- 2-(9-chloro-3-
oxonaphtho[ 1,2-b]thien-2(3H)-ylidene)-1,2-dih
ydro- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3688-53-7 AF-2;[2-(2-fur yl)-3-(5-nitro-2-fur yl)]acr ylamide CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3697-24-3 5-Meth ylchryseneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TR ICA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC PB
T cance rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3701-40-42,7-Naphthalenedisulfonic acid, 4-hydroxy- 3-[[4'-
[(2-hydroxy- 1-naphthalenyl)azo]-2,2'-dimeth
yl[1,1'-biphen yl ]-4- yl]azo]-, disodium salt Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3734-48-34,7-methano-1H-indene, 4,5,6,7,8,8-hexachloro-
3a,4,7,7a-tetrah ydro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3759-07-710(9H)-acridinepropanamine, N,N,9,9-tetramethyl-
, [R-(R*,R*)]-2,3-dih ydroxybutanedioate (1:1)OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3761-53-3 Pon ceau MX CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3767-68-89,10-Anthracenedione, 1-amino-4-(2-
benzothiazol ylthio)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3778-73-2 Ifosfamide CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3810-74-0 Streptom ycin sulfate CA Prop 65 developmental P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
3846-71-7phenol, 2-(2H-benzotriazol-2-yl)-4,6-bis(1,1-
dimeth
ylethyl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
3972-13-2 DID TOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
4027-18-3 4-Oxo-4 -[(tribut ylstann yl)oxy]-2-butenoic aci d Canada PBiT List PBiT P(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009TOXNET 
2011
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
4051-63-2[1,1'-bianthracene]-9,9',10,10'-tetrone, 4,4'-
diamino-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
4342-30-7 Phenol, 2 -[[(tribut ylstann yl)oxy]carbon yl]- Canada PBiT ListEU Endocrine 
Disrupto r PBiTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
4376-20-9 Mono 2 eth yl hex ylphthalate (MEHP)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
4378-61-4dibenzo[def,mno]chrysene-6,12-dione, 4,10-
dibromo-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
4395-65-7 9,10-Anthr acenedione, 1-amino-4-(phen ylamino)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
4400-06-0 4-H ydroxy-3,4',5-trichlorobiphen ylEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
4474-24-2Benzenesu lfonic acid, 3,3'-[(9,10-dihydro-9,10- 
dioxo-1,4-anthr acenediyl)diimino]bis[2,4,6-
trimeth yl -, disodium salt Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
4549-40-0 N-Nitrosometh ylvinylamineCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
4757-55-5 10(9h)-acridinepropanamine, n,n,9,9-tetrameth yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
4782-29-0 Stannane, [1,2-phen ylenebis(carbon yloxy)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
4824-78-6phosphorothioic acid, O-(4-bromo-2,5-
dichlorophen yl) O,O-dieth yl este rOSPAR Chemicals of Concern PB
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
4904-61-4 1,5,9-c yclodod ecatrieneOSPAR  Chemicals 
of Concern; OSPAR Chemicals PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
5103-73-1 Cis-Nonachlo rEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
5160-02-1 D&C Red No. 9 CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
5216-25-1 p-a,a,a-Tetrachlorotoluene CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
5261-31-4Propanenitrile, 3-[[2-(acetyloxy)ethyl][4- [(2,6-
dichloro-4-nitrophen yl)azo]phen yl]amino]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
5285-60-9benzenamine, 4,4'-methylenebis[N-(1-
meth ylprop yl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
5385-75-1 Dibenzo(a,e)fluorantheneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TR I PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
5411-22-3 Benzphetamine h ydrochloride CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
5466-77-3 2-eth yl-hex yl-4-methox ycinnamateEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
5510-99-6 phenol, 2,6-bis(1-meth ylprop yl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
5522-43-0 1-Nitrop yreneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; OSPAR Chemicals CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC PB
T PBT cance rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
5543-57-7(S)-4-hydroxy-3-(3-oxo-1-phenylbutyl)-2-
benzop yroneEU Reproductive 
ToxicantCategory 1 
Reproductive Toxicant Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
5543-58-8(R)-4-hydroxy-3-(3-oxo-1-phenylbutyl)-2-
benzop yroneEU Reproductive 
ToxicantCategory 1 
Reproductive Toxicant Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
5989-27-5 c yclohexene, 1-meth yl-4-(1-meth ylethen yl)-, (R)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6109-97-3 3-Amino-9-eth ylcarbazole h ydrochloride CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6130-43-4 Heptanoic acid, trid ecafluoro-, ammonium salt Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6232-56-0Ethanol, 2-[[4-[(2,6-dichloro-4-nitr ophenyl) 
azo]phen yl]meth ylamino]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6250-23-3 Phenol, 4 -[[4-(phen ylazo)phen yl]azo]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6253-10-7 Phenol, 4 -[[4-(phen ylazo)-1-naphthalen yl]azo]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6257-39-2 [1,1'-Biphen yl]-4-ol, 3,4',5-tris(1,1-dimeth ylethyl)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6300-37-4 Phenol, 2-meth yl-4-[[4-(phen ylazo)phen yl]azo]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6358-53-8 Citrus Red No. 2 CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6358-57-22,7-Naphthalenedisulfonic acid, 3-[[2,2'-dimethyl-
4'-[[4- [[(4-meth
ylphen yl)sulfon yl]oxy]phen yl]azo][1,1'- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6368-72-52-Naphthalenamine, N-ethyl-1-[[4-
(phen ylazo)phen yl]azo]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6371-23-9Benzo[b]thi ophen-3(2H) -one, 5,7-dichloro-2-(6-
chloro- 4-methyl-3-oxobenzo[b]thien-2(3H)-
ylidene)-4-meth yl - Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6373-31-5Naphth[2,3-c]acridine-5,8,14(13H)-trione, 6,10,12 -
trichloro- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6407-74-53H-Pyrazol-3-one, 4-[(2-chlor ophenyl)azo]-2, 4-
dihydro-5-meth yl-2-phen yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6407-78-93H-Pyrazol-3-one, 4-[(2,4-dimethylphenyl)azo] -
2,4-dih ydro-5-meth yl-2-phen yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6408-50-09,10-Anthracenedione, 1-(methylamino)-4-[(3-
meth ylphen yl)amino]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6409-68-32-Anthracenecar boxaldehyde, 1-amino-9,10-
dihydro-9,10-dioxo-, 2 -[(1-amino-9,10-dihydro- 
9,10-dioxo-2-anthr acenyl)meth ylene]h ydrazone Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6410-09-9 2-Naphthalenol, 1 -[(2-nitr ophen yl)azo]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6410-13-5 2-Naphthalenol, 1 -[(4-chloro-2-nitr ophen yl)azo]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6410-41-92-Naphthalenecar boxam ide, N-(5-chloro-2,4-
dimethoxyphenyl) -4 -[[5-[(diethylamino)sulfonyl]-
2-methox yphen yl ]azo]-3-h ydroxy- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6417-38-5Naphth[2 ,3-c]acridine-10-carboxam ide, N-[5-
(benzoylamino)-9,10- dihydro-9,10-dioxo-1-anthracen
yl]-5,8,13,14-tetrah ydro -5,8,14-trioxo- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
6420-06-01-Naphthalenesu lfonic acid, 4-hydroxy- 3-[[4'-[(1-
hydroxy- 5-sulfo-2-naphthalenyl)azo]-3,3'-dimeth
yl[1,1' -biphen yl]-4-yl]azo]-, disodium salt Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6459-94-5 C.I. Acid Red 114 CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6465-02-7Carbamic acid, [4-[[4-[(4-hydroxyphenyl) azo]-2-
meth ylphen yl]azo]phen yl]-, meth yl este r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6471-01-82-Anthracenesu lfonic acid, 4,4'-[(1-
methylethylidene) bis(4,1-phenyleneimino)]bis[1-amino-9,10-dih
ydro -9,10-dioxo-, disodium salt Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6535-42-8 1-Naphthalenol, 4 -[(4-ethox yphen yl)azo]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6731-36-8Peroxide, (3,3,5-trimethylcyclohexylidene) 
bis[(1,1-dimeth ylethyl) Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6786-83-01-Naphthalenemethanol, α,α-bis[4-
(dimeth ylamino) phen yl]-4-(phen ylamino)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6842-15-5 1-propene, tetrame rOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
6936-40-9 benzene, 1,2,4,5-tetrachloro-3-methox y-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
7012-37-5 1,1'-biphen yl, 2,4,4'-trichloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of ConcernEU Endocrine 
Disrupto r PBTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
7099-43-6 5,6-C yclopento-1,2-benzanthraceneEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
7139-02-8pyrimido[5,4-d]pyrimidine, 2,6-dichloro-4,8-di-1-
piperidin yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
7147-42-4Butanamide, 2,2'-[(3,3'-dimet hoxy[1,1'- biphenyl]-
4,4'-di yl)bis(azo)]bis[N-(2-meth ylphen yl )-3-oxo- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
7280-37-7 Estropipate CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65cancer, 
developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
7328-97-4Oxirane, 2,2',2'',2'''-[1,2-ethanediylidenetetrakis( 
4,1-phen yleneox ymeth ylene)]tetrakis - Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
7400-08-0 p-Coumaric acid (PCA)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
7439-92-1 Lea dTRI PBT Chemical 
List; EPA Priority PBT; NWM IRIS; NTP 
11th ROC CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65 PB
T PBT PBTdevelopmen tal, 
reproductive female, male B2Reasonably 
anticipate
d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
7439-97-6 Mercur yTRI PBT Chemical 
List; EPA Priority PBT; NWM CA Prop 65 PB
T PBT PBT developmental P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
7440-02-0 Nickel (Metallic)CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
7440-38-2 Arsenic and arsenic compoundsCA Prop 65; 
IARC; IRIS; NTP 11th cance
r Group 1 A Known P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
7440-41-7 Ber
yllium and ber yllium co mpoundsCA Prop 65; 
IARC; IRIS; NTP 11th cance
r Group 1B1 
(1986 Guidel Known Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
7440-43-9 Cadmiu mNWM Priority 
ChemicalsIARC ; IRIS; 
NTP 11th ROC CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65 PB
Tdevelopmen tal, 
reproductive male Group 1 B1 Known P(NR)(O) Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
7440-48-4 Cobalt metal powde
r CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
7446-27-7 Lead phosphate CA Prop 65EU Reproductive 
Toxicant cance rCategory 1 
Reproductive Toxicant Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
7446-34-6 Selenium sulfideCA Prop 65; 
IRIS; NTP 11th ROC cance
r B2Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
7496-02-8 6-Nitrochr yseneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
7646-79-9 Cobalt dichlorideREACH  Substances 
of Very High ConcernCMR 
(carcino
gen) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
7664-93-9strong inorganic acid mists containing sulfuric 
acidCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
r Group 1 Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
7758-01-2 Potassium bromate CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
7758-97-6 lead chromateEU Reproductive 
ToxicantCategory 1 
Reproductive Toxicant Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
7789-12-0 Sodium dichromate, dih ydrateREACH  Substances 
of Very High ConcernCMR  
(carcinogen, reproductive P(A)(O) Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
8001-58-9 Creosotes IARC; IRISGroup 
2A B1 P(A)(O) Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
8002-05-9 Petroleu
m Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
8007-45-2 Coal-tarsIARC ; EU 
Carcinogen; IRIS Group 1Category 1 
carcino
gen A P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
8068-44-8 Clophen A50EU Endocrine 
Disrupto
rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
8072-20-6 ethanol, 1,1-bis(4-chlorophen yl)-, mixe dOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
9004-66-4 Iron dextran complexCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
10024-97-2 Nitrous oxide CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
10026-24-1 Cobalt sulfate heptah ydrate CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
10034-93-2 H ydrazine sulfateCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
10043-35-3 Boric aci dEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r (P)(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
10043-92-2 Radon-222 and its deca
y productsIARC; NTP 
11th ROC Group 1 Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
10048-13-2 Steri gmatoc ystin CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
10108-64-2 cadmium chlorideOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
10124-43-3 Cobalt sulfateCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
10331-57-4 [1,1'-biphen yl]-2,2'-diol, 5,5'-dichloroOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
10448-09-6 C yclotetrasiloxane, heptameth ylphen yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
10595-95-6 N-Nitrosometh ylethylamineCA Prop 65; 
IRIS cance r B2 Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
11081-15-5 phenol, isooct yl-EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rOSPAR  
Chemicals of ConcernEquivalent 
level of concern Category 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
11096-82-5 PCB Aroclor 1260 (Clophen A60)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
11097-69-1 PCB Aroclor 1254EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
12001-28-4 asbestos (crocidolite)EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
12001-29-5 asbestos (chr ysotile)EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
12002-48-1 TrichlorobenzeneEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
12035-36-8 nickel dioxideEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
12035-72-2 Nickel subsulfideCA Prop 65; 
EU Carcino
gen; cance rCategory 1 
carcino gen A Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
12054-48-7 Nickel (II) h ydroxide CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
12122-67-7 ZinebEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011
12125-56-3 Nickel ( III) h ydroxide CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
12172-73-5 asbestos (amosite)EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
12174-11-7 Pal ygorskite fibers (> 5mm in len gth) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
12236-64-52-Naphthalenecar boxam ide, N-[4-
(acetylamino)phenyl] -4-[[5-(aminocar bonyl)-2-
chlorophen yl]azo]-3-h ydroxy - Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
12239-34-8Acetamide, N-[5-[bis[2-(acetyloxy)ethyl] amino]-2-
[(2-bromo-4,6-dinitrophenyl)azo]-4-ethoxyphenyl 
]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
12408-10-5 Benzene, tetrachloro- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
12510-42-8 ErioniteCA Prop 65; 
EU Carcino
gen cance rCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
12642-23-8 PCT Aroclor 5442EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
12656-85-8C.I. Pigmen t Red 104 [This substance is identified 
in the Colour Index by Colour Index Constitution Number, C.I. 77605.], Lead chromate mol
ybdate EU Reproductive 
ToxicantCategory 1 
Reproductive Toxicant Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
12672-29-6 PCB Aroclor 1248EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
13010-47-41-(2-Chloroethyl)-3-cyclohexyl-1-nitrosourea 
(CCNU) (Lomustine)CA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC CA Prop 65cancer, 
developmentalGroup 
2AReasonably 
anticipate
d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
13049-13-3 4,4'-Dih ydroxy-3,3',5,5'-tetrachlorobiphen ylEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
13080-86-9Benzenamine, 4,4'-[(1-methylethylidene) bis(4,1-
phenyleneox y)]bis- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
13256-22-9 N-NitrososarcosineCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
13424-46-9 lead azide, lead diazideEU Reproductive 
ToxicantCategory 1 
Reproductive Toxicant Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
13463-39-3 Nickel carbon ylCA Prop 65; 
IRIS CA Prop 65cancer, 
developmental B2 Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
13552-44-8 4,4'-Meth ylenedianiline dih ydrochlorideCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
13593-03-8 Quinalphos = ChinalphosEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
13654-09-6 1,1'-biphen yl, 2,2',3,3',4,4',5,5',6,6'-decabromo-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
13680-35-8 benzenamine, 4,4'-meth ylenebis[2,6-dieth yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
13909-09-61-(2-Chloroethyl)-3-(4-methylcyclohexyl)-1-
nitrosourea (Meth yl-CCNU)CA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
r Group 1 Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
14295-43-3Benzo[b]thiophen-3(2H)-one, 4,7-dichloro-2-(4,7-
dichloro- 3-oxobenzo[b]thien-2(3H)- ylidene)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
14808-60-7Silica, crystalline (in the form of quartz or 
cristobalite dust) IARC Group 1 Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
14816-18-33,5-dioxa-6-aza-4- phosphaoct-6-ene-8-nitrile, 4-
ethox y-7-phen yl-, 4-sulfideOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
14835-94-0 o,p'-DDMUEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
14901-08-7 C ycasin CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
14962-28-8 4-H ydroxy-2',4',6'-trichlorobiphen ylEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
15086-94-9Spiro[isobenzofuran-1(3H),9'-[9H]xanthen]-3-one, 
2',4',5',7'-tetrabromo-3',6'-dih ydroxy- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
15087-24-8 3-Benz ylidene camphor (3-BC)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
15114-15-59,10-anthracenedione, 4,8-diamino-2-(4-
ethox yphen yl)-1,5-dih ydroxy-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
15245-44-0lead 2,4,6-trinitro-m-phenylene dioxide, lead 2,4,6 -
trinitroresorcinoxide, lead st yphnateEU Reproductive 
ToxicantCategory 1 
Reproductive Toxicant Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
15541-45-4 BromateCA Prop 65; 
IRIS cance rB2 
(1986 Guidelnot a 
pesticide Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
15606-95-8 trieth yl arsenateREACH  Substances 
of Very High ConcernEU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino genCMR 
(carcino gen) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
15958-27-7Propanen itrile, 3-[[4-[(4-nitrophenyl)azo] 
phenyl][2-[[(phen
ylamino)carbon yl]oxy]ethyl]amino ]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
15958-61-99,10-Anthracenedione, 1-[[4-
(phen ylsulfon yl)phen yl]amino]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
16071-86-6 Direct Brown 95 (technical grade) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
16421-40-2Acetamide, N-[5-[[2-(acetyloxy)ethyl] 
(phenylmethyl)amino]-2-[(2-chloro-4,6-dinitrophen
yl )azo]-4-methox yphen yl]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
16421-41-3Acetamide, N-[5-[[2-(acetyloxy)ethyl] 
(phenylmethyl)amino]-2-[(2,4-dinitr ophenyl)azo]-
4 -methox yphen yl]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
16543-55-8 N-NitrosonornicotineCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
r Group 1Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
16568-02-8Gyromitrin (Acetaldehyde 
meth ylform ylhydrazone) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
16586-42-8Propanenitrile, 3-[ethyl[3-methyl-4-[(6-nitro- 2-
benzothiazol yl)azo]phen yl]amino]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
16812-54-7 nickel sulphideEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
16834-13-2 21H,23H-Porphine, 5,10,15,20-tetra-4-p yridin yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
17202-41-41-Nonanesulfonic acid, 1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7, 
7,8,8,9,9,9-nonad ecafluoro-, ammonium salt Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
17321-77-65H-Dibenz[b,f]azepine-5-propanamine, 3-chloro-
10,11-dih ydro-N,N-dimeth yl-, monoh ydrochloride Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
17464-91-4Ethanol, 2,2'-[[4-[(2-bromo-6-chloro- 4-
nitrophen yl)azo]-3-chlorophen yl]imino]bis- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
17540-75-9phenol, 2,6-bis(1,1-dimethylethyl)-4-(1-
meth ylprop yl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern Canada PBiT List PBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
17570-76-2 lead(II) methanesulphonateEU Reproductive 
ToxicantCategory 1 
Reproductive Toxicant Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
18181-70-9phosphorothioic acid, O-(2,5-dichloro-4-
iodophen yl) O,O-dimeth yl este rOSPAR Chemicals of Concern PB
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
18540-29-9 Chromium(VI)IARC ; IRIS; 
NTP 11th ROC Group 1A 
(1986 Guidel Knownnot a 
pesticide Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011
18662-53-8 Nitrilotri acetic acid, trisodium salt monoh ydrate CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
18883-66-4 Streptozocin (streptozotocin)CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65cancer, 
developmental, reproductive Reasonably 
anticipate
d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
19163-98-5Benzoxazo lium, 2-[3-[5,6-dichloro-1-ethyl- 1,3-
dihydro-3-(3-sulfopropyl)-2H-benzimidazol-2 -
ylidene]-1-propen yl]-3-eth yl-, hydroxide, inner Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
19408-74-3 1,2,3,7,8,9-Hexachlorodibenzo-p-dioxinEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
19745-44-9Propanenitrile, 3-[4-[(5-nitro-2-thiazolyl) azo](2-
phenylethyl)amino]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
19774-82-4methanone, (2-butyl-3-benzofurany l)[4-[2-
(diethylamino)ethoxy]-3,5-diiodophenyl]-, h
ydrochlorideOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65 PBTdevelopmen tal, 
reproductive female, male Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
19800-42-1Phenol, 4-[[2-met hoxy-4 -[(4-
nitrophen yl)azo]phen yl]azo]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
20241-76-39,10-Anthracenedione, 1,8-dihydroxy-4-nitro-5-
(phen ylamino)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
20265-96-7 p-Chloroaniline h ydrochloride CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
20325-40-0 3,3'-Dimethox ybenzidine dih ydrochloride CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
20830-81-3 Daunom ycin CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
21136-70-9 benzidine sulphateEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
21150-89-0phenol, 4-(1,1-dimethylethyl)-, hydrogen 
phosphateOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
21609-90-5phosphonothioic acid, phenyl-, O-(4-bromo-2,5-
dichlorophen yl) O-meth yl este rOSPAR Chemicals of Concern PB
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
21811-64-3 Phenol, 4,4'-[1,4-phen ylenebis(azo)]bis- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
21850-44-2benzene, 1,1'-(1-methylethylidene)bis[3,5-dibromo -
4-(2,3-dibromopropox y)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
22398-80-7 Indium phosphideCA Prop 65; 
IARC cancer Group 
2A Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
22506-53-2 3,9-Dinitrofluoranthene CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
22832-87-71H-imidazole, 1-[2-(2,4-dichlorophenyl)-2 -[(2,4-
dichlorophen yl)methox y]ethyl]-, mononitrateOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
22916-47-81H-imidazole, 1-[2-(2,4-dichlorophenyl)-2 -[(2,4-
dichlorophen yl)methox y]ethyl]-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
22967-92-6 Meth yl mercur y WA PBT List CA Prop 65 PBT developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
23077-61-49H-Carbazole-1-carboxamide, N-(4-chlorophenyl)-
2-hydroxy- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
23246-96-0 Ri ddelliine CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
23355-64-8Ethanol, 2,2'-[[3-chloro-4-[(2,6-dichloro- 4-
nitrophen yl)azo]phen yl]imino]bis- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
23541-50-6 Daunorubicin h ydrochloride CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
24169-02-61H-Imidazole, 1-[2-[(4-chlor ophenyl)methoxy] -2-
(2,4-dichlorophen yl)ethyl]-, mononitrate Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
24448-09-71-Octanesu lfonam ide, 1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7, 
7,8,8,8-heptadecafluoro-N-(2-hydroxyethyl)-N-meth
yl - Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
24610-00-2Benzonitrile, 2-[[4-[(2-cyanoethyl)(2-phenylethyl) 
amino]phen yl]azo]-5-nitro- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
25013-16-5 butylhydroxyanisolCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROCOSPAR  
Chemicals of Concern; EU Endocrine 
disrupto
r cance rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
rReasonably anticipate
d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
25036-25-3 2,2'-bis(2-(2,3-epox ypropox y)phen yl)-propaneEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
25150-28-1Propanenitrile, 3-[[4-[(6,7-dichloro-2-
benzothiazol yl) azo]phen yl]ethylamino]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
25154-52-3 phenol, non yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of ConcernEU Endocrine 
Disrupto r PBTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
25155-25-3Peroxide, [1,3(or 1,4)-phenylenebis(1-
meth ylethylidene) ]bis[(1,1-dimeth ylethyl) Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
25168-15-4acetic acid, (2,4,5-trichlorophenoxy)-, isooctyl 
esterOSPAR Chemicals of Concern PB
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
25176-89-0Propanenitrile, 3-[[4-[(5,6-dichloro-2-
benzothiazol yl) azo]phen yl]ethylamino]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
25321-09-9 benzene, bis(1-meth ylethyl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
25637-99-4 Hexabromoc yclodod ecaneWA PBT List; EU 
PBT List; REACH Substances of Ver
y PBTFulfilling
 PBT crit
eria PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
25808-74-6 lead hexafluorosilicateEU Reproductive 
ToxicantCategory 1 
Reproductive Toxicant Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
25857-05-0Hexanedioic acid, bis[2-[[4-(2,2-dicyanoethenyl) -
3-meth ylphen yl]ethylamino]eth yl] este r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
25973-55-1phenol, 2-(2H-benzotriazol-2-yl)-4,6-bis(1,1-
dimeth ylprop yl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
26140-60-3 terphen ylOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
26148-68-5 A-alpha-C (2-Amino-9H-p yrido[2,3-b]indole) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
26447-49-4 hexabromodod ecaneOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
26471-62-5 Toluene diisoc yanateCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
26603-40-71,3,5-triazine-2,4,6(1H,3H,5H)-trione, 1,3,5-tris(3-
isocyanatometh ylphen yl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
26636-32-8 Tribut yltinnaphthalateEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
26761-40-0 Di-isodec yl phthalate (DIDP) CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
26850-12-4Propanamide, N-[5-[bis[2-(acetyloxy)ethyl] 
amino]-2-[(2-chloro-4-nitr ophen yl)azo]phen yl] - Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
26864-56-2 4-piperidinol, 1-[4,4-bis(4-fluorophen ylOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
26999-29-1 phosphorodithioic acid, O,O-diisooct yl este rOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
27193-28-8 Phenol, (1,1,3,3-tetrameth ylbutyl)- = Oct ylphenolEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS 
2011
27208-37-3 C yclopenta[cd]p yrene IARCGroup 
2A Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
27341-33-99,10-Anthracenedione, 1-amino-4-
[(methox yphen yl)amino]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
27554-26-3 1,2-benzenedicarbox ylic acid, diisooct yl este rOSPAR  
Chemicals of ConcernEquivalent 
level of concern Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
27753-52-2 nonabromobiphen ylOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
27858-07-7 octabromobiphen ylOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
28118-10-71H-Benzimidazolium, 5,6-dichloro-2-[3-(5,6-
dichloro- 1,3-diethyl-1,3-dihydro-2H-
benzimidazol-2- ylidene )-1-propen yl]-1-eth yl-3-(3- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
28407-37-6 C.I. Direct Blue 218 CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
28434-86-8 3,3'-Dichloro-4,4'-diamino-diphen yl ethe r CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
28680-45-7 heptachloronorborneneOSPAR  Chemicals 
of Concern; OSPAR Chemicals PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
28824-41-1Propanenitrile, 3-[[4-[(4,6-dibromo-2-
benzothiazol yl) azo]phen yl]ethylamino]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
28911-01-5 Triazola m CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
28981-97-7 Alprazola m CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
29081-56-9Ammonium salt [Perfluorooctane sulfonates 
(PFOS)] WA PBT List Canada PBiT List PBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
29082-74-4 Octachlorost yreneEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; TRI PBT Chemical List; PB
T PBT PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
29098-15-5 benzoic acid, 2-[(2,6-dichloro-3-meth ylpOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
29312-59-2benzenamine, 4-(2,6-diphenyl-4-pyridinyl)-N,N-
dimeth yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
29398-96-7[1,1'-biphenyl]-4,4'-diamine, N,N'-bis(2,4-
dinitrophen yl)-3,3'-dimethox y-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern Canada PBiT List PBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
29457-72-5 Lithium salt [Perfluorooctane sulfonates (PFOS)] WA PBT List PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
29761-21-5 phosphoric acid, isodec yl diphen yl este rOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
29765-00-2Benzamide, N-[5-[bis[2-(acetyloxy)ethyl] amino]-
2-[(4-nitr ophen yl)azo]phen yl]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
30668-06-51,3-Dichloro-2,2-bis(4-methoxy-3-
meth ylphen yl)propaneEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
31030-27-0Benzenamine, 4-[(2-chloro-4-nitr ophenyl) azo]-N-
ethyl-N-(2-phenox yethyl)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
31508-00-6 2,3',4,4',5-Pentachlorobiphen ylEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT ListEU Endocrine 
Disrupto
r PBT PBTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
32241-08-0Heptachloronaphthalene [Polychlorinated 
naphthalenes]WA PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of Concern PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
32534-81-9Pentabromodiphenyl ether [Polybrominated 
diphen yl ethers]WA PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of Concern Canada PBiT List PB
T PBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
32536-52-0Octabromodiphenyl ether [Polybrominated 
diphen yl ethers]WA PBT List; EU 
PBT List; OSPAR Chemicals of PB
TFulfilling
 PBT crit
eria PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
32598-13-3 3,3',4,4'-Tetrachlorobiphen ylEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TR IEU Endocrine Disrupto
r PBTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
32598-14-4 2,3,3',4,4'-Pentachlorobiphen ylEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT ListEU Endocrine 
Disrupto
r PBT PBTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
32774-16-6 3,3',4,4',5,5'-Hexachlorobiphen ylEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT ListEU Endocrine 
Disrupto
r PBT PBTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
33204-76-12,6-cis-Diphenylhexamethylcyclotetrasiloxane - 
2,6-cis-[(PhMeSiO)2(Me2SiO)2][EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
33979-03-2 1,1'-biphen yl, 2,2',4,4',6,6'-hexachloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
33979-43-0Propanenitrile, 3-[[2-(acetyloxy)ethyl][4- [(5,6-
dichloro-2-benzothiazol yl)azo]phen yl]amino ]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
34455-03-31-Hexanesulfonamide, N-ethyl-1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5, 
5,6,6,6-tridecafluoro-N-(2-h ydroxyethyl)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
34465-46-8 Hexachlorodibenzodioxin CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
35065-27-1 PCB 153 (2,2',4,4',5,5'-Hexachlorobiphen yl)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
35693-99-3 PCB 52 (2,2';5,5'-Tetrachlorobiphen yl)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
35822-46-9 1,2,3,4,6,7,8-Heptachlorodibenzo-p-dioxinEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
36065-30-22,4,6-bromophenyl 1-2(2,3-dibromo-2-
meth ylprop yl)OSPAR  Chemicals 
of Concern; OSPAR Chemicals PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
36294-24-3Benzenepropanoic acid, 3,5-bis(1,1-dimethylethyl) -
4-hydroxy-, eth yl este r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
36341-27-2 benzidine acetateEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
36355-01-8 1,1'-biphen yl, hexabromo-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
36483-60-0 Benzene, 1,1'-ox ybis-, hexabromo deriv. Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
36631-23-9 Stannane, tribut yl = Tribut yltin naphtalateEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
36861-47-9bicyclo(2.2.1)heptan-2-one, 1,7,7-trimethyl-3-[(4-
meth ylphen yl)meth ylene]-OSPAR Chemicals 
of ConcernEU Endocrine 
Disrupto r PBTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
37680-65-2 PCB 18 (2,2',5-Trichlorobiphen yl)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
37893-02-0benzenamine, N-[3-phenyl-4,5-
bis[(trifluorometh yl)imino]-2-thiazolidin ylidene]-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
38006-74-51-Propanaminium, 3-[[(heptadecafluorooctyl) 
sulfon yl]amino]-N,N,N-trimeth yl-, chloride Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
38380-07-3 PCB 128 (2,2',3,3',4,4'-Hexachlorobiphen yl)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
38380-08-4 2,3,3',4,4',5-Hexachlorobiphen ylEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
38465-55-3Nickel, bis[1-[4-(dimethylamino)phenyl] -2-
phenyl-1,2-ethenedithiolato(2-)-S,S']- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
38521-51-6 benzene, pentabromo(bromometh yl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
38640-62-9 naphthalene, bis(1-meth ylethyl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
39001-02-0 1,2,3,4,6,7,8,9-OctachlorodibenzofuranEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
39156-41-7 2,4-Diaminoanisole sulfateCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
39227-28-6 1,2,3,4,7,8-Hexachlorodibenzo-p-dioxinEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
39365-31-92,3,3',4,4',5,5' Heptachlorobiphenyl 
[Polychlorinated biphen yls (PCBs)] WA PBT List PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
39489-75-3phenol, 2,4-dichloro-5-nitro-, carbonate (2:1) 
(ester)OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
39635-31-9 2,3,3',4,4',5,5'-Heptachlorobiphen ylEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TR I PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
39765-80-5 Trans-Nonachlo rEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
40088-47-9 Benzene, 1,1'-ox ybis-, tetrabromo deriv. Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
40321-76-4 1,2,3,7,8-Pentachlorodibenzo-p-dioxinEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT ListEU Endocrine 
Disrupto
r PBT PBTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
40615-36-9Benzene, 1,1'-(chlorophenylmethylene)bis[4-
methox y- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
41362-82-7Propanenitrile, 3-[[4-[(5,6-dichloro-2-
benzothiazol yl) azo]phen yl]meth ylamino]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
41556-26-7Decanedioic acid, bis(1,2,2,6,6-pentamethyl-4-
piperidin yl) este r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
41604-19-7 1,1'-biphen yl, 4-bromo-2-fluoro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
41999-84-2 benzene, 1,4-dichloro-2,5-bis(dichlorometh yl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
42074-68-0 benzene, 1-chloro-2-(chlorodiphen ylmeth yl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
42397-64-8 1,6-Dinitrop yreneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
42397-65-9 1,8-Dinitrop yreneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
42479-88-9 [1,1'-Biphen yl]-4-ol, 3,4'-bis(1,1-dimeth ylethyl)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
42576-02-3benzoic acid, 5-(2,4-dichlorophenoxy)-2-nitro-, 
meth yl este rOSPAR Chemicals of Concern PB
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
42739-61-7Nickel, bis[2,3-bis(hydroxyimino) -N-(2-
methox yphen yl)butanamidato]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
42852-92-6Acetamide, N-[2-[(2-bromo- 4,6-dinitrophenyl) 
azo]-4-methoxy-5 -[(phenylmethyl)-2-
propen ylamino ]phen yl]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
43035-18-3Benzenesu lfonic acid, 4-[[3-[[2-hydroxy- 3-[[(4- 
methoxyphenyl)amino]carbonyl]-1-naphthalen
yl]azo] -4-meth ylbenzo yl]amino]-, Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
50585-41-62,3,7,8-tetrabromodibenzo-pdioxin 
[Polybrominated dibenzodioxins and furans] WA PBT ListEU Endocrine 
Disrupto r PBTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
50772-29-7butanoyl chloride, 4-[2,4-bis(1,1-
dimeth ylprop yl)phenox y]-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
50849-47-3 benzaldeh yde, 2-h ydroxy-5-non yl-, oximeOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
51000-52-3 neod ecanoic acid, ethen yl este rOSPAR  Chemicals 
of Concern; OSPAR Chemicals PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
51207-31-9 2,3,7,8-TetrachlorodibenzofuranEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
51775-36-1 2,2,5-endo,6-exo,8,9,10-heptachloronorbornaneOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
52179-28-9propano ic acid, 2-[4-(2,2-
dichlorocyclopropyl)phenoxy]-2-methyl-, ethyl este
rOSPAR Chemicals of Concern PB
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
52434-90-91,3,5-triazine-2,4,6(1H,3H,5H)-trione, 1,3,5-
tris(2,3-dibromoprop yl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
52591-25-09,10-Anthracenedione, 2,2'-(1,3,4-oxadiazole-2,5-
diyl)bis[1-amino- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
52663-72-6 2,3',4,4',5,5'-Hexachlorobiphen ylEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
52671-38-29,10-Anthracenedione, 2,2'-[1,4-phenylenebis(1, 
3,4-oxadiazole-5,2-di yl)]bis[1-amino- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
52697-38-8Acetamide, N-[2-[(2-bromo-4,6-dinitr ophenyl) 
azo]-5-(dieth ylamino)phen yl]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
52740-90-62-anthracenecar boxam ide, 1-amino-N-(3-bromo-
9,10-dihydro-9,10-dioxo-2-anthr acenyl)-9,10-
dihydro-9,10-dioxo-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
53184-75-1Phosphorous ac id, (1-methylethylidene)di-4,1-
phenylene tetrakis[(3-ethyl-3-oxetanyl)methyl] este
r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
53469-21-9 PCB Aroclor 1242EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
53742-07-7 1,1'-biphen yl, nonachloro-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
53905-33-2 4-H ydroxy-2,2',5'-trichlorobiphen ylEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
53973-98-1 Pol ygeenan CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
54079-53-7Propanedinitrile, [[4-[[2-(4-cyclohexylphe noxy) 
ethyl]ethylamino]-2-meth ylphen yl]meth ylene]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
54079-60-6Propanedinitrile, [[4-[[2-(2-cyclohexylphe noxy) 
ethyl]ethylamino]-2-meth ylphen yl]meth ylene]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
54243-60-69,10-Anthracenedione, 1-amino-4-hydroxy-2-(4-
methox yphenox y)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
54991-93-4 Clophen A30EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
55252-53-4Acetamide, N-[2-[(2-cyano-6-i odo-4-nitrophenyl) 
azo]-5-(dieth ylamino)phen yl]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
55281-26-0Propanenitrile, 3-[[4-[(2,6-dibromo-4-nitr ophenyl) 
azo]phen yl]ethylamino]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
55525-54-73,3'-(ureylenedimethylene)bis(3,5,5-
trimeth ylcyclohex yl) diisoc yanateOSPAR  Chemicals 
of Concern; OSPAR Chemicals PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
55619-18-6Ethanol, 2,2'-[[4-[(2,6-dibromo- 4- 
nitrophenyl)azo]phenyl]imino]bis-, di acetate 
(ester) Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
55673-89-7 1,2,3,4,7,8,9-HeptachlorodibenzofuranEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
55702-46-0 PCB 21 (2,3,4-Trichlorobiphen yl)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
55738-54-0trans-2-[(Dimethylamino)methylimino]-5-[2-(5-
nitro-2-fur yl)vinyl]-1,3,4-oxadiazole CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
56296-78-7benzenepropanamine, N-methyl-.gamma.-[4-
(trifluorometh yl)phenox y]-, hydrochlorideOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
56307-70-1Benzenediazonium, 2-methoxy-4-nitro-, salt with 
naphthalenedisulfonic acid (2:1) Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
56532-53-7Acetamide, N-[2-[(2,6-dicyano-4-nitr ophenyl) azo] -
5-(diprop ylamino)phen yl]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
56614-97-2 3,9-Dih ydroxybenz(a)anthraceneEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
57018-52-7 Prop ylene glycol mono-t-but yl ethe r CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
57117-31-4 2,3,4,7,8-PentachlorodibenzofuranEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT ListEU Endocrine 
Disrupto
r PBT PBTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
57117-41-6 1,2,3,7,8-PentachlorodibenzofuranEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
57117-44-9 1,2,3,6,7,8-HexachlorodibenzofuranEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
57465-28-8 3,3',4,4',5-Pentachlorobiphen ylEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TR IEU Endocrine Disrupto
r PBTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
57648-21-2 1-butanone, 4-[4-(2,3-dih ydro-2-thioxo-1OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
57653-85-7 1,2,3,6,7,8-Hexachlorodibenzo-p-dioxinEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TR I IRIS PBT B2 Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
57808-65-8benzam ide, N-[5-chloro-4-[(4-
chlorophenyl)cyanomethyl]-2-methylphenyl]-2-h
ydroxy-3,5-diiodo-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
57835-92-4 4-Nitrop yreneCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
58019-27-5Anthra[9,1,2-cde]benzo[rst]pentaphene-5,10-
dione, diamino- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
58138-08-2oxirane, 2-(3,5-dichlorophenyl)-2-(2,2,2-
trichloroeth yl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
58161-93-6Benzoic acid, 4-[1-[[(2,4-dichlor ophenyl) 
amino]carbon yl]-3,3-dimeth yl-2-oxobutox y]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
59447-55-1 2-propenoic acid, (pentabromophen yl)meth yl este rOSPAR  Chemicals 
of Concern; OSPAR Chemicals PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
59467-70-84H-imidazo[1,5-a][1,4]benzodiazepine, 8-chloro-6 -
(2-fluorophen yl)-1-meth yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
59487-23-92-Naphthalenecar boxam ide, 4-[[5-[[[4-
(aminocarbonyl) phenyl]amino]carbonyl]-2-methox
yphen yl]azo]-N-(5 -chloro-2,4- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
59536-65-1 Hexabromobiphen yl WA PBT List PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
59583-77-6Carbamic acid, (3,4-dichlorophenyl)-, 2-[butyl[4-
(2,2-dicyanoethenyl) -3-methylphenyl]amino]ethyl este
r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
59709-10-3Pyridinium, 1-[2-[[4-[(2-chloro-4-nitr ophenyl) 
azo]phen yl]ethylamino]eth yl]-, acetate Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
59709-38-5ß-Alanine, N-[4-[(2-bromo- 6-chloro-4- 
nitrophenyl)azo]phenyl]-N-(3-methoxy-3-oxoprop
yl )-, meth yl este r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
60153-49-3 3-(N-Nitrosometh ylamino) propionitrile CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
60352-98-91-Propanam inium, 3-[[4-[(2,4-dimethylphenyl) 
amino]-9,10-dihydro-9,10-dioxo-1-anthracen
yl]amino ]-N,N,N-trimeth yl-, meth yl Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
60391-92-6 N-Carbox ymeth yl-N-nitrosoure a CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
60851-34-5 2,3,4,6,7,8-HexachlorodibenzofuranEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
61788-33-8 terphen yl, chlorinate dOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
61788-76-9 Alkanes, chloro Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
61799-13-13-Pyridinecar bonitrile, 5-[(2-cyano- 4-nitrophenyl) 
azo]-2-[(2-hydroxyethyl)amino]-4-methyl-6-[[3-(2 -
phenox yethox y)prop yl]amino]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
62450-06-0 Trp-P-1 (Tr yptophan-P-1) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
62450-07-1 Trp-P-2 (Tr yptophan-P-2) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
62625-32-5Phenol, 4,4'-(3H-1,2-benzoxa thiol- 3-
ylidene)bis[2,6-dibromo-3-methyl-, S,S-dioxide, monosodium salt Canada PBiT List PBi
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
63133-84-61(2H) -Quinolineethanol, 6-[(2-chloro-4,6-
dinitrophenyl) azo]-3,4-dihydro-2,2,4,7-tetrameth
yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
63134-15-6Acetamide, N-[5-(dipropylamino)-2-[[ 5-
(ethylthio)-1,3,4-thiadiazol-2- yl]azo]phen yl]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
63281-10-73-Pyridinecar bonitrile, 5-[[2-chloro-4-
(methylsulfonyl) phenyl]azo]-4-methyl-2,6-bis[[3-(2-phenox
yethox y )prop yl]amino]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
63449-39-8paraffin waxes and hydrocarbon waxes, 
chlorinate dOSPAR Chemicals of Concern Canada PBiT List PB
T PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
63467-15-21(2H) -Quinolinepropanam ide, 6-(2,2-
dicyanoethenyl)-3, 4-dihydro-2,2,4,7-tetramethyl-N-phen
yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
63467-19-6Propane dinitrile, [[1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-2,2, 4-
trimethyl-1-[2-[[(phenylamino)car bonyl]oxy]ethyl 
]-6-quinolin yl]meth ylene]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
63833-78-33-Pyridinecar bonitrile, 5-[(2-cyano- 4-nitrophenyl) 
azo]-6-[(2-hydroxyethyl)amino]-4-methyl-2-[[3-(2 -
phenox yethox y)prop yl]amino]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64086-95-99,10-Anthracene dione, 1-amino-2-bromo- 4-[[4-[(1- 
methylethyl)amino]-6-phenyl-1,3,5-triazin-2-
yl]amino ]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64086-96-09,10-Anthracene dione, 2-acetyl-1-amino-4-[[4-[( 1-
methylethyl)amino]-6-phenyl-1,3,5-triazin-2-
yl]amino ]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64091-91-44-(N-Nitrosomethylamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)1-
butanoneCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
r Group 1Reasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64111-81-5 Triclosan Canada PBiT List PBiT P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
64131-85-7phosphorothioic acid, O,O,O-tris(4-nitrophenyl) 
este
rOSPAR Chemicals of Concern PB
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64325-78-6Adenosine, N-benzoyl-5'-O-[bis(4-
methox yphen yl) phen ylmeth yl]-2'-deox y- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64338-16-57-Oxa-3,20-diazadispiro[5.1.11.2] heneicosan-21-
one, 2,2,4,4-tetrameth yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64365-17-9Resin acids and Rosin acids, hydrogenated, esters 
with pentaer ythritol Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64381-97-1 1,4-benzenediamine, N,N,N'-tris(1-meth ylprop yl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64741-42-0 Naphtha (petroleum), full-ran ge strai ght-run Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64741-47-5 Natural gas condensates (petroleum) Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64741-50-0Distillates (petroleum), light paraffinic, Unrefined 
or mildl y refined baseoilEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64741-51-1Distillates (petroleum), heavy paraffinic, 
Unrefined or mildl y refined baseoilEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
64741-52-2Distillates (petroleum), light naphthenic, 
Unrefined or mildl y refined baseoilEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64741-53-3Distillates (petroleum), heavy naphthenic, 
Unrefined or mildl y refined baseoilEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64741-58-8 Gas oils (petroleum), li ght vacuu m Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64741-61-3 Dis tillates (petroleum), heav y catal ytic cracke d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64741-67-9Residues (petroleum), catalytic reformer 
fractionato r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64741-78-2 Naphtha (petroleum), heav y hydrocracke d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64741-81-7 Dis tillates (petroleum), heav y thermal cracke d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64741-83-9 Naphtha (petroleum), heav y thermal cracke d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64741-85-1 Raffinates (petroleum), sorption process Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64741-87-3 Naphtha (petroleum), sweetene d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64742-18-3Distillates (petroleum), acid-treated heavy 
naphthenic, Unrefined or mildl y refined baseoilEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64742-19-4Distillates (petroleum), acid-treated light 
naphthenic, Unrefined or mildl y refined baseoilEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64742-20-7Distillates (petroleum), acid-treated heavy 
paraffinic, Unrefined or mildl y refined baseoilEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64742-21-8Distillates (petroleum), acid-treated light 
paraffinic, Unrefined or mildl y refined baseoilEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64742-22-9 Naphtha (petroleum), chemicall y neutralized heav y Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64742-27-4Distillates (petroleum), chemically neu tralized 
heavy paraffinic, Unrefined or mildly refined 
baseoilEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64742-28-5Distillates (petroleum), chemically neu tralized 
light paraffinic, Unrefined or mildly refined 
baseoilEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64742-34-3Distillates (petroleum), chemically neu tralized 
heavy naphthenic, Unrefined or mildly refined 
baseoilEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64742-35-4Distillates (petroleum), chemically neu tralized 
light naphthenic, Unrefined or mildly refined 
baseoilEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64742-48-9 Naphtha (petroleum), h ydrotreated heav y Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64742-59-2 Gas oils (petroleum), h ydrotreated vacuu m Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64742-66-1 Naphtha (petroleum), catal ytic dewaxe d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64742-82-1 Naphtha (petroleum), h ydrodesulfurized heav y Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64742-87-6Gas oils (petroleum), hydrodesulfurized light 
vacuu m Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
64742-90-1 Residues (petroleum), steam-cracke d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
65140-91-2Phosphonic acid, [[3,5-bis(1,1-dimethylethyl) -4-
hydroxyphenyl]methyl]-, monoethyl ester, calcium salt (2:1) Canada PBiT List PBi
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
65148-83-6o,p'-DDA-glycinat = N-[(2-chlor ophenyl)(4-
chlorophen yl)acett yl]glycinEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
65277-42-1 KetoconazolEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
65294-17-9methylium, tris[4-(dimethylamino)phenyl]-, salt 
with 3-[[4-(phen
ylamino)phen yl]azo]benzenesulfonic acid OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
65510-44-3 2',3,4,4',5-Pentachlorobiphen ylEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TR I PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
65925-28-2benzene, 1-[2-(2-chloroethoxy)ethoxy]-4-(1,1,3,3-
tetrameth ylbutyl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
65996-89-6 Coal tar, Tar, coal, hi gh-temp.EU 
Carcinogen; NTP 11th Category 1 
carcino
gen Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
65996-90-9 Coal oil, Tar, coal, low-temp.EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
65996-93-2 Pitch, coal tar, hi ghtemp. EU PBT ListIARC; NTP 
11th ROCFulfilling
 PBT criteri
a Group 1 Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
65997-06-0 Rosin, h ydrogenate d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
65997-13-9Resin acids and Rosin acids, hydrogenated, esters 
with glycerol Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
66733-21-9 ErioniteCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
r Group 1 Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
67124-09-8 2-propanol, 1-(tert-dodec ylthio)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
67219-55-0Cytidine, N-benzoyl-5'-O-[bis(4-methoxyphenyl) 
phenylmeth yl]-2'-deox y- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
67562-39-4 1,2,3,4,6,7,8-HeptachlorodibenzofuranEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
67651-34-7 4-H ydroxy-2',3',4',5'-tetrachlorobiphen ylEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
67651-37-0 3-H ydroxy-2',3',4',5'-tetrachlorobiphen ylEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
67701-37-5Stannane, [(2-octyl-1,4-dioxo-1,4-butanediyl) 
bis(ox y)]bis[tribut yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
67730-10-3 Glu-P-2 (2-Aminodip yrido[1,2-a:3',2'-d]imidazole) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
67730-11-4Glu-P-1 (2-Amino-6-methyldipyrido[1,2- a:3',2'-
d]imidazole) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
67733-57-72,3,7,8-tetrabromodibenzofuran [Polybrominated 
dibenzodioxins and furans] WA PBT List PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
67940-02-71-Heptanesu lfonam ide, N-[3-
(dimethylamino)propyl] -1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,7-pentadecafluoro- , Canada PBiT List PBi
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
67969-69-11-octanesu lfonam ide, N-ethyl-
1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,8,8,8-heptadecafluoro-N-[2-(phosphonoox
y)ethyl]-, diammonium saltOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern Canada PBiT List PBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68006-83-7Me-A-alpha-C (2-Amino-3-methyl-9H-pyrido[2,3-
b]indole) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68015-60-1benzenesulfonic acid, 2-amino-, (1-
meth ylethylidene)di-4,1-phen ylene este rOSPAR Chemicals of Concern PB
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68083-48-72-butanone, O-[[[[1,3,3-trimethyl-5-[[[[(1 -
methylpropylidene)amino]oxy]carbonyl]amino]cyclohex
yl]meth yl]amino]carbon yl]oximeOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68131-75-9Gases (petroleum), C.sb.3-4.sb., Petroleum gas, [A 
complex combination of hydrocarbons produced 
by distillation of  products from the crackin g of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68214-66-4Carbamic acid, [2-[(2-chloro-4-nitr ophenyl) azo]-5 -
(dieth ylamino)phen yl]-, 2-ethox yethyl este r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68227-79-2Benzenesu lfonic acid, 2-[[9,10-dihydro-4-[(4-
methylphenyl) amino]-9,10-dioxo-1-anthracen
yl]amino] -5-meth yl-, monoammonium Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68259-07-41-Heptanesu lfonic acid, 
1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,7-pentadecafluoro-, ammonium salt Canada PBiT List PBi
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68259-14-31-Heptanesulfonamide, 1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7, 
7,7-pentadecafluoro-N-meth yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68259-15-41-Hexanesulfonamide, 1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,6-
tridecafluoro-N-meth yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68298-13-51-Pentanesulfonamide, 1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5,5-
undecafluoro-N-meth yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68307-98-2Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic 
cracked distillate and catalytic cracked naphtha fractionation absorber, [The complex combination EU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68307-99-3Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic 
polymn. naphtha fractionation stabilizer, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons from the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68308-00-9Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic 
reformed naphtha fractionation stabilizer, h
ydrogen sulfide-free, [A complex combination of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68308-01-0Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), crac ked 
distillate hydrotreater stripper, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained b y treatin g EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68308-03-2Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), gas o il 
catalytic cracking absorber, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained from the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68308-04-3Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), gas recovery 
plant, [A complex combination of hydrocarbons from the distillation of products from EU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68308-05-4Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), gas recovery 
plant deethanizer, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons from the di stillation of  products EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68308-06-5Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), 
hydrodesulfurized distillate and hydrodesulfurized naphtha fractionator, acid-free, [A complex EU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68308-07-6Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), 
hydrodesulfurized vacuum gas oil stripper, h
ydrogen sulfide-free, [A complex combination of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68308-08-7Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), isomer ized 
naphtha fractionation stabilizer, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained from the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68308-09-8Tail gas (petroleum), light straight-run nap htha 
stabilizer, hydrogen sulfide-free, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained from EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68308-10-1Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), straight-run 
distillate hydrodesulfurizer, hydrogen sulfide -free, 
[A complex combination of h ydrocarbons obtained EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68308-11-2Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), propane-
propylene alkylation feed prep deethanizer, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68308-12-3Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), vacuum gas 
oil hydrodesulfurizer, hydrogen sulfide-free, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68308-34-9 Shale-oilsCA Prop 65; 
IARC cance r Group 1 Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68308-48-5 Amines, tallow alk yl, ethox ylated, phosphates Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68333-22-2 Residues (petroleum), atmospheric Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68391-08-2 Alcohols, C8-14, γ-ω-perfluoro Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68400-36-22,7-Naphthalenedisulfonic acid, 4-amino-5-
hydroxy-6-[[4'- [(4-hydroxyphenyl)azo]-3,3'-dimeth
yl[1,1'-biphen yl ]-4- yl]azo]-3-[(4- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68409-99-4Gases (petroleum), catalytic crac ked over heads, 
Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons produced b y the distillation of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68410-00-4 Dis tillates (petroleum), crude oil Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68412-48-62-Propanone, r eaction products with 
diphen ylamine Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68412-68-0 Phosphonic acid, perfluoro-C6-12-alk yl derivs. Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68443-10-7 Amines, C18-22-tert-alk yl, ethox ylated Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68475-57-0 Alkanes, C.sb.1-2.sb., Petroleum gasEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68475-58-1 Alkanes, C.sb.2-3.sb., Petroleum gasEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68475-59-2 Alkanes, C.sb.3-4.sb., petroleum gasEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68475-60-5 Alkanes, C.sb.4-5.sb., Petroleum gasEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68476-26-6Fuel gases, Petroleum gas, [A com bination of light 
gases. It consists predominantly of hydrogen and/or low molecular wei
ght hydrocarbons.]EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68476-29-9Fuel gases, cru de oil of distillates, Petroleum gas, 
[A complex combination of light gases produced 
by distillation of crude oil and b y catal ytic EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68476-31-3 Fuel oil, no. 4 Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68476-40-4 H ydrocarbons, C.sb.3-4.sb., Petroleum gasEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
68476-42-6 H ydrocarbons, C.sb.4-5.sb., Petroleum gasEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68476-44-8 H ydrocarbons, C$<G3 Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68476-46-0 H ydrocarbons, C3-11, catal ytic cracker distillates Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68476-49-3Hydrocarbons, C.sb.2-4.sb., C.sb.3.sb.-rich, 
Petroleum gasEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68476-77-7 Lubricatin g oils, refined use d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68476-85-7Petroleum gas, Petroleum gases, liquefied, [A 
complex combination of hydrocarbons produced 
by the distillation of crude oil. It consists of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68476-86-8Petroleum gas, Petroleum gases, liquefied, 
sweetened, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained b y subjectin g liquefied EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-33-8Petroleum gas, [A comp lex com bination of 
hydrocarbons from the dis tillation of sa turated and 
unsaturated h ydrocarbons usuall y ranging in EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-35-0Distillates (petroleum), C.sb.3-6.sb., piperylene-
rich, Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons from th e distillation of saturated and EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-65-6Gases (petroleum), amine sys tem feed, Refinery 
gas, [The feed gas to the amine system for removal of h
ydrogen sulfide. It consists of h ydrogen. EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-66-7Gases (petroleum), benzene un it hydrodesulfurizer 
off, Refinery gas, [Off gases produced by the 
benzene unit. It consists primaril y of hydrogen. EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-67-8Gases (petroleum), benzene un it recyc le, hydrogen-
rich, Refinery gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained b y recycling the gases of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-68-9Gases (petroleum), blend oil, hydrogen-n itrogen-
rich, Refinery gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained b y distillation of a blend EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-69-0Gases (petroleum), butane sp litter over heads, 
Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained from the distillation of the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-70-3Gases (petroleum), C.sb.2-.sb., Petroleum gas, [A 
complex combination of hydrocarbons produced 
by the distillation of products from a catal ytic EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-71-4Gases (petroleum), catalytic-crac ked gas o il 
depropanizer bottoms, C.sb.4.sb.-rich acid-free, Petroleum 
gas, [A complex combination of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-72-5Gases (petroleum), catalytic-crac ked naphtha 
debutanizer bottoms, C.sb.3-5.sb.-rich, Petroleum 
gas, [A complex combination of h ydrocarbons EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-73-6Gases (petroleum), catalytic crac ked naphtha 
depropanizer overhead, C.sb.3.sb.-rich acid-free, Petroleum 
gas, [A complex combination of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-74-7Gases (petroleum), catalytic crac ker, Petroleum 
gas, [A complex combination of hydrocarbons 
produced b y the distillation of the products from a EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-75-8Gases (petroleum), catalytic crac ker, C.sb.1-5.sb.-
rich, Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons produced b y the distillation of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-76-9Gases (petroleum), catalytic polymd. nap htha 
stabilizer overhead, C.sb.2-4.sb.-rich, Petroleum 
gas, [A complex combination of h ydrocarbons EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-77-0Gases (petroleum), catalytic reforme d naphtha 
stripper overheads, Refinery gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained from EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-79-2Gases (petroleum), catalytic reformer, C.sb.1-4.sb.-
rich, Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons produced b y distillation of products EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-80-5Gases (petroleum), C.sb.6-8.sb. catalytic reformer 
recycle, Refinery gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons produced b y distillation of products EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-81-6Gases (petroleum), C.sb.6-8.sb. catalytic reformer, 
Refinery gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons produced b y distillation of products EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-82-7Gases (petroleum), C.sb.6-8.sb. catalytic reformer 
recycle, h ydrogen-rich, Refiner y gasEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-83-8Gases (petroleum), C.sb.3-5.sb. olefinic-para ffinic 
alkylation feed, Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of olefinic and paraffinic EU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-84-9Gases (petroleum), C.sb.2.sb.-return s tream, 
Refinery gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained b y the extraction of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-85-0Gases (petroleum), C.sb.4.sb.-rich, Petroleum gas, 
[A complex combination of hydrocarbons 
produced b y distillation of products from a EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-86-1Gases (petroleum), deethanizer over heads, 
Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons produced fro m distillation of the gas EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-87-2Gases (petroleum), deisobutanizer tower 
overheads, Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons produced b y the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-90-7Gases (petroleum), depropan izer dry, propene-r ich, 
Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons produced b y the distillation of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-91-8Gases (petroleum), depropan izer over heads, 
Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons produced b y distillation of products EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-92-9Gases (petroleum), dry sour, gas-concn.-un it-off, 
Refinery gas, [The complex combination of dry 
gases from a gas concentration unit. It consists of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-93-0Gases (petroleum), gas concn. rea bsorber distn., 
Refinery gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons produced b y distillation of products EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-94-1Gases (petroleum), gas recovery p lant 
depropanizer overheads, Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained b y EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-95-2Gases (petroleum), Girbatol unit feed, Petroleum 
gas, [A complex combination of hydrocarbons that is used as the feed into the Girbatol unit to remove EU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-96-3Gases (petroleum), hydrogen a bsorber off, 
Refinery gas, [A complex combination obtained by absorbin
g hydrogen from a h ydrogen rich stream. EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-97-4Gases (petroleum), hydrogen-r ich, Refinery gas, 
[A complex combination separated as a gas from h
ydrocarbon gases b y chillin g. It consists EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-98-5A comp lex com bination obtained from recyc led 
hydrotreated blend oil. It consists primarily of h
ydrogen and nitro gen with various small amounts EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68477-99-6Gases (petroleum), isomer ized naphtha 
fractionator, C.sb.4.sb.-rich, hydrogen sulfide-free, Petroleum 
gasEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-00-2Gases (petroleum), recyc le, hydrogen-r ich, 
Refinery gas, [A complex combination obtained from rec
ycled reactor gases. It consists primaril y of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-01-3Gases (petroleum), reformer ma ke-up, hydrogen-
rich, Refinery gas, [A complex combination obtained from the reformers. It consists primaril
y EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-02-4Gases (petroleum), reforming hydrotreater, 
Refinery gas, [A complex combination obtained from the reformin
g hydrotreatin g process. It EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-03-5Gases (petroleum), reforming hydrotreater, 
hydrogen-methane-rich, Refinery gas, [A complex combination obtained from the reformin
g EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
68478-04-6Gases (petroleum), reforming hydrotreater ma ke-
up, hydrogen-rich, Refinery gas, [A complex combination obtained from the reformin
g EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-05-7Gases (petroleum), therma l cracking distn., 
Refinery gas, [A complex combination produced 
by distillation of products from a thermal crackin g EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-17-1Residues (petroleum), heavy coker gas oil and 
vacuum gas oil Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-21-7Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic 
cracked clarified oil and thermal cracked vacuum residue fractionation reflux drum, [A complex EU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-22-8Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic 
cracked naphtha stabilization absorber, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-24-0Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic 
cracker, catalytic reformer and hydrodesulfurizer combined fractionater, [A complex combination of EU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-25-1Refinery gas, Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic 
cracker refractionation absorber, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained from EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-26-2Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic 
reformed naphtha fractionation stabilizer, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-27-3Refinery gas, Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic 
reformed naphtha separator, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained from the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-28-4Refinery gas, Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic 
reformed naphtha stabilizer, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained from the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-29-5Refinery gas, Tail gas (petroleum), crac ked 
distillate hydrotreater separator, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained b y treatin g EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-30-8Refinery gas, Tail gas (petroleum), 
hydrodesulfurized straight-run naphtha separator, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-32-0Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), saturate gas 
plant mixed stream, C.sb.4.sb.-rich, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained from the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-33-1Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), saturate gas 
recovery plant, C.sb.1-2.sb.-rich, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained from EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-34-2Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), vacuum 
residues thermal cracker, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained from the thermal EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68478-45-51,4-Benzenediamine, N,N'-mixed tolyl and xylyl 
derivs. Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68512-30-1 Phenol, meth ylstyrenate d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68512-62-9 Residues (petroleum), li ght vacuu m Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68512-91-4Hydrocar bons, C.sb.3-4.sb.-rich, petroleum 
distillate, Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons produced b y distillation and EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68513-02-0 Naphtha (petroleum), full-ran ge coke r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68513-14-4Gases (petroleum), catalytic reforme d straight-run 
naphtha stabilizer overheads, Refinery gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68513-15-5Gases (petroleum), full-range s traight-run nap htha 
dehexanizer off, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained b y the fractionation of the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68513-16-6Gases (petroleum), hydrocrac king depropan izer 
off, hydrocarbon-rich, Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbon produced b y the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68513-17-7Gases (petroleum), light straight-run nap htha 
stabilizer off, Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained b y the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68513-18-8Gases (petroleum), reformer e ffluent high-pressure 
flash drum off, Refinery gas, [A complex combination produced b
y the hi gh-pressure EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68513-19-9Gases (petroleum), reformer e ffluent low-pressure 
flash drum off, Refinery gas, [A complex combination produced b
y low-pressure flashin g of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68513-66-6Petroleum gas, Residues (petroleum), alkylation 
splitter, C.sb .4.sb.-rich, [A complex residuum 
from the distillation of streams various refiner y EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68514-31-8Hydrocar bons, C.sb.1-4.sb., Petroleum gas, [A 
complex combination of hydrocarbons provided by thermal crackin
g and absorber operations and b y EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68514-36-3Hydrocar bons, C.sb.1-4.sb., swee tened, Petroleum 
gas, [A complex combination of hydrocarbons obtained b
y subjectin g hydrocarbon gases to a EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68515-49-1 Di-isodec yl phthalate (DIDP) CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68516-64-3Propanenitrile, 3-[[2-(acetyloxy)ethyl][4- [(2-
chloro-4-nitrophen yl)azo]-3-meth ylphen yl]amino ] - Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68527-15-1Gases (petroleum), oil refinery gas distn. off, 
Refinery gas, [A complex combination separated 
by distillation of a gas stream containin g EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68527-16-2Hydrocar bons, C.sb.1-3.sb., Petroleum gas, [A 
complex combination of hydrocarbons having carbon numbers predominantl
y in the ran ge of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68527-19-5Hydrocarbons, C.sb.1-4.sb., debutanizer fraction, 
Petroleum gasEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68551-44-0 Fatt y acids, C6-19-branched, zinc salts Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68553-00-4 Fuel oil, no. 6 Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68555-72-61-Pentanesulfonamide, N-ethyl-1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5, 
5,5-undecafluoro-N-(2-h ydroxyethyl)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68555-73-71-Heptanesulfonamide, N-ethyl-1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5, 
5,6,6,7,7,7-pentadecafluoro-N-(2-h ydroxyethyl)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68555-75-91-Hexanesulfonamide, 1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,6- 
tridecafluoro-N-(2-h ydroxyethyl)-N-meth yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68555-76-01-Heptanesulfonamide, 1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7, 
7,7-pentadecafluoro-N-(2-h ydroxyethyl)-N-meth yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68583-58-4Ethanam ine, N-ethyl-N-hydroxy-, reac tion 
products with hexamethylcyclotrisiloxane, silica and 1,1,1-trimeth
yl-N-(trimeth ylsilyl)silanamine Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68602-82-4Gases (petroleum), benzene un it hydrotreater 
depentanizer overheads, Refinery gas, [A complex combination produced b
y treatin g the feed from EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68602-83-5Gases (petroleum), C.sb.1-5.sb., wet, Petroleum 
gas, [A complex combination of hydrocarbons 
produced b y the distillation of crude oil and/or the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68602-84-6Gases (petroleum), secon dary a bsorber off, 
fluidized catalytic cracker overheads fractionator, Refiner
y gas, [A complex combination produced EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68606-25-7 H ydrocarbons, C.sb.2-4.sb., Petroleum gasEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
68606-26-8 H ydrocarbons, C.sb.3.sb., Petroleum gasEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68606-27-9Gases (petroleum), alkylation feed, Petroleum gas, 
[A complex combination of hydrocarbons 
produced b y the catal ytic crackin g of gas oil. It EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68606-34-8Gases (petroleum), depropan izer bottoms 
fractionation off, Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained from the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68607-11-4Petroleum pro ducts, refinery gases, Refinery gas, 
[A complex combination which consists primarily of h
ydrogen with various small amounts of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68607-30-7 Residues (petroleum), toppin g plant, low-sulfu r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68648-53-3Resin acids and Rosin acids, hydrogenated, esters 
with trieth ylene glycol Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68783-06-2Gases (petroleum), hydrocrac king low-pressure 
separator, Refinery gas, [A complex combination obtained b
y the liquid-vapor separation of the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68783-07-3Gases (petroleum), refinery blend, Petroleum gas, 
[A complex combination obtained from various 
processes. It consists of h ydrogen, h ydrogen EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68783-08-4 Gas oils (petroleum), heav y atmospheric Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68783-12-0 Naphtha (petroleum), unsweetene d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68783-64-2Gases (petroleum), catalytic crac king, Petroleum 
gas, [A complex combination of hydrocarbons 
produced b y the distillation of the products from a EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68783-65-3Gases (petroleum), C.sb.2-4.sb., swee tened, 
Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained b y subjectin g a petroleum EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68814-67-5Gases (petroleum), refinery, Refinery gas, [A 
complex combination obtained from various 
petroleum refinin g operations. It consists of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68814-90-4Gases (petroleum), platformer pro ducts separa tor 
off, Refinery gas, [A complex combination obtained from the chemical reformin
g of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68815-10-1 Petroleum, sulfurize d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68877-63-4Acetamide, N-[2-[(2-bromo- 4,6-dinitrophenyl) 
azo]-5-[(2-cyanoethyl)-2-propenylamino]-4 -methox
yphen yl]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68910-11-2Benzeneme thanol, 3,5-bis(1,1-dimethylethyl)-4-
hydroxy-, reaction products with 1,3,5-trimeth
ylbenzene Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68911-58-0Gases (petroleum), hydrotreated sour kerosine 
depentanizer stabilizer off, Refinery gas, [The complex combination obtained from the EU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68911-59-1Gases (petroleum), hydrotreated sour kerosine 
flash drum, Refinery gas, [A complex combination obtained from the flash drum of the unit treatin
g EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68918-99-0Gases (petroleum), crude oil fractionation off, 
Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons produced b y the fractionation of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68919-00-6Gases (petroleum), dehexanizer o ff, Petroleum gas, 
[A complex combination of hydrocarbons obtained 
by the fractionation of combined naphtha streams. EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68919-01-7Gases (petroleum), distillate unifiner 
desulfurization stripper off, Refinery gas, [A complex combination stripped from the liquid EU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68919-02-8Gases (petroleum), fluidized catalytic crac ker 
fractionation off, Refinery gas, [A complex combination produced b
y the fractionation of the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68919-03-9Gases (petroleum), fluidized catalytic crac ker 
scrubbing secondary absorber off, Refinery gas, [A complex combination produced b
y scrubbin g the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68919-04-0Gases (petroleum), heavy distillate hydrotreater 
desulfurization stripper off, Refinery gas, [A complex combination stripped from the liquid EU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68919-05-1Gases (petroleum), light straight run gaso line 
fractionation stabilizer off, Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained b y EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68919-06-2Gases (petroleum), nap htha unifiner 
desulfurization stripper off, Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons produced EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68919-07-3Gases (petroleum), platformer s tabilizer o ff, light 
ends fractionation, Refinery gas, [A complex combination obtained b
y the fractionation of the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68919-08-4Gases (petroleum), preflash tower o ff, crude distn., 
Refinery gas, [A complex combination produced from the first tower used in the distillation of EU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68919-09-5Gases (petroleum), straight-run nap htha catalytic 
reforming off, Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained b y the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68919-10-8Gases (petroleum), straight-run s tabilizer o ff, 
Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained from the fractionation of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68919-11-9Gases (petroleum), tar stripper o ff, Refinery gas, 
[A complex combination obtained by the fractionation of reduced crude oil. It consists of EU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68919-12-0Gases (petroleum), unifiner s tripper o ff, Refinery 
gas, [A combination of hydrogen and methane obtained b
y fractionation of the products from the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68919-20-0Gases (petroleum), fluidized catalytic crac ker 
splitter overheads, Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons produced b y the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68920-70-7 Alkanes, C6-18, chloro Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68921-45-9Benzenamine, N-phenyl-, reaction products with 
styrene and 2,4,4-trimeth ylpentene Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68937-51-9Silanam ine, 1,1,1-trimethyl-N-(trimethylsilyl)-, 
reaction products with ammonia, octameth
ylcyclotetrasiloxane and silic a Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68938-42-1Paraffin waxes and Hydrocarbon waxes, chloro, 
reaction products with naphthalene Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68938-51-2Siloxanes and Silicones,  3-cyanopropyl Me, di-
Me Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68952-02-3Siloxanes and Silicones, Me 3,3,3-trifluoropropyl, 
Me vin yl, hydroxy-terminate d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68952-76-1Gases (petroleum), catalytic crac ked naphtha 
debutanizer, Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained from EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68952-77-2Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic 
cracked distillate and naphtha stabilizer, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained b y EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68952-79-4Refinery gas, Tail gas (petroleum), catalytic 
hydrodesulfurized naphtha separator, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained from the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68952-80-7Refinery gas, Tail gas (petroleum), straight-run 
naphtha hydrodesulfurizer, [A complex combination obtained from the EU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68952-81-8Tail gas (petroleum), therma l-crac ked distillate, 
gas oil and naphtha absorber, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained from the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
68952-82-9Petroleum gas, Tail gas (petroleum), therma l 
cracked hydrocarbon fr actionation stabilizer, 
petroleum cokin g, [A complex combination of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68953-84-41,4-Benzenediamine, N,N'-mixed Ph and tolyl 
derivs. Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68955-27-1 Dis tillates (petroleum), petroleum residues vacuu m Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68955-28-2Gases (petroleum, light steam-crac ked, butadiene 
conc., Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons produced b y the distillation of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68955-33-9Gases (petroleum), sponge a bsorber off, fluidized 
catalytic cracker and gas oil desulfurizer overhead fractionation, Refiner
y gas, [A complex EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68955-34-0Gases (petroleum), straight-run nap htha catalytic 
reformer stabilizer overhead, Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained b y EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68957-62-01-Heptanesulfonamide, N-ethyl-1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5, 
5,6,6,7,7,7-pentadecafluoro- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
68989-88-8Gases (petroleum), crude distn. an d catalytic 
cracking, Refinery gas, [A complex combination 
produced b y crude distillation and catal ytic EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
69430-47-3Siloxanes an d Silicones, di-Me, reac tion pro ducts 
with Me hydrogen siloxanes and 1,1,3,3-tetrameth
yldisiloxane Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
69695-75-69,10-Anthracene dione, 1-amino-4-[[3-
[(dimethylamino) methyl]phenyl]amino]-, monoh
ydrochloride Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
69782-90-7 2,3,3',4,4',5'-Hexachlorobiphen ylEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
69898-41-5furo[3,4-b]pyridin-7(5H) -one, 5-[4-(diethylamino)-
2-ethoxyphenyl]-5-(1-ethyl-2-methyl-1H-indol-3-
yl)-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
69898-66-45-Isobenzofurancar boxylic acid, 3-[4-
(diethylamino)-2-ethoxyphenyl] -3-(1-ethyl-2-meth
yl-1H-indol-3- yl)-1,3 -dih ydro-1-oxo-, eth yl Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
69898-67-55-Isobenzofurancar boxylic acid, 1-[4-
(diethylamino)-2-ethoxyphenyl] -1-(1-ethyl-2-meth
yl-1H-indol-3- yl)-1,3 -dih ydro-3-oxo-, eth yl Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70161-19-2Benzenesu lfonic acid, [(9,10-dihydro-9,10-dioxo- 
1,4-anthracenediyl)bis(imino-4,1-
phenyleneox y)]bis -, disodium salt Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70210-08-12-Naphthalenesu lfonam ide, N-[2-(acetyloxy)ethyl]-
6- hydroxy-N-methyl-5-[[4-
(phen ylazo)phen yl]azo]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70225-14-8Diethanolamine salt [Perfluorooctane sulfonates 
(PFOS)] WA PBT List Canada PBiT List PBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70225-15-91-Heptanesu lfonic acid, 
1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,7-pentadecafluoro-, compd. with 2,2'-iminobis[ethanol] (1:1) Canada PBiT List PBi
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70331-94-1Benzenepropano ic acid, 3,5-bis(1,1-dimethylethyl)-
4-hydroxy-, (1,2-dioxo-1,2-ethanediyl) bis(imino-
2,1-ethanedi yl) este r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70514-12-4 Lubricatin g oils, use d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70592-76-6 Dis tillates (petroleum), intermediate vacuu m Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70592-77-7 Dis tillates (petroleum), li ght vacuu m Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70592-78-8 Dis tillates (petroleum), vacuu m Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70592-79-9 Residues (petroleum), atm. tower, li ght Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70648-26-9 1,2,3,4,7,8-HexachlorodibenzofuranEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70660-55-81-Naphthalenamine, 4-[(2-bromo-4,6-
dinitrophen yl) azo]-N-(3-methox ypropyl)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70776-03-3 naphthalene, chloro derivs.OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern Canada PBiT List PBT PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70776-86-22-Butanone, 4-[[[1,2,3,4,4a,9,10,10a- oc tahydro-
1,4a-dimethyl-7-(1-methylethyl)-1-phenanthrenyl ]meth
yl](3-oxo-3-phen ylprop yl)amino]-, [1R- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70900-21-9Siloxanes and Silicones, di-Me, hydrogen-
terminate d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
70969-47-0Thiols, C8-20, γ-ω-perfluoro, telomers with 
acrylamide Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
71032-95-62-Naphthalenesu lfonic acid, 7-[[4,6-bis[[3-
(diethylamino) propyl]amino]-1,3,5-triazin-2-
yl]amino]-4-h ydroxy -3-[[4- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
71720-89-32-Naphthalenesu lfonic acid, 5-[[4-(4-
cyclohexylphenoxy) -2-sulfophenyl]azo]-6 -[(2,6-
dimeth ylphen yl)amino ]-4-h ydroxy-, disodium salt Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
71832-83-22-Naphthalenecar boxylic acid, 4-[(5-chloro-4-
methyl-2-sulfophenyl) azo]-3-hydroxy-, ma
gnesium salt (1:1) Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
72102-55-7Methylium, [4-(dimethylamino)phenyl] bis[4-
(ethylamino)-3-meth ylphen yl]-, acetate Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
72102-56-8Methylium, [4-(dimethylamino)phenyl] bis[4-
(ethylamino)-3-meth ylphen yl]-, chloride Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
72102-64-8Methylium, bis[4-(dimethylamino)phenyl] [4-
(ethylamino)-3-meth ylphen yl]-, chloride Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
72243-90-4Benzenesu lfonic acid, 3-[[4-amino-9,10-dihydro- 
9,10-dioxo-3-[sulfo-4-(1,1,3,3-tetrameth
ylbutyl)phenox y ]-1-anthracen yl]amino]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
72318-87-7Phenol, [[[3-
(dimethylamino)propyl]amino]methyl]-, isobut
ylenate d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
72749-91-8Benzenesu lfonic acid, [(9,10-dihydro-9,10-dioxo- 
1,4-anthracenediyl)diimino]bis[(1,1-dimethylethyl )-, sodium salt Canada PBiT List PBi
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
72812-39-6Methylium, bis(4-amino-3,5-dimethylphenyl) (2,6-
dichlorophen yl)-, phosphate (1:1) Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
72828-63-8Benzon itrile, 2-[[4-[[2-(acetyloxy)ethyl] 
butylamino]-2-methylphenyl]azo]-3-bromo-5-nitro - Canada PBiT List PBi
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
72828-64-91,3-Benzene dicarbonitrile, 2-[[4-[[2-
(acetyloxy)ethyl] butylamino]-2-meth
ylphen yl]azo]-5-nitro- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
72828-93-41-Propanam inium, 3-[[9,10-dihydro-4-[(4-
methylphenyl) amino]-9,10-dioxo-1-anthracen
yl]amino] -N,N,N-trimeth yl-, meth yl Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
72869-85-3Chromate(1-), bis[3,5-bis(1,1-dimethylethyl) -2-
hydroxybenzoato(2-)-O1,O2]-, h ydrogen Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
72918-21-9 1,2,3,7,8,9-HexachlorodibenzofuranEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
72927-94-7Benzenamine, 4-[(2,6-dichloro-4-nitr ophenyl) azo] -
N-(4-nitrophen yl)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
72968-82-2Methanesulfonamide, N-[2-[(2,6-dicyano-4-
meth ylphen yl) azo]-5-(diprop ylamino)phen yl]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
73003-64-22,4,10-Trioxa-7-azaun decan- 11-oic acid, 7-[4-
[(2,6-dichloro-4-nitrophenyl) azo]-3-meth
ylphen yl]-3-oxo-, meth yl este r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
73398-86-4 P yridine, 4-(3-chloro-5-prop ylphen yl)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
73398-87-5 P yridine, 4-(4-chloro-3-prop ylphen yl)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
73398-96-63-Pyridinecar bonitrile, 5-[(9,10-dihydro-9,10-
dioxo- 1-anthr acenyl)azo]-2,6-bis[(2-
methox yethyl)amino ]-4-meth yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
73528-78-63-Pyridinecar bonitrile, 5-[[4-[(2,6-dichloro-4-
nitrophenyl) azo]-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl]azo]-2,6-
bis[(2 -methox yethyl)amino]-4-meth yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
74336-60-09,10-Anthracene dione, 1-[(5,7-dichloro-1,9-
dihydro- 2-methyl-9-oxopyrazolo[5,1-b]quinazolin -
3-yl)azo ]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
74472-37-0 2,3,4,4',5-Pentachlorobiphen ylEPA Final PBT 
Rule for TRI; WA PBT List PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
75768-65-9Phosphonium, triphenyl(phenylmethyl)-, salt with 
4,4'-[2,2,2-trifluoro-1-( trifluorometh
yl)ethylidene]bis[phenol] (1:1) Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
75908-83-7Benzenesulfonic acid, oxybis[(1,1,3,3-
tetrameth ylbutyl)-, dipotassium salt Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
76180-96-6 IQ (2-Amino-3-meth ylimidazo[4,5-f] quinoline)CA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
rGroup 
2AReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
77094-11-2MeIQ (2-Amino-3,4-dimethylimidazo[4,5-
f]quinoline)CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
77439-76-0MX (3-chloro-4-dichloromethyl-5-hydroxy-2(5H)-
furanone) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
77500-04-0MeIQx (2-Amino-3,8-dimethylimidazo[4,5-
f]quinoxaline)CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
77536-67-5 asbestos (anthoph yllite)EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
77536-68-6 asbesto s (tremolite)EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
78952-70-2Butanam ide, 2-[[3,3'-dichloro-4'-[[1- [[(2-
chlorophenyl)amino]carbonyl]-2-oxopropyl]azo ][1,1'-biphen
yl]-4-yl]azo]-N-(2,4-dimeth ylphen yl)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
79357-73-6Amines, C18-22-tert-alkyl, 
(chlorometh yl)phosphonates (2:1) Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
79542-46-4Acetamide, N-[4-chloro-2-[2-(2-chloro- 4-
nitrophenyl)azo]-5 -[(2-hydroxy-3-phe noxypropyl 
)amino]phen yl]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
79748-81-5 Fusarin C CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
81412-43-3 morpholine, 2,6-dimeth yl-4-(C10-13)-alk yl-OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
83006-67-1Benzenesu lfonic acid, 2,2'-[(9,10-dihydro-5,8-
dihydroxy- 9,10-dioxo-1,4-anthracenedi
yl)diimino]bis [5-(1,1-dimeth ylethyl)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
83027-51-41,7-Naphthalenedisulfonic acid, 6-[[2-(4-
cyclohexylphenoxy) phenyl]azo]-4 -[[(2,4-
dichlorophenox y)acet yl]amino ]-5-h ydroxy-, Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
83027-52-51,7-Naphthalenedisulfonic acid, 6-[[2-(2-
cyclohexylphenoxy) phenyl]azo]-4 -[[(2,4-
dichlorophenox y)acet yl]amino ]-5-h ydroxy-, Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
83249-47-2Acetamide, N-[2-[(2-bromo-6-cyano-4- 
nitrophen yl)azo]-5-(diprop ylamino)phen yl]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
83249-49-4Benzonitrile, 3-bromo-2-[[4-(diethylamino) -2-
meth ylphen yl]azo]-5-meth yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
83249-53-0Methanesulfonamide, N-[2-[(2-bromo-6-cyano-4- 
meth ylphen yl)azo]-5-(dieth ylamino)phen yl]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
83249-54-1Methanesulfonamide, N-[2-[(2-bromo-6-cyano-4- 
meth ylphen yl)azo]-5-(diprop ylamino)phen yl]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
83721-47-5Methanesulfonamide, 1-chloro-N-[2,3,4-trichloro- 
6-(2,4-dichlorophenox y)phen yl]-, sodium salt Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
83721-48-6Methanesu lfonam ide, 1-chloro-N-[2,3,4,5-
tetrachloro- 6-(2,4-dichlorophenoxy)phenyl]-, sodium salt Canada PBiT List PBi
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
83968-86-99,10-Anthracene dione, 1-amino-4-[[3-
[(dimethylamino) methyl]phenyl]amino]-, monoacetate Canada PBiT List PBi
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
84082-38-2 Alkanes, C10-21, chloro Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
84852-15-3 phenol, 4-non yl-, branche dOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
85005-63-62-Naphthalenecar boxamide, 4 -[(2,4-
dinitrophen yl)azo]-3-h ydroxy-N-phen yl- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
85186-47-6Xanthylium, 9-(2-carboxyp henyl)-3,6-
bis(diethylamino)-, salt with mono-C10-14-alk
ylbenzenesulfonic acid (1:1) Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
85392-21-83-Pyridinecar bonitrile, 5-[[2-chloro-4-(phenylazo) 
phenyl]azo]-2,6-bis[(3-methoxypropyl)amino]-4-meth
yl - Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
85409-17-2 stannane, tribut yl-, mono(naphtheno yloxy) derivs.OSPAR Chemicals 
of ConcernEU Endocrine 
Disrupto r PBTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
85422-92-0 Paraffin oils, chloro Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
85535-84-8 Short-chain chlorinated paraffinsWA PBT List; EU 
PBT List; OSPAR Chemicals of Canada PBiT ListEU Endocrine 
Disrupto
r PBTFulfilling
 PBT criteri
a PBT PBiTCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
85535-85-9 alkanes, C14-17, chloro Canada PBiT ListEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rOSPAR  
Chemicals of ConcernEquivalent 
level of concern PBi
TCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
85535-86-0 Alkanes, C18-28, chloro Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
85702-64-33H-Indol-3-one, 5,7-dibromo- 2-(5-bromo- 7- 
chloro-1,3-dihydro-3-oxo-2H-indol-2-ylidene)-1,2-dih
ydro - Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
85702-90-52,9,11,13-Tetraaza nona decane thioic acid, 19-
isocyanato-11-(6-isocyanatohexyl)-10,12-dioxo-, S-[3-(trimethox
ysilyl)prop yl] este r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
86220-42-0 Nafarelin acetate CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
86290-81-5 Gasoline Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
86551-61-3Butanamide, 2-[2,4-bis(1,1-dimethylpropyl) 
phenox y]-N-[4-(2-form ylhydrazino)phen yl]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
87237-48-7propanoic acid, 2-[4-[[3-chloro-5-(trifluoromethyl) -
2-pyridin yl]oxy]phenox y]-, 2-ethox yethyl este rOSPAR  
Chemicals of ConcernEquivalent 
level of concern Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
87741-01-3 H ydrocarbons, C.sb.4.sb., Petroleum gasEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
90218-20-5Benzenesu lfonic acid, 5-amino-2,4-dimethyl-, 
diazotized, coupled with diazotized 2,4-, 2,5-and 2,6-x
ylidine and 4-[(2,4- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
90268-98-7Carbonic acid disodium sa lt, reac tion pro ducts 
with aniline, 4-nitrobenzenamine, p-
phenylenediamine, sodium sulfide, sulfur and p- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
90459-02-22,7-Naphthalenedisulfonic acid, 5-amino-4-
hydroxy-3-[[6-sulfo- 4-[(4-sulfo-1-naphthalen
yl)azo]-1-naphthalen yl ]azo]-, Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
90481-05-3phenol, nonyl-, manuf. of, by-products from, high-
boilingOSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
90622-55-2Alkanes, C.sb.1-4.sb., C.sb.3.sb.-rich, Petroleum 
gasEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
90640-80-5 Anthr acene oilEU PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of ConcernFulfilling
 PBT criteri
a PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
90640-81-6 Anthr acene oil, anthracene pasteEU PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of ConcernFulfilling
 PBT criteri
a PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
90640-82-7 Anthr acene oil, anthracenelo wEU PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of ConcernFulfilling
 PBT criteri
a PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
90640-86-1 Dis tillates (coal tar), heav y oilsEU PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of ConcernFulfilling
 PBT criteri
a PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
90729-40-13-Pyridinecar bonitrile, 1-butyl-5-[[4-(4-
chlorobenzoyl) -2-nitrophenyl]azo]-1,2-dihydro-6-h
ydroxy-4 -meth yl-2-oxo- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
91696-90-1[2,6'-Bibenzothiazole]-7-sulfonic acid, 2'-(4-
aminophenyl)-6-methyl-, diazotized, coupled with diazotized 4-aminobenzenesulfonic acid and Canada PBiT List PBi
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
91995-15-2Anthracene oil, anthracene paste, anthracene 
fractionEU PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of ConcernFulfilling
 PBT criteri
a PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
91995-17-4 Anthr acene oil, anthracene paste, distn. Li ghtsEU PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of ConcernFulfilling
 PBT criteri
a PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
91995-42-5 Dis tillates (coal tar), heav y oils, p yrene fractionEU PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of ConcernFulfilling
 PBT criteri
a PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
91995-52-7 Dis tillates (coal tar), pitch, p yrene fractionEU PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of ConcernFulfilling
 PBT criteri
a PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
92045-15-3Gases (petroleum), gas o il diethanolamine 
scrubber off, Refinery gas, [A complex combination produced b
y desulfurization of gas EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
92045-16-4Gases (petroleum), gas o il hydrodesulfurization 
effluent, Refinery gas, [A complex combination obtained b
y separation of the liquid phase from EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
92045-17-5Gases (petroleum), gas o il hydrodesulfurization 
purge, Refinery gas, [A complex combination of 
gases obtained from the reformer and from the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
92045-18-6Gases (petroleum), hydrogena tor effluent flash 
drum off, Refinery gas, [A complex combination of 
gases obtained from flash of the effluents after EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
92045-19-7Gases (petroleum), nap htha steam crac king high-
pressure residual, Refinery gas, [A complex combination obtained as a mixture of the non-EU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
92045-20-0Gases (petroleum), residue visbaking off, Refinery 
gas, [A complex combination obtained from viscosit
y reduction of residues in a furnace. It EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
92045-22-2Gases (petroleum), steam-crac ker C.sb.3.sb.-rich, 
Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons produced b y the distillation of EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
92045-23-3Hydrocar bons, C.sb.4.sb., steam-crac ker distillate, 
Petroleum gas, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons produced b y the distillation of the EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
92045-41-5 Lubricatin g oils, used, vacuum distd. Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
92045-52-8 Naphtha (petroleum), h ydrodesulfurized full-ran ge Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
92045-80-2Petroleum gas, Petroleum gases, liquefied, 
sweetened, C.sb.4.sb. fraction, [A complex combination of h
ydrocarbons obtained b y EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
92061-94-4 Residues (coal tar), pitch distn.EU PBT List; 
OSPAR Chemicals of ConcernFulfilling
 PBT criteri
a PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
93384-84-0Naphthalenesu lfonic acid, reac tion pro ducts with 
formaldehyde and hydroxybenzenesulfonic acid, ammonium salts Canada PBiT List PBi
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
93805-00-6Phenol, 4-[[2-met hoxy-4 -[(2-met hoxyphenyl) azo]-
5-meth ylphen yl]azo]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
93918-79-7Carbamic acid, cyclohexyl-, nitrilotri-2,1-
ethanedi yl este r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
94088-85-4 Dox ycycline calcium (internal use) CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
94199-57-22-Naphthalenecar boxamide, N-(2-ethoxyphenyl)-3 -
hydroxy- 4-[(2-nitr ophen yl)azo]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
94248-26-7Methanesulfonamide, 1-chloro-N-(2-
phenox yphen yl)-, pentachloro deriv., sodium salt Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
97722-19-5Petroleum gas, Raffinates (petroleum), steam-
cracked C.sb.4.sb. fraction cuprous ammonium acetate extn., C.sb.3-5.sb. and C.sb.3-5.sb. EU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
100702-98-5 4,4'-Dih ydroxy-2,3,5,6-tetrachlorobiphen ylEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
101200-53-7 P yridine, 2-[3-(3-chlorophen yl)prop yl]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
101316-50-1distillates (petroleum), alkene-alkyne manuf. 
pyrolysis oil, condensed arom. rin g-cont g.OSPAR Chemicals 
of Concern PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
101316-83-0 Tar brown-coalEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
101316-84-1 Tar, brown-coal, low-temp.EU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
103331-97-1Fatty acids, tallow, hydrogena ted, [6-
[bis(methoxymethyl)amino] -1,3,5-triazine-2,4-di
yl]bis[[(methox ymeth yl)imino ]meth ylene] este r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
103331-98-2Fatty acids, tallow, hydrogena ted, hexaes ters w ith 
2-[[[4-[[[2-hydroxy-1-(hydroxymethyl) ethox
y]meth yl](hydroxymeth yl)amino]-6 - Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
104376-69-4Formaldehyde, reaction products with branched 
nonylphenol and x ylenol, ethox ylated Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
104948-36-9 Alkanes, C10-22, chloro Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
105650-23-5PhiP(2-Amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazol[4,5-
b]pyridine)CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
105735-71-5 3,7-Dinitrofluoranthene CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
106232-85-3 Alkanes, C18-20, chloro Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
106276-78-2Benzoic acid, 2,3,4,5-tetrachloro-6-cyano-, me thyl 
ester, reaction products with 4 -[(4-
aminophen yl)azo]-3-meth ylbenzenamine and Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
108004-27-91H-Imidazole-1-ethanol, α-(2,4-dichlorophenyl) - α-
[2-(2,4-dichlorophen yl)cycloprop yl]-, [1α(R),2ß]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
108171-26-2Chlorinated paraffins (Average chain length, 
C12;approximatel y 60 percent chlorine b y weight)CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
113089-51-3Alkenes, C12-14, hydroformy lation pro ducts, 
distn. residues, ethoxylated propoxylated, dih
ydrogen phosphates, sodium salts Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
113163-36-3Forma ldehyde, reac tion pro ducts with sulfonated 
1,1'-biphenyl and sulfonated terphenyl, sodium salts Canada PBiT List PBi
T Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
114910-04-21-Naphthalenediazonium, 4-[[4-[(4-nitro-2-
sulfophenyl) amino]phenyl]azo]-6-sulfo-, chloride, reaction products with formaldeh
yde and salic ylic Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
116355-83-0 Fumonisin B1 CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
117310-64-2Phosphine oxide, (butylphenyl)bis(2,6-
dichlorobenzo yl)- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
118174-38-2 6-Meth yl-1,3,8-trichlorodibenzofuranEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
119209-64-2Alkenes, C12-14, hydroformy lation pro ducts, 
distn. residues, ethoxylated, dihydrogen 
phosphates, sodium salts Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
121181-53-1 Fil grastim CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
124751-15-1Resin acids and Rosin acids, fumarated, barium 
salts Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
125328-28-1Phenol, 4,4'-(1-methylethylidene)bis-, reaction 
products with hexakis(methox ymeth yl)melamine Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
125351-99-79,10-Anthracenedione, 1,4-bis[(4-
meth ylphen yl)amino]-, sulfonated, potassium salts Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
125471-97-8Lubricating oils (petroleum), hydrotreated, used, 
distn. residues Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
127126-02-7Propanenitrile, 3-[[2-(acetyloxy)ethyl][4- [(6,7-
dichloro-2-benzothiazol yl)azo]phen yl]amino ]- Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
128683-25-0 Crude oil (oil sand) Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
128683-26-1 Dis tillates (petroleum), full-ran ge atm. Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
128683-28-3 Gas oils (petroleum), full-ran ge Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
128683-29-4 Gas oils (oil sand), h ydrotreate d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
128683-30-7 Gas oils (oil sand) Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
128683-33-0 Naphtha (oil sand), h ydrotreate d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
128683-35-2 Residues (oil sand), atm. towe r Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
129566-94-5Hydrocarbons, C12-25, dehydrated used 
lubricatin g oil distillates Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
129893-11-4Residues (petroleum), vacuum, hydrocracked, 
naphtha fraction Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
129893-17-0 Lubricatin g oils, used, residues Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
129893-18-1 Lubricatin g oils, used, vacuum distd., cla y-treate d Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
129893-21-6 Natural gas condensates, C4-12 di stillate Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
129893-22-7 Natural gas condensates, C5-12 di stillate Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
132207-32-0 asbestosEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
132538-91-1 Lubricatin g oils, used, distd., C5-18 fraction Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
132538-93-3 Lubricatin g oils, used, distd., li ght oil Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
140923-17-7 Iprovalicarb (also CAS#140923-25-7) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
177406-68-7 Benthiavalicarb-isoprop yl CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
223777-68-2Benzenesulfonic acid, hydroxydinonyl-, branched, 
monoammonium salt Canada PBiT List PBiT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A zinc chromates includin g zinc potassium chromateEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
N/A Lead compoundsTRI PBT Chemical 
List; OSPAR Chemicals for CA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROCEU Reproductive 
Toxicant PB
T PBT cance rGroup 2ACategory 1 
Reproductive ToxicantReasonably 
anticipate
d P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
N/A Nickel compoundsCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
r Group 1 Known P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
N/A1,1-trichloro-2,2-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)ethane 
(HPTE)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto
rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A 2,4,5-Trimeth ylaniline and its stron g acid salts CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
35693-92-6 2,4-6-trichlorobiphen ylEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A2,4-Hexadienal (89% trans, trans isomer; 11% cis, 
trans isomer) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
38444-88-1 3,4',5-trichlorobiphen ylEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A 4-H ydroxy-3,3',4',5'-tetrachlorobiphen ylEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A 4-OH-2,2',4',5,5'-pentachlorobiphen ylEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A 5-Chloro-o-toluidine and its stron g acid salts CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Aristolochic acidsCA Prop 65; 
IARC cance rGroup 
2A Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Arsenic in drinkin g-wate r IARC Group 1 Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Arsenic (inor ganic oxides) P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
N/A Benzidine-based d
yes CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
108-60-1 Bis(2-chloro-1-meth ylethyl)ether, technical grade CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A brominated flame retardantsOSPAR Chemicals 
for Priorit y ActionOSPAR  
Chemicals for Priorit
y ActionPBT, 
Endocrine disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Cobalt metal with tun gsten carbide IARCGroup 
2A Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Diaminotoluene (mixed) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Dinitrotoluene (technical grade) CA Prop 65reproductive 
female, male Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Dinitrotoluene mixture, 2,4-/2,6-CA Prop 65; 
IRIS cance r B2 Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Dioxin and dioxin-like compoundsTRI PBT Chemical 
List PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Dioxins and furans EPA Priorit y PBT PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A d yes metabolized to 3,3'-dimethox ybenzidineCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A D yes metabolized to 3,3'-dimeth ylbenzidineCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
rReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A D yes metabolized to benzidineIARC; NTP 
11th ROC Group 1 Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
N/A lead alk ylsEU Reproductive 
ToxicantCategory 1 
Reproductive Toxicant Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Lindane and other hexachloroc yclohexane isomers CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Mercur y compoundsTRI PBT Chemical 
List; OSPAR Chemicals for CA Prop 65 PB
T PBT developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Methox yetylacrylate tinbut yltin, copol ymerEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/AMethylhydrazine and its salts, methylhydrazine, 
meth ylhydrazine sulfate CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Meth ylmercur y compounds CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Mineral oils (untreated and mildl y treated)IARC; NTP 
11th ROC Group 1 Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
N/AMixture o f 2,3,4,5-tetrachlorobiphenyl (PCB  61), 
2,2',4,5,5'-octachlorobiphenyl (PCB 101) and 2,2',3,3',4,4',5,5'-octachlorobiphen
yl (PCB 194)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
81-15-2 2,4,6-Trinitro-5-tert-but yl-m-x yleneOSPAR Chemicals 
for Priorit y Action PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/ANitrate or nitrite (ingested) under conditions that 
result in endo genous nitrosation IARCGroup 
2A Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A non ylphenol/ethox ylates and related substancesOSPAR Chemicals 
for Priorit y ActionOSPAR  
Chemicals for Priorit
y ActionPBT, 
Endocrine disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/APBBs = Brominated Flame retardants = PBB 
(mixed group of 209 Con geners)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
56558-16-8 PCB 104 (2,2',4,6,6'-Pentachlorobiphen yl)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
74472-37-0 PCB 114 (2,3,4,4',5-pentachlorobiphen yl)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
76842-07-4 PCB 122 (2,3,3',4,5 -Pentachlorobiphen yl)EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
12674-11-2 Aroclor 1016EU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
35065-28-2 PCB138 2,2',3,4,4',5'-hexachlorobiphen ylEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
35065-29-3 PCB180 2,2',3,4,4',5,5'-heptachlorobiphen ylEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/Ap-Chloro-o-toluidine, strong acid salts of / p-
Chloro-o-toluidine, h ydrochloride CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/APhenylhydrazine and its salts, phenylhydrazine, 
phenylhydrazine h ydrochloride CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Pol ybrominated biphen ylsCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC CA Prop 65cancer, 
developmentalReasonably 
anticipate
d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
1336-36-3 Pol ychlorinated biphen yls CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65cancer, 
developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A polychlorinated dibenzodioxins (PCDDs)OSPAR Chemicals 
for Priorit y Action PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Pol ychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs)OSPAR Chemicals 
for Priorit y Action CA Prop 65 PBT cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
N/A Pol ychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A polychlorinated naphthalenesOSPAR Chemicals 
for Priorit y Action PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Pol ycyclic aromatic compounds (PACs)TRI PBT Chemical 
List; NWM Priority Chemicals PB
T PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Quinoline and its stron g acid salts CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A salts of 2-naphth ylamineEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/Asalts of 4-aminobiphenyl, salts of biphenyl-4-
ylamine, salts of xen ylamineEU 
Carcino genCategory 1 
carcino gen Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
114466-38-5 Sermorelin acetate CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A short chained chlorinated paraffins (SCCP)OSPAR Chemicals 
for Priorit y Action PBT Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Tribut yltincarbox ylateEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Tribut yltinpol yethox ylateEU Endocrine 
Disrupto rCategory 1 
Endocrine Disrupto
r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A cadmium compoundsCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
r Known P(NR)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
N/A Arsenic (inor
ganic oxides) CA Prop 65 developmental P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
N/A arsenic acid and its saltsEU 
Carcino
genCategory 1 
carcino gen P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
N/A Bitumens, extracts of steam-refined and air refine
d CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Carbon-black extracts CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Certain combined chemotherap y for l ymphomas CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Diesel en gine exhaustCA Prop 65; 
IARC; IRIS cance rGroup 
2ALikely 
to be carcin Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A diesel exhaust particulatesNTP 11th 
ROCReasonably 
anticipate d Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Gasoline en gine exhaust (condensates/extracts) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Histrelin acetate CA Prop 65 developmental Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Residual (heav y) fuel oils CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A silica, cr ystalline (respirable size)CA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
r Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
N/A SootsIARC; NTP 
11th ROC Group 1 Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
N/ASoots, tars, and mineral oils (untreated and mildly 
treated oils and used en gine oils) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Talc containin g asbestiform fibersCA Prop 65; 
IARC cance r Group 1 Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Unleaded gasoline (wholl y vaporized) CA Prop 65 cance r Dec_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A coke oven emissionsCA Prop 65; 
NTP 11th ROC cance
r Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Environmental tobacco smokeNTP 11th 
ROC CA Prop 65 developmental Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
N/A smokeless tobaccoCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
r Group 1 Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Tobacco smokeCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC CA Prop 65 CA Prop 65cancer, 
developmental, reproductive Group 1 Known Dec
_2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Alcoholic bevera gesCA Prop 65; 
IARC; NTP 11th ROC cance
r Group 1 Known Dec _2011 Jul y 2009
N/A Chromium (hexavalent compounds) CA Prop 65 cance r P(A)(O) Dec _2011 Jul y 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 
668-34-8Triphenylstannanylium, also known as 
"Stannylium, triphenyl"EU Endocrine 
DisruptorCategory 1 
Endocrine Disruptor P(O) Dec_2011 July 2009NSPIRS  
2011, TOXNET 2011
P(A) Pesticide active federally
P(A)(NR) Pesticide some active; some not-activeP(A)(O) Pesticide active federally (Other uses)P(NR) Pesticide not-active federallyP(NR)(O) Pesticide not-active federally (Other uses)P(M) Pesticide metabolite
P(M)(O) Pesticide metabolite (Other uses)
* * CAS numbers are specific for the parent 
chemical, but the COC listing includes both the parent chemical and parent chemical-related salt compounds.Legend
(Persistent 
Bioaccumulative 
and Toxic)
PBT(Very Persistent and 
Very 
Bioaccumulative)
vPvB(Persistent, 
Bioaccumulative 
and inherently 
Toxic)
PBiT(Carcinogenic, 
Mutagenic and 
Reproductive 
(Toxicants))
CMR CarcinogenEndocrine 
DisruptorDevelopmental 
ToxicantReproductive 
ToxicantEquivalent 
Level of ConcernEPA 
Final PBT Rule for TRITRI PBT 
Chemical ListEPA 
Priority PBTNWM 
Priority Chemicals (PBTs)WA PBT 
ListEU PBT 
ListOSPAR 
Chemicals of ConcernOSPAR 
Chemicals for Priority ActionCanada 
PBiT List CA Prop 65EU 
Endocrine Disruptor IARCEU 
CarcinogenEU 
Reproductive Toxicant IRISREACH 
Substances of Very High ConcernNTP 
11th/13th ROCNTP 
CERHR
Chemicals of Concern
Published by Maine DEP
July 2015
Source
CAS Chemical of Concern NamePesticide 
NotationSource list 
last 
reviewed ORIGINATING LIST TYPE OF TOXICITY
Date 
Listed
NSPIRS 2011 National State Pesticide Information Retrieval System; http ://nspirs.ceris .purdue.edu/
TOXNET 2011 National Libr ary of Medicines Toxicology Network;http ://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/ 
Merck 2006 Merck Index, 14th edition Mrck & Co Whitehouse NJ References
Recycling solar panels in 2018 
https://news.energysage.com/recycling-solar-panels/  
Solar panels have a lifetime of about 30 years. With the increasing number of solar panels being sold and installed in the Unit ed 
States each year, it’s only a matter of time before high volumes of silicon solar panels are at the end of their useful life an d have 
to be disposed of. Solar panel recycling is still at a very early stage, but as the market continues to grow, it will have an important part to play in the solar industry. 
Solar panel recycling is important for the future of solar 
Solar energy is inexpensive and environmentally friendly  – until your solar panels have reached the end of their lifetime. After 
about 30 years, many crystalline silicon solar panels will start having significant dips in energy production and it may be tim e to 
replace them or dispose of them entirely. 
Like any manufactured product, disposing of  solar panels is hardly environmentally friendly. Heavy metals like cadmium and 
lead are found in solar cells, which can harm the natural envi ronment if they are not recycl ed or disposed of properly. 
Additionally, solar panels that are carelessly thrown away can end up in large landfills. 
Besides environmental protection, recycling solar panels will be economically impactful as well. Some of the rare elements in 
photovoltaic (PV) cells like gallium and indium are being depleted from the environment over time. If we were able to recover those elements, we can conserve the limited amount available on earth and continue to use them for solar panels and other 
products. Furthermore, a 2016 study  by the International Renewable Agency (IR ENA) estimated that $15 billion could be 
recovered from recycling solar modules by the year 2050. 
When do solar panels need to be recycled? 
With a lifetime of about 30 years on average, crystalline sili con solar panels don’t become obsolete very quickly. However, 
given the rapid expansion of the solar industry, the number of sola r panels needing to be recycled or disposed of in the coming  
years will continue to increase. More and more panels will reac h the end of their life each year, and even now, old solar panel s 
are beginning to become a problem.  
What parts of solar panels can be recycled? 
Recycling solar panels can only be effective if  the materials used to build them are able to be used again, 30 or more years la ter. 
Solar panels are made from several components , including: 
• Silicon solar cells 
• Metal framing 
• Glass sheets 
• Wires 
• Plexiglas 
Right away, it’s clear that many of the core components of solar panels can be recycled on their own. Metal, glass, and wiring 
can all be recycled and reused. Silicon cells , the component that is most essential to producing electricity, are a slightly different 
story. While silicon wafers are not recyclable like glass and pl astic are, some specialty recycling companies are able to reuse  
silicon cells by melting them down and reclaiming the silicon and various metals. 
The difficulty with recycling solar panels isn’t that the material s they are made from are hard to recycle; rather, it’s that t hey are 
constructed from many parts all used together in one product. Separating those materials and r ecycling them each in a unique 
way is a complex and potentially expensive process. 
Solar panel recycling options 
What are the current options for recycling your old solar panels? Solar panels have traditionally been recycled at general 
purpose glass recycling facilities, where the metal frames and glass parts are salvaged but the remaining parts are disposed of  or 
burned. Nowadays, there are a few organizations working to make solar panel recycling both complete and mainstream: 
Veolia  
Unlike the U.S., Europe has a developed solar market. Due to government regulations , European solar panel owners must 
recycle their panels once they are done using them. This has created a market for panel recyclers, one of which is Veolia. 
Veolia partners with the non-profit PV Cycle in Europe to collect and recycle solar panels. They opened their first recycling 
plant in 2018 , where robots separate glass, silicon, plastics, and metals from solar panels. 
Recycle PV  
One company looking to bring solar recycling to the U.S. is R ecycle PV. Because of the lack of governmental solar recycling 
requirements, the company has trouble operating on a wide scale lo cally. Despite this, Recycle PV is partnering with PV Cycle 
to help move U.S. panels to recycling facilities in Europe. While currently only a small operation compared to some European panel recycling efforts, groups like Recycle PV will almost definitely see the demand for their recycling services grow over th e 
next several years. 
Solar Energy Industries Association (SEIA)  
SEIA has a PV Recycling Working Group that chooses recycling partners offering benefits to SEIA members. These partners 
give special pricing to the SEIA members, and in exchange, recycle their solar panels  at special facilities. An example of a 
SEIA recycling partner is the company Clean lites. Cleanlites operates recycling facilitie s that aren’t dedicated only to solar but 
can handle recycling panels and other solar equipment. 
Manufacturer recycling  
Another example of solar recycling efforts comes from manufactur ers. Companies like SunPower and First Solar run global 
recycling programs for their customers, allo wing them to return old so lar panels (often through groups like PV Cycle) to the 
manufacturer to be recycled or repurposed. 
Solar panels are good for the environment, and recycling is coming 
While solar panel recycling isn’t widely available in the U.S. for all of the components in solar panels, there’s still a littl e time 
before the number of panels needing to be recycled gets too high. Groups like SEIA and Recycle PV are doing important 
groundwork for the industry, but there’s more to do in years to come. 
Solar panel recycling may not be widespread, but solar energy is still a great financial investment that is environmentally 
friendly  as well. By going solar now, you can cut your el ectric bill and start saving right away. Sign up for the EnergySage 
Solar Marketplace  to receive free quotes from our network of qualified, pre-vetted installers  so you can start the process 
of going solar. 
Posted on AUGUST 30, 2018  by JACOB MARSH . 
Categories: ENVIRONMENT AND CLEAN TECHNOLOGY  
Tags: ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF SOLAR ENERGY , FIRST SOLAR , SOLAR ENERGY INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION 
(SEIA) , SUNPOWER  
 
About Jacob Marsh 
Jacob is a Digital Marketing Analyst working primarily on  EnergySage's SEO and content marketing. He recently 
graduated from Tufts University with a degree in Geoscience. When he’s not checking up on the latest Google algorithm 
update, you can find him playing Ultimate Frisbee or rewatching Game of Thrones. 
Solar New ZealandNovember 2, 2018 at 9:12 am  
this is cool info, getting more and more green. Love it! 
 
Jeff BrownDecember 4, 2018 at 2:26 pm  
Hi Jacob 
I have some Great news to share! Solar Pioneer Sam Vanderhoof  has built a PV recycling plant in Tuscon AZ and it is up 
and running, In the last couple weeks Peter Beadle and myself , both old solar guys 3 decades each plus have joined him 
in his efforts. 
Doing my due diligence I am blown away of  the need for this to prevent in the near future billions of pounds of our 
“Green” technology each ye ar ending up in landfills. 
I too have been guilty simply assuming PV was a small sin to simply toss into dumpsters out of convenience just as 
computers and monitors. I never had anyone in our industry pus h recycling especially due to the fact today in California 
where I am they are listed as “Hazardous Waste” not Universal as computers are. 
For a follow up article it would be great to have EnergySa ge do a follow up article on RecyclePV,Solar and how several 
solar veterans are tackling this issue. 
It is a fact over 90% of day to day so lar contractors are tossing modules in dumpsters. Some have them stacking up in 
their warehouse or using the very popular method of stacking them up outside near the dumpsters of their building next 
to the used pallets only to watch them simply go away. 
This issue is larger than us and we n eed our solar associations and groups as you to help educate our industry and step 
up ensuring every pv module at end of life is recycled, Us ed PV Mods are re purposed and even those with say a bad 
diode are repaired then re-purposed, 
Cheers 
Jeff Brown  Brady Rose December 27, 2018 at 11:29 am  
How much of the energy produced by pa nels, on a watt / dollar basis, prior to subsidization, will be  consumed through 
the processes needed to recycle them? Melting glass, electro- winning, ball milling, and chem ical separation are all VERY 
energy intensive processes. Given that solar panels are alread y only about as profitable as the subsidies paid for by tax 
payers, and that likely most of the energy used to produce them, let alone recycle them do not come from solar energy. 
I can’t imagine that the true end cost of properly recy cling them doesn’t completely  bottom out their economic 
feasibility. More than likely, much of them  will end up in the landfill and the effo rts to avert environmental disaster will 
become the causes of such. 
 Marc Fontana January 24, 2019 at 8:07 am  
It’s nice to know that solar PV modules  can potentially be recycled. But what do  I do with old pv panels today? If a 
homeowner living in the San Francisco Bay area has solar modul es they want to dispose of, where can they take them? I 
searched online and came up empty. California does not allow disposing of PV modules in landfills. Frankly, I’m surprised 
there isn’t a recycling fee imposed on PV modul es like there is for LCD displays and TV’S. 
 
Brian March 6, 2019 at 6:45 pm  
The easiest way I have heard of to recycle solar panels is as follows. 
Put them in a pyrolysis sealed oven with no oxygen. Heat them till all the plastic and organics have evaporated or turned 
to char. 
Vibrate the panels and they fall apart with the organics glues. 
Recycle the glass which is about 90% of the mass of the panels, and the aluminum with not all panels have. Folks have 
also refinished the cells to updated performance. It takes half as much energy to make a solar panels from recycled parts 
as new. The silver is also recycled. 
96% of solar panels contain ZERO Cadmium, can we stop with  this meme? The toxic CdTe panels are the sole reason 96% 
solar panels which are not toxic are consid ered toxic by some govs. CdTe and any other toxic solar panels should have a 
mandatory label. 
The question I have is, are solar panels  uses lead free solder or not?  
Solar Equipment Recycling Requirements – Preventi on and Recycling – 2019 Legislative Session 129 
Kenneth A. Capron, 1375 Forest Ave D-11, Po rtland, ME 04103 207-797-7891 solar@maine.rr.com 
Page 1 of 1  
 
SUMMARY 
This bill provides for significant and appropriate st ewardship of solar panel waste. It provides for the 
development of a 95-98% recycling process and facility. It conforms the definitions of solar equipment. It 
provides for a tracking process to provide early detection of panel cracks, damages and leaks. And it provides for 
funding of this plan. 
 
With a projected solar farm installation of 30,000 panels in  Oxford and more such installations elsewhere, it is 
urgent that we get out ahead of a potential chemical hazard as identified in th e 2019 DEP stewardship report. 
 
We urge emergency adoption of this legislation. 
 
 
Title 5: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND SERVICES 
Chapter 153: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 
§1764. LIFE-CYCLE COSTS 
3. Determination of life-cycle costs.  To determine the life-cycle costs, the Bureau  of General Services shall adopt rules that 
include but are not limited to: 
C. The effect of insulation incorporated  into the facility design and the effect  on solar utilization to the properties 
of external surfaces including the cost(s) of recycling; 
F. The cost-effectiveness of integrating wind or solar electricity generating equipment into the design and 
construction of the facility incl uding the cost(s) of recycling. 
 
Title 5: ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND SERVICES 
Chapter 13: DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Subchapter 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS 
§282. Powers and duties of commissioner 
9. Energy infrastructure benefits fund.    To establish an energy infrastructu re benefits fund. Except as otherwise 
provided by Title 35-A, section 122, subsections 1-C and 6-B or any other law, including the Constitution of 
Maine, the fund consists of any revenues derived from  the use of state-owned land and assets for energy 
infrastructure development pursuant to Title 35-A, sect ion 122. Each fiscal year, the Treasurer of State shall 
transfer revenues collected in the fund to the Efficiency  Maine Trust for deposit by the Efficiency Maine Trust 
Board in program funds pursuant to Title 35-A, section 10103, subsection 4 and use by the trust in accordance 
with Title 35-A, section 10103, subsecti on 4-A. For the purposes of this su bsection, "energy infrastructure" and 
"state-owned" have the same meanings as in Title 35-A, section 122, subsection 1; 
NOTE: Title 35-A, section 122 Energy infrastr ucture corridors has been repealed   
Title 35-A, Chapter 95 Energy Efficiency, §10103, Training for energy auditors, has been repealed  
Title 10: COMMERCE AND TRADE 
Part 3: REGULATION OF TRADE Chapter 221: WARRANTIES FOR SALE AND INST ALLATION OF SOLAR ENERGY EQUIPMENT 
§1492. Definitions 
As used in this chapter, unless the context indicates otherwise, the following terms shall have the following 
meanings.  1. Solar energy equipment.  "Solar energy equipment" means all controls, tanks, pumps, heat 
exchangers, collectors and all other equipment necessary fo r the collection, transfer and storage of solar energy, 
Solar Equipment Recycling Requirements – Preventi on and Recycling – 2019 Legislative Session 129 
Kenneth A. Capron, 1375 Forest Ave D-11, Po rtland, ME 04103 207-797-7891 solar@maine.rr.com 
Page 2 of 1  
as determined by the Governor's Energy Office. Passive  solar energy systems or those systems using natural 
means to collect, store and transfer solar energy may not be included under this chapter. 
 
1. "Solar energy equipment" has the same me aning as the Title 35-A §3475(1) definition.  
 
Title 30-A: MUNICIPALITIES AND COUNTIES 
Part 2: MUNICIPALITIES 
Subpart 4: ORDINANCE AUTHORITY AND LIMITATIONS 
Chapter 141: ORDINANCES 
§3013. Solar energy devices; ordinances 
A municipal ordinance, bylaw or regulation adopted af ter September 30, 2009 that directly regulates the 
installation or use of solar energy devices on residential property must comply with the requirements of Title 33, 
chapter 28-A. For the purposes of this section, "solar ener gy device" has the same meaning as in Title 33, section 
1421, subsection 5.  "Solar energy equipment" has the same meaning as  the Title 35-A §3475(1) definition. 
 
 
Title 33: PROPERTY   
§1423. USE AND INSTALLATION OF SOLAR ENERGY DEVICES EQUIPMENT  
2. Right to install and use solar energy devices equipmen t. Except as provided in subsections 3 and 4, a legal 
instrument subject to this section may not pr ohibit a person from installing or using: 
A. A solar Solar energy devices equipment.  on residential property owned by that person; or 
 
3. Exception. A legal instrument subj ect to this section may prohibit the installation and use of solar energy 
devices equipment on residential property in common ownership with 3rd parties or common elements of a 
condominium. 
4. Reasonable restrictions. A legal instrument subject to this section may include reasonable restrictions on the 
installation and use of a solar energy devices equipm ent. For the purposes of this section, a reasonable 
restriction is any restriction th at is necessary to protect: 
 
Title 33: PROPERTY 
Chapter 28-A: SOLAR RIGHTS 
§1421. DEFINITIONS 
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherw ise indicates, the following terms have the following 
meanings.  
5. Solar energy device equipment. "Solar energy device equipment" means a solar collector or solar clothes-
drying device. has the same meaning as  the Title 35-A §3475(1) definition. 
 
Title 35-A: PUBLIC UTILITIES 
Chapter 34-B: The Maine Solar Energy Act §3472. Legislative findings 
3. Risk to Environment 
Solar Equipment Recycling Requirements – Preventi on and Recycling – 2019 Legislative Session 129 
Kenneth A. Capron, 1375 Forest Ave D-11, Po rtland, ME 04103 207-797-7891 solar@maine.rr.com 
Page 3 of 1  
A. The Legislature hereby recognizes the chemical haza rd that solar panels present based on the 2019  
Product Stewardship Report [Section 4-E] from the Maine DEP 
B. The Legislature hereby acknowledges that solar pane ls contain the following Chemicals of Concern or 
Chemicals of High Concern (Maine  CDC 6-27-2012 Report) -  aluminum; cadmium ; copper; gallium; 
silica; indium; lead ; selenium; silicon; silver; tellurium ; tin; zinc. Of these, CADMIUM is a Regulated 
Priority Chemical. 
C. The Legislature finds that the production and/or recyc ling of solar panels uses chemical such as sodium 
hydroxide and hydrochloric acid 
D. The average life span of a solar panel is estimated to be 25 to 30 years.  
E. In addition, Legislature hereby acknowledges the like lihood that properties on which solar panels are 
installed are likely to change ownership at one or more points in their life cycle. 
F. International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) estimated that global PV waste streams will grow from 
250,000 tonnes at the end of 2016 - less than one percen t of installed capacity - to more than five 
million tonnes by 2050. By then, the amount of PV waste will almost match th e mass contained in new 
installations. 
G. "[I]f recycling processes were not put in place, ther e would be 60 million tons of  PV panel waste lying in 
landfills by the year 2050" 
H. The Legislature acknowledges that since all PV cells  contain certain amount of toxic substances that 
would truly become a not-so-sustain able way of sourcing energy." 
I. The Legislature recognizes that this risk to our envi ronment is critical and thus this legislature is an 
emergency and shall be implemented as soon as possible.  
 
*Source: 2016 International Renewable Energy Ag ency_IEAPVPS_End-of-Life_Solar_PV_Panels.pdf 
Title 35-A: PUBLIC UTILITIES 
Chapter 34-B: The Maine Solar Energy Act §3472. Legislative findings 4. Prevention and Tracking: In order to prevent or minimize the potential damage from solar panel 
deterioration, the following requirements will be implemented immediately: 
A. Ban disposal of solar panels in whole or in part in  landfills, dumps, waste stations, transfer stations or 
other place. Solar panels are classified different from electronic waste. 
B. Mandate that all 'solar energy equi pment' be recycled by a Maine DEP approved "solar recycling facility" 
using an approved solar equipment recycling process th at prevents transmission into the air, water or 
land of Maine CDC Designated Chemicals of High Co ncern; allergens and other irritants harmful to 
organic life forms. 
C. At time of purchase of any solar panel, a tracking document will be completed by the seller and/or the 
installer identifying the specific brand(s), size, mode l, serial number, location and any other information 
needed to assure the proper tracking and future disposal of each and every solar panel. 
D. In order to assure adequate tracking of solar in stallations to assure proper disposal, a $25 fee per 
standard unit will be assessed at time of purchase. 
E. The fees collected for tracking are restricted to the funding of one or more FTE's solely for the purpose 
of tracking purchases and dispositions of solar panels  in Maine and the proper disposal of panels that 
are damaged, that have reached end of life cycle or are otherwise no longer functional. That FTE may be 
an employee of the DEP or of the recycling facility. 
F. To assure funds are available for proper and timely  recycling, a deposit of $100 per panel for that 
purpose must be made at time of purchase. It is assumed that at EOL, there is a propensity to not 
remove the panels if a fee is assessed at time of disposal. 
Solar Equipment Recycling Requirements – Preventi on and Recycling – 2019 Legislative Session 129 
Kenneth A. Capron, 1375 Forest Ave D-11, Po rtland, ME 04103 207-797-7891 solar@maine.rr.com 
Page 4 of 1  
G. In an effort to detect and prevent leakage of ch emicals, an authorized agent of the agency or 
municipality may enter upon and inspect the health of the installed solar panels and surrounding 
environment once in any five  (5) calendar year(s).  
H. An owner is required to maintain solar panels in a healthy state such that hazardous materials do not 
leak or otherwise impact the air, soil, water, i nhabitants nor environment of the installation area. 
I. An approved recycling facility must deploy regional take back locations. 
J. Information gathered for tracking purposes is public and not exempt from Maine's FOAA. 
 
Title 35-A: PUBLIC UTILITIES 
Chapter 34-B: The Maine Solar Energy Act §3472. Legislative findings 5. Insurance: All property where solar panels are installed must carry insurance that pays the full costs of 
recycling solar panels damaged in any form of catastrophe ; and to that extent, insurance companies are 
required to pay such costs before any other distributions of proceeds of the insurance. 
 
 
Title 35-A: PUBLIC UTILITIES 
Chapter 34-B: The Maine Solar Energy Act §3475 Funding of Recycling Process Deve lopment; Equipmen t and Facility: Whereas no approved solar panel 
recycling process currently exists in Maine, and no approv ed recycling facilities exist, the legislature approves 
the following: 
A. Funding to develop a recycling process that recycles 95% of the entire panel regardless of manufacturer 
or engineering. An alloca tion of up to $2,500,000 in grants fr om the 35-A §10109 Regional Greenhouse 
Gas Initiative Trust Fund is authorized for this purpose. 
B. Funding to design and construct recycling equipment and a recycling facility to assure success of the 
process identified above.  An allocation of up to $2,500,000 in grants from the 35-A §10109. Regional 
Greenhouse Gas Initiative Trust Fund  is authorized for this purpose. 
C. Similar allocations are approved from the following and other available government resources if needed 
to assure an approved process, facility and collection scheme. 
1. Maine Solid Waste Management Fund 
2. Maine Solid Waste Diversion Grant Program 
3. Maine Technology Institute 
 
 
Title 35-A: PUBLIC UTILITIES 
Chapter 34-B: The Maine Solar Energy Act 
§3499 Penalties: Failure to Comply  
A. Failure to dispose of solar equipmen t in a manner other than an approv ed recycling process will result in 
a fine equal to the costs to recover, retrieve and recycle said equipment in an approved manner. 
B. Failure to register identification information includin g serial number(s) of any solar equipment will result 
in a fine of up to $250 per unit. Such levy will be re corded as an addendum to the deed of the property 
in the Registry of Deeds on wh ich the equipment is installed. 
C. Refusal to permit inspection of any solar equipment w ill result in a fine of up to $250 per unit. Such levy 
will be recorded as an addendum to  the deed of the property in the Registry of Deeds on which the 
equipment is installed. 
 
Solar Equipment Recycling Requirements – Preventi on and Recycling – 2019 Legislative Session 129 
Kenneth A. Capron, 1375 Forest Ave D-11, Po rtland, ME 04103 207-797-7891 solar@maine.rr.com 
Page 5 of 1  
 
Title 35-A: PUBLIC UTILITIES 
Chapter 34-B: The Maine Solar Energy Act 
§3475. Definitions 
1. Solar energy equipment.   "Solar energy equipment" means all controls, tanks, pumps, heat exchangers, 
collectors and all other equipment necessary for the co llection, transfer and stor age of solar energy, as 
determined by the Governor's Energy Office. Passive solar  energy systems or those systems using natural means 
to collect, store and transfer solar energy  may not be included under this chapter.  
 
 
Title 36: TAXATION 
Part 3: SALES AND USE TAX 
Chapter 211: GENERAL PROVISIONS 
§1752. Definitions 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in chapters 211 to 225 have  the meaning ascribed to them in 
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
 14-A. Solar energy equipment .     repeal  
 
Title 36: TAXATION 
Part 3: SALES AND USE TAX 
Chapter 211: GENERAL PROVISIONS 
§1760. Exemptions 
Subject to the provisions of sectio n 1760-C, no tax on sales, storage or use may be collected upon or in 
connection with:  
38. Solar energy equipment .     repeal  
 
 
 
SCALING UP  
RENEWABLES IN CITIES: 
OPPORTUNITIES FOR  
MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENTS
Cities are responsible for 65% of global energy 
demand. Their contribution will therefore be crucial 
in accelerating the world’s transition to a sustainable 
energy future. Given continued urban population 
growth – including the migration of some 80 million 
people from rural to urban areas each year – the 
importance of cities continues to rise. 
Renewable energy solutions for buildings, 
transport and other urban systems will be 
especially crucial to ensure energy security, fulfil 
climate commitments and secure social benefits 
for all urban residents. Fortunately, successes are 
already being achieved.Renewable 
buildings and 
transport will  
be crucial to 
ensure energy 
security
Integrated planning enables cities to pursue ambitious renewable energy targets

SCALING UP RENEWABLES IN CITIES2
To examine ongoing challenges and highlight effective solutions in this regard, the International 
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) has collaborated with ICLEI (Local Governments for Sustainability)1 
and the German Agency for International Cooperation (GIZ) to produce a new set of case studies 
that review crucial aspects of the urban energy transition. The selected cases highlight local policy 
instruments – including public procurement, ordinances, mandates, and pilot projects – with a focus on 
ensuring reliable energy supply and on the building and transportation sectors.
As drivers of change, cities assume a multitude of roles, including decision-making, planning, giving 
key authorisations, managing assets, operating local energy suppliers and providing guidance or 
models for the public to follow. Municipalities can encourage, enable, measure and regulate the shift 
to new energy technologies and inform the debate on the necessary changes before turning them into 
relevant policies (IRENA, 2016).
Renewable energy procurement, for instance, helps municipalities meet rising electricity demand. To 
address the challenge of electricity shortages, Cape Town, South Africa, is deploying solar photovoltaic 
(PV) rooftop installations on municipality-operated buildings and purchasing renewable electricity 
both from small-scale embedded generation and independent renewable power producers. Cape Town 
has also initiated a campaign to raise public awareness of energy efficiency. 
Ordinances and mandates are common policy tools that may be employed to encourage more sustainable 
building construction; for example, they can set minimum requirements for the share of renewable energy 
in a building’s overall energy consumption or establish specific energy efficiency targets. A solar thermal 
ordinance adopted in Rosario, Argentina, has resulted in the installation of considerable numbers of solar 
water heaters on both new and upgraded municipality-owned buildings. Meanwhile, the municipality is 
partnering with various stakeholders from academia, civil society and the state government to provide 
dedicated training and loan options to expand installations. This has led to widespread use of solar water 
heaters throughout the community. On average, households have reduced their energy costs for hot water 
by 80%, compared to the cost of conventional water heaters. Following this successful implementation 
in Rosario, the market for solar water heaters is expanding across the different provinces of Argentina.  
1   ICLEI was founded in 1990 as the International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives.
Cities are responsible for 65% of global energy demand
SCALING UP RENEWABLES IN CITIES3
Pilot projects have shown that powering local transport systems with renewables can be cost 
competitive. In New Delhi, India, the government-owned Delhi Metro Rail Company (DMRC) has 
commissioned 20 MWp of solar rooftop installations on metro stations and other buildings. Solar 
electricity is expected to cost less than the power supplied to DMRC by distribution utilities. The solar 
deployment will result not only in financial savings but also create 34 jobs per installed MW. With a  
50 MWp target, solar PV is expected to allow the Delhi Metro Rail system to become climate-neutral 
by 2021 .
Integrated planning enables cities to pursue more ambitious renewable energy targets. Malmö, Sweden, 
for example, was sourcing all energy for municipal operations (such as city-owned buildings, city 
vehicle fleets and city-owned power-generation assets) from renewables by 2015. By 2016, renewables 
accounted for roughly one quarter of energy use within the municipality as a whole, putting the city on 
on track to reach 100% by 2030. Vancouver, Canada, meanwhile, has committed to sourcing 100% of 
its energy consumption from renewables by 2050. Vancouver integrates its renewable energy targets 
within existing sectoral strategies, including its Zero Emissions Building Plan, the Neighbourhood 
Energy Strategy, and the Transportation 2040 Strategy. In 2016, Vancouver achieved a 30% share of 
energy derived from renewable sources. 
Reliable public lighting improves safety and navigation in cities but also contributes to local energy 
consumption and GHG emissions. Sydney, Australia, has substantially benefitted from measures to 
introduce energy efficient public lighting, which previously accounted for one third of municipal 
electricity consumption. Since the publication of an initial IRENA/ICLEI case study of Sydney in 2013, 
the replacement of conventional light bulbs with energy-efficient LED street lights has resulted in 
annual savings of USD 1.3 million in electricity and maintenance costs, as well as in saving 2.8 million 
kilowatt hours of electricity use. 
IRENA also co-operated with ICLEI to produce an earlier set of case studies on renewable energy policy 
in cities (IRENA and ICLEI, 2013). Those cases examined renewable energy industries in Dezhou, China; 
strategies for the use of renewable sources in Chemnitz, Germany; emission reduction and waste-to-
energy development in Belo Horizonte, Brazil; efficient street lighting in Sydney and in Nagpur, India; 
solar water heater mandates in Sao Paolo, Brazil; and earlier target development in Malmö.
Cities are drivers of change, taking on decision-making, planning and public guidance  
roles in the shift to new energy technologies
SCALING UP RENEWABLES IN CITIES4
Ambitious renewable energy strategies can contribute significantly to enhancing the quality of life in 
cities through lowered costs, as well as reduced air pollution and carbon emissions. Turning successful 
pilot projects into well-defined roadmaps requires adequate policy support, strategic partnerships 
with public shareholders and development of the necessary technical capacity. A clear roadmap also 
demonstrates strong political commitment. 
Furthermore, engagement with community stakeholders through consultations and awareness 
campaigns is essential. However, because they do not always have the requisite regulatory authority 
or the financial wherewithal, in many cases municipal actors also need to co-ordinate their efforts with 
regional and national levels of government. 
These case studies offer a detailed review of the different approaches that municipal authorities can 
adopt to achieve progress. While each city faces particular challenges and opportunities, they share 
a common need for swift action. Avoiding climate disruption, reducing dangerous air pollutants and 
securing adequate energy supplies are immediate requirements that leave no time for delay. 
The promotion of renewable energy, together with greater energy efficiency, offers practical solutions 
to these problems. As the experiences highlighted here confirm, however, those solutions work best 
when they are informed by pro-active consultations with the urban community and emphasise the 
socio-economic benefits for all residents.
Renewable energy, together with greater energy efficiency, offers practical solutions 

SCALING UP RENEWABLES IN CITIES5
References
IRENA (2016), Renewable energy in cities, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,  
www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2016/IRENA_Renewable_Energy_  
in_Cities_2016.pdf .
IRENA and ICLEI (2013), Renewable energy policy in cities: Selected case studies,  
International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi, www.irena.org/publications/2013/Jan/
Renewable-Energy-Policy-in-Cities-Selected-Case-Studies.
Further references are cited within each case study. 
Copyright © IRENA 2018
Unless  otherwise  stated,  material  in this  publication  may  be freely  used,  shared,  copied,  reproduced,  printed  and/or  
downloaded,  provided  that appropriate  acknowledgement  of IRENA  as the source  and copyright  holder  is given.  Material  
attributed to third parties may be subject to third-party copyright and separate terms of use and restrictions.
Disclaimer
This  publication  and  the material  herein  are provided  “as is”. Neither  IRENA  nor any of its officials,  agents,  data  or other  
third-party  content  providers  provides  warranty  of any kind,  either  expressed  or implied,  and they  accept  no responsibility  
or liability with regard to the use of this publication and the material featured therein.
The  information  contained  herein  does  not necessarily  represent  the views  of the Members  of IRENA.  The  mention  of 
specific  companies  or certain  projects  or products  does  not imply  that  they  are endorsed  or recommended  by IRENA  
in preference  to others  of a similar  nature  that  are not mentioned.  The  designations  employed  and  the presentation  of 
material  herein  do not imply  the expression  of any opinion  on the part  of IRENA  concerning  the legal  status  of any region,  
country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries.

SOLAR SIMULATORS:2
Copyright © IRENA 2019
Unless otherwise stated, this publication and material featured herein are the property of IRENA and are subject to copyright 
by IRENA. Material in this publication may be freely used, shared, copied, reproduced, printed and/or stored, provided that all such 
material is clearly attributed to IRENA and bears a notation that it is subject to copyright.  Material contained in this publication 
attributed to third parties may be subject to third-party copyright and separate terms of use and restrictions, including restrictions in relation to any commercial use.
ISBN:  978-92-9260-099-0
 
Citation: Solar simulators: Application to developing cities , International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi.
About IRENA
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental organisation that supports countries 
in their transition to a sustainable energy future, and serves as the principal platform for international cooperation, a centre of excellence, and a repository of policy, technology, resource and financial knowledge on renewable 
energy. IRENA promotes the widespread adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy, including 
bioenergy, geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy, in the pursuit of sustainable development, energy access, energy security and low-carbon economic growth and prosperity.
www.irena.org
Acknowledgements
This report was prepared under the guidance of Henning Wuester and Rabia Ferroukhi (IRENA) and authored by Nicolas Fichaux 
(consultant), Abdulmalik Oricha Ali and Huiyi Chen (IRENA).
The German Federal Ministry for Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety (BMU), though the International Climate Initiative 
(IKI), generously supported IRENA’s Solar City Simulators demonstration and the preparation of this report.
The report is available for download: www.irena.org/publications
For further information or to provide feedback: publications@irena.org
Disclaimer
The designations employed and the presentation of materials featured herein are provided on an “as is” basis, for informational 
purposes only, without any conditions, warranties or undertakings, either express or implied, from IRENA, its officials and agents, including but not limited to warranties of accuracy, completeness and fitness for a particular purpose or use of such content.
The information contained herein does not necessarily represent the views of the Members of IRENA, nor is it an endorsement 
of any project, product or service provider. The designations employed and the presentation of material herein do not imply the expression of any opinion on the part of IRENA concerning the legal status of any region, country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of frontiers or boundaries. 
APPLICATION TO DEVELOPING CITIES1
CONTENTS
Abbreviations 1
Executive summary 2
Introduction 41. Urban energy challenges and the need for solar simulators 5
1.1. Solar simulators for cities in developing countries 6
2. Solar city simulators: Applications and alternative methods 8
2.1. Developing solar simulators based on a complete census approach 10
2.2. Emerging alternative to expensive 3D building footprint and DEM generation 11
3. Low-cost simulators for solar policy design 13
4. An IRENA solar city simulator: Demonstration in Uganda and China 15
5. Conclusion 16
References 17Annex 1. Interactive solar rooftop simulators and cadastres: A non-exhaustive list 20
Annex 2. The solar resource modelling process 21
FIGURES
Figure 1: African countries with below 80% electricity access in urban areas, 2014 5
Figure 2: Approach and uncertainties of digital elevation model generation from stereo-imaging 11
Figure 3: Reconstruction of city digital elevation model from stereo imaging 12
ABBREVIATIONS
3D three-dimensional
cm centimetre
DEM digital elevation model
DHI diffuse horizontal irradiation
DNI direct normal irradiation
DTI  direct tilted irradiation
GHI global horizontal irradiance
GIS geographic information system 
GTI  global tilted irradiance
IEA International Energy Agency
IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency
LAI leaf area index
LCOE levelised cost of electricity
LiDAR light detection and ranging
PV photovoltaic
S shadowing effect
t time
SOLAR SIMULATORS:2
The typical energy supply 
challenges cities face range from ageing infrastructure and high consumer prices, mainly in developed cities, to efficiency and reliability issues, typically seen in the cities of developing countries.Over half the world’s population, or 
3.5 billion people, are now living in cities. By 2050 this number is expected to reach nearly 6.5 billion. Cities, moreover, already account for 60-80% of global energy consumption, while urban energy supply systems face increasing pressure.  
Typical challenges range from ageing infrastructure 
and high consumer prices, mainly in developed cities, to efficiency and reliability issues, typically seen in the cities of developing countries.
At the same time, the energy supply landscape 
globally is experiencing rapid change made possible by cutting-edge innovation. Storage technologies are improving and electrical loads are more efficient. Mini-grid applications are better understood and direct end uses such as heating, cooling and transport are being electrified. In addition, the cost of technologies that exploit alternative energy sources, notably solar photovoltaic (PV) systems, is continuing to decline.
With the right policies and sound urban planning 
practices at city level, administrators are particularly well positioned to effectively use these developments to manage energy demand, while simultaneously securing energy supply for their constituents that is clean, affordable and reliable both today and in the future. Urban planning and policy design, however, are complex. They require astute attention to the local conditions of the city – the structure of the local economy, income levels, existing regulations and overarching fiscal policies. They may also require attention to the priorities of central government and potential market players, including the private sector. 
In advanced economies such as France, the 
Netherlands, the Republic of Korea and the United States, solar PV rooftop simulators have been put to effective use to aid the assessment of conditions in specific cities, with the prospect of establishing rooftop PV markets. These simulators use cutting-edge technology that combines know-how in remote sensing, high-performance data processing, three-dimensional (3D) building footprint generation and solar irradiation modelling. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This study explores the possibility of deploying similar simulation engines inexpensively, but effectively, in developing cities. If deployed correctly, they can quicken the pace of energy planning and improve the efficiency of policy structures aimed at creating sustainable markets for rooftop solar PV in these parts of the world. They can also provide important metrics for individual businesses and homeowners to assess PV systems as an electricity supply option for their properties.
The study elaborates the evolution of solar PV 
simulators, accounting for a wide range of applications from single rooftop assessments, typically performed by individuals, to large-scale, aggregate-level analyses undertaken by municipal authorities and other large entities. Larger-scale applications typically precede establishment of the optimal level and mix of incentives to stimulate this form of decentralised generation while, at the same time, ensuring the long-term viability of traditional power supply markets.
In the past, the need for specific expertise and the 
significant costs to develop these simulators have limited their use to advanced economies with well-established electricity markets and a strong research culture. This study finds that the technology landscape has evolved and that solar simulators can now be deployed to maximum benefit anywhere in the world at an affordable cost. 
Major cost drivers – 3D rooftop footprint generation 
and solar irradiation modelling – can now be achieved at significantly lower cost with reasonable accuracy. The quality of satellite imagery required for modelling at this scale can now be produced with a resolution as high as 30 centimetres.
APPLICATION TO DEVELOPING CITIES3
The solar PV potential of rooftops 
in developing cities can now be captured and modelled more accurately using low-cost solar simulators
Image on this page: ShutterstockIn addition, the emergence of cloud computing 
solutions coupled with advancements in solar irradiation modelling – especially techniques that account for the tilt and shading typical of modern multifaceted roofing architecture – mean that the solar potential of rooftops can now be captured and modelled more accurately. This potential is subsequently provided as an input to complex economic models that examine multiple pathways to sustainable rooftop solar markets in cities.
As encouraging as this is, each individual city 
faces its own challenges. That is, while modelling techniques may be similar, energy services vary between cities. Thus, simulation of energy services and any subsequent shift in them must be tailored individually to the level of policy and market maturity in each city. 
On this issue, the study finds that existing solar 
simulators, tuned to the business and regulatory setting of developed cities, may not readily be applicable to the developing world without considerable reworking. This is because they do not incorporate the issues faced by cities in these countries, where energy access and affordability are constrained, and where private-sector participation in the energy sector is limited. Furthermore, the regulatory regimes in these settings are often not sophisticated and still skewed towards traditional generators. Accordingly, this study provides a breakdown of potential policy design cases for low-cost solar city simulators. The opportunity for rooftop PV markets in developing countries is highlighted with a detailed explanation of the techniques required to build cost-effective simulators that can be deployed with considerable ease in these settings. Finally, the study highlights the ongoing effort of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) to use the expertise, data-sharing and hosting capabilities of its Global Atlas for Renewable Energy in demonstrating this technology in selected cities in Uganda and China.
The findings of this work should motivate further 
dialogue on energy planning in the urban context. More importantly, they make the case for greater use of proven data-driven techniques – such as solar simulators – in creating actionable, pragmatic policy and economic solutions for enhancing energy sustainability in cities in developing countries.
SOLAR SIMULATORS:4
This report has been prepared to assist cities around 
the world to take advantage of new developments in solar simulation technology to meet their increasing energy needs. It focuses on aspects of these developments – technology and expertise, mostly pioneered in developed countries – that can be transferred cost-effectively to help alleviate the energy challenges of cities in the developing world.
With this focus, the report explains how city 
energy planning can benefit from an enhanced understanding of the potential of rooftop solar, appealing both to local municipalities at an aggregate scale and home owners on a small scale. It highlights aspects of the process that can be achieved at a cost significantly lower than previously possible, and presents particular cases where outputs are adapted to the most pressing issues being faced in these settings.
The report opens with an appraisal of the opportunity, 
shedding light on the common issues faced by cities in most developing countries – growing demand, access, reliability and affordability. It explains the evolving trends in innovation in this space, requiring sound data-driven policies and regulatory regimes to increase access to clean and sustainable energy services in cities in developing countries.
Next, the report explains the findings from an 
extensive literature review of the methods for developing citywide solar simulators and their application, detailing instances where the results can feed into key processes such as target setting, policy design and market facilitation. It explains INTRODUCTION
key aspects of the modelling process (i.e. three-dimensional [3D] building footprint generation and rooftop solar resource estimation) that were hitherto only achievable at significantly higher cost. It also documents a potential alternative that can enable these tools to be applied at significantly lower cost and adapted to the needs of these cities.
Further, the report provides an extensive overview 
of these needs, segmenting various cases and establishing four practically applicable scenarios for the use of solar city simulators in developing countries. These include studying the economics of solar photovoltaic (PV) generation and the impacts of rooftop PV electricity production; assessing potential ways to boost access to or improve intermittent supply of electricity; investigating options to reduce consumer prices for electricity through rooftop PV programmes; and finally, assessing the opportunities for end-use sector coupling (e.g. solar heating and cooling, transport).
Finally, the report outlines the International  
Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) plan to 
demonstrate these simulators in two cities, one in China and another in Uganda, capitalising on the technical capabilities of its Global Atlas for Renewable Energy. The report provides initial insights into the key functionalities and outputs that can be expected from IRENA’s pilot implementation of low-cost simulators. It also features two annexes, one providing a list of examples of solar simulators deployed mostly in cities in developed economies, and a second reviewing the technical process for developing citywide solar irradiation rooftop models.
Image on this page: Shutterstock
APPLICATION TO DEVELOPING CITIES5
Demand growth and access
By 2050 two-thirds of the global population is expected to live in urban areas, with most of the growth 
occurring in Africa and Asia. The trend is clear in large cities such as Delhi, Dhaka, Jakarta, Rio de Janeiro and Shanghai, where electricity demand grew by factors between 1.5 and 2.0 in the decade 2001 to 2011.(ibid.) This rapid pace of urbanisation is creating a massive surge in demand for energy services and the electricity they require.
Currently, however, more than 130 million people lack access to electricity in urban areas, with 95 million 
of these living in sub-Saharan Africa (World Bank, 2017). Figure 1, for example, illustrates the situation in a number of countries in the subcontinent as of 2014. As highlighted, while the urban growth rate tops 4% in most of the countries, a significant proportion of residents are still without access to electricity.1. URBAN ENERGY CHALLENGES AND THE NEED    
 FOR SOLAR SIMULATORS
Figure 1: Countries in sub-Saharan Africa with below 80% electricity access in urban areas, 2014
Notes: The left-hand chart illustrates electricity access in urban areas as a percentage of the urban population (blue), and the 
urban population as a percentage of the total population (red). The right-hand chart represents the annual rate of growth of the urban population in percentage terms.Based on World Bank (2017), World Bank Open Data, https://data.worldbank.org.0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 0 1 -1 -2 2 3 4 5 6 100% 7
SOLAR SIMULATORS:6
Rooftop PV supplies residential and commercial power during grid outages 
and increases the resilience of the whole electricity systemReliability
In countries with greater than average urban electricity access, the reliability of supply is a challenge. For example, although 30% of the population in Africa and 60% in Southeast Asia are reportedly connected to an electricity grid, the service is often infrequent, with disruptions that compel consumers to rely on back-up generators at a high cost (ESMAP, 2017). 
These disruptions result in a loss of productive 
capacity for business and they negatively impact the standard of living of residents. In 2016, for example, the loss of value to business due to electrical outages in sub-Saharan Africa was quoted at 8%. In the Middle East and North Africa these losses reached 5.9%, and 3% in East Asia and the Pacific. By comparison, they are less than 1% in the European Union (World Bank, 2017). 
Potential solutions
With the rapidly falling price of rooftop PV systems and smart system design, this option is becoming attractive and reliable, offering competitive economics compared to the extension of grids (IRENA, 2017). Rooftop PV installations can bring value to residential and commercial buildings by supplying electricity during grid outages, as well as increasing the resilience of the electricity system (NREL, 2014). In India, for example, Sundaray et al. (2014) highlight the value of rooftop PV in compensating for the regular power outages experienced in most Indian cities due to load shedding. 
This shedding and consequent loss of productivity 
also are mentioned as the main drivers for assessing the potential of rooftop PV in other developing-country cities: see, for example, Adeleke and Smit (2016) for South Africa; Khan (2016) for Pakistan; and Luqman et al. (2015) for Lahore. In this context, simulators capture the potential for decentralised rooftop installations. This makes them essential to modelling solar-based business and policy solutions.1.1. Solar simulators for cities in   
 developing countries
The energy services landscape is evolving rapidly. With the falling cost of PV systems and wide-ranging innovation – net-metering, microgrids and electric mobility on the engineering front, and the evolution of business and financing models and payment systems – there is no a better time for cities to incorporate rooftop PV solutions into their supply mix. Municipal planners in these cities, however, need to develop sound data-driven policies and regulatory regimes to incentivise this process. More pertinently, these policies need to reflect the economic realities of these cities, particularly in developing countries where − as indicated earlier − the issue is a dire need. 
Developing this enabling framework for the most 
part can be quite complex and expensive, depending on the approach taken. It typically starts with a citywide assessment of the rooftop solar potential, where the total available rooftop surface of the entire city is established and then delimited to determine the share of the surface that is suitable for installing solar PV. Castellanos, Sunte and Kammen (2017) distinguish three categories of methods to do this:
• Sampling methodology: A calculation is made of the total available roof surface, based on a detailed analysis over a sample area that is generalised to the entire city.
• Multivariate sampling methodology: The rooftop area per capita is calculated using population density correlated with the types of building and the available area. This is then multiplied by the total city population. 
• Complete census methodology: The entire  
rooftop area is computed by producing either statistical datasets that contain building information (i.e. proportions of commercial, residential and industrial buildings) or by carrying out an analysis by way of a geographic information system (GIS) with 3D models of the city.
APPLICATION TO DEVELOPING CITIES7
The results obtained, using any of these methods, 
ultimately feed into studies that assess suitable policy options to improve the supply, efficiency and sustainability of energy in these cities. In principle, this outcome is achievable through desktop research and anecdotal experience from other cities. 
It is also achievable through initial demonstrations 
on a sample of buildings. For example, Ethekwini – a small municipality in the city of Durban, South Africa – installed solar PV systems on five of its municipal buildings in 2017 to learn about the daily and yearly generation profiles obtainable from these systems. One of the main objectives of this pilot was to create enough local experience of PV systems to develop policies that would guide their deployment across the entire municipality.
The anecdotal approach to policy analysis and 
design is obviously susceptible to potential flaws, as knowledge gaps can result from limited understanding of all potential outcomes of deployment, with a fuller understanding obtainable only through multiple simulations. Pilot implementation, conversely, can be costly. Pilots require time and do not necessarily guarantee representative results. This is where solar simulators that apply complete census methods play a key role, as they provide the capacity to pre-emptively analyse several outcomes prior to roll-out.
Solar simulators employ cutting-edge technology 
that combines know-how in remote sensing, high-performance data processing, 3D building footprint generation and solar irradiation modelling. They are by far the most accurate methodology, can be deployed to study entire cities, and can be applied to support target setting, policy design and market facilitation.
They can also be tuned to provide a variety of 
outputs, including estimates of the installable capacity and generation potential of each rooftop, directly relevant to individual homeowners and property investors, but also very useful for city planning when output is aggregated. Examples of solar simulators include Google’s Project Sunroof
1 
and MIT’s Mapdwell.2Annex 1 provides a non-exhaustive list of places that have employed interactive rooftop solar simulators. As a result they have enabling frameworks with sound policies to lessen the risks associated with investing in rooftop PV. Most of these platforms have been made public and interactive to reach the targeted audience. They form the knowledge base from which to exploit solar energy (Kanters, Wall and Kjellsson, 2014). 
The listed cities are, however, exclusively in developed 
countries with a strong research culture and funding base, where key ingredients of a simulator, such as 3D city plans based on expensive airborne light detection and ranging (LiDAR) measurements, already exist. For the most part, these simulators are also used in other areas of analysis, including estate and infrastructure development. 
Therefore, bringing the value of this technology 
to cities in developing countries would require significant adaptation, both in the technical methodologies – to save cost – and in the development of business cases that adequately reflect these cities’ characteristics. The subsequent parts of this report review in detail the current methods deployed in developing existing solar simulators. The limitations of these methods are highlighted, with an emphasis on the need for their adaptation to solve problems in developing-country cities. It provides insight into a revised cost-competitive approach that can be deployed with considerable ease in such places. 
The work also provides a general breakdown of 
potential cases for the use of simulators, with a solution-focused approach to urban energy planning. It highlights important international influencers, such as the New Urban Agenda adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in resolution 71/256 of 23 December 2016, which could support the push for their deployment across several cities and communities in the developing world.
1. See www.google.com/get/sunroof#p=0 for more information.
2. See www.mapdwell.com/en/solar for more information.
SOLAR SIMULATORS:8
Kanters, Wall and Kjellsson (2014) have compared 
the outputs and impacts of 19 solar simulators in 8 countries. Half of the cadastres in their review were designed to illustrate the level of incoming solar irradiation on rooftops, while the other half simulate the PV output (technical potential). In terms of impact, the city of Basel in Switzerland was cited as an example where the deployment of a solar city simulator encouraged citizens to renovate their roofs so that solar PV systems could be installed on 500 of them. 
Nevertheless, the level of complexity of solar 
simulators varies significantly, from simple static maps describing the potential suitability of a rooftop PV system (e.g. from high to low), to tools that pre-calculate technical potential under fixed assumptions (e.g. production, investment, net present value), to fully interactive technical and financial simulators. IRENA’s literature review supports the classification of solar cadastres by complexity level, as proposed by Kanters, Wall and Kjellsson (2014):
• Basic: Indicates irradiation levels and their categorisation (e.g. high, medium, low irradiation values).2. SOLAR CITY SIMULATORS:        
 APPLICATIONS AND ALTERNATIVE METHODS
• Medium: Indicates irradiation levels, solar system outputs, categorisation of suitable area for solar production and system effect.
• Advanced: Indicates irradiation levels, system (PV, thermal) output, categorisation of suitable area for solar production, system effect, monthly output, financial considerations, information about installers and data regarding solar energy. 
The new generation of advanced online solar simulators can provide analytical support in three major opportunity areas:
• Opportunity 1: target setting: high-level data to provide a broad analysis of solar PV rooftop potential.
• Opportunity 2: policy design: detailed information required to deliver an effective and efficient business case to achieve objectives.
• Opportunity 3: market growth: support to citizens, financers and installers in order to lower investment barriers and risks of investing, as well as increase the volume of installations.Image on this page: Shutterstock
APPLICATION TO DEVELOPING CITIES9
Opportunity 1: Target setting
Setting renewable energy targets is a policy-driven process that uses evaluations of the renewable energy potential as a knowledge base. Solar simulators can support this by providing an evidence- and data-based analysis of solar PV rooftop potential. The analysis establishes the suitability of rooftop areas, corresponding installable capacity, production potential, and levelised cost of electricity (LCOE), particularly for public buildings (AfDB, 2017).
At this level the prevailing preference is for high-
level approaches, whereby an initial assessment is made through sampling and extrapolation (Amado and Poggi, 2014a; Gagnon et al., 2016; Sundaray et al., 2014; Wiginton, Nguyen and Pearce, 2010). With more time and effort, solar simulators that are developed using census methodologies result in more accurate analysis. At such an early stage (target setting), however, the use of this approach should be limited, in the event the municipality does not proceed with solar PV as an option for the city’s energy supply. 
Opportunity 2: Policy design 
Post target setting, once the municipal authorities are convinced of the solar potential for their city as derived either from simplified estimates or advanced solar simulators, the need for an appropriate policy framework arises. This brings more complexity with regard to the granularity of data and required modelling, and is the environment in which solar simulators are most valuable, since they provide a precise vision of the solar rooftop potential. 
Solar simulators are used in the design of these 
policy frameworks, which may include investment incentives, attractive business models (Sundaray et al., 2014) and various tariff scenarios (Martin and Rice, 2018), often in combination. A simulation of the distribution grids with a large share of rooftop solar PV may also be made available. 
The target audience for solar simulators as applied 
to policy design are those cities that are sufficiently ambitious to pursue renewable energy alternatives, and which are in the process of developing relevant regulations. These cities may be participants in or members of the Sustainable Cities Integrated Approach Pilot programme (supported by the Global Environment Facility [GEF, 2017]); the World Bank’s Global Platform for Sustainable Cities; the International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives (ICLEI) (1 500 members); or the 
Covenant of Mayors (7 700 signatories). The main 
outcomes of policy design are evidence-based recommendations and the enhanced capacity of local policy makers in urban energy planning, together with the solar simulator (cadastre) as a knowledge base. 
SOLAR SIMULATORS:10
Opportunity 3: Market facilitation
During implementation of local policy, advanced solar simulators (as presented previously) that are publicly available (web-based) can help identify projects that are potentially profitable, while taking into account the local enabling environment. These online platforms are currently of commercial value and are managed by start-up companies. They operate in countries where the policy framework has reached maturity and the rooftop PV market is sufficiently large to allow these start-ups to sell solar simulators or analysis as a service to municipalities, and/or to use them to connect consumers and installers. At this stage, the most comprehensive online solar simulators are essentially business-to-business and business-to-consumer multi-dimensional platforms that compare electricity demand with supply for each building in the city, and highlight the need for and prospective gains from rooftop installation. 
2.1. Developing solar simulators   
 based on a complete census  
  approach
The creation of a solar simulator can be summarised by a four-step workflow, adapted from Lukač et al. (2013) and Gagnon et al. (2016), as follows: 
• creation of detailed 3D building footprint and digital elevation model (DEM)
• simulation of solar rooftop resource
• identification of suitable roof areas
• simulation of rooftop systems.
These steps provide a geospatial dataset relating to city rooftops. Each polygon (building rooftop) includes information on the height, azimuth, tilt and suitable area(s) of the rooftop, installable capacity and generation potential. 
The creation of the 3D building footprint and DEM 
represent the major cost drivers in the process, which could significantly hinder their deployment in low-income countries. Existing techniques create these by using LiDAR measurement campaigns, which are highly detailed and extremely expensive. The spatial resolution of these input datasets (in centimetres [cm]), reflecting the close accuracy of this method, represents the city while capturing detailed features such as sharp elevation changes in complex rooftop structures. 
Using attributes of the 3D building rooftop structures, 
an estimate of the solar irradiation captured on the surface of each rooftop – and, consequently, the generation potential − can be computed. These pro-forma solar resource generation estimates rely on methods developed to calculate the irradiation on tilted surfaces, which effectively transpose the direct normal (DNI), the diffuse horizontal (DHI) and the ground-reflected irradiation components (see detailed model review in Annex 2). Critical factors, such as shading, are accounted for and used to limit the rooftops to suitable portions upon which PV cells should be installed. This area then forms the basis of rooftop system simulations to estimate generation capacity (Annex 2).
Image on this page: Shutterstock
APPLICATION TO DEVELOPING CITIES11
2.2. Emerging alternative to 
 expensive 3D building 
 footprint and DEM 
 generation
An alternative approach to LiDAR measurement 
campaigns in the generation of the 3D building footprints and DEMs, which is deemed to be less expensive, relies on stereoscopy (photogrammetric techniques) that use high-resolution satellite imagery (up to 30 cm spatial resolution) as input.
For illustrative purposes, IRENA conducted an 
in-house exercise to develop a DEM from a pair of stereoscopic images at 50 cm resolution, representing two perspectives of the same scene (buildings in a city). The height (elevation) of each building was estimated by processing an ortho-rectified pair of images and combining them to observe the parallax between the exact features in the same position. The DEM from this could then be segmented and further processed to create representations of each rooftop’s structure and, eventually, the 3D building rooftop model of the city.
Although the DEM from this exercise identifies the 
rooftop locations (Figure 2), the results require additional refinement to be practically applicable. Specifically, manual edits are necessary at the edges of complex roof types to correct classification errors due to shade or other image noise phenomena, and also to account for obstructions such as trees, water tanks or mounted structures on rooftops (Figure 3). 
Figure 2: Approach and uncertainties of DEM generation from stereo imaging
Notes: A building is imaged twice (a), with a difference in parallax; the curve in (b) represents the colour gradient for a cross-
section of the building (the rooftop edge is not sharply identified, and the actual elevation differs from the calculated height); (c) the grey-coded elevation and the actual building edges are overlaid in black lines; and the elevation profile across the line is observed in (d); artefacts next to the building location may confuse automated recognition software.Source: Zeng, Chuiqing (2014), “Automated building information extraction and evaluation from high-resolution remotely sensed data”, https://ir.lib.uwo.ca/etd/2076 .
BuildingSatellite orbit
(a)Ground Shadow
(b)OcclusionEb1Er
Eb2h
Occlusion
(d)Distance (m)Building
locationDSMElevation (m)
(c)m0     1020         40      60         80
SOLAR SIMULATORS:12
Figure 3: Reconstruction of city DEM from stereo imaging
Notes: Internal simulation using sample satellite images over Melbourne for testing purposes: (a) mosaicked Tri-stero panchromatic 
image bundle shows; (b) the digital terrain model created from ortho-rectified stereoscopic images with resolution at 50 cm; in areas with strong elevation gradients, shading is the cause of difficulties in extracting the elevation ; (c) initial outlines of rooftops are extracted from one of the ortho-images; (d) both inputs are combined to assign an elevation and to delineate the sections of each rooftop. The artefacts on some of the buildings are not properly captured in the digital elevation and terrain model which result in notable omissions in the rooftop segmentation in this image. To correct this, manual edits are required.
Source: Internal simulation produced by IRENA using Airbus (2012), Sample Imagery: Pleiades Tri-stereo panchromatic bundle for 
Melbourne Australia, www.intelligence-airbusds.com/en/8262-sample-imagery .
Although commercial software programs, such 
as PCI Geomatica used in IRENA’s previously mentioned exercise, allow the processing of stereo images, the generation of a high-resolution DEM for an entire city requires significant computational capabilities and skills. The study found these to be obtainable with varying levels of accuracy from a number of private companies, for a fee, for any location in the world due to the availability of high-resolution satellite imagery. The quality of the output, however, may vary depending on the resolution of data input. 
Notably, LiDAR and stereoscopy alike produce 
clouds of elevation points, with the former being better due to the ultra-high resolution, possibly less than 10 cm. The cost of LiDAR campaigns, however, can run into the millions of US dollars for cities 20–30 square kilometres in size – hence the reason 3D building footprint data and high-resolution DEMs are not readily available in developing countries.Although LiDAR campaigns (sometimes coupled with aerial imagery) remain the ideal option, satellite imagery based stereoscopic modelling – achievable for under USD 50 000 for a similar area − provides an inexpensive and fairly accurate option that can be deployed rapidly in developing countries to build the essential data input for the solar resource modelling process. The required overlapping satellite images are, in general, available at 50 cm resolution globally
3 and, in some instances, at 
30 cm resolution from DigitalGlobe’s WorldView-3 and Worldview-4 satellites. The availability of such images taken in conditions that allow for stereoscopic pairing depends on the latitude of the city, with frequencies improving at higher latitudes.
Agugiaro et al. (2012) compare the performance of 
50 cm resolution images with those of 25 cm and conclude that the former would be sufficient to extract the rooftop surfaces and required attributes (tilt and azimuth) for rooftop PV simulation. At that scale, the detailed structure of the roof (e.g. presence of chimneys and other artefacts) would remain unknown. 
3. The satellite coverage can be tested online. See DigitalGlobe at https:/ /discover.digitalglobe.com and LandInfo Worldwide Mapping LLC at http:/ /search. 
 landinfo.com/. For some campaigns, images can be downloaded from US Geological Survey archives at https:/ /earthexplorer.usgs.gov (accessed March 
 2018). 
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
APPLICATION TO DEVELOPING CITIES13
Having established in earlier chapters the technical 
feasibility of developing and running solar simulators, the next question is how these simulators can practically make a difference for cities in the developing world. In other words, what impact can solar simulators have on improving the accessibility, affordability and reliability of electricity supplies?
Building the use-case scenario requires a preliminary 
assessment of each city’s strategy, with the aim of reaching solutions that are tailored to local needs (design thinking). The sections that follow discuss some of the issues that developing-country cities may face, based on the body of literature reviewed:
• Case 1 provides a baseline scenario: the interest in growing rooftop PV is driven by the economics of the technology and the opportunity to reduce the carbon dioxide impacts of electricity production.
• Case 2 presents constrained access based on supply: the main issue is the lack of access to or intermittent supply of electricity, rather than that of pricing.
• Case 3 presents constrained access based on prices: the prospective cost of grid extension, especially to remote communities, results in electricity prices that hamper economic and social development.
• Case 4 offers a sustainable city scenario: the municipality investigates the opportunities for modern energy services and sector coupling (e.g. coupling solar with heating and cooling or  with transport).3. LOW-COST SIMULATORS FOR SOLAR POLICY DESIGN 
Case 1. Accessible, affordable and reliable   
 electricity supply
This is the current environment in which solar simulators have been produced so far (see list in Annex 2). In this case, specific attention is paid to taking advantage of falling PV production costs where grid parity has been reached or surpassed. Simulations are based on the expectation that the electricity produced would satisfy household demand either partially or completely. The existing simulators that address this case have options to assume gross or net metering, allowing the economics of a PV system to be assessed in an interactive fashion based on available financial incentives. The decision of a building owner to invest in a PV system is assumed to be one based on a comparison of the system’s LCOE against the electricity retail price, accounting for possible local tax exemptions, premiums or tariffs. 
Case 2. Unreliable electricity supply
In this case, solar PV adds value by bridging the gap created by electricity demand that is unsatisfied. When backup power capacity is used, the economics of the PV system is compared to the LCOE of alternatives (e.g. diesel generator, kerosene). In such case, the solar PV system improves access by lowering the kilowatt hour price. When there is no alternative, however, the PV system may improve access by increasing power reliability and daily energy availability. 
A major variance in this scenario would be the 
addition of storage for a single household, or for mini-grids at the district level. This level of simulation requires a more complex supply and demand analysis, as well as a review of load profiles. IRENA’s online Project Navigator offers a residential solar PV evaluation model that includes storage criteria (IRENA, 2018).
Building the use-case scenario 
for solar simulators requires a preliminary assessment of each city’s energy strategy
SOLAR SIMULATORS:14
Case 3. High electricity prices due to excessive   
 grid extension costs
In this case, rooftop PV is investigated as an 
alternative to extending the electricity grid to remote communities or creating standalone electricity grids – which could give rise to electricity prices that are exorbitant, that constrain demand for the service, and consequently result in adverse impacts on the local economy. The main dimensioning parameters include the load and production profiles, investment costs, and capital and maintenance costs (e.g. inverter). 
Case 4. End-use sector coupling
Accelerated urbanisation rates translate into an urgent demand for improved infrastructure, services and institutions. The complexity of urban infrastructure requires collaboration at the highest levels to address multiple-sector coupling, referred to as the Urban Nexus in GIZ and ICLEI (2014). Urban issues are complex and require solar simulators to provide the necessary baseline information to conduct an analysis of energy policy. A prime example for reference is electric mobility (e-mobility).The global market for electric vehicles is growing at a rapid pace, having exceeded 2 million units in 2016 (IEA, 2017). Electric cars outnumber public charging stations at a 6:1 ratio, and most drivers rely on private charging stations to power their vehicles.
According to the International Energy Agency (IEA, 
2017) and Bauer et al. (2017), the e-mobility sector is expected to create important sector coupling opportunities and could change demand profiles. One option to mitigate the impacts of electric vehicle charging is to incentivise self-consumption through solar systems (IEA, 2017). This is a case of sector coupling that is examined by Byrd et al. (2013). A high-resolution solar simulator is used to simulate daily net-metering patterns and assess the energy absorption of electric vehicles through self-consumption.
One option to mitigate the effect 
of electric vehicle charging on the electricity system in cities in the future will be to encourage self consumption through solar PV.

APPLICATION TO DEVELOPING CITIES15
The Global Atlas for Renewable Energy is IRENA’s 
platform to promote best practices in renewable energy resource assessment globally. It comprises a web-based geographic information platform, coupled with offline zoning and site assessment services aimed at facilitating the development of renewable energy markets worldwide. The web platform provides access to more than 2 000 renewable energy maps covering solar, 
wind, geothermal, biomass and tidal energy, and has played host to more than 200 000 online 
professionals since 2013.
Drawing on the technical expertise, datasets and 
network built around the platform over the years, IRENA is in the process of demonstrating a pilot solar city simulator − the SolarCityEngine − in the cities of Kasese in Uganda and Zhangjiakou in China. While the demonstration in Zhangjiakou is yet to start, that in Kasese has progressed significantly. In Kasese,  a settlement with a population of slightly more than a 100 000 people, Case 1 and Case 2 will be tested. 
The solar simulator for Kasese – now quite advanced 
in design − addresses purchase and lease financing options for rooftop solar PV installations in the city, with three business cases: 
• That of an individual home owner seeking to compare rooftop PV to alternatives.
• An estate promoter investigating the prospects of a small community (group of buildings) being equipped with rooftop solar.
• A simplified case of a municipality investigating the cost of different policy options on a broad scale, across the entire city. 4. AN IRENA SOLAR CITY SIMULATOR: 
 DEMONSTRATION IN UGANDA AND CHINA
For individual homes and small communities, this simulator allows for the dynamic optimisation of PV systems on rooftops in the city and generates several key decision factors, such as total available surface area, installable capacity, generation potential, total investment cost, LCOE, net present value and savings, among others. The same tool also helps to investigate the long-term benefits of rooftop PV installations in load-shedding situations compared to alternatives (e.g. small gasoline generator sets).
For municipal authorities, the system optimises 
installations for the entire city, assuming the best areas are equipped to meet target capacity. It allows for highly simplified simulations of the impact of a limited list of policy options – on the viability and affordability of rooftop systems in the community. One example addressed in this tool is the effect of import tax reductions on the tariff  (under a lease model) for a target installed capacity across the city. The outputs may include the total volume of investment created, the value per unit of government spending, and indices to estimate affordability, i.e. the per kilowatt-hour PV electricity price as a percentage of daily household income, and the quantity of electricity that can be purchased at this price with 10% of daily household income.
This demonstration is intended to highlight the 
opportunities for growth in rooftop installations in Kasese. In addition, and as a consequence, it should stimulate the appetite of municipal authorities in other cities in developing countries to take full advantage of the benefits of low-cost solar simulators.
A simulator for Kasese, Uganda, offers financing options
for solar PV installation
SOLAR SIMULATORS:16
This report was prepared in the context of ongoing 
activity by IRENA to demonstrate the impact of deploying low-cost rooftop solar PV simulators, primarily to support the energy transition in cities of developing countries. The report is a product of a detailed review of literature to understand the processes behind solar rooftop PV simulator tools and their effectiveness at providing accurate information on solar potential at a resolution high enough to assess rooftop spaces in cities.
The report concludes that solar PV simulators that 
embrace cutting-edge technology – combining know-how in remote sensing, high-performance data processing, 3D building footprint generation and solar irradiation modelling – can be deployed cost-effectively in cities in developing countries for a wide range of applications.
Primarily, at the individual level, they can be 
used to study the economics of a rooftop solar PV installation. For municipalities, they can be used to: assess ways to boost access to electricity 5. CONCLUSION
or improve intermittent electricity supply; investigate options to reduce consumer prices for electricity through rooftop PV programmes; or to assess the opportunities for end-use sector coupling (e.g. coupling solar heating and cooling with transport).
The report also concludes that these tools – currently 
only available to cities in developed countries (see Annex 1) – can now be built cost-effectively and deployed in cities in developing countries to provide input to the process of urban planning and, specifically, that of developing solar PV rooftop programmes in these settings.
The findings of this work are intended to motivate 
further dialogue on energy planning in the urban context. Most importantly, they are meant to spur the increased use of proven data-driven techniques – such as solar simulators – to create actionable and pragmatic policy and economic solutions. Better-informed solutions, in turn, should enhance energy sustainability in the cities of developing countries.
APPLICATION TO DEVELOPING CITIES17
REFERENCES
Adeleke, A. K. and J. L. Smit (2016), “Integration of LiDAR data with aerial imagery for estimating rooftop 
solar photovoltaic potentials in the city of Cape Town”, Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, XLI-B7, pp. 617−24.
AfDB (2017), Uganda: Decentralized Renewables Development Program, RDGE Department, African 
Development Bank, Abidjan, www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Project-and-Operations/UGANDA_-_Approved_Decentralised_Renewables_Development_Program.pdf. 
Agugiaro, G. et al. (2012), “Solar radiation estimation on building roofs and web-based solar cadaster”, 
ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Vol. I-2, pp. 177−82, XXII ISPRS Congress, 25 August–1 September, Melbourne, Australia, https:/ /pdfs.semanticscholar.org/1cd7/
cbc86f3b93cc898f74d167892b9c48c186f0.pdf. 
Amado, M. and F. Poggi (2012), “Towards solar urban planning: A new step for better energy performance”, 
Energy Procedia, Vol. 30, pp. 1261–73, www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1876610212016554.  
Airbus (2012), Sample Imagery: Pleiades Tri-stereo panchromatic bundle for Melbourne Australia, Airbus 
Defence and Space Company, www.intelligence-airbusds.com/en/8262-sample-imagery.
Bauer, Roland et al. (2017), “E-Mobility and its future effect on demand and flexibility: Chances and 
challenges 2035 from a transmission system operator’s perspective”, 1st E-Mobility Power System Integration Symposium, Berlin, Germany, 23 October, http:/ /mobilityintegrationsymposium.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/7/2017/11/1_3_EMob17_190_paper_Roland_Bauer.pdf. 
Bourges, Bernard (1986), “Le calcul de l’éclairement solaire sur plans inclinés”, La Météorologie, 7ème série, 
Vol. 11, pp. 58-68.
Boz, Mesude Bayrakci, Kirby Calvert and Jeffrey R. S. Brownson (2015), “An automated model for rooftop 
PV systems assessment in ArcGIS using LiDAR”, AIMS Energy, Vol. 3(3), pp. 401−20, www.aimspress.com/article/10.3934/energy.2015.3.401.
Byrd, Hugh et al. (2013), “Measuring the solar potential of a city and its implications for energy 
policy”, Energy Policy, Vol. 61, pp. 944–52, https:/ /econpapers.repec.org/article/eeeenepol/v_3a61_3ay_3a2013_3ai_3ac_3ap_3a944-952.htm. 
Castellanos, Sergio, Deborah A. Sunte and Daniel M. Kammen (2017), “Rooftop solar photovoltaic potential 
in cities: How scalable are assessment approaches?”, Environmental Research Letters, 12 125005, https:/ /rael.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Castellanos_2017_Environ._Res._Lett._12_125005.pdf. 
Eicker, Ursula et al. (2014), “Assessing passive and active solar energy resources in cities using 3D city 
models”, Energy Procedia, Vol. 57, pp. 896−905. 
ESMAP (2017), State of Electricity Access Report, Energy Sector Management Assistance Program, World 
Bank, Washington, DC, www.esmap.org/node/58016. 
Frankfurt School – UNEP Collaborating Centre for Climate and Sustainable Energy Finance (2015), 
Renewable Energy in Hybrid Mini-Grids and Isolated Grids: Economic Benefits and Business Cases, Frankfurt 
School of Finance & Management gGmbH, www.irena.org/publications/2015/Jul/Renewable-Energy-in-
Hybrid-Mini-Grids-and-Isolated-Grids-Economic-Benefits-and-Business-Cases. 
Gagnon, Pieter et al. (2016), “Rooftop solar photovoltaic technical potential in the United States: A detailed assessment”, NREL/TP P-6A20-65298, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Denver, Colorado, www.nrel.
gov/docs/fy16osti/65298.pdf. 
SOLAR SIMULATORS:18
GEF (2017), “GEF-7 Programming Directions and Policy Agenda”, First Meeting for the Seventh Replenishment 
of the GEF Trust Fund, Ref. GEF/R.7/02, Global Environment Facility, Washington, DC, www.thegef.org/sites/default/files/council-meeting-documents/GEF-7%20Programming%20and%20Policy%20Document%20.pdf. 
GIZ and ICLEI (2014), Operationalizing the Urban NEXUS Towards Resource-Efficient and Integrated Cities 
and Metropolitan Regions, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit GmbH, in collaboration with Local Governments for Sustainability on behalf of the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development, www2.giz.de/wbf/4tDx9kw63gma/UrbanNEXUS_Publication_ICLEI-GIZ_2014_kl.pdf. 
IEA (International Energy Agency) (2018), Solar Energy in Urban Planning, Solar Heating and Cooling 
Programme, OECD/IEA, Paris, http:/ /task51.iea-shc.org/. 
IEA (2017), Global EV Outlook 2017: Two Million and Counting, Clean Energy Ministerial, OECD/IEA, Paris, 
www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/GlobalEVOutlook2017.pdf. 
IRENA (2018), IRENA Project Navigator (online platform), International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu 
Dhabi, https:/ /navigator.irena.org/index.html (accessed March 2018).
IRENA (2017), IRENA Cost and Competitiveness Indicators: Rooftop Solar PV, International Renewable 
Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi, www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2017/Dec/IRENA_Cost_Indicators_PV_2017.pdf.  
IRENA (2016), Renewable Energy in Cities, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi, www.irena.
org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/IRENA_Renewable_Energy_in_Cities_2016.pdf. 
Kanters, Jouri, Maria Wall and Elisabeth Kjellsson (2014), “The solar map as a knowledge base for solar 
energy use”, Energy Procedia, Vol. 48(0), pp. 1597–606, www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1876610214004421. 
Khan, Jibran and Mudassar Hassan Arsalan (2016), “Estimation of rooftop solar photovoltaic potential 
using geo-spatial techniques: A perspective from planned neighborhood of Karachi – Pakistan”, Renewable Energy, Vol. 90, pp. 188−203. 
Lukač, N. et al. (2013), “Rating of roofs’ surfaces regarding their solar potential and suitability for PV systems, 
based on LiDAR data”, Applied Energy, Vol. 102, pp. 803−12. 
Luqman, Muhammad et al. (2015), “Estimation of solar energy potential from rooftop of Punjab Government 
Servants Cooperative Housing Society Lahore using GIS”, www.scirp.org/journal/PaperInformation.aspx?paperID=56795.  
Martin, Nigel and John Rice (2018), “Solar feed-In tariffs: Examining fair and reasonable retail rates using 
cost avoidance estimates”, Energy Policy, Vol. 112, pp. 19−28, https:/ /kundoc.com/pdf-solar-feed-in-tariffs-
examining-fair-and-reasonable-retail-rates-using-cost-avoi.html.
Mthethwa (2017), “EThekwini launches first solar energy project”, Ethekwini News Flash, Durban, www.
durban.gov.za/Resource_Centre/Press_Releases/Pages/EThekwini-Launches-First-Solar-Energy-Project.aspx.  
Mubarak, Riyad et al. (2017), “Comparison of modelled and measured tilted solar irradiance for photovoltaic 
applications”, Energies, Vol. 10, Iss. 11, 1688, doi:10.3390/en10111688, www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/10/11/1688/htm.
APPLICATION TO DEVELOPING CITIES19
NREL (2014), “Distributed solar PV for electricity system resiliency”, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 
Denver, Colorado, www.nrel.gov/docs/fy15osti/62631.pdf.
Sundaray, Sundakar et al. (2014), Reaching the Sun with Rooftop Solar, The Energy and Resources Institute, 
New Delhi, http:/ /mnre.gov.in/file-manager/UserFiles/Rooftop-SPV-White-Paper-low.pdf.
Wiginton, L. K., H.T. Nguyen and J.M. Pearce (2010), “Quantifying rooftop solar photovoltaic potential for 
regional renewable energy policy”, Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, Vol. 34, pp. 345−57.
Wolfs, Tinsley (2017), “GIS-based approach to estimate the geographic potential for rooftop solar 
PV: Developing a database at building-level for Denmark”, Geoinformatics Master’s Thesis, School of Architecture, Design and Planning, Aalborg University, Copenhagen, 6 September, 52  pp., http:/ /projekter.aau.dk/projekter/files/260035888/SPLM_MSC04_Thesis_Final_T.Wolfs_20151525.pdf. 
World Bank (2017), World Bank Open Data, https:/ /data.worldbank.org (accessed on April 2018).
World Bank (2015), “Ending extreme poverty and sharing prosperity: Progress and policies”, Policy 
Research Note, World Bank, Washington, DC, http:/ /pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/109701443800596288/PRN03Oct2015TwinGoals.pdf. 
Zeng, Chuiqing (2014), “Automated building information extraction and evaluation from high-resolution 
remotely sensed data”, Electronic Thesis and Dissertation Repository, 2076, https:/ /ir.lib.uwo.ca/etd/2076.
SOLAR SIMULATORS:20
ANNEX 1. INTERACTIVE SOLAR ROOFTOP SIMULATORS AND 
 CADASTRES: A NON-EXHAUSTIVE LIST
Aachen (Germany)Geoportal Aachen: https:/ /geoportal.aachen.de/extern/?lang=de&basemap=luftbi-
ld2016&blop=1&x=294405.36611213&y=5628845.6132009&zl=15&hl=0&layers=solara-
nalyse57e2770b86066&theme=3
Amersfoort (the 
Netherlands)Amersfoort rooftop solar PV installation and generation potential simulator:
http:/ /amersfoort.burokarto.nl
Annecy, Bordeaux, Lyon, 
Nantes, Paris (France)Solar cadastres for:
Annecy, Bordeaux, Lyon: www.cythelia.fr/energies-renouvelables/expertise/cadas-
tre-solaire/ 
Nantes https:/ /nantes-metropole.insunwetrust.solar/simulateurParis: http:/ /capgeo.sig.paris.fr/Apps/CadastreSolaire/ 
Berlin (Germany)Berlin Solar Atlas (by business location centre)www.businesslocationcenter.de/wab/maps/solaratlas/?startingmap=ol3&leg-
endposition=left&layerToActivate=solarpotential_gebaeude_2013&ground-
Position=13.39848,52.51573&distance=3217.64&headerTitle=Solaratlas+Ber -
lin&lang=de&WAB-REDIRECT=1
Calgary (Canada)
Calgary Solar Potential Map:
https:/ /maps.calgary.ca/SolarPotential/
Dusseldorf (Germany)Rooftop Solar Suitability Indicator for Dusseldorf:http:/ /details.solare-stadt.de/duesseldorf 
Geneva (Switzerland) Solar Cadastre of the Territory of Geneva:www.etat.ge.ch/geoportail/pro/?mapresources=GEOTHERMIE%2CENERGIE_
SOLAIRE%2CENERGIE&hidden=GEOTHERMIE%2CENERGIE_SOLAIRE
Graz (Austria)
Geodata Portal of Graz:
https:/ /geodaten.graz.at/WebOffice/synserver?project=solar_pv&client=core
Lisbon (Portugal)Rooftop Solar Potential Platform of Lisbon by Lisboa e.Nova:http:/ /80.251.174.200/lisboae-nova/potencialsolar/
Marburg (Germany)
Solar Cadastre of Marburg:www.gpm-webgis-10.de/geoapp/solarkataster/marburg/
Solingen (Germany) Rooftop Solar Potential Platform for Solingen:https:/ /stadtplan.solingen.de/buergerservice1/ol3/sg_layout.html?gui=solar&s-
cale=4&x=2576000&y=5671201&wmslayer=1,0
The Netherlands
Zone Atlas of the Netherlands:
www.zonatlas.nl/home/
United StatesMapdwell: www.mapdwell.com/en/solar Google sunroof: www.google.com/get/sunroof#p=0
Tyrol (Austria)
SOLAR-TIROL Solar Potential Database:http:/ /webgis.eurac.edu/solartirol/
Vienna (Austria)
Vienna Solar Potential Cadastre:www.wien.gv.at/umweltgut/public/grafik.aspx?ThemePage=9
APPLICATION TO DEVELOPING CITIES21
ANNEX 2. THE SOLAR RESOURCE MODELLING PROCESS
An estimate of solar irradiation on the tilted surfaces 
of various orientations is essential to simulate the production of PV arrays. For this, transposition models that estimate the solar irradiance incident on tilted PV panels are used. The global horizontal irradiance (GHI) consists of three components: the direct normal, the diffuse and a third component due to reflectance from earth surfaces. 
Transposing the direct component is fairly 
straightforward, using commonly agreed trigonometric transformations that take into account the sun’s azimuth and the tilt angle of the location. Where opinions differ is in the handling of the diffuse component. Mubarak et al. (2017) compared five models built for this purpose (i.e. the models of Liu and Jordan, Klucher, Hay and Davies, Reidl and Perez). In their review, anisotropic models offer a finer description of the diffuse component, presenting a higher performance compared to isotropic models, which assume that all directions contribute equally to the diffuse irradiance component (Bourges, 1986).
The influence of isotropy on solar rooftop resource 
estimation has been calculated by Clean Power Research, comparing the results from current isotropic methods (Figure A2.1(a) and Figure A2.1(c)) to the results obtained with anisotropic methods (Figure A2.1(b) and Figure A2.1(d)). Isotropic methods tend to underestimate the predicted hours of sunlight and irradiation (Figure A2.1(e)). 
Beyond isotropy, other elements explain the 
differences between the two approaches. The isotropic method used in this example was used to evaluate the rooftop potential for the United States. Reflecting the magnitude of this work, attempts were made to optimise the calculation time by binning tilt and azimuth data into 15-degree sectors, discarding north-oriented surfaces and discarding heavily tilted surfaces (above 60 degrees in tilt).
Figure A2.1: Illustration of the influence of anisotropy on solar rooftop resource estimation
1,500
1,000
5001,500
1,000
500
37.795 37.790 37.785
-122.405 -122.400 -122.395 -122.390
37.795 37.790 37.785
-122.405 -122.400 -122.395 -122.390a. b.
1,500
-1,5001,000
-1,000500
-5000
37.795 37.790 37.785
-122.405 -122.400 -122.395 -122.390e.
37.795 37.790 37.785
-122.405 -122.400 -122.395 -122.390c.
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
37.795 37.790 37.785
-122.405 -122.400 -122.395 -122.390d.
12345
Notes: Estimates of annual radiation in kilowatt hour/square metre/year from (a) isotropic method and (b) anisotropic method; 
predicted number of hours of sunlight with (c) isotropic method and (d) anisotropic method; the error map (isotropic–anisotropic) in kilowatt hour/square metre/year is presented in (e). Source: Clean Power Research.
SOLAR SIMULATORS:22
4. See https:/ /grass.osgeo.org/grass74/manuals/r.sun.html (accessed April 2018).
5. See PV Performance Modeling Collaborative at https:/ /pvpmc.sandia.gov/modeling-steps/1-weather-design-inputs/plane-of-array-poa-irradiance/ 
 calculating-poa-irradiance/poa-sky-diffuse/ (accessed on March 2018).Once calculated on a tilted plane, the irradiance 
values should be corrected for shadowing effects from neighbouring buildings and vegetation. Lukač et al. (2013) detailed a methodology using an 
As explained in Lukač et al. (2013) (Figure A2.2), the irradiance at any point is calculated in a time-dependent manner (e.g. hourly, although r.sun indicates a 30-minute timestamp) by weighting the direct irradiation component on the tilted surface with a shading coefficient. The shadowing is assumed to affect only the direct tilted irradiation (DTI) component. The diffuse horizontal irradiation 
(DHI) component remaining unaffected. 
These assumptions lead to a simplified instantaneous 
global tilted irradiance (GTI) on a tilted surface that becomes, at any moment t:
GTI (t) = DTI (t) (1 – S) + DHI (t), where:isotropic transposition model. While the irradiance 
calculation differs, their approach to shadowing calculations is similar to the open-source software r.sun
4 and the ArcGIS solar analyst (Wolfs, 2017). 
 »S is the shadowing effect, which is discussed below.
 »DTI and DHI have previously been transposed from their horizontal components to the tilted surface (i.e. the rooftop surface or PV panel surface) using a transposition model.  The model discussed here includes the direct and diffuse irradiance components and does not include the reflected component due to the albedo of the ground surface, which is assumed to be negligible.Figure A2.2: Solar cadastre generation workflow
Notes: Irradiance, shadows and vegetation shadowing are considered separately, and combined to calculate the solar insolation 
at any given point of the rooftop area; LAI = leaf area index. Source: Lukač, N. et al. (2013), “Rating of roofs’ surfaces regarding their solar potential and suitability for PV systems, based on LiDAR data”, Applied Energy, Vol. 102, pp. 803−12.Data preparation
Irradiance
calculationShadows
calculationSun’s position 
calculation
Vegetation
shadowing
LAI dataSolar insolation
calculation
Solar potential 
calculation
Roof rating listSuitability 
ﬁlteringRoofs 
segmentationPyranometer
dataDEM surrounding 
dataClassiﬁed
LIDAR data1
2
3 4
5
6
7
APPLICATION TO DEVELOPING CITIES23
The GTI is calculated for each unit of time and, therefore, 
the daily irradiation value is the integral of the values between sunrise and sunset. The annual potential is the average daily insolation throughout the year. 
In addition, the shadowing effect from neighbouring 
buildings is calculated by simulating the sun’s position over time. The model will test if a particular map cell is casting shadows onto other cells. A shadowing flag is raised for that particular cell at that particular point in time if shadowing is detected (Figure A2.3). The shadowing analysis is performed at various resolution levels to account for shadowing from terrain and from smaller objects. The calculation of shadows at every point produces hourly shadowing maps, similar to those presented in Figures A2.4 and A2.5. Boz, Calvert and Brownson (2015) and Gagnon et al. (2016) limit the computational requirements by selecting specific days, representative of a single month or season.
Figure A2.3: Illustration of the shadowing approach
Figure A2.4: Example of hourly shading and sunlight availability
Note: The sun’s position is simulated to assess if cell (b) is being shadowed by cell (a) at a given time.
Source: Lukač, N. et al. (2013), “Rating of roofs’ surfaces regarding their solar potential and suitability for PV systems, based on LiDAR data”, Applied Energy, Vol. 102, pp 803−12.
Source: Gagnon et al. (2016), “Rooftop solar photovoltaic technical potential in the United States: A detailed assessment”, NREL/
TP P-6A20-65298, www.nrel.gov/docs/fy16osti/65298.pdf.Sun
C
ay a
b
Dh
by
hmln
March 21, 2:00 PM March 21, 4:00 PM March 21, 3:00 PM 
SOLAR SIMULATORS:24
Figure A2.5: Example of average daily hours of sunlight
Based on Gagnon et al. (2016), “Rooftop solar photovoltaic technical potential in the United States: A detailed assessment”, 
NREL/TP P-6A20-65298, www.nrel.gov/docs/fy16osti/65298.pdf.Number of hourly simulations in sunlight
0
0% 50% 100%1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
The shadowing from vegetation takes into 
consideration categories of canopies, either deciduous or coniferous. Deciduous vegetation drops its leaves during winter. A light absorption coefficient, varying between 0 and 1, is used to simulate the light absorption by the canopy. 
At the exclusion of detailing the methodologies 
developed in the literature, it should be highlighted that calculating a solar cadastre requires a run of the solar irradiance models and the shading model for every rooftop at a time interval of 30 minutes to one hour over a period of one year. 
Having calculated the solar irradiation, selecting the 
rooftop areas suitable for deployment is the final step in the process of estimating the potential. In practice, the most common constraints relate to the azimuth, the tilt of the rooftop surface. Complex decision points include: »the definition of flat rooftops, as well as the optimal tilt angle that will be assigned to this category (the optimal angle will vary with latitude and is therefore city-dependent)
 »PV system performance, usually ranging from 14% to 18%.
The total potential for the city is obtained by aggregating the values obtained for each rooftop. Practically, this would require extensive consultation with the final recipient of the modelling results since it is possible to change the perspective according to selected thresholds. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern 
 
Process Documentation 
June 27, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental & Occupational Health Programs 
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
286 Water Street, 3 rd  Floor, Augusta, ME 04333 
207.287.4311 /circle6/circle6 /circle6/circle6 866.292.3474 

 
Table of Contents 
 
I. Executive Summary .............................. ................................................... ............................................. 1 
II. Introduction .................................. ................................................... ................................................... .. 2 
III. Starting Point for the MECDC Process: The Stat e of Washington List of Potential Chemicals of High  
Concern for Children .............................. ................................................... ............................................ 3 
IV. MECDC Process to Identify Chemicals of High Con cern .............................................. ......................... 8 
A. Step 1 – Identify and exclude chemicals not on M aine’s list of CC, already addressed by other 
regulatory frameworks, and unlikely to be added to consumer products. ................................ .. 8 
B. Step 2 – Identify chemicals on the list that may  not meet the statutory definition of “credible 
scientific evidence.” ............................. ................................................... ...................................... 9 
1. Chemicals on the California Proposition 65 list of carcinogens .................................... .............. 10 
2. Chemicals on the California Proposition 65 list for reproductive or developmental toxicants . 10 
3. Chemicals on the Washington PBT list ........... ................................................... ......................... 11 
C. Step 3 – Prioritize the remaining chemicals acco rding to weight of evidence of toxicity and 
potential for exposure. ........................... ................................................... ................................. 12 
1. Toxicity criteria used for prioritizing ........ ................................................... ................................ 13 
2. Exposure criteria used for prioritizing ........ ................................................... ............................. 14 
3. Application of Prioritizing Criteria ........... ................................................... ................................ 16 
V. Description databases relied on in developing a list of Chemicals of High Concern ................. ............. 19 
 
Appendix I:   List of candidate chemicals of high c oncern with results from applying prioritization sc heme 
Appendix II:   Final list of chemicals of high conc ern with results from applying prioritization schem e 
Appendix III:  Narrative of chemical specific inclu sion criteria for chemicals of high concern 
Appendix IV:  Reference list for candidate chemical s 
Appendix V:   Maine Department of Environmental Pro tection Process Documentation for Investigating 
Chemical Presence in Consumer Products 
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 1 
 I. Executive Summary 
The Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  (MECDC), in consultation with the Maine 
Department of Environmental Protection (MEDEP) is r equired by Maine Title 38, Chapter 16-D 
Toxic Chemicals in Children’s Products to develop a  list of chemicals of high concern (CHC) 
from an existing list of 1384 Chemicals of Concern (CC) designated to be toxic by the State of 
Maine.  The list of CHC is not to exceed 70 chemica ls.  In developing the list, MECDC is 
directed to make a finding that there is strong cre dible scientific evidence that a chemical is 
reproductive or developmental toxicant, endocrine d isruptor or human carcinogen.  A finding 
must also be made that the chemical has been found in the human body through biomonitoring 
studies, present in the home environment, or presen t in a consumer product used or present in the 
home.   
MECDC used as a starting point a list of 184 “Chemi cals of High Concern for Children” 
developed by the State of Washington. Washington be gan with a list of over 2000 “high priority 
chemicals” that included all 1384 of Maine’s CC.  W ashington then derived a separate list of 
over 2000 chemicals believe to have exposure potent ial.  The intersection of these two lists 
yielded 476 chemicals with both toxicity and exposu re information.  The list of 476 was then 
reduced to 184 chemicals by excluding chemicals sub ject to overlapping regulatory initiatives, 
chemicals unlikely to be in consumer products, chem icals with limited toxicity data, and 
chemicals primarily of concern because of ecologica l toxicity.   
MECDC followed a three step process to develop a li st of Maine CHC from the Washington list 
of 184 chemicals:  Step 1 – Identify and exclude an y chemicals either not on Maine’s list of 1384 
chemicals of concern, already addressed by Maine or  other regulatory frameworks, or unlikely to 
be added to consumer products; Step 2 – Identify ch emicals on the list that may not meet the 
statutory definition of “credible scientific eviden ce” as defined by statute; Step 3 – Prioritize the 
remaining chemicals according to weight of evidence  of toxicity and potential for exposure. 
MECDC relied on many – though not all - of the same  toxicity databases used by the state of 
Washington.  One notable difference is that Maine s tatute does not authorize reliance on state 
databases of toxicity.  MECDC applied a similar pri oritizing scheme as Washington (e.g., 
including only carcinogens known to cause cancer in  humans).  MECDC and MEDEP worked 
collaboratively to update and expand Washington’s a ssessment of exposure potential for 
candidate CHC.  This included performing literature  searches to obtain more data about presence 
of chemicals in the human body, indoor air, or hous ehold dust.  It also included evaluating an 
expanded list of national and international databas es to identify chemicals in consumer products.   
The final list of Chemicals of High Concern consist s of 49 chemicals.  The majority of these 
chemicals are on the list either because they are k nown human carcinogens or endocrine 
disruptors.  Nearly two-thirds of these chemicals h ad information indicating their presence in 
human body. 
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 2 
 §1693 –A. Identification of chemicals of high 
concern 
1.  List.  By July 1, 2012, the department shall publish a  
list of no more than 70 chemicals of high concern.  The 
Department of Health and Human Services, Maine 
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, in 
consultation with the department, shall develop the li st.  
To be listed as a chemical of high concern, a chemical 
must be on the list of chemicals of concern pursuant to 
section 1693 and meet the eligibility criteria of 
subsection 2.   
 
2.  Criteria.  A chemical of concern on the list of chemicals 
of concern pursuant to section 1693 may be included in 
the list published pursuant to subsection 1 if the 
department, in concurrence with the Department of 
Health and Human Services, Maine Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention, determines that there is stron g 
credible scientific evidence that the chemical is 
reproductive or developmental toxicant, endocrine 
disruptor or human carcinogen, and there is strong 
credible scientific evidence that the chemical meets one 
or more of the following criteria: 
 
a.  The chemical has been found through biomonitoring 
studies to be present in human blood, human breast 
milk, human urine or other bodily tissues or fluids;  
 
b.  The chemical has been found through sampling and 
analysis to be present in household dust, indoor air 
or drinking water or elsewhere in the home 
environment; or  
 
c.  The chemical has been added to or is present in a 
consumer product used or present in the home.  II. Introduction 
Maine Title 38, Chapter 16-D Toxic Chemicals in Chi ldren’s Products1  requires the Maine 
Center for Disease Control (MECDC) to develop a lis t of chemicals of high concern (CHC) by 
July 1, 2012, in consultation with the Maine Depart ment of Environmental Protection (MEDEP).   
This list is to consist of no more than 70 
chemicals. The list is to be based on 
“credible scientific evidence,” defined in 
the statute  “as the results of a study, the 
experimental design and conduct of 
which have undergone independent 
scientific peer review, that are published 
in a peer-reviewed journal or publication 
of an authoritative federal or international 
governmental agency, including but not 
limited to the United States Department 
of Health and Human Services, National 
Toxicology Program, Food and Drug 
Administration and Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention; the United States 
Environmental Protection Agency; the 
World Health Organization; and the 
European Union, European Chemicals 
Agency.” Note that authoritative lists are 
to be national or international (not state), 
and that peer-reviewed studies may also 
be considered in determining whether a 
chemical meets the criteria for “credible 
scientific evidence.”   
The toxicity criteria used to develop the 
list are that there is strong credible scientific e vidence that the chemical is a developmental or 
reproductive toxicant, endocrine disruptor, or huma n carcinogen. Further, there must be strong 
credible scientific evidence of one of the followin g exposure criteria: the chemical is present in 
the human body based on biomonitoring studies; it h as been found to be present in household 
dust, indoor air, or drinking water based on sampli ng; it has been added or is present in a 
consumer product used or present in the home. The s ources used for deriving the list of 70 or 
fewer chemicals were chosen to comply with these cr iteria. 
                                                           
1 http://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/statutes/38/t itle38sec1693-A.html   
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 3 
 III. Starting Point for the MECDC Process: The State of Washington 
List of Potential Chemicals of High Concern for Chi ldren 
The State of Washington passed Chapter 70.240 RCW Children’s Safer Products 2 that in part 
required the state to develop a list of high priori ty chemicals to which children may be exposed.  
The State of Washington, through a publicly-reviewe d process, first developed a list of 184 
chemicals determined to have both toxicity and expo sure information (referred to as Phase 1 
assessment), referred to as a list of potential che micals of high concern for children. These 184 
chemicals then underwent further evaluation by a se cond set of criteria (referred to as Phase 2) to 
develop a prioritize list of 66 chemicals subject t o reporting requirements.   
MECDC has accepted the Phase 1 assessment carried o ut by the State of Washington as the 
starting point for Maine’s prioritizing process to identify up to 70 chemicals of high concern 
(CHC).  Washington’s Phase 1 process is briefly sum marized below and in Figure 1.  For more 
information, visit the State of Washington’s websit e where documents describing their process 
can be viewed.3     
Washington began by assembling a list of “high prio rity chemicals” (HPC) defined by statute to 
have met one or more of the following criteria.4  
(a) Harm the normal development of a fetus or child  or cause other developmental toxicity  
(b) Cause cancer, genetic damage, or reproductive h arm  
(c) Disrupt the endocrine system 
(d) Damage the nervous system, immune system, or or gans or cause other systemic toxicity  
(e) Be persistent, bioaccumulative, and toxic  
(f) Be very persistent and very bioaccumulative 
In compiling their list of HPC chemicals, Washingto n relied upon the authoritative work of 
governmental agencies as the primary source of info rmation, much as Maine did in compiling its 
list of “chemicals of concern”. Because government sources identifying neurotoxicants are not 
                                                           
2 http://apps.leg.wa.gov/RCW/default.aspx?cite=70.240 &full=true  
 
3 http://www.ecy.wa.gov/programs/swfa/rules/ruleChild PilotPhase.html  . Also see: A Stone and D Delistraty, 
Sources of toxicity and exposure information for id entifying chemicals of high concern to children, Environmental 
Impact Assessment Review , 30: 380-387, 2010 
  
4 These criteria are very similar to those required under Maine law for developing a list of “chemicals  of concern”.  
A chemical may be included on the list of chemicals  of concern only if it has been identified by an au thoritative 
governmental entity on the basis of credible scient ific evidence as being: A. A carcinogen, a reproduc tive or 
developmental toxicant or an endocrine disruptor; B . Persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic; or C. Very  persistent 
and very bioaccumulative (38 MRSA §1693) 
 
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 4 
 available, Washington turned to scientific peer-rev iewed literature as well.  Through this process, 
Washington compiled a list of over 2044 chemicals f rom these sources that could be assigned a 
unique CAS registration number, a list that include s all 1380 chemicals on Maine’s list of 
chemicals of concern.   
In a parallel effort, Washington also compiled a li st of chemicals with evidence of having been 
found in humans or that have a potential exposure r oute to children. The potential for exposure 
was considered established if a chemical met one or  more of the flowing criteria. 
(a) The chemical has been found through biomonitori ng studies that demonstrate the 
presence of the chemical in human umbilical cord bl ood, breast milk, urine, or other bodily 
tissues or fluids. 
(b) The chemical has been found through sampling an d analysis to be present in household 
dust, indoor air, drinking water, or elsewhere in t he home environment. 
(c) The chemical has been added to or is present in  a consumer product used or present in the 
home. 
Data published both by authoritative governmental a gencies and in peer reviewed scientific 
literature were considered by Washington in compili ng the list of chemicals with exposure 
potential. Table 2 below, reproduced from the State  of Washington Phase 1 report summarizes 
the major sources of authoritative governmental exp osure information. 
Table 1: Authoritative sources to identify exposure  potential 
Area Authoritative Sources 
Biomonitoring Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) – National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey (NHANES) 
Danish Birth Cohort 
Indoor Air and Dust California Air Resources Board 
Drinking Water EPA Drinking Water Program 
Consumer Products Danish EPA 
Dutch Government 
 
Washington expanded its search for data on the abov e by including chemicals identified in 
studies published in three peer-reviewed scientific  journals searched using a set of specified 
keywords: 
• Environmental Science and Technology: http://pubs.acs.org/search/advanced  
• Environmental Health Perspectives: http://www.ehponline.org/  
• Toxicological Sciences: http://toxsci.oxfordjournals.org/search.dtl  
 
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 5 
 Through this process, about 2219 chemicals were ide ntified as having the potential for exposure 
and a unique CAS registration number. Washington ne xt identified those chemicals common to 
both their lists of “chemicals of high concern” and  those with exposure potential, resulting in a 
list of 476 chemicals referred to as “potential che micals of high concern for children” (CHCCs).    
Washington then excluded potential CHCCs they belie ved were already sufficiently addressed 
by overlapping regulatory frameworks, chemicals unl ikely to be added to children’s products 
because they were combustion products, emerging che micals with only limited toxicity data, and 
chemicals of concern primarily due to their ecologi cal (as opposed to human) toxicity. These 
decisions reduced Washington’s list of potential CH CCs from 476 to 184 chemicals. These 184 
chemicals are listed in Appendices 10A and 10B of t heir supporting documents and other 
accompanying appendices provide documentation of se lection criteria and chemicals excluded. 3     
There were several reasons MECDC chose not to adopt  the Washington’s Phase 2 process used 
to develop a final prioritize list of 66 chemicals.   Maine’s authorizing law has certain 
requirements that differ in some important ways fro m Washington (e.g., Maine’s law did not 
authorize reliance on state government lists of che micals under its definition of credible 
scientific information).  Maine’s list of chemicals  of concern is a subset of the Washington’s list 
of CHC.  Washington’s consideration of overlapping regulatory frameworks did not consider any 
Maine specific regulations.  Additionally, Washingt on’s literature search for biomonitoring and 
other exposure potential data and its assessment of  chemicals in products were now dated.  Yet 
there were elements of Washington’s Phase 2 process  that Maine did decide to adopt; such as a 
prioritizing of chemicals based on a higher weight of evidence that a chemical was toxic to 
humans (e.g., a known human carcinogen; clear or so me evidence a chemical was a reproductive 
or developmental toxicant).  For more information o n Washington’s Phase 2 process, visit the 
State of Washington’s website where documents descr ibing their process can be viewed. 3 
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 6 
 Figure 1: Washington State Chemicals of High Concer n for Children Identification Process 
List of Chemicals with 
Evidence of Potential Exposure to Children List of High Priority 
Chemicals 
Chemicals with Both 
Toxicity and Exposure 
Evidence 2,219  2,044 * 
476  *Includes all 1,384 Chemicals of 
Concern identified by the State of Maine  
Exclu sions  
• Chemicals regulated under other 
frameworks 
• Chemicals that are combustion products 
• Chemicals with limited toxicity data 
• Chemicals that are primarily of concern 
because of their ecological toxicity Inclusion Criteria  
• Present in indoor air and household dust  
• Present in drinking water or elsewhere in the home  environment 
• Present in human body  
• Present in consumer products  Inclusion Criteria  
• Chemicals with developmental or reproductive toxic ity 
• Chemicals that cause cancer, genetic damage, or re productive harm  
• Chemicals that disrupt the endocrine system 
• Chemicals with systemic toxicity 
• Chemicals that are persistent, bioaccumulative, an d toxic (PBT) 
 
Potential 
Chemicals of High 
Concern 184  476  Chemicals on 
Both Lists  
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 7 
 Figure 2: State of Maine Chemicals of High Concern for Children Prioritization Process 
 
Potential Chemicals of High 
Concern for Children  
(from Washington State) 
 184 10 7 
Steps 1 & 2 Exclusions  
• Chemicals not on list of 1,384 Maine 
Chemicals of Concern 
• Chemicals that are regulated by other 
frameworks 
• Chemicals unlikely to be added to 
consumer products 
• Chemicals only on California’s Prop 65  
list of carcinogens or reproductive/ developmental toxicants and no other authoritative lists Step 3 Exclusions  
• Chemicals only on Reprotext listing 
• Chemicals with low toxicity values from 
U.S. EPA’s IRIS data base 
• Carcinogens from authoritative lists not 
listed as “known human carcinogen” 
• Chemicals only on list of NTP 
reproductive or developmental toxicants without either “clear” or “some” evidence of adverse effects 
• European Union category 2 endocrine 
disruptors 
• Chemicals that do not meet State of 
Maine exposure criteria 49 
State of Maine 
Chemicals of 
High Concern 
 Steps 1 & 2  Step 3  
Candidate  Chemicals 
of High Concern  
 
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 8 
 IV.  MECDC Process to Identify Chemicals of High Concer n  
Starting with Washington’s list of 184 chemicals, M ECDC conducted a three step process to 
meet the statutory mandate of identifying a list of  Chemicals of High Concern consisting of 70 or 
fewer chemicals (Figure 2). 
Step 1 – Identify and exclude any chemicals either not on Maine’s list of 1380 chemicals of 
concern, already addressed by Maine or other regula tory frameworks, or unlikely to be added to 
consumer products; 
Step 2 – Identify chemicals on the list that may no t meet the statutory definition of “credible 
scientific evidence” and either exclude such chemic als or otherwise determine there is sufficient 
peer review literature to retain the chemical; 
Step 3 – Prioritize the remaining chemicals accordi ng to weight of evidence of toxicity and 
potential for exposure.   
A. Step 1 – Identify and exclude chemicals not on Main e’s list of CC, already 
addressed by other regulatory frameworks, and unlik ely to be added to 
consumer products.  
MECDC identified 53 chemicals that were on the Wash ington list of 184 but not on the Maine 
list of CC (Table 2).  These chemicals were exclude d from further consideration.     
 
Table 2: Chemicals not on the Maine CC list 
 
57-55-6 Propylene glycol 101-68-8 Mono-/polymeric M DI 624-83-9 Methyl isocyanate 
57-63-6 17-ethylnyestradiol 107-21-1 Ethylene glyco l 822-06-0 Hexamethylene diisocyanate 
60-29-7 Diethyl ether 108-91-8 Cyclohexylamine 7439 -98-7 Molybdenum 
64-18-6 Formic Acid 108-95-2 Phenol 7440-14-4 Radiu m 
65-85-0 Benzoic acid 121-44-8 Triethylamine 7440-22 -4 Silver compounds 
71-36-3 n-Butanol 123-38-6 Propionaldehyde 7440-24- 6 Strontium compounds 
75-44-5 Phosgene 124-40-3 Dimethylamine 7440-36-0 A ntimony compounds 
75-60-5 Dimethylarsenic acid 131-11-3 Dimethyl phth alate 7440-42-8 Boron compounds 
75-69-4 Trichlorofluromethane 137-17-7 Trimethylani line 7440-40-8 Copper compounds 
75-71-8 Dichlorodifluoromethane 142-82-5 n-Heptane 7440-61-1 Uranium compounds 
76-13-1 Trichloro-trifluoroethane 142-83-6 Hexadien al 7647-01-0 Hydrochloric acid 
78-83-1 Isobutyl alcohol 143-22-6 Triethylene glyco l 7782-41-4 Fluorine 
78-93-3 Methyl ethyl ketone 149-57-5 Ethylhexanoic acid 10049-04-4 Chlorine dioxide 
85-44-9 Phthalic anhydride 156-59-2 Dichloroethylen e 10102-43-9 Nitric oxide 
92-52-4 Biphenyl 156-60-5 Trans-dichloroethylene 10 102-44-0 Nitrogen dioxide 
95-50-1 Dichlorobenzene 463-58-1 Carbonyl sulfide 1 4859-67-7 Radon 222 
96-33-3 Methyl acrylate 506-77-4 Cyanogen chloride 28553-12-0 DiNP 
98-86-2 Acetophenone 540-84-1 Trimethylpentane  
 
 
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 9 
 Five additional chemicals were eliminated based on a determination that there were other 
overlapping regulatory frameworks, with several alr eady identified as a Maine priority chemical 
and one already regulated by federal and state laws  (Table 3).  
Table 3:  Chemicals eliminated because of overlappi ng regulatory framework 
64-17-5 ethanol: ingested voluntarily, regulated by  FDA 
80-05-7 BPA: Maine priority chemical 
104-40-5 4-nonylphenol: Maine priority chemical 
9016-45-9 nonylphenolethoxylate: Maine priority che mical 
25154-52-3 nonylphenol: Maine priority chemical 
 
Four chemicals were eliminated because they were vi ewed as unlikely to be added to consumer 
products (Table 4).  
Table 4:  Chemicals eliminated because unlikely to be added to consumer products 
55-16-7 estrone: natural hormone 
4376-20-9  Mono-2-ethyl hexylphthalate or MEHP: a m ammalian metabolite of DEHP.5 
22967-92-6 methylmercury: not added to products, in cluded in 7439-97-6 
64742-48-9 crude oil: unlikely to be added to a pro duct in the home 
 
B. Step 2 – Identify chemicals on the list that may no t meet the statutory 
definition of “credible scientific evidence.”   
Maine law defines “credible scientific evidence" as  “ the results of a study, the experimental 
design and conduct of which have undergone independ ent scientific peer review, that are 
published in a peer-reviewed journal or publication  of an authoritative federal or international 
governmental agency, including but not limited to t he United States Department of Health and 
Human Services, National Toxicology Program, Food a nd Drug Administration and Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention; the United States E nvironmental Protection Agency; the World 
Health Organization; and the European Union, Europe an Chemicals Agency.” 
State agencies were not included in this definition , yet there are a number of chemicals included 
on the Washington list of 184 chemicals only on the  basis of inclusion on an authoritative state 
government list. This includes chemicals on the Cal ifornia Prop 65 lists either as carcinogens or 
as reproductive and developmental toxicants.  It al so includes chemicals on Washington’s list of 
persistant bioaccumulative toxins (PBTs).  Chemical s on these state lists were therefore 
evaluated as to whether they should be excluded.  
                                                           
5 Mono-2-ethyl hexylphthalate or MEHP is a mammalian metabolite of DEHP: a compound already regulated un der 
the federal CSPIA. http://www.ecy.wa.gov/programs/swfa/rules/pdf/p3doh .pdf   
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 10 
  
1.  Chemicals on the California Proposition 65 list of carcinogens   
Chemicals that were on the Prop 65 list as carcinog ens, but were not on any of the national and 
international governmental carcinogen lists (i.e., IARC, NTP, or EPA) were excluded. Maine law 
does not recognize state databases as “credible sci entific evidence”.  There are three separate 
authoritative national / international lists of car cinogens available for consideration. Washington 
also excluded Prop65 carcinogens in their Phase 2 a ssessment. The 17 chemicals excluded for 
this reason are listed in Table 5. All of these che micals can be expected to have peer reviewed 
publications to support their classification of car cinogens by California. However a review of 
this peer reviewed literature was considered outsid e the scope of this current screening effort.   
Table 5: Chemicals listed by the State of Washingto n as toxicants only on the CA PROP65 list as  carci nogens 
59-89-2 N-nitrosomorpholine 139-65-1 4,4’-thiobsben zenamine 
62-56-6 thiourea 140-82-5 heptane 
84-65-1 anthraquinone 140-88-5 ethyl acrylate 
93-15-2 methyleuganol 615-05-4 2,4-diaminoanisole 
94-59-7 safrole 838-88-0 4,4’-methylene bis(methyla naline) 
96-13-9 2,3-dibromo-1-propanol 1333-86-4 carbon bla ck 
97-56-3 o-aminoazotoluene 29082-74-4 octachlorostyr ene 
101-77-9 4,4’-diaminodipehnylmenthane 77439-76-0 3- chloro-4(dichloromethyl)-5-hydroxy-2(5H)-furanone 
120-71-8 p-cresidene  
 
An exception was the chemical tris (2-chloroethyl) phosphate (TCEP, CAS# 115-96-8  ).  TCEP 
is listed as a carcinogen under Proposition 65, but  was retained because the Canadian 
Environmental Protection Act (CEPA) proposes to lim it TCEP in products intended for children 
under 3 years of age under the Hazardous Products A ct. 6  The Canadian government’s screening 
assessment report published in August 2009 conclude d TCEP may pose a danger to human life 
or health as it is a carcinogen for which there may  be a probability of harm at any level of 
exposure and it may cause impaired fertility in mal es. Infants from 0-6 months old were the 
population with potentially the highest consumer pr oduct exposure estimates, resulting from 
mouthing of polyurethane foam cushioning.   
2.  Chemicals on the California Proposition 65 list for  reproductive or 
developmental toxicants 
MECDC excluded chemicals that appeared solely on Wa shington’s list of potential CHCC 
because they were on the California Prop 65 list fo r reproductive and developmental toxicants.  
The rationale was similar to that of Prop 65 carcin ogens; it is a State list and there already exists 
                                                           
6 http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/cps-spc/legislation/consulta tion/_2010tris_phosphate/index-eng.php   
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 11 
 both a national (National Toxicology Program) and i nternational authoritative governmental lists 
for reproductive and developmental toxicants (UN Gl obally Harmonized System of 
Classification and Labeling of Chemicals). Six chem icals were excluded based on this decision 
(Table 6).  All of these chemicals likely have peer  reviewed publications to support their 
classification of reproductive or developmental haz ards by California. However a review of this 
peer reviewed literature was considered outside the  scope of this current screening effort.   
Table 6: Chemicals listed by the State of Washingto n as toxicants only because on the CA PROP65 list a s 
reproductive or developmental toxicants 
75-15-0  carbon disulfide 872-50-4  n-methylpyrroli done (NMP) 
84-75-3 di- n-hexyl phthalate (DnHP)   109-86-4  methoxyethanol 
149-50-4 2-ethylhexanoic acid (2-EHA) 110-80-5  eth ylene glycol monoethyl ether 
 
3.  Chemicals on the Washington PBT list   
Persistent, bioaccumulative toxins (PBTs) are chemi cals that are believed to represent a unique 
threat to human health and the environment, because  they remain in the environment for long 
periods of time, are hazardous to the health of hum ans and wildlife, can build up in the food 
chain, and can be transported long distances and re adily move between air, land and water 
media.  Maine law clearly established persistent an d bioaccumulative and toxic as criteria to be 
used in identifying chemicals of concern, yet MECDC  could identify only one national / 
international governmental agency with a list of PB Ts (Canada’s).  Several chemicals on the 
Washington PBT list are chemicals that MECDC has pr eviously undertaken extensive reviews of 
the scientific literature is support of regulatory initiatives in Maine.  These chemicals are listed 
below and were retained as potential candidates for  CHC based on MECDC’s determination that 
there is credible scientific evidence to support th eir inclusion.   
(CAS# 79-94-7)  tetrabromobisphenyl A (TBBPA)  A re view by the Maine CDC identified about 
two dozen studies documenting effects on reproducti ve, developmental, endocrine, or cancer 
endpoints.  Studies were also identified with data on levels of TBBPA in humans. 7  
(CAS# 1163-19-5)  deca brominated diphenyl ether (d eca BDE)  Reports to the Maine legislature 
by the MEDEP and MECDC reviewed numerous studies do cumenting adverse endocrine and 
developmental effects of deca BDE, including effect s on thyroid hormones and developmental 
neurotoxicity.8  
                                                           
7 Rationale for Concurrence by Maine Center for Disea se Control and Prevention on the Designation of Bro minated 
Flame Retardants as a Priority Chemical, November 2 2, 2010  
8  Brominated Flame Retardants: A Report to the Join t Standing Committee on Natural Resources, 122nd Ma ine 
Legislature, Prepared by:  Maine Bureau of Health ( now the Maine Center for Disease Control and Preven tion) and 
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 12 
 (CAS# 25637-99-4) hexabromocyclododecane  (HBCD).    Maine CDC documents peer-
reviewed studies reporting endocrine and developmen tal effects of HBCD, including 
developmental neurotoxicity in humans.  Studies wer e also identified with data on levels of 
TBBPA in humans.9  It is also noteworthy that the US EPA has an acti on plan for HBCD based 
on concerns for reproductive, developmental, and ne urological effects. 10   
(CAS # 1763-23-1) perfluorooctanyl sulfuric acid an d its salts (PFOS). MECDC is currently 
performing an assessment of the peer reviewed liter ature of PFOS in support of developing a 
maximum exposure guideline for drinking water.   As  part of this review, a recent scientific 
publication was identified that reported serum leve ls perfluorooctane sulfonate were positively 
associated with chronic kidney disease. 11  The authors examined the relation of serum PFOS (a nd 
PFOA) and chronic kidney disease in 4,587 adult par ticipants from combined  National Health 
and Nutritional Examination Surveys for whom serum measurements were available. Compared 
with subjects in the first quartile of serum level (referent), the multivariable odds ratio for 
chronic kidney disease among subjects in fourth qua rtile of serum levels of PFOS was 1.82 (95% 
confidence interval: 1.01, 3.27; P for trend = 0.01 9). The association was independent of 
confounders such as age, sex, race/ethnicity, body mass index, diabetes, hypertension, and serum 
cholesterol level. It is also noteworthy that the E uropean Union designates PFOS as persisitent, 
bioaccumulative, and toxic to mammalian species, an d recommends ultimate phase-out.12    
C. Step 3 – Prioritize the remaining chemicals accordi ng to weight of evidence 
of toxicity and potential for exposure.   
After the completion of Step 2, Washington’s list o f 184 chemicals was reduced to 101 
chemicals.  MECDC then implemented a prioritizing s cheme similar to that undertaken by 
Washington in its Phase 2 prioritizing process, but  with some differences with respect to toxicity 
databases considered, and more inclusive and up to date with respect to exposure databases.   
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
the Maine Department of Environmental Protection,  February 2005.  Brominated Flame Retardants: A repo rt to 
the Committee on Natural Resources, 122nd Maine Leg islature, Prepared by the Center for Disease Contro l and 
Prevention and Department of Environmental Protecti on, February 2006.  Brominated Flame Retardants: Th ird 
annual report to the Maine Legislature, Prepared by  the Maine Center for Disease Control & Prevention and the 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection, Janua ry 2007. 
9 Rationale for Concurrence by Maine Center for Disea se Control and Prevention on the Designation of Bro minated 
Flame Retardants as a Priority Chemical, November 2 2, 2010  
10  http://www.epa.gov/existingchemicals/pubs/actionpla ns/hbcd.html .   
11  Shankar, Anoop; Jie Xiao and Alan Ducatman (2011-1 0-15). "Perfluoroalkyl Chemicals and 
Chronic Kidney Disease in US Adults". American Jour nal of Epidemiology 174 (8): 893–900.  
12   http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?u ri=OJ:L:2006:372:0032:0034:en:PDF  
 
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 13 
 1.  Toxicity criteria used for prioritizing 
A number of authoritative lists were considered by the MECDC to prioritize the remaining 
potential chemicals of high concern in order of tox icity.  These databases are listed in Table 8.  
MECDC dropped the following two databases relied on  by Washington in their prioritizing 
process. 
• Reprotext is a non-government database owned by Reu ters.  It requires a subscription to 
access.  It consists of evaluations of about 850 ch emicals with respect to characteristics and 
uses of each chemical, as well as reviews of genera l and reproductive toxicity.  A grading 
system indicating degree of hazard is included.  Re views are done by an expert reproductive 
and developmental toxicologist, with no peer review .  Designation in Category A+  (human 
reproductive hazard with no known no-effect level) or A ( human reproductive hazard with 
known no-effect dose) were the inclusion criteria b y the State of Washington in their Phase 2 
assessment.  MECDC did not use this database as a m eans of prioritizing chemicals in part 
out of concern as to whether it met the statutory d efinition of credible scientific evidence, and 
lack of access to this database.  Two chemicals wer e excluded for this reason: Aniline (CAS 
#62-53-3) and methylene chloride (CAS# 75-09-2). 
• Washington included a number of reproductive and de velopment chemicals with low toxicity 
values identified from databases maintained by eith er the U.S. Agency for Toxic Substances 
and Disease Registry (ATSDR) or CDC / NIOSH Registr y of Toxic Effects of Chemical 
Substances (RTECs). The stated purpose was to ident ify chemicals with developmental or 
reproductive toxicity that are not on the authorita tive lists, especially chemicals with newer 
information in this toxicity endpoint.  While lauda ble in intent, Maine’s definition of credible 
scientific evidence emphasizes the use of either pu blished peer-reviewed journals articles or 
lists compiled by authoritative federal or internat ional governmental agency.  Consequently, 
chemicals on the list of 184 chemicals solely on th e basis of a low toxicity value were 
excluded. Sixteen chemicals were excluded for this reason (Table 7). 
Table 7: Chemicals listed by the State of Washingto n only due to low toxicity values 
67-56-1  Methanol 100-41-4 Ethylbenzene 
74-87-3  Methyl chloride 100-52-7 Benzaldehyde 
75-00-3  Chloroethane; Ethyl chloride 106-47-8 para -Chloroaniline 
78-87-5  1,2-Dichloropropane 107-13-1 Acrylonitrile  
79-01-6  Trichloroethylene 110-86-1 Pyridine 
79-06-1  Acrylamide 119-93-7  3,3´-Dimethylbenzidin e 
95-80-7  2,4-Diaminotoluene 127-18-4  Perchloroethy lene 
96-18-4  1,2,3-Trichloropropane 26471-62-5  Toluene  diisocyanate; TDI 
 
For the remaining databases, MECDC applied criteria  fairly similar to those used by Washington 
in their Phase 2 assessment as follows.  
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 14 
 • For chemicals identified  as a carcinogen on an aut horitative national or international 
government list, MECDC only included those classifi ed as known human carcinogens or a 
similar level of evidence of carcinogenicity in hum ans (i.e., Category A, Category 1 
carcinogens).  Thus, chemicals classified as either  an IARC 2a, or IRIS 86 B1, B2 or C 
carcinogens were excluded.  
• For chemicals that were on the Washington list beca use they were listed by NTP as 
reproductive or developmental toxicants, MECDC only  included those classified as having 
“clear evidence of adverse effects in humans” or “s ome evidence of adverse effects in 
humans”. Chemicals not meeting this criterion were excluded.   
• Chemicals identified as endocrine disruptors by the  European Union were included if they 
were classified as Category 1 (evidence of endocrin e disrupting activity in at least one 
species using intact animals), and excluded if Cate gory 2 (at least some in vitro  evidence of 
biological activity related to endocrine disruption ).   
Table 8: Databases and associated prioritizing crit eria used by MECDC in prioritizing toxicity 
DATA BASE PRIORITIZING CRITERIA 
National Toxicology Program Center for Evaluation o f 
Risks to Human Reproduction (NTP CERHR)  “Clear” or “Some” evidence of adverse effect in hum ans 
National Toxicology Program  
Report of Carcinogens Known human carcinogen 
Globally Harmonized System of Classification and 
Labelling of Chemicals (GHS) Category 1A reproductive hazard 
Category 1 carcinogen 
European Commission (EC) Endocrine Disruptor 
Program Category 1 endocrine disruptor 
Canadian PBiT  Present on list 
 
Washington PBT  Present on list and confirmed with review of studie s 
published  in peer reviewed publications 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Integrated Ris k 
Information System (IRIS)  1986 category A, 1996, 1999, or 2005 known human 
carcinogen 
European Union List of Carcinogens Category 1A carcinogen 
 
International Agency for Research of Cancer (IARC) Category 1 
 
Detailed description of these databases can be foun d at the end of this document.   
 
2.  Exposure criteria used for prioritizing 
MECDC sought to both update and expand the search o f published peer reviewed studies 
identifying chemicals present in biomonitoring stud ies and indoor air and dust.  Washington 
gathered biomonitoring, drinking water, and indoor air and dust data from three scientific 
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 15 
 journals:  Environmental Health Perspectives , Environmental Science and Technology , and 
Toxicological Sciences .  In addition, biomonitoring results from the 2005  CDC NHANES study, 
which is representative of the US population, were included.   For indoor air and dust, several 
reports from the California Air Bureau were also so urces for exposure data.  Only the 2005 
report to the legislature was peer-reviewed, and so  eligible to be considered by MECDC.  
MECDC updated the search of published peer reviewed  studies identifying chemicals present in 
biomonitoring studies and indoor air and dust by se arching for papers in recent years, and 
additionally expanded the journals searched to incl ude all accessible through a PubMed search 
using search terms similar to those used by Washing ton and described at the end of this report.  
The publications found through this literature sear ch are listed in Appendix IV.     
The Maine Department of Environmental Protection (M EDEP) assumed responsibility for 
revisited databases evaluated by Washington for pre sence of chemicals in consumer products 
both to look for updates since Washington last eval uated them and to expand to allow for a 
broader inclusion of types of consumer products (Wa shington’s law requires more focus on 
children’s products).  MEDEP additionally expanded the set of databases evaluated based on 
references identifying chemical compounds within co nsumer products were identified through 
the Washington process documents, chemical score sh eets, and published spreadsheets outlining 
their exposure research efforts.   
Table 9 lists product related databases used by MED EP/MECDC to evaluate evidence of 
exposure to chemicals and viewed as permissible und er Maine’s definition of credible scientific 
evidence. A description of these databases and link s to them are provided in the addendum to 
this report.  A more complete description of the pr ocess used by MEDEP and associated 
databases and literature search is presented in App endix V.  
Table 9: Criteria used by MECDC/MEDEP as evidence o f potential exposure 
Danish and Dutch Environmental Protection 
Agency (DEPA) studies and reports National Library of Medicine Hazardous Substances D ata 
Bank (HSDB) 
European chemical Substances Information System 
(ESIS) Risk Assessment Reports National Library of Medicine Household Products 
Database (HPD) 
Netherlands Food and Consumer Product Safety 
Authority (NL) U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Inventor y 
Use and Reporting Database (IUR) 
German Environmental Protection Agency U.S. EPA Che mical Assessment and Management 
Program (ChAMP) 
2012 ToSCA Work Plan for Consumer Products U.S. EPA  Voluntary Children’s Chemical Evaluation 
Program (VCCEP) 
 
Although not used for purposes of prioritizing, MEC DC included information compiled by State 
of Washington regarding whether their priority chem icals were likely to be released into air, 
ingested by the child, or come in contact with skin  for potential future use.  
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 16 
  
3.  Application of Prioritizing Criteria 
The list of 107 chemicals that went through the pri oritization process were compiled into a table 
with separate columns for each toxicity exposure re lated database considered, and rows for each 
chemical (see Appendix I).   Check boxes were used to denote that a chemical met the 
prioritizing scheme for toxicity (e.g., known human  carcinogen, clear or some evidence of toxic 
effects in humans for developmental/reproductive to xicants).  Cells left empty either do not meet 
the prioritizing criteria above, or do not have any  information for that data source.  Cells on the 
exposure section similarly use checks to indicate t hat a chemical was reported present in 
consumer products.  For columns labeled biomonitori ng and indoor air or household dust, a 
number is provided indicating the number of peer-re viewed journal articles identified through 
MECDC’s literature search (e.g., number of biomonit oring papers with reference to a chemical 
being found in human tissue, number of governmental  reports indicate a chemical present in a 
consumer product).   Chemicals excluded based on th e prioritizing scheme are identifiable as 
shaded rows.   
The final prioritized list of CHC consists of 49 ch emicals.  A list of 49 CHC is provided in Table 
10 with supporting information of results from appl ying prioritizing scheme tabulated in 
Appendix II and an accompanying narrative in Append ix III. The majority of listed chemicals 
were prioritized based on being either known human carcinogens or European Union Category 1 
endocrine disruptors.  Biomonitoring data indicatin g presence in the human body was identified 
for 30 chemicals, and 28 chemicals were identified as having been detected in indoor air or dust.  
Only five chemicals were excluded for lack of expos ure information. 
There is considerable overlap between Maine’s list of Chemicals of High Concern and 
Washington’s final list of Chemicals of High Concer n for Children (66 chemicals).  The two lists 
share 33 chemicals in common.    
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 17 
 Table 10: List of Chemicals of High Concern 
CAS  Chemical 
50-00-0  Formaldehyde 
71-43-2 Benzene 
75-01-4 Vinyl chloride 
79-94-7 Tetrabromobisphenol A 
84-61-7 Dicyclohexyl phthalate; DCHP 
84-66-2 Diethyl phthalate 
84-74-2 DBP (Dibutyl phthalates); di-n-butyl phthal ate 
84-75-3 Di-n-Hexyl Phthalate 
85-68-7 BzBP; Benzyl butyl phthalate; Butyl benzyl phthalate; BBzP 
87-68-3 Hexachlorobutadiene 
91-59-8 2-Naphthylamine 
92-69-3 4-Hydroxybiphenyl; 4-Phenylphenol 
92-87-5 Benzidine and its salts 
94-13-3 Propyl paraben 
94-26-8 Butyl paraben 
95-53-4 2-Aminotoluene 
99-76-3 Methyl paraben 
99-96-7 p-Hydroxybenzoic acid 
100-42-5 Styrene 
101-14-4 4,4´-Methylenebis(2-Chloroaniline) 
106-89-8 Epichlorohydrin 
106-93-4 1,2-Dibromoethane 
106-99-0 1,3-Butadiene 
108-88-3 Toluene 
115-96-8 Tris(2-chloroethyl) phosphate 
117-81-7 DEHP (Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate); bis(2- ethylhexyl) phthalate 
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 18 
 118-74-1 Hexachlorobenzene 
120-47-8 Ethyl paraben 
131-55-5 Benzophenone-2 (Bp-2), 2,2',4,4'-tetrahydr oxybenzophenone 
131-56-6 2,4-Dihydroxybenzophenon; Resbenzophenone 
131-70-4 Mono-n-butylphthalate 
140-66-9 4-tert-Octylphenol; 1,1,3,3-Tetramethyl-4- butylphenol 
556-67-2 Octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane 
608-93-5 Benzene, pentachloro- 
1163-19-5 2,2',3,3',4,4',5,5',6,6'-Decabromodipheny l ether; BDE-209 
1634-04-4 Methyl tert-butyl ether; MTBE 
1763-23-1 perfluorooctanyl sulphonic acid and its s alts; PFOS 
1806-26-4 Phenol, 4-octyl- 
2425-85-6 2-Naphthalenol, 1-[(4-methyl-2-nitropheny l)azo]- 
5466-77-3 2-ethyl-hexyl-4-methoxycinnamate 
7439-97-6 Mercury & mercury compounds 
7440-02-0 Nickel & nickel compounds 
7440-38-2 Arsenic & Arsenic compounds 
7440-41-7 Beryllium & Beryllium compounds 
7440-43-9 Cadmium 
14808-60-7 Quartz 
25013-16-5 Butylated hydroxyanisole 
25637-99-4 Hexabromocyclododecane 
27193-28-8 Phenol, (1,1,3,3-tetramethylbutyl)-; Oct ylphenol 
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 19 
 V. Description databases relied on in developing a list of Chemicals 
of High Concern  
A. Toxicity databases 
National Toxicology Program Center for the Evaluati on of Risks to Human Reproduction  
The National Toxicology Program (NTP) is an interag ency program managed by the US 
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) whos e mission is to evaluate agents of 
public health concern by developing and applying to ols of modern toxicology and molecular 
biology.  The NTP Center for the Evaluation of Risk s to Human Reproduction (CERHR) was 
established in 1998 to serve as an environmental he alth resource to the public and regulatory and 
health agencies. CERHR publishes monographs that as sess evidence that environmental 
chemicals, physical substances, or mixtures that ca use adverse effects on reproduction and 
development and provides opinion on whether these s ubstances are hazardous for humans. 
Chemicals for which the NTP issued a monograph and had concluded that there was clear or 
some evidence of adverse effects in humans were inc luded by MECDC. 
Globally Harmonized System of Classification and La beling of Chemicals (GHS)  The Globally 
Harmonized System of Classification and Labeling of  Chemicals (GHS), published by the 
United Nations (UN) GHS sub-committee, addresses th e classification of chemicals by hazard 
types and harmonized communication tools. The UN en courages countries to implement GHS 
worldwide.  Japan launched the GHS Inter-ministeria l Committee in 2001, and has published the 
GHS Classification Manual and the Technical Guidanc e used for GHS classification. The 
Committee has classified approximately 1,500 chemic als by GHS.   Designation in Category 1A 
(human evidence is the main criterion for classific ation as a hazard) for reproductive toxicity was 
the inclusion criterion. 
European Commission (EC) Endocrine Disruptor Progra m The mission of the EC is to promote 
the general interest of the European Union. The EC conducts work on a wide range of 
environmental issues and has established several da tabases that address chemical-specific issues 
undertaken by the EC to address chemical safety.  O n December 20, 1999, the EC adopted a 
Communication on a Community Strategy for Endocrine  Disrupters: a range of substances 
suspected of interfering with the hormone systems o f humans and wild life. The strategy focuses 
on man-made substances, including chemicals and syn thetic hormones, which may harm health 
and cause cancer, behavioral changes and reproducti ve abnormalities. Designation of Category 1 
for Humans (Appendix L) (evidence of endocrine disr uptor activity) was the inclusion criterion. 
International Agency for Research of Cancer (IARC)  IARC is part of the World Health 
Organization. IARC's mission is to coordinate and c onduct research on the causes of human 
cancer, the mechanisms of carcinogenesis, and to de velop scientific strategies for cancer control. 
The Agency is involved in both epidemiological and laboratory research and disseminates 
scientific information through publications, meetin gs, courses, and fellowships.  Designation of a 
chemical as belonging to Category 1 (known human ca rcinogen) was the inclusion criterion. 
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 20 
  
National Toxicology Program Report on Carcinogens  The NTP is an interagency program 
managed by the US Department of Health and Human Se rvices (DHHS) whose mission is to 
evaluate agents of public health concern by develop ing and applying tools of modern toxicology 
and molecular biology.  The NTP publishes a list of  carcinogens in its Report on Carcinogens 
(RoC).  The RoC is an informational scientific and public health document first ordered by 
Congress in 1978 that identifies and discusses agen ts, substances, mixtures, or exposure 
circumstances that may pose a hazard to human healt h by virtue of their carcinogenicity.  The 
category of known carcinogens was included. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  Integrated Ri sk Information System  The US 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is the primar y federal agency charged with protecting human 
health and the environment.  As EPA states on its website “ IRIS  (Integrated Risk Information 
System) is a compilation of electronic reports on s pecific substances found in the environment 
and their potential to cause human health effects”.  Designation as a chemical in category A 
(known)  carcinogens under the 1986 Guideline, or k nown carcinogens  under the 1996, 1999, 
and 2005 Guidelines were considered in the toxicity  criteria. 
European Union Carcinogen List  EU Directive on Dan gerous Substances (Directive 
67/548/EEC) introduced EU-wide provisions on the cl assification, packaging and labeling of 
dangerous substances. The classification of dangero us substances places a substance into one of 
several defined classes of danger and characterizes  the type and severity of the adverse effects 
that the substance can cause.  The Directive catego rizes chemicals as carcinogens and 
reproductive toxicants.  Designation as Category 1 (known or presumed to be a human 
carcinogen or reproductive toxicant) was the inclus ion criterion. 
 
Washington State Persistent Bioaccumulative and Tox ic Chemical List  In 2006, the Department 
of Ecology as directed by the Governor adopted regu lations specific to PBTs (WAC 173-333). 
The PBT (persistent, bioaccumulative, and toxic) In itiative is a key part of Ecology’s efforts to 
reduce toxic threats. It names the ‘worst of the wo rst’ toxic substances and suggests ways to 
reduce or remove the threat posed by them.  Twenty- seven PBTs are identified including 25 
organic chemicals/chemical groups and two ‘metals o f concern.’ The legislation also requires 
Ecology and Department of Health (DOH) to issue one  Chemical Action Plan (CAP) each year 
until all of the PBTs are assessed. Ecology and DOH  are also required to prioritize the PBTs and 
to address first those that pose the greatest threa t to human health and the environment. As part 
of this process, Ecology and DOH issued a multiyear  CAP Schedule in 2007.   The Washington 
list of PBTs was included in the criteria for toxic ity. The chemicals identified as potential CHC 
from this list were confirmed to be on national or international lists, or identified by the State of 
Maine on the basis of extensive peer review literat ure searches.  
Canadian PBiT List  The Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999  (CEPA 1999) is 
Canada's federal environmental legislation aimed at  preventing pollution and protecting the 
environment and human health.  As part of this effo rt, the Canadian government evaluated all 
compounds imported or produced in Canada and priori tized them for various criteria.  The 
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 21 
 results of these efforts are available on the web.  Designation as PBiT (persistent, 
bioaccumulative and inherently toxic) was included as a criterion.  In addition, one chemical on 
the Washington list of CHC was included on the basi s of being banned in products for use by 
children under 3 years under the Canadian Hazardous  Products Act. 
 
B. Exposure Databases  
Biomonitoring Studies  
MECDC searched Pubmed (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ pubmed/) for studies documenting the 
presence in humans in the general population for ch emicals on the Washington list of 184 
chemicals. Pubmed search terms included [chemical n ame] AND exposure, breast milk, blood, 
and/or urine. Occupational studies or studies from populations with an identified point source of 
exposure were not included.  There was no attempt t o do a comprehensive literature survey: one 
relevant paper was considered to be evidence of exp osure. Nonetheless, a number of chemicals 
were identified in more than one study because the study contained other chemicals in the search.  
Therefore, a greater number of citations are not ev idence of more exposure.  The MECDC also 
updated the NHANES results to include the chemicals  added in the 2009 National Biomonitoring 
Study.   
Indoor Air and Dust Studies 
MECDC searched Pubmed for studies documenting the p resence in indoor air or dust for 
chemicals on the Washington list of 184 chemicals.  Search terms included [chemical name] 
AND exposure, dust, and/or air.  Occupational studi es or studies from populations with an 
identified point source of exposure were not includ ed.  There was no attempt to do a 
comprehensive literature survey: one relevant paper  was considered to be evidence of exposure. 
Nonetheless, a number of chemicals were identified in more than one study because the study 
contained other chemicals in the search.  Therefore , a greater number of citations are not 
evidence of more exposure.   
 
Product database  
Danish EPA Reports 
The Danish Environmental Protection Agency (DEPA) c onducts a consumer products program.  
This includes a series of reports on chemicals pres ent in consumer products as tested by the 
Danish EPA.  This database was used to identify che micals in children’s and other household 
products.   
 
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 22 
 Dutch Reports 
The Netherlands Food and Consumer Product Safety Au thority (NL) monitors food and 
consumer products to safeguard public health.  This  Authority controls entire production chains, 
from raw materials and processing aids, to end prod ucts and consumption. 
EU Risk Assessment  
The ESIS (European chemical Substances Information System) of the European Commission 
Joint Research Centre Institute for Health and Huma n Protection Final RUR was used to identify 
use in children’s products. 
National Library of Medicine Hazardous Substances D atabase 
The Toxicology and Environmental Health Information  Program (TEHIP) of the National 
Library of Medicine maintains a comprehensive web s ite with access to resources produced by 
TEHIP and by other government agencies and organiza tions.  Its flagship resource is TOXNET, 
an integrated database system of hazardous chemical s, toxic releases and environmental health.  
The State of Washington used this site to identify chemicals that may be used in children’s 
products.  
EPA Inventory Use and Reporting (IUR) Database 
The IUR database includes chemicals that are manufa ctured or imported in quantities of 25,000 
pounds or more at a single site.  The 2006 IUR incl udes information about chemicals 
manufactured or imported during calendar year 2005.  In addition to the basic manufacturing 
information collected in previous reporting cycles,  the 2006 cycle is the first time EPA collected 
information to characterize exposure during manufac turing, processing and use of organic 
chemicals. This includes information on whether a c hemical is present in products intended for 
use by children 14 and under.  The State of Washing ton used this database in its assessment of 
the potential for exposure to children. 
National Library of Medicine Household Products 
The US Department of Health and Human Services Nati onal Library of Medicine maintains a 
database that links over 10,000 consumer brands to health effects.  Information in the Household 
Products Database is from a variety of publicly ava ilable sources including brand-specific labels 
and Material Safety Data Sheets when available from  manufacturers and manufacturers' web 
sites. The database can be searched by chemical, wh ich contains a list of products that contain 
the chemical.  The State of Washington used this li st to identify chemicals that were present in 
children’s products. 
 
 
 
  Maine CDC – Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Proc ess Documentation  /circle6 23 
 EPA ChAMP Program 
The ChAMP program is no longer updated, and was sup erseded by other initiatives in 2009.  
Under ChAMP, EPA evaluated and assigned priority fo r follow-up action on high production 
volume (HPV) and medium production volume (MPV) che micals. EPA produced a number of 
monograghs for a limited number of chemicals that i ncluded information on chemical properties, 
toxicity, and in some instances product information .  The State of Washington used this database 
to identify chemicals with potential exposure for c hildren.  
 
Routes of exposure 
The State of Washington also categorized chemicals with respect to the probability of exposure 
to children via specific routes.  This information is provided for completeness.  No chemical was 
included in the list of CHC based on this informati on. 
Inhalation - Using information on the properties of an individua l chemical, the State of 
Washington determined whether the chemical was like ly to be released into air from products. 
Ingestion or mouthed or sucked by children - The possibility of ingestion or mouthing by 
children was made by the State of Washington on the  basis of the type of product containing the 
chemical. 
Dermal exposure - The potential for dermal exposure was made by the S tate of Washington on 
the basis of the type of product containing the che mical and the properties of the chemical. 
State of Maine Appendix II- Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Pro cess Documentation July 1, 2012 
CAS Chemical 
NTP_REP GSH cat 1A repro reprotex A+,A Prop65_DEV Prop65_MAL Prop65_FEM EU_END1 NTP_cancer IRIS_86A IRIS_96 GSH cat 1 cancer EU carcinogen 1A IARC_1 WA_PBT CAN_PBiT or HAS low tox value Biomonitoring Indoor air and dust Danish EPA Dutch (NL) Reports German FEA ESIS_RAR HSDB_NLM EPA Inventory Use (IUR) HPD_NLM ChAPM child exp SPIN 2012 TSCA Work Plan Consumer Products Peer reviewed journals VCCEP Released into air Ingested by child Applied to skin 
50-00-0 Formaldehyde /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 5 14 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld74 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
55-18-5 N-nitrosodiethylamine 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
56-23-5 Carbon tetrachloride 3 2 3 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
62-53-3 Aniline /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 2 4 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
62-75-9 N-Nitrosodimethylamine 1 2 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
67-56-1 Methanol /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld128 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
67-66-3 Chloroform 5 9 1 3
71-43-2 Benzene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 8 9 6 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld11 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
74-87-3 Methyl chloride /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 1
75-00-3 Chloroethane; Ethyl chloride /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
75-01-4 Vinyl chloride /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld nd 1 NF /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
75-07-0 Acetaldehyde 3 8 9 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
75-09-2 Methylene chloride /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld nd 4 7 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld48 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
75-15-0 Carbon disulfide /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld nd,1 2 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
75-25-2 Bromoform 2 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
75-27-4 Bromodichloromethane 2 1
75-34-3 1,1-Dichloroethane nd /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
78-87-5 1,2-Dichloropropane /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbldnd nd,1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
79-00-5 1,1,2-Trichloroethane nd,2 3 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
79-01-6 Trichloroethylene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbldnd,3 6 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld12 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
79-06-1 Acrylamide /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld3 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld2 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
79-34-5 1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane nd 2
79-43-6 Dichloroacetic acid /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
79-94-7 Tetrabromobisphenol A /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 2 1 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
84-61-7 Dicyclohexyl phthalate; DCHP /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld nd,1 4 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
84-66-2 Diethyl phthalate /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld8 10 15 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld41 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
84-74-2 Dibutyl phthalate; DBP /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld8 9 21 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 32 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1
84-75-3 Di-n-Hexyl Phthalate /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
85-68-7 Benzyl butyl phthalate; BBP /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 8 9 7 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld42 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
86-30-6 N-Nitrosodiphenylamine 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
87-68-3 Hexachlorobutadiene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld nd 1
91-22-5 Quinoline /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
91-59-8 2-Naphthylamine /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 1Exposure Toxicity Candidate Chemicals 
for CHC List 
Appendix I Candidate CHC.xlsx,Candidates Page 1 of 4 
State of Maine Appendix II- Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Pro cess Documentation July 1, 2012 
CAS Chemical 
NTP_REP GSH cat 1A repro reprotex A+,A Prop65_DEV Prop65_MAL Prop65_FEM EU_END1 NTP_cancer IRIS_86A IRIS_96 GSH cat 1 cancer EU carcinogen 1A IARC_1 WA_PBT CAN_PBiT or HAS low tox value Biomonitoring Indoor air and dust Danish EPA Dutch (NL) Reports German FEA ESIS_RAR HSDB_NLM EPA Inventory Use (IUR) HPD_NLM ChAPM child exp SPIN 2012 TSCA Work Plan Consumer Products Peer reviewed journals VCCEP Released into air Ingested by child Applied to skin Exposure Toxicity Candidate Chemicals 
for CHC List 
91-94-1 3,3'-Dichlorobenzidine 1
92-69-3 4-Hydroxybiphenyl /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 3
92-87-5 Benzidine and its salts /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1
92-88-6 4,4'-Dihydroxybiphenyl /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
94-13-3 Propyl paraben /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 3 6 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld >400 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
94-26-8 Butyl paraben /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 2 1 6 1 65 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
95-53-4 2-Aminotoluene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 3 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
95-69-2 4-Chloro-ortho-toluidine 1
95-80-7 2,4-Diaminotoluene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
96-09-3 Styrene oxide 1
96-12-8 1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbldnd 
96-18-4 1,2,3-Trichloropropane /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
99-76-3 Methyl paraben /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 3 1 10 2 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld >400 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
99-96-7 p-Hydroxybenzoic acid /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 1
100-41-4 Ethylbenzene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld5 8 14 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld375 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
100-42-5 Styrene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld5 9 11 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld14 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
100-52-7 Benzaldehyde /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 13 4 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
101-14-4 4,4´-Methylenebis(2- 
Chloroaniline) /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
103-33-3 Azobenzene 106-47-8 para-Chloroaniline 
/checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld2 3
106-89-8 Epichlorohydrin /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
106-93-4 1,2-Dibromoethane /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld nd /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
106-99-0 1,3-Butadiene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld1 4 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld4 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
107-06-2 1,2-Dichloroethane nd nd,2 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
107-13-1 Acrylonitrile /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld2 1 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
108-88-3 Toluene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld8 10 19 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld>400 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
109-86-4 2-Methoxyethanol /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld nd 2 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
110-49-6 Methyl cellosolve acetate /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1
110-80-5 Ethylene glycol monoethyl ether /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 4 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
110-86-1 Pyridine /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1
111-15-9 2-ethoxyethyl acetate /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1
115-96-8 Tris(2-chloroethyl) phosphate /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 2 2 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
117-81-7 Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate; DEHP /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 9 10 22 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1
Appendix I Candidate CHC.xlsx,Candidates Page 2 of 4 
State of Maine Appendix II- Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Pro cess Documentation July 1, 2012 
CAS Chemical 
NTP_REP GSH cat 1A repro reprotex A+,A Prop65_DEV Prop65_MAL Prop65_FEM EU_END1 NTP_cancer IRIS_86A IRIS_96 GSH cat 1 cancer EU carcinogen 1A IARC_1 WA_PBT CAN_PBiT or HAS low tox value Biomonitoring Indoor air and dust Danish EPA Dutch (NL) Reports German FEA ESIS_RAR HSDB_NLM EPA Inventory Use (IUR) HPD_NLM ChAPM child exp SPIN 2012 TSCA Work Plan Consumer Products Peer reviewed journals VCCEP Released into air Ingested by child Applied to skin Exposure Toxicity Candidate Chemicals 
for CHC List 
117-84-0 Di-n-octyl phthalate; DOP 3 2 5 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1
118-74-1 hexachlorobenzene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 6
119-90-4 3,3´-Dimethoxybenzidine 119-93-7 
3,3´-Dimethylbenzidine and Dyes 
Metabolized to 3,3´- 
Dimethylbenzidine /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 3
120-47-8 Ethyl paraben /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 2 1 6 1 75 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
123-91-1 1,4-Dioxane 2 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld2 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
127-18-4 Perchloroethylene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld5 6 3 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld30 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
131-55-5  2,2',4,4'- 
tetrahydroxybenzophenone /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 73 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
131-56-6 2,4-Dihydroxybenzophenon /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 25 1
131-70-4 Mono-n-butylphthalate /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 4 2
140-66-9 1,1,3,3-Tetramethyl-4-butylphenol /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 5 1 1 uk /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
140-67-0 Estragole 3 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld/checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
149-57-5 2-Ethylhexanoic acid /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 4 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld4 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
556-67-2 Octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 4 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld26 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
608-93-5 Benzene, pentachloro- /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld2
842-07-9 C.I. Solvent Yellow 14 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
872-50-4 N-Methylpyrrolidone /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 10 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld42 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
924-16-3 N-Nitroso-di-n-butylamine 1 2
930-55-2 N-Nitrosopyrrolidine /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
1163-19-5 2,2',3,3',4,4',5,5',6,6'- 
Decabromodiphenyl ether; BDE- 
209 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 2 2 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
1327-53-3 Diarsenic trioxide /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
1461-25-2 Tetrabutyltin 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
1634-04-4 Methyl tert-butyl ether; MTBE /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld4 4 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
1763-23-1 perfluorooctanyl sulphonic acid 
and its salts; PFOS /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 5 3 1 2
1806-26-4 Phenol, 4-octyl- /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld nd,2 1 1 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
2425-85-6 2-Naphthalenol, 1-[(4-methyl-2- 
nitrophenyl)azo]- /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 4 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
4376-20-9 Mono 2 ethyl hexylphthalate; 
MEHP /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 3
5466-77-3 2-ethyl-hexyl-4- 
methoxycinnamate /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 109 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
7439-97-6 Mercury & mercury compounds /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 3 1 3 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 2 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
7440-02-0 Nickel & nickel compounds /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld3 2 9 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld3 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld1
7440-38-2 Arsenic & Arsenic compounds /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 6 5 4 5 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
7440-41-7 Beryllium & Beryllium 
compounds /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 4
Appendix I Candidate CHC.xlsx,Candidates Page 3 of 4 
State of Maine Appendix II- Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Pro cess Documentation July 1, 2012 
CAS Chemical 
NTP_REP GSH cat 1A repro reprotex A+,A Prop65_DEV Prop65_MAL Prop65_FEM EU_END1 NTP_cancer IRIS_86A IRIS_96 GSH cat 1 cancer EU carcinogen 1A IARC_1 WA_PBT CAN_PBiT or HAS low tox value Biomonitoring Indoor air and dust Danish EPA Dutch (NL) Reports German FEA ESIS_RAR HSDB_NLM EPA Inventory Use (IUR) HPD_NLM ChAPM child exp SPIN 2012 TSCA Work Plan Consumer Products Peer reviewed journals VCCEP Released into air Ingested by child Applied to skin Exposure Toxicity Candidate Chemicals 
for CHC List 
7440-43-9 Cadmium /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 8 2 5 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 6 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
7440-48-4 Cobalt & Cobalt compounds 3 1 5 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
14808-60-7 Quartz /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld>400 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
15541-45-4 Bromate /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
25013-16-5 Butylated hydroxyanisole /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 41 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
25637-99-4 Hexabromocyclododecane /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 2 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
26471-62-5 Toluene diisocyanate; TDI /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
26761-40-0 Diisodecyl Phthalate; DIDP /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 3 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
27193-28-8  (1,1,3,3-tetramethylbutyl)-Phenol /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1
/checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbldFound to be present 
nd chemical not detected 
Toxicology Data Sources Consumer Product Data 
NTP_REP Danish EPA 
GSH cat 1A repro Global Harmonization System - Categ ory 1A for reproductive or germ cell mutagenicity, known Dutch reports 
reprotext A+, A REPROTEXT ® database for reproductive and developmental toxica nts - A+,A German Federal Environment Agency 
Prop 65 dev California Proposition 65 Program - Impact to devel opment ESIS Risk Assessment Report 
Prop65_FEM California’s Proposition 65 Program - Impact to fem ales HSDB_NLM Listed in National Library of Medicine Hazardous Su bstances Database 
Prop65_MAL California’s Proposition 65 Program - Impact to mal es EPA_Inventory Use Report 
EU_END1 European Union Endocrine Disruptor Program - Catego ry 1, probable HPD_NLM household products 
NTP_cancer National Toxicology Prrogram. Report on Carcinogens  - Known human carcinogen SPIN Substances in Products in Nordic Countries Dat abase 
IRIS_86A EPA Integrated Risk Information System-1986 critera , Known human carcinogen TSCA Work Plan Chemicals 
IRIS 96 EPA Integrated Risk Information System-1996 Known h uman carcinogen Peer Reviewed Journals 
GSH category 1A cancer Global Harmonization System Catergory 1A, Known hum an carcinogen VCCEP 
EU carcinogen 1A European Union Carcinogen List, Category 1, Known c arcinogen ChAMP child exp EPA ChAMP program indicating potenti al exposure to children 
IARC_1 IARC - Group 1 - Known human carcinogen Released into air 
WA_PBT Washington State PBT Program with supporting ME-CDC  review of peer-reviewd publications Ingested by chi ld Potential ingestion, mouthing, or sucking by chil d based on product type 
CAN PBiT or HAS Canadian Environmental Protection Act PB & inherent ly Toxic chemicals or Hazardous Substances Act Applied to skin Product is applied to skin 
Low tox value Low toxicity values for selected endpo ints based on ATSDR and RTEC 
Exposure Studies 
Biomonitoring Identified as present in human tissue by US CDC or pubmed search, numbers refer to number  of studies in which chemical was identified. 
Indoor air and dust Identified as present in indoor air or dust by Pubmed search, numbers refer to numb er of studies in which chemical was identified. Potential release into air based on properties of c hemicalIdentifed as present in consumer products by the Da nish EPA 
Identified as present in consumer products by the D utch government 
EU or other authoritative risk assesment indicating  use in consumer products 
EPA Inventory Use and Reporting database indicating  use in consumer products 
Household Products Database, National Library of Me dicine used in consumer 
products Legend 
National Toxicology Program Evaluation of Risks to Human Reproduction - Clear or 
Some Evidence of adverse reproductive or developmen tal effects 
Appendix I Candidate CHC.xlsx,Candidates Page 4 of 4 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation Appendix II - Final List of Chemicals of High Conce rn Maine CDC - July 1, 2012 
CAS Chemical 
NTP_REP GSH cat 1A repro EU_END1 NTP_cancer IRIS_86A IRIS_96 GSH cat 1 cancer EU carcinogen 1A IARC_1 WA_PBT CAN_PBiT or HAS Biomonitoring Indoor air and dust Danish EPA Dutch (NL) Reports German FEA ESIS_RAR HSDB_NLM EPA Inventory Use (IUR) HPD_NLM ChAMP child exp SPIN 2012 TSCA Work Plan Consumer Products Peer Reviewed Journals VCCEP Released into air Ingested by child Applied to skin 
50-00-0 Formaldehyde /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 5 14 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld74 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
71-43-2 Benzene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 8 9 6 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld11 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
75-01-4 Vinyl chloride /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld nd 1 NF /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
79-94-7 Tetrabromobisphenol A /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 2 1 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
84-61-7 Dicyclohexyl phthalate; DCHP /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld nd,1 4 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
84-66-2 Diethyl phthalate /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 8 10 15 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld41 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1/checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
84-74-2 Dibutyl phthalate, DBP /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 8 9 21 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 32 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1
84-75-3 Di-n-Hexyl Phthalate /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
85-68-7 Benzyl Butyl phthalate; BBP /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 8 9 7 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld42 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
87-68-3 Hexachlorobutadiene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld nd 1
91-59-8 2-Naphthylamine /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 1
92-69-3 4-Hydroxybiphenyl /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 3
92-87-5 Benzidine and its salts /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1
94-13-3 Propyl paraben /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 3 6 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld >400 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
94-26-8 Butyl paraben /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 2 1 6 1 65 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
95-53-4 2-Aminotoluene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 3 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
99-76-3 Methyl paraben /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 3 1 10 2 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld >400 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
99-96-7 p-Hydroxybenzoic acid /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
100-42-5 Styrene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 5 9 11 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld14 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
101-14-4 4,4´-Methylenebis(2-Chloroaniline) /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
106-89-8 Epichlorohydrin /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
106-93-4 1,2-Dibromoethane /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld nd /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
106-99-0 1,3-Butadiene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 4 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld4/checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbldList of Chemicals of High Concern Exposure Toxicity 
Page 1 of 3 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation Appendix II - Final List of Chemicals of High Conce rn Maine CDC - July 1, 2012 
CAS Chemical 
NTP_REP GSH cat 1A repro EU_END1 NTP_cancer IRIS_86A IRIS_96 GSH cat 1 cancer EU carcinogen 1A IARC_1 WA_PBT CAN_PBiT or HAS Biomonitoring Indoor air and dust Danish EPA Dutch (NL) Reports German FEA ESIS_RAR HSDB_NLM EPA Inventory Use (IUR) HPD_NLM ChAMP child exp SPIN 2012 TSCA Work Plan Consumer Products Peer Reviewed Journals VCCEP Released into air Ingested by child Applied to skin List of Chemicals of High Concern Exposure Toxicity 
108-88-3 Toluene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 8 10 19 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld>400 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
115-96-8 Tris(2-chloroethyl) phosphate /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 2 2 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld1/checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
117-81-7 Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate, DEHP /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 9 10 22 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld1/checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1
118-74-1 Hexachlorobenzene /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 6
120-47-8 Ethyl paraben /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 2 1 6 1 75 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
131-55-5  2,2',4,4'-tetrahydroxybenzophenone, BP-2 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 73 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
131-56-6 2,4-Dihydroxybenzophenon /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 25 1
131-70-4 Mono-n-butylphthalate /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 4 2
140-66-9 1,1,3,3-Tetramethyl-4-butylphenol /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 5 1 1 uk /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
556-67-2 Octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 4 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld26 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld1/checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
608-93-5 Benzene, pentachloro- /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld2
1163-19-5 2,2',3,3',4,4',5,5',6,6'-Decabromodiphenyl ether; 
BDE-209 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 2 2 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
1634-04-4 Methyl tert-butyl ether; MTBE /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 4 4 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
1763-23-1 perfluorooctanyl sulphonic acid and its salts; 
PFOS /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 5 3 1 2
1806-26-4 Phenol, 4-octyl- /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld nd,2 1 1 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
2425-85-6 2-Naphthalenol, 1-[(4-methyl-2-nitrophenyl )azo]- /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 4 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
5466-77-3 2-ethyl-hexyl-4-methoxycinnamate /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 109 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
7439-97-6 Mercury & mercury compounds /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 3 1 3 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 2/checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
7440-02-0 Nickel & nickel compounds /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 3 2 9 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld3 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld1
7440-38-2 Arsenic & Arsenic compounds /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 6 5 4 5 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
7440-41-7 Beryllium & Beryllium compounds /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 4
7440-43-9 Cadmium /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 8 2 5 1 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 6/checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
14808-60-7 Quartz /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld>400 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
25013-16-5 Butylated hydroxyanisole /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 41 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
Page 2 of 3 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation Appendix II - Final List of Chemicals of High Conce rn Maine CDC - July 1, 2012 
CAS Chemical 
NTP_REP GSH cat 1A repro EU_END1 NTP_cancer IRIS_86A IRIS_96 GSH cat 1 cancer EU carcinogen 1A IARC_1 WA_PBT CAN_PBiT or HAS Biomonitoring Indoor air and dust Danish EPA Dutch (NL) Reports German FEA ESIS_RAR HSDB_NLM EPA Inventory Use (IUR) HPD_NLM ChAMP child exp SPIN 2012 TSCA Work Plan Consumer Products Peer Reviewed Journals VCCEP Released into air Ingested by child Applied to skin List of Chemicals of High Concern Exposure Toxicity 
25637-99-4 Hexabromocyclododecane /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1 2 /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld/checkbld
27193-28-8 (1,1,3,3-tetramethylbutyl)-phenol /checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld 1
Note: Please see text for further description of da ta sources and evaluation process.
/checkbld/checkbld /checkbld/checkbld Found to be present 
C information is confidential in SPIN 
Toxicology Data Sources Consumer Product Data 
NTP_REP Danish EPA 
GSH cat 1A repro Dutch reports Identified as present in consumer prod ucts by the Dutch government 
EU_END1 EU Endocrine Disruptor Program - Category 1,  probable German Federal Environment Agency 
NTP_cancer Nat. Tox. Prg. Report on Carcinogens - Kn own human carcinogen ESIS Risk Assessment Report EU or other authoritativ e risk assesment indicating use in consumer product s 
IRIS_86A EPA Integrated Risk Information System -198 6 critera - Known human carcinogen HSDB_NLM Listed in  National Library of Medicine Hazardous Substances Database 
IRS 96 EPA Integrated Risk Information System -1996 Known carcinogenic to humans EPA_Inventory Use Report
GSH category 1A cancer HPD_NLM household products 
EU carcinogen 1A European Union Carcinogen List, Cat egory 1, Known carcinogen SPIN Substances in Products in Nordic Countries Dat abase 
IARC_1 IARC - Group 1 - Known human carcinogen TSCA Work Plan Chemicals 
WA_PBT Washington State PBT Program with supporting ME-CDC review of peer-reviewd publications Peer Revi ewed Journals 
CAN PBiT or HAS VCCEP 
Exposure Studies ChAMP child exp EPA ChAMP program indicating potenti al exposure to children 
Biomonitoring Released into air Potential release into air based o n properties of chemical
Indoor air and dust Ingested by child Potential ingestion, mouthing, or sucking by child based on product type 
Applied to skin Product is applied to skin Identifed as present in consumer products by the Da nish EPA 
EPA Inventory Use and Reporting database indicating  use in consumer 
products Household Products Database, National Library of Me dicine used in 
consumer products Legend 
Identified as present in indoor air or dust by Pubm ed search, numbers refer to number of 
studies in which chemical was identified.Canadian Environmental Protection Act PB & inherent ly Toxic chemicals or Hazardous 
Substances Act - Present on list Global Harmonization System Catergory 1A - Known hu man carcinogen National Toxicology Program Evaluation of Risks to Human Reproduction - Clear or some 
evidence for of adverse reproductive or development al effects 
Global Harmonization System - Category 1A for repro ductive or germ cell mutagenicity, 
known Identified as present in human tissue by biomonitor ing studies identified by a Pubmed 
search, numbers refer to number of studies in which  chemical was identified.
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern 
Process Documentation 
 
 
Appendix III 
Chemical Specific Inclusion Criteria 
July 1, 2012  
 
 
 
 
This document presents the rationale for inclusion and support for each chemical on the CHC 
list, as presented in the Maine CDC Chemicals of Hi gh Concern Process Documentation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental & Occupational Health Programs 
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
286 Water Street, 3 rd  Floor, Augusta, ME 04333 
207.287.4311 /circle6/circle6 /circle6/circle6 866.292.3474  

Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 1 
  
Contents      Page   
FORMALDEHYDE (CAS 50000)  .................................................. ................................................... ................... 3 
BENZENE (CAS 71432)  .................................................. ................................................... .................................... 3 
VINYL CHLORIDE (CAS 75014)  .................................................. ................................................... .................. 4 
TETRABROMOBISPHENOL A (CAS 79947)  .................................................. .............................................. 5 
DICYCLOHEXYL PHTHALATE; DCHP (CAS 84617)  .................................................. ............................. 5 
DIETHYL PHTHALATE (CAS 84662)  .................................................. ................................................... ......... 6 
DBP (DIBUTYL PHTHALATES); DI-N-BUTYL PHTHALATE (CAS  84742)  ...................................... 7 
DI-N-HEXYL PHTHALATE (CAS 84753)  .................................................. ................................................... .. 8 
BENZYL BUTYL PHTHALATE; BUTYL BENZYL PHTHALATE; BBZ P (CAS 85687)  ................. 9 
HEXACHLOROBUTADIENE (CAS 87683)  .................................................. ................................................ 10  
2-NAPHTHYLAMINE (CAS 91598)  .................................................. ................................................... ............ 10 
4-HYDROXYBIPHENYL; 4-PHENYLPHENOL (CAS 92693)  .................................................. .............. 11 
BENZIDINE AND ITS SALTS (CAS 92875)  .................................................. ................................................ 11  
PROPYL PARABEN (CAS 94133)  .................................................. ................................................... ............... 11 
BUTYL PARABEN (CAS 94268)  .................................................. ................................................... .................. 12 
2-AMINOTOLUENE (CAS 95534)  .................................................. ................................................... ............... 12 
METHYL PARABEN (CAS 99763)  .................................................. ................................................... .............. 13 
P-HYDROXYBENZOIC ACID (CAS 99967)  .................................................. ............................................... 13 
STYRENE (CAS 100425)  .................................................. ................................................... ................................ 13 
4,4´-METHYLENEBIS(2-CHLOROANILINE) (CAS 101144)  .................................................. ................ 15 
EPICHLOROHYDRIN (CAS 106898)  .................................................. ................................................... ......... 15 
1,2-DIBROMOETHANE (CAS 106934)  .................................................. ................................................... ...... 15 
1,3-BUTADIENE (CAS 106990)  .................................................. ................................................... .................... 16 
TOLUENE (CAS 108883)  .................................................. ................................................... ................................ 16 
ETHYLENE GLYCOL MONOETHYL ESTER (CAS 110805)  .................................................. .............. 17 
TRIS (2-CHLOROETHYL) PHOSPHATE (CAS 115968)  .................................................. ....................... 18 
DEHP (DI-(2-ETHYLHEXYL) PHTHALATE); BIS(2-ETHYLHEXY L) PHTHALATE (CAS 
117817)  .................................................. ................................................... ................................................... .............. 18 
DOP (DI-N-OCTYL PHTHALATE) (CAS 117840)  ....................... ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.  
HEXACHLOROBENZENE (CAS 118741)  .................................................. ...................................................  19 
ETHYL PARABEN (CAS 120478)  .................................................. ................................................... ................ 20 
BENZOPHENONE-2 (BP-2), 2,2',4,4'-TETRAHYDROXYBENZOP HENONE (CAS 131555)  ........ 21 
2,4-DIHYDROXYBENZOPHENON; RESBENZOPHENONE (CAS 1315 66)  ...................................... 21 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 2 
 MONO-N-BUTYLPHTHALATE (CAS 131704)  .................................................. ......................................... 21 
4-TERT-OCTYLPHENOL; 1,1,3,3-TETRAMETHYL-4-BUTYLPHEN OL (CAS 140669)  .............. 22 
OCTAMETHYLCYCLOTETRASILOXANE (CAS 556672)  .................................................. .................. 22 
BENZENE, PENTACHLORO- (CAS 608935)  .................................................. ............................................. 23 
2,2',3,3',4,4',5,5',6,6'-DECABROMODIPHENYL ETHER; B DE-209 (CAS 1163195)  ........................ 23 
METHYL TERT-BUTYL ETHER; MTBE (CAS 1634044)  .................................................. ..................... 24 
PERFLUOROOCTANYL SULPHONIC ACID AND ITS SALTS; PFOS  (CAS 1763231)  ................ 24 
PHENOL, 4-OCTYL- (CAS 1806264)  .................................................. ................................................... .......... 25 
2-NAPHTHALENOL, 1-[(4-METHYL-2-NITROPHENYL)AZO]- (C AS 2425856)  ............................ 26 
2-ETHYL-HEXYL-4-METHOXYCINNAMATE (CAS 5466773)  .................................................. .......... 26 
MERCURY & MERCURY COMPOUNDS (CAS 7439976)  .................................................. ..................... 26 
NICKEL & NICKEL COMPOUNDS (CAS 7440020)  .................................................. ................................ 27 
ARSENIC & ARSENIC COMPOUNDS (CAS 7440382)  .................................................. ........................... 27 
BERYLLIUM & BERYLLIUM COMPOUNDS (CAS 7440417) ................................................... ............ 28 
CADMIUM (CAS 7440439)  .................................................. ................................................... ............................ 29 
QUARTZ (CAS 14808607)  .................................................. ................................................... .............................. 30 
BUTYLATED HYDROXYANISOLE (CAS 25013165)  .................................................. ............................. 30 
HEXABROMOCYCLODODECANE (CAS 25637994)  .................................................. ............................. 30 
DIDP; DIISODECYL PHTHALATE (CAS 26761400)  ................. ERROR! BOOKMARK NOT DEFINED.  
PHENOL, (1,1,3,3-TETRAMETHYLBUTYL)-; OCTYLPHENOL (C AS 27193288)  ......................... 31 
 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 3 
 Formaldehyde (CAS 50-00-0) 
Criteria for inclusion of formaldehyde in the CHC L ist: IARC - Group 1 known human 
carcinogen. 
 
The presence of formaldehyde in humans was not iden tified in biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
The presence of formaldehyde was identified in 5 in door air and/or dust studies (preliminary 
literature search). 
1.  California Air Resources Board (2005).  Indoor Air Pollution in California - Report to the 
California Legislature.  California Environmental P rotection Agency. 
2.  Guo, H.,Kwok, N. H.,Cheng, H. R.,Lee, S. C.,Hung, W . T.,Li, Y. S. (2009). "Formaldehyde and 
volatile organic compounds in Hong Kong homes: conc entrations and impact factors." Indoor Air 
19: 206-217. 
3.  Hodgson, A.T., Rudd, A.F., Beal, D., Chandra, S. (2 000).  “Volatile organic compound 
concentrations and emission rates in new and site-b uilt houses.”  Indoor Air 10: 178-192. 
4.  Koziel, J.,Noah, J.,Pawliszyn, J. (2001). "Field sa mpling and determination of formaldehyde in 
indoor air with solid-phase microextraction and on- fiber derivatization." Environmental Science 
& Technology 35: 1481-1486. 
5.  Serrano-Trespalacios, P. I.,Ryan, L.,Spengler, J. D . (2004). "Ambient, indoor and personal 
exposure relationships of volatile organic compound s in Mexico City Metropolitan Area." Journal 
of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology  14: S118-S132. 
Benzene (CAS 71-43-2) 
Criteria for inclusion of benzene in the CHC List: NTP Report on Carcinogens - known 
carcinogen, EPA Integrated Risk Information System - 1986 criteria, known carcinogen, EPA 
Integrated Risk Information System – 1996 known car conogen, IARC - Group 1 known human 
carcinogen, European Union carcinogen list, Categor y 1, known carcinogen. 
 
The presence of benzene in humans was identified in  8 biomonitoring studies (preliminary 
literature search). 
1.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 009).  Fourth National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
2.  Elliott, L.,Longnecker, M. P.,Kissling, G. E.,Londo n, S. J. (2006). "Volatile organic compounds 
and pulmonary function in the Third National Health  and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1988-
1994." Environmental Health Perspectives 114(8): 12 10-1214. 
3.  Kim, S. R.,Halden, R. U.,Buckley, T. J. (2007). "Vo latile organic compounds in human milk: 
Methods and measurements." Environmental Science Te chnology 41(5): 1662-1667. 
4.  Lin, Y. S.,Egeghy, P. P.,Rappaport, S. M. (2008). " Relationships between levels of volatile 
organic compounds in air and blood from the general  population." Journal of Exposure Science 
and  Environmental Epideniology 18: 421-429. 
5.  Pellizzari, E. D.,Smith, D. J.,Clayton, A.,Michael,  L. C.,Quackenboss, J. J. (2001). "An 
assessment of the data quality for NHEXAS-Part I: E xposure to metals and volatile organic 
chemicals in Region 5." Journal of Exposure Analysi s and Environmental Epidemiology 11: 140-
154. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 4 
  
6.  Sexton, K.,Adgate, J. L.,Church, T. R.,Ashley, D. L .,Needham, L. L.,Ramachandran, 
G.,Fredrickson, A. L.,Ryan, A. D. (2005). "Children 's exposure to volatile organic compounds as 
determined by longitudinal measurements in blood." Environmental Health Perspectives 113(3): 
342-348. 
7.  Sexton, K.,Adgate, J. L.,Fredrickson, A. L.,Ryan, A . D.,Needham, L. L.,Ashley, D. L. (2006). 
"Using biologic markers in blood to assess exposure  to multiple environmental chemicals for 
inner-city children 3 - 6 years of age." Environmen tal Health Perspectives 114(3): 453-459. 
8.  Woodruff, T.J., Zota, A.R., Schartz, J.M.  (2011). Environmental chemicals in pregnant women 
in the United States: NHANES 2003-2004. Environment al Health Perspectives 119:878-885. 
 
The presence of benzene was identified in 9 indoor air and/or dust studies (preliminary literature 
search).   
1.  Adgate, J. L.,Church, T. R.,Ryan, A. D.,Ramachandra n, G.,Fredrickson, A. L.,Stock, T. 
H.,Morandi, M. T.,Sexton, K. (2004). "Outdoor, indo or and personal exposure to VOCs in 
children." Environmental Health Perspectives 112(14 ): 1386-1392. 
2.  California Air Resources Board (2005).  Indoor Air Pollution in California - Report to the 
California Legislature.  California Environmental P rotection Agency. 
3.  Kim, S. R.,Halden, R. U.,Buckley, T. J. (2007). "Vo latile organic compounds in human milk: 
Methods and measurements." Environmental Science Te chnology 41(5): 1662-1667. 
4.  Liu, J.,Drane, W.,Liu, X.,Wu, T. (2009). "Examinati on of the relationships between 
environmental exposures to volatile organic compoun ds and biochemical liver tests: application 
of canonical correlation analysis." Environmental R esearch 109(2): 193-199. 
5.  Miller, S. L.,Branoff, S.,Nazaroff, W. W. (1998). " Exposure to toxic air contaminants in 
environmental tobacco smoke: An assessment for Cali fornia based on personal monitoring data." 
Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epid emiology 8(3): 287-311. 
6.  Pellizzari, E. D.,Smith, D. J.,Clayton, A.,Michael,  L. C.,Quackenboss, J. J. (2001). "An 
assessment of the data quality for NHEXAS-Part I: E xposure to metals and volatile organic 
chemicals in Region 5." Journal of Exposure Analysi s and Environmental Epidemiology 11: 140-
154. 
7.  Serrano-Trespalacios, P. I.,Ryan, L.,Spengler, J. D . (2004). "Ambient, indoor and personal 
exposure relationships of volatile organic compound s in Mexico City Metropolitan Area." Journal 
of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology  14: S118-S132. 
8.  Weisel, C. P.,Alimokhtari, S.,Sanders, P. F. (2008) . "Indoor air VOC concentrations in suburban 
and rural New Jersey." Environmental Science & Tech nology 42(22): 8231-8238. 
9.  Zhu, J.,Laifeng, Y.,Shoeib, M. (2007). "Detection o f dechlorane plus in residential indoor dust in 
the city of Ottawa, Canada." Environmental Science & Technology 41: 7694-7698. 
Vinyl chloride (CAS 75-01-4) 
Criteria for inclusion of vinyl chloride in the CHC  List: NTP Report on Carcinogens - known 
carcinogen, EPA Integrated Risk Information System - 1986 criteria, known carcinogen, EPA 
Integrated Risk Information System - 1996, IARC - G roup 1 known human carcinogen, 
European Union carcinogen list, Category 1, known c arcinogen, Global Harmonization System - 
Category 1A known human carcinogen. 
 
The presence of vinyl chloride in humans was not id entified in biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 5 
 The presence of vinyl chloride was not identified i n indoor air and/or dust studies (preliminary 
literature search). 
 
Compound detected in consumer products. 
Tetrabromobisphenol A (CAS 79-94-7) 
Criteria for inclusion of tetrabromobisphenol A in the CHC List: Washington State PBT Program 
and confirmed by ME-CDC with review of peer-reviewe d scientific publications.  A review by 
the Maine CDC identified about two dozen studies do cumenting effects on reproductive, 
developmental, endocrine, or cancer endpoints.  Stu dies were also identified with data on levels 
of TBBPA in humans. 
1.  Rationale for Concurrence by Maine Center for Disea se Control and Prevention on the 
Designation of Brominated Flame Retardants as a Pri ority Chemical, November 22, 2010 
 
The presence of tetrabromobisphenol A in humans was  identified in 2 biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
1.  Peters,R.J.B. (2005) Man-made chemicals in maternal  and cord blood.  TNO Report. B&O-A R 
2005/129. 
2.  Thomsen, C.,Lundanes, E.,Becher, G. (2002). "Bromin ated flame retardants in archived serum 
samples from Norway: A study on temporal trends and  the role of age." Environmental Science & 
Technology 36(7): 1414-1418. 
 
The presence of tetrabromobisphenol A was identifie d in 1 indoor air and/or dust study 
(preliminary literature search). 
1.  Peters,R.J.B. (2005) Man-made chemicals in maternal  and cord blood.  TNO Report. B&O-A R 
2005/129. 
Dicyclohexyl phthalate; DCHP (CAS 84-61-7) 
Criteria for inclusion of dicyclohexyl phthalate in  the CHC List: EU Endocrine Disruptor 
Program - Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of dicyclohexyl phthalate in humans wa s identified in 2 biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
1.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 005).  Third National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
2.  Peters,R.J.B. (2005) Man-made chemicals in maternal  and cord blood.  TNO Report. B&O-A R 
2005/129. 
 
The presence of dicyclohexyl phthalate was identifi ed in 4 indoor air and/or dust studies 
(preliminary literature search).   
1.  Fromme, H.,Lahrz, T.,Piloty, M.,Gebhart, H.,Oddoy, A.,Ruden, H. (2004). "Occurrence of 
phthalates and musk fragrances in indoor air and du st from apartments and kindergartens in 
Berlin (Germany)." Indoor Air 14: 188-195. 
2.  Otake, T.,Yoshinga, J.,Yanagisawa, Y. (2001). "Anal ysis of organic esters of plasticizer in indoor 
air by GC-MS and GC-FPD." Environmental Science & T echnology 35(15): 3099-31002. 
3.  Roberts, J. W.,Wallace, L. A.,Camann, D. E.,Dickey,  P.,Gilbert, S. G.,Lewis, R. G.,Takaro, T. K. 
(2009) "Monitoring and reducing exposure of infants  to pollutants in house dust." Reviews of 
Environmental Contamination & Toxicology 201: 1-39.   
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 6 
 4.  Rudel, R. A.,Camann, D. E.,Spengler, J. D.,Korn, L.  R.,Brody, J. G. (2003). "Phthalates, 
alkylphenols, pesticides, polybrominated diphenyl e thers, and other endocrine-disrupting 
Ccmpounds in indoor air and dust." Environmental Sc ience & Technology 37(20): 4543-4553. 
 
Diethyl phthalate (CAS 84-66-2) 
Criteria for inclusion of diethyl phthalate in the CHC List: EU Endocrine Disruptor Program - 
Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of diethyl phthalate in humans was ide ntified in 8 biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
1.  Adibi, J. J.,Whyatt, R. M.,Williams, P. L.,Calafat,  A. M.,Camann, D.,Herrich, R.,Nelson, 
H.,Bhat, H. K.,Perera, F. P.,Silva, M. J.,and Hause r, R. (2008). "Characterization of phthalate 
exposure among pregnant women assessed by repeat ai r and urine samples." Environmental 
Health Perspectives 116(4): 467-473. 
2.  Adibi, J. J.,Pepera, F. P.,Jedrychowski, W.,Camann,  D. E.,Barr, D.,Jacek, R.,Whyatt, R. M. 
(2003). "Prenatal epposures to Phthalates among wom en in New York City and Krakow, Poland." 
Environmental Health Perspectives 111(14): 1719-172 2. 
3.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 005).  Third National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
4.  Guo, Z. Y.,Gai, P. P.,Duan, J.,Zhai, J. X.,Zhao, S.  S. (2010). "Simultaneous determination of 
phthalates and adipates in human serum using gas ch romatography-mass spectrometry with solid-
phase extraction." Biomedical Chromatography 24: 10 94-1099. 
5.  Main, K.,Mortensen, G. K.,Kaleva, M. M.,Boisen, K. A.,Damgaard, I. N.,Chellakooty, 
M.,Schmidt, I. M.,Suomi, A. M.,Virtanen, H. E.,Pete rsen, J. H.,Andersson, A. M.,Toppari, 
J.,Skakkebæk, N. E. (2006). "Human breast milk cont amination with phthalates and alterations of 
endogenous reproductive hormones in infants three m onths of age." Environmental Health 
Perspective 114(2): 270-276. 
6.  Peters,R.J.B. (2005) Man-made chemicals in maternal  and cord blood.  TNO Report. B&O-A R 
2005/129. 
7.  Weuve, J.,Hauser, R.,Calafat, A. M.,Missmer, S. A., Wise, L. A. (2010). "Association of exposure 
to phthalates with endometriosis and uterine leiomy omata: Findings from NHANES, 1999-2004." 
Environmental Health Perspectives 118(6): 825-832.  
8.  Wolff, M. S.,Teitelbaum, S. L.,Windham, G.,Pinney, S. M.,Britton, J. A.,Chelimo, C.,Godbold, 
J.,Biro, F.,Kushi, L. H.,Pfeiffer, C. M.,Calafat, A . M. (2007). "Pilot study Of urinary biomarkers 
Of phytoestrogens, phthalates, and phenols In girls ." Environmental Health Perspectives 115 (1): 
116-121  
 
The presence of diethyl phthalate was identified in  10 indoor air and/or dust studies (preliminary 
literature search).  
1.  Adibi, J. J.,Pepera, F. P.,Jedrychowski, W.,Camann,  D. E.,Barr, D.,Jacek, R.,Whyatt, R. 
M. (2003). "Prenatal epposures to Phthalates among women in New York City and 
Krakow, Poland." Environmental Health Perspectives 111(14): 1719-1722. 
2.  Adibi, J. J.,Whyatt, R. M.,Williams, P. L.,Calafat,  A. M.,Camann, D.,Herrich, R.,Nelson, 
H.,Bhat, H. K.,Perera, F. P.,Silva, M. J.,and Hause r, R. (2008). "Characterization of 
phthalate exposure among pregnant women assessed by  repeat air and urine samples." 
Environmental Health Perspectives 116(4): 467-473. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 7 
 3.  Bornehag, C. G.,Lundgren, B.,Weschler, C. J.,Sigsfa ard, T.,Hagerhed-Engman, L.,Sundell, J. 
(2005). "Phthalates in indoor dust and their associ ation with building characteristics." 
Environmental Health Perspectives 113(10): 1399-140 4. 
4.  California Air Resources Board (2005).  Indoor Air Pollution in California - Report to the 
California Legislature.  California Environmental P rotection Agency. 
5.  Fromme, H.,Lahrz, T.,Piloty, M.,Gebhart, H.,Oddoy, A.,Ruden, H. (2004). "Occurrence of 
phthalates and musk fragrances in indoor air and du st from apartments and kindergartens in 
Berlin (Germany)." Indoor Air 14: 188-195. 
6.  Just, A. C.,Adibi, J. J.,Rundle, A. G.,Calafat, A. M.,Camann, D.,Hauser, R.,Silva, M. J.,Whyyatt, 
R. M. (2010). "Urinary and air phthalate concentrat ions and self-reported use of personal care 
products among minority pregnant women in New York city." Journal of Exposure Science and  
Environmental Epideniology 20: 625-633. 
7.  Kolarik, B.,Naydenov, K.,Larsson, M.,Bornehag, C. G .,Sundell, J. (2008). "The association 
between phthalates in dust and allergic diseases am ong Bulgarian children." Environmental 
Health Perspective 116(1): 98-103. 
8.  Otake, T.,Yoshinga, J.,Yanagisawa, Y. (2001). "Anal ysis of organic esters of plasticizer in indoor 
air by GC-MS and GC-FPD." Environmental Science & T echnology 35(15): 3099-31002. 
9.  Roberts, J. W.,Wallace, L. A.,Camann, D. E.,Dickey,  P.,Gilbert, S. G.,Lewis, R. G.,Takaro, T. K. 
(2009) "Monitoring and reducing exposure of infants  to pollutants in house dust." Reviews of 
Environmental Contamination & Toxicology 201: 1-39.   
10.  Rudel, R. A.,Camann, D. E.,Spengler, J. D.,Korn, L.  R.,Brody, J. G. (2003). "Phthalates, 
alkylphenols, pesticides, polybrominated diphenyl e thers, and other endocrine-disrupting 
Ccmpounds in indoor air and dust." Environmental Sc ience & Technology 37(20): 4543-4553. 
Dibutyl phthalates; DBP (CAS 84-74-2) 
Criteria for inclusion of DBP (dibutyl phthalates) in the CHC List: NTP – clear evidence of 
adverse reproductive and developmental effects, EU Endocrine Disruptor Program - Category 1 
probable. 
 
The presence of DBP (dibutyl phthalates); di-n-buty l phthalate in humans was identified in 8 
biomonitoring studies (preliminary literature searc h). 
1.  Adibi, J. J.,Whyatt, R. M.,Williams, P. L.,Calafat,  A. M.,Camann, D.,Herrich, R.,Nelson, 
H.,Bhat, H. K.,Perera, F. P.,Silva, M. J.,and Hause r, R. (2008). "Characterization of phthalate 
exposure among pregnant women assessed by repeat ai r and urine samples." Environmental 
Health Perspectives 116(4): 467-473. 
2.  Adibi, J. J.,Pepera, F. P.,Jedrychowski, W.,Camann,  D. E.,Barr, D.,Jacek, R.,Whyatt, R. M. 
(2003). "Prenatal epposures to Phthalates among wom en in New York City and Krakow, Poland." 
Environmental Health Perspectives 111(14): 1719-172 2. 
3.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 005).  Third National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
4.  Guo, Z. Y.,Gai, P. P.,Duan, J.,Zhai, J. X.,Zhao, S.  S. (2010). "Simultaneous determination of 
phthalates and adipates in human serum using gas ch romatography-mass spectrometry with solid-
phase extraction." Biomedical Chromatography 24: 10 94-1099. 
5.  Main, K.,Mortensen, G. K.,Kaleva, M. M.,Boisen, K. A.,Damgaard, I. N.,Chellakooty, 
M.,Schmidt, I. M.,Suomi, A. M.,Virtanen, H. E.,Pete rsen, J. H.,Andersson, A. M.,Toppari, 
J.,Skakkebæk, N. E. (2006). "Human breast milk cont amination with phthalates and alterations of 
endogenous reproductive hormones in infants three m onths of age." Environmental Health 
Perspective 114(2): 270-276. 
6.  Peters,R.J.B. (2005) Man-made chemicals in maternal  and cord blood.  TNO Report. B&O-A R 
2005/129. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 8 
 7.  Wolff, M. S.,Teitelbaum, S. L.,Windham, G.,Pinney, S. M.,Britton, J. A.,Chelimo, C.,Godbold, 
J.,Biro, F.,Kushi, L. H.,Pfeiffer, C. M.,Calafat, A . M. (2007). "Pilot study Of urinary biomarkers 
Of phytoestrogens, phthalates, and phenols In girls ." Environmental Health Perspectives 115 (1): 
116-121  
8.  Woodruff, T.J., Zota, A.R., Schartz, J.M.  (2011). Environmental chemicals in pregnant women 
in the United States: NHANES 2003-2004. Environment al Health Perspectives 119:878-885. 
 
The presence of DBP (dibutyl phthalates); di-n-buty l phthalate was identified in 9 indoor air 
and/or dust studies (preliminary literature search) . 
1.  Adibi, J. J.,Pepera, F. P.,Jedrychowski, W.,Camann,  D. E.,Barr, D.,Jacek, R.,Whyatt, R. M. 
(2003). "Prenatal epposures to Phthalates among wom en in New York City and Krakow, Poland." 
Environmental Health Perspectives 111(14): 1719-172 2. 
2.  Adibi, J. J.,Whyatt, R. M.,Williams, P. L.,Calafat,  A. M.,Camann, D.,Herrich, R.,Nelson, 
H.,Bhat, H. K.,Perera, F. P.,Silva, M. J.,and Hause r, R. (2008). "Characterization of phthalate 
exposure among pregnant women assessed by repeat ai r and urine samples." Environmental 
Health Perspectives 116(4): 467-473. 
3.  Bornehag, C. G.,Lundgren, B.,Weschler, C. J.,Sigsfa ard, T.,Hagerhed-Engman, L.,Sundell, J. 
(2005). "Phthalates in indoor dust and their associ ation with building characteristics." 
Environmental Health Perspectives 113(10): 1399-140 4. 
4.  Fromme, H.,Lahrz, T.,Piloty, M.,Gebhart, H.,Oddoy, A.,Ruden, H. (2004). "Occurrence of 
phthalates and musk fragrances in indoor air and du st from apartments and kindergartens in 
Berlin (Germany)." Indoor Air 14: 188-195. 
5.  Just, A. C.,Adibi, J. J.,Rundle, A. G.,Calafat, A. M.,Camann, D.,Hauser, R.,Silva, M. J.,Whyyatt, 
R. M. (2010). "Urinary and air phthalate concentrat ions and self-reported use of personal care 
products among minority pregnant women in New York city." Journal of Exposure Science and  
Environmental Epideniology 20: 625-633. 
6.  Kolarik, B.,Naydenov, K.,Larsson, M.,Bornehag, C. G .,Sundell, J. (2008). "The association 
between phthalates in dust and allergic diseases am ong Bulgarian children." Environmental 
Health Perspective 116(1): 98-103. 
7.  Otake, T.,Yoshinga, J.,Yanagisawa, Y. (2001). "Anal ysis of organic esters of plasticizer in indoor 
air by GC-MS and GC-FPD." Environmental Science & T echnology 35(15): 3099-31002. 
8.  Roberts, J. W.,Wallace, L. A.,Camann, D. E.,Dickey,  P.,Gilbert, S. G.,Lewis, R. G.,Takaro, T. K. 
(2009) "Monitoring and reducing exposure of infants  to pollutants in house dust." Reviews of 
Environmental Contamination & Toxicology 201: 1-39.   
9.  Rudel, R. A.,Camann, D. E.,Spengler, J. D.,Korn, L.  R.,Brody, J. G. (2003). "Phthalates, 
alkylphenols, pesticides, polybrominated diphenyl e thers, and other endocrine-disrupting 
Ccmpounds in indoor air and dust." Environmental Sc ience & Technology 37(20): 4543-4553. 
Di-n-Hexyl phthalate (CAS 84-75-3) 
Criteria for inclusion of di-n-hexyl phthalate in t he CHC List: NTP – clear evidence of adverse 
reproductive effects. 
 
The presence of di-n-hexyl phthalate in humans was not identified in biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
The presence of di-n-hexyl phthalate was identified  in 1 indoor air and/or dust study (preliminary 
literature search).   
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 9 
 1.  Rudel, R. A.,Camann, D. E.,Spengler, J. D.,Korn, L.  R.,Brody, J. G. (2003). "Phthalates, 
alkylphenols, pesticides, polybrominated diphenyl e thers, and other endocrine-disrupting 
Ccmpounds in indoor air and dust." Environmental Sc ience & Technology 37(20): 4543-4553. 
Benzyl butyl phthalate; Butyl benzyl phthalate; BBz P (CAS 85-68-7) 
Criteria for inclusion of Benzyl butyl phthalate; B BP in the CHC List: EU Endocrine Disruptor 
Program - Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of benzyl butyl phthalate; BBP in huma ns was identified in 8 biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
1.  Adibi, J. J.,Whyatt, R. M.,Williams, P. L.,Calafat,  A. M.,Camann, D.,Herrich, R.,Nelson, 
H.,Bhat, H. K.,Perera, F. P.,Silva, M. J.,and Hause r, R. (2008). "Characterization of phthalate 
exposure among pregnant women assessed by repeat ai r and urine samples." Environmental 
Health Perspectives 116(4): 467-473. 
2.  Adibi, J. J.,Pepera, F. P.,Jedrychowski, W.,Camann,  D. E.,Barr, D.,Jacek, R.,Whyatt, R. M. 
(2003). "Prenatal epposures to Phthalates among wom en in New York City and Krakow, Poland." 
Environmental Health Perspectives 111(14): 1719-172 2. 
3.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 005).  Third National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
4.  Guo, Z. Y.,Gai, P. P.,Duan, J.,Zhai, J. X.,Zhao, S.  S. (2010). "Simultaneous determination of 
phthalates and adipates in human serum using gas ch romatography-mass spectrometry with solid-
phase extraction." Biomedical Chromatography 24: 10 94-1099. 
5.  Main, K.,Mortensen, G. K.,Kaleva, M. M.,Boisen, K. A.,Damgaard, I. N.,Chellakooty, 
M.,Schmidt, I. M.,Suomi, A. M.,Virtanen, H. E.,Pete rsen, J. H.,Andersson, A. M.,Toppari, 
J.,Skakkebæk, N. E. (2006). "Human breast milk cont amination with phthalates and alterations of 
endogenous reproductive hormones in infants three m onths of age." Environmental Health 
Perspective 114(2): 270-276. 
6.  Peters,R.J.B. (2005) Man-made chemicals in maternal  and cord blood.  TNO Report. B&O-A R 
2005/129. 
7.  Weuve, J.,Hauser, R.,Calafat, A. M.,Missmer, S. A., Wise, L. A. (2010). "Association of exposure 
to phthalates with endometriosis and uterine leiomy omata: Findings from NHANES, 1999-2004." 
Environmental Health Perspectives 118(6): 825-832.  
8.  Wolff, M. S.,Teitelbaum, S. L.,Windham, G.,Pinney, S. M.,Britton, J. A.,Chelimo, C.,Godbold, 
J.,Biro, F.,Kushi, L. H.,Pfeiffer, C. M.,Calafat, A . M. (2007). "Pilot study Of urinary biomarkers 
Of phytoestrogens, phthalates, and phenols In girls ." Environmental Health Perspectives 115 (1): 
116-121  
 
The presence of butyl benzyl phthalate; BBP was ide ntified in 9 indoor air and/or dust studies 
(preliminary literature search).   
1.  Adibi, J. J.,Pepera, F. P.,Jedrychowski, W.,Camann,  D. E.,Barr, D.,Jacek, R.,Whyatt, 
R. M. (2003). "Prenatal epposures to Phthalates amo ng women in New York City and 
Krakow, Poland." Environmental Health Perspectives 111(14): 1719-1722. 
2.  Adibi, J. J.,Whyatt, R. M.,Williams, P. L.,Calafat,  A. M.,Camann, D.,Herrich, 
R.,Nelson, H.,Bhat, H. K.,Perera, F. P.,Silva, M. J .,and Hauser, R. (2008). 
"Characterization of phthalate exposure among pregn ant women assessed by repeat 
air and urine samples." Environmental Health Perspe ctives 116(4): 467-473. 
3.  Bornehag, C. G.,Lundgren, B.,Weschler, C. J.,Sigsfa ard, T.,Hagerhed-Engman, 
L.,Sundell, J. (2005). "Phthalates in indoor dust a nd their association with building 
characteristics." Environmental Health Perspectives  113(10): 1399-1404. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 10 
 4.  California Air Resources Board (2005).  Indoor Air Pollution in California - Report to 
the California Legislature.  California Environment al Protection Agency. 
5.  Fromme, H.,Lahrz, T.,Piloty, M.,Gebhart, H.,Oddoy, A.,Ruden, H. (2004). 
"Occurrence of phthalates and musk fragrances in in door air and dust from 
apartments and kindergartens in Berlin (Germany)." Indoor Air 14: 188-195. 
6.  Kolarik, B.,Naydenov, K.,Larsson, M.,Bornehag, C. G .,Sundell, J. (2008). "The 
association between phthalates in dust and allergic  diseases among Bulgarian 
children." Environmental Health Perspective 116(1):  98-103. 
7.  Otake, T.,Yoshinga, J.,Yanagisawa, Y. (2001). "Anal ysis of organic esters of 
plasticizer in indoor air by GC-MS and GC-FPD." Env ironmental Science & 
Technology 35(15): 3099-31002. 
8.  Roberts, J. W.,Wallace, L. A.,Camann, D. E.,Dickey,  P.,Gilbert, S. G.,Lewis, R. 
G.,Takaro, T. K. (2009) "Monitoring and reducing ex posure of infants to pollutants in 
house dust." Reviews of Environmental Contamination  & Toxicology 201: 1-39.  
9.  Rudel, R. A.,Camann, D. E.,Spengler, J. D.,Korn, L.  R.,Brody, J. G. (2003). 
"Phthalates, alkylphenols, pesticides, polybrominat ed diphenyl ethers, and other 
endocrine-disrupting Ccmpounds in indoor air and du st." Environmental Science & 
Technology 37(20): 4543-4553. 
Hexachlorobutadiene (CAS 87-68-3) 
Criteria for inclusion of hexachlorobutadiene in th e CHC List: Canadian Environmental 
Protection Act - PersistentBioaccumulative & Inhere ntly Toxic,  
 
The presence of hexachlorobutadiene in humans was n ot identified in biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
The presence of hexachlorobutadiene was not identif ied in indoor air and/or dust studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
Compound detected in consumer products. 
2-Naphthylamine (CAS 91-59-8) 
Criteria for inclusion of 2-naphthylamine in the CH C List: NTP Report on Carcinogens - known 
carcinogen, IARC - Group 1 known human carcinogen, European Union carcinogen list, 
Category 1, known carcinogen. 
 
The presence of 2-naphthylamine in humans was not i dentified in biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
The presence of 2-naphthylamine was identified in 1  indoor air and/or dust study (preliminary 
literature search).  
1.  Wilson, W. E.,Lioy, P. J. (1994). "Sources of organ ic acids in indoor air: a field study." Journal of 
Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology 4( 1): 25-47. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 11 
 4-Hydroxybiphenyl; (CAS 92-69-3) 
Criteria for inclusion of 4-hydroxybiphenyl  in the  CHC List: EU Endocrine Disruptor Program - 
Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of 4-hydroxybiphenyl in humans was ide ntified in 3 biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
1.  Wolff, M. S.,Teitelbaum, S. L.,Windham, G.,Pinney, S. M.,Britton, J. A.,Chelimo, 
C.,Godbold, J.,Biro, F.,Kushi, L. H.,Pfeiffer, C. M .,Calafat, A. M. (2007). "Pilot study Of 
urinary biomarkers Of phytoestrogens, phthalates, a nd phenols In girls." Environmental 
Health Perspectives 115 (1): 116-121  
2.  Ye, X.,Kuklenyik, Z.,Bishop, A. M.,Needham, L. L.,C alafat, A. M. (2006). "Quantification 
of the urinary concentrations of parabens in humans  by on-line solid phase extraction-high 
performance liquid chromatography-isotope dilution tandem mass spectrometry." Journal of 
Chromatography B 844: 53-59. 
3.  Ye, X., Bishop, A.M., Needham, L.L., Calafat, A.M. (2008).  Automated on-line column-
switching HPLC-MS/MS method with peak focusing for measuring parabens, triclosan, and 
other environmental phenols in human milk.  Analyti ca Chimica Acta 622:150-156. 
 
The presence of 4-hydroxybiphenyl; 4-phenylphenol w as not identified in indoor air and/or dust 
studies (preliminary literature search). 
Benzidine and its salts (CAS 92-87-5) 
Criteria for inclusion of benzidine and its salts i n the CHC List: EPA Integrated Risk Information 
System - 1986 criteria, known carcinogen, IARC - Gr oup 1 known human carcinogen. 
 
The presence of benzidine and its salts in humans w as not identified in biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
The presence of benzidine and its salts was not ide ntified in indoor air and/or dust studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
Compound detected in consumer products. 
 
Propyl paraben (CAS 94-13-3) 
Criteria for inclusion of propyl paraben in the CHC  List: EU Endocrine Disruptor Program - 
Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of propyl paraben in humans was identi fied in 3 biomonitoring studies (preliminary 
literature search). 
1.  Calafat, A. M.,Yang Wong, L.,Ye, X.,Reidy, J. A.,Ne edham, L. L. (2008). "Exposure of the U.S. 
population to bisphenol A and 4-tertiary-octylpheno l: 2003-2004." Environmental Health 
Perspectives 116(1): 39-44. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 12 
  
2.  Ye, X.,Kuklenyik, Z.,Bishop, A. M.,Needham, L. L.,C alafat, A. M. (2006). "Quantification of the 
urinary concentrations of parabens in humans by on- line solid phase extraction-high performance 
liquid chromatography-isotope dilution tandem mass spectrometry." Journal of Chromatography 
B 844: 53-59. 
3.  Ye, X., Bishop, A.M., Needham, L.L., Calafat, A.M. (2008).  Automated on-line column-
switching HPLC-MS/MS method with peak focusing for measuring parabens, triclosan, and other 
environmental phenols in human milk.  Analytica Chi mica Acta 622:150-156. 
 
The presence of propyl paraben was not identified i n indoor air and/or dust studies (preliminary 
literature search). 
Butyl paraben (CAS 94-26-8) 
Criteria for inclusion of butyl paraben in the CHC List: EU Endocrine Disruptor Program - 
Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of butyl paraben in humans was identif ied in 2 biomonitoring studies (preliminary 
literature search). 
1.  Calafat, A. M.,Yang Wong, L.,Ye, X.,Reidy, J. A.,Ne edham, L. L. (2008). "Exposure of the U.S. 
population to bisphenol A and 4-tertiary-octylpheno l: 2003-2004." Environmental Health 
Perspectives 116(1): 39-44. 
2.  Ye, X.,Kuklenyik, Z.,Bishop, A. M.,Needham, L. L.,C alafat, A. M. (2006). "Quantification of the 
urinary concentrations of parabens in humans by on- line solid phase extraction-high performance 
liquid chromatography-isotope dilution tandem mass spectrometry." Journal of Chromatography 
B 844: 53-59. 
 
The presence of butyl paraben was identified in 1 i ndoor air and/or dust study (preliminary 
literature search).   
1.  Rudel, R. A.,Camann, D. E.,Spengler, J. D.,Korn, L.  R.,Brody, J. G. (2003). "Phthalates, 
alkylphenols, pesticides, polybrominated diphenyl e thers, and other endocrine-disrupting 
Ccmpounds in indoor air and dust." Environmental Sc ience & Technology 37(20): 4543-4553. 
2-Aminotoluene (CAS 95-53-4) 
Criteria for inclusion of 2-aminotoluene in the CHC  List: IARC - Group 1 known human 
carcinogen. 
 
The presence of 2-aminotoluene in humans was not id entified in biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
The presence of 2-aminotoluene was not identified i n indoor air and/or dust studies (preliminary 
literature search). 
 
Compound detected in consumer products. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 13 
 Methyl paraben (CAS 99-76-3) 
Criteria for inclusion of methyl paraben in the CHC  List: EU Endocrine Disruptor Program - 
Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of methyl paraben in humans was identi fied in 3 biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
1.  Calafat, A. M.,Yang Wong, L.,Ye, X.,Reidy, J. A.,Ne edham, L. L. (2008). "Exposure of the U.S. 
population to bisphenol A and 4-tertiary-octylpheno l: 2003-2004." Environmental Health 
Perspectives 116(1): 39-44. 
2.  Ye, X.,Kuklenyik, Z.,Bishop, A. M.,Needham, L. L.,C alafat, A. M. (2006). "Quantification of the 
urinary concentrations of parabens in humans by on- line solid phase extraction-high performance 
liquid chromatography-isotope dilution tandem mass spectrometry." Journal of Chromatography 
B 844: 53-59. 
3.  Ye, X., Bishop, A.M., Needham, L.L., Calafat, A.M. (2008).  Automated on-line column-
switching HPLC-MS/MS method with peak focusing for measuring parabens, triclosan, and other 
environmental phenols in human milk.  Analytica Chi mica Acta 622:150-156. 
 
The presence of methyl paraben was identified in 1 indoor air and/or dust study (preliminary 
literature search). 
1.  A.,Camann, D. E.,Spengler, J. D.,Korn, L. R.,Brody,  J. G. (2003). "Phthalates, 
alkylphenols, pesticides, polybrominated diphenyl e thers, and other endocrine-disrupting 
Ccmpounds in indoor air and dust." Environmental Sc ience & Technology 37(20): 4543-
4553. 
p-Hydroxybenzoic acid (CAS 99-96-7) 
Criteria for inclusion of p-hydroxybenzoic acid in the CHC List: EU Endocrine Disruptor 
Program - Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of p-hydroxybenzoic acid in humans was  not identified in biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
The presence of p-hydroxybenzoic acid was not ident ified in indoor air and/or dust studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
Compound detected in consumer products. 
 
Styrene (CAS 100-42-5) 
Criteria for inclusion of styrene in the CHC List: EU Endocrine Disruptor Program - Category 1 
probable. 
 
The presence of styrene in humans was identified in  5 biomonitoring studies (preliminary 
literature search). 
1.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 009).  Fourth National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 14 
 2.  Elliott, L.,Longnecker, M. P.,Kissling, G. E.,Londo n, S. J. (2006). "Volatile organic compounds 
and pulmonary function in the Third National Health  and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1988-
1994." Environmental Health Perspectives 114(8): 12 10-1214. 
3.  Pellizzari, E. D.,Smith, D. J.,Clayton, A.,Michael,  L. C.,Quackenboss, J. J. (2001). "An 
assessment of the data quality for NHEXAS-Part I: E xposure to metals and volatile organic 
chemicals in Region 5." Journal of Exposure Analysi s and Environmental Epidemiology 11: 140-
154. 
4.  Sexton, K.,Adgate, J. L.,Church, T. R.,Ashley, D. L .,Needham, L. L.,Ramachandran, 
G.,Fredrickson, A. L.,Ryan, A. D. (2005). "Children 's exposure to volatile organic compounds as 
determined by longitudinal measurements in blood." Environmental Health Perspectives 113(3): 
342-348. 
5.  Sexton, K.,Adgate, J. L.,Fredrickson, A. L.,Ryan, A . D.,Needham, L. L.,Ashley, D. L. (2006). 
"Using biologic markers in blood to assess exposure  to multiple environmental chemicals for 
inner-city children 3 - 6 years of age." Environmen tal Health Perspectives 114(3): 453-459. 
 
The presence of styrene was identified in 9 indoor air and/or dust studies (preliminary literature 
search).   
1.  Thomsen, C.,Lundanes, E.,Becher, G. (2002). "Bromin ated flame retardants in archived serum 
samples from Norway: A study on temporal trends and  the role of age." Environmental Science & 
Technology 36(7): 1414-1418. 
2.  California Air Resources Board (2005).  Indoor Air Pollution in California - Report to the 
California Legislature.  California Environmental P rotection Agency. 
3.  Guo, H.,Kwok, N. H.,Cheng, H. R.,Lee, S. C.,Hung, W . T.,Li, Y. S. (2009). "Formaldehyde and 
volatile organic compounds in Hong Kong homes: conc entrations and impact factors." Indoor Air 
19: 206-217. 
4.  Hodgson, A.T., Rudd, A.F., Beal, D., Chandra, S. (2 000).  “Volatile organic compound 
concentrations and emission rates in new and site-b uilt houses.”  Indoor Air 10: 178-192. 
5.  Miller, S. L.,Branoff, S.,Nazaroff, W. W. (1998). " Exposure to toxic air contaminants in 
environmental tobacco smoke: An assessment for Cali fornia based on personal monitoring data." 
Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epid emiology 8(3): 287-311. 
6.  Pellizzari, E. D.,Smith, D. J.,Clayton, A.,Michael,  L. C.,Quackenboss, J. J. (2001). "An 
assessment of the data quality for NHEXAS-Part I: E xposure to metals and volatile organic 
chemicals in Region 5." Journal of Exposure Analysi s and Environmental Epidemiology 11: 140-
154. 
7.  Serrano-Trespalacios, P. I.,Ryan, L.,Spengler, J. D . (2004). "Ambient, indoor and personal 
exposure relationships of volatile organic compound s in Mexico City Metropolitan Area." Journal 
of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology  14: S118-S132. 
8.  Weisel, C. P.,Alimokhtari, S.,Sanders, P. F. (2008) . "Indoor air VOC concentrations in suburban 
and rural New Jersey." Environmental Science & Tech nology 42(22): 8231-8238. 
9.  Zhu, J.,Laifeng, Y.,Shoeib, M. (2007). "Detection o f dechlorane plus in residential indoor dust in 
the city of Ottawa, Canada." Environmental Science & Technology 41: 7694-7698. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 15 
 4,4´-Methylenebis(2-Chloroaniline) (CAS 101-14-4) 
Criteria for inclusion of 4,4´-methylenebis(2-chlor oaniline) in the CHC List: IARC - Group 1 
known human carcinogen. 
 
The presence of 4,4´-methylenebis(2-chloroaniline) in humans was not identified in 
biomonitoring studies (preliminary literature searc h). 
 
The presence of 4,4´-methylenebis(2-chloroaniline) was not identified in indoor air and/or dust 
studies (preliminary literature search). 
 
Compound detected in consumer products. 
Epichlorohydrin (CAS 106-89-8) 
Criteria for inclusion of epichlorohydrin in the CH C List: EU Endocrine Disruptor Program - 
Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of epichlorohydrin in humans was not i dentified in biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
The presence of epichlorohydrin was not identified in indoor air and/or dust studies (preliminary 
literature search). 
 
Compound detected in consumer products. 
1,2-Dibromoethane (CAS 106-93-4) 
Criteria for inclusion of 1,2-dibromoethane in the CHC List: EU Endocrine Disruptor Program - 
Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of 1,2-dibromoethane in humans was not  identified in biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
The presence of 1,2-dibromoethane was not identifie d in indoor air and/or dust studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
Compound detected in consumer products. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 16 
 1,3-Butadiene (CAS 106-99-0) 
Criteria for inclusion of 1,3-butadiene in the CHC List: NTP Report on Carcinogens - known 
human carcinogen, IARC - Group 1 known human carcin ogen, European Union carcinogen list, 
Category 1, known carcinogen. 
 
The presence of 1,3-butadiene in humans was identif ied in 1 biomonitoring study (preliminary 
literature search). 
1.  Schettgen, T.,Musiol, A.,Alt , E.,Ochsmann, E. (200 9). "A Method for the quantification of 
biomarkers of exposure to acrylonitrile and 1, 3-bu tadiene in human urine by column-switching 
liquid chromatography- tandem mass spectrometry." A nalytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 393: 
969-981. 
 
The presence of 1,3-butadiene was identified in 4 i ndoor air and/or dust studies (preliminary 
literature search).   
1.  California Air Resources Board (2005).  Indoor Air Pollution in California - Report to the 
California Legislature.  California Environmental P rotection Agency. 
2.  Serrano-Trespalacios, P. I.,Ryan, L.,Spengler, J. D . (2004). "Ambient, indoor and personal 
exposure relationships of volatile organic compound s in Mexico City Metropolitan Area." Journal 
of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology  14: S118-S132. 
3.  Weisel, C. P.,Alimokhtari, S.,Sanders, P. F. (2008) . "Indoor air VOC concentrations in suburban 
and rural New Jersey." Environmental Science & Tech nology 42(22): 8231-8238. 
4.  Zhu, J.,Laifeng, Y.,Shoeib, M. (2007). "Detection o f dechlorane plus in residential indoor dust in 
the city of Ottawa, Canada." Environmental Science & Technology 41: 7694-7698. 
Toluene (CAS 108-88-3) 
Criteria for inclusion of toluene in the CHC List: Global Harmonization System - category 1A 
for known reproductive or germ cell mutagenicity. 
 
The presence of toluene in humans was identified in  8 biomonitoring studies (preliminary 
literature search. 
1.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 009).  Fourth National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
2.  Elliott, L.,Longnecker, M. P.,Kissling, G. E.,Londo n, S. J. (2006). "Volatile organic compounds 
and pulmonary function in the Third National Health  and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1988-
1994." Environmental Health Perspectives 114(8): 12 10-1214. 
3.  Kim, S. R.,Halden, R. U.,Buckley, T. J. (2007). "Vo latile organic compounds in human milk: 
Methods and measurements." Environmental Science Te chnology 41(5): 1662-1667. 
4.  Lin, Y. S.,Egeghy, P. P.,Rappaport, S. M. (2008). " Relationships between levels of volatile 
organic compounds in air and blood from the general  population." Journal of Exposure Science 
and  Environmental Epideniology 18: 421-429. 
5.  Pellizzari, E. D.,Smith, D. J.,Clayton, A.,Michael,  L. C.,Quackenboss, J. J. (2001). "An 
assessment of the data quality for NHEXAS-Part I: E xposure to metals and volatile organic 
chemicals in Region 5." Journal of Exposure Analysi s and Environmental Epidemiology 11: 140-
154. 
6.  Sexton, K.,Adgate, J. L.,Church, T. R.,Ashley, D. L .,Needham, L. L.,Ramachandran, 
G.,Fredrickson, A. L.,Ryan, A. D. (2005). "Children 's exposure to volatile organic compounds as 
determined by longitudinal measurements in blood." Environmental Health Perspectives 113(3): 
342-348. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 17 
 7.  Sexton, K.,Adgate, J. L.,Fredrickson, A. L.,Ryan, A . D.,Needham, L. L.,Ashley, D. L. (2006). 
"Using biologic markers in blood to assess exposure  to multiple environmental chemicals for 
inner-city children 3 - 6 years of age." Environmen tal Health Perspectives 114(3): 453-459. 
8.  Woodruff, T.J., Zota, A.R., Schartz, J.M.  (2011). Environmental chemicals in pregnant women 
in the United States: NHANES 2003-2004. Environment al Health Perspectives 119:878-885. 
 
The presence of toluene was identified in 10 indoor  air and/or dust studies (preliminary literature 
search).   
1.  Thomsen, C.,Lundanes, E.,Becher, G. (2002). "Bromin ated flame retardants in 
archived serum samples from Norway: A study on temp oral trends and the role of 
age." Environmental Science & Technology 36(7): 141 4-1418. 
2.  California Air Resources Board (2005).  Indoor Air Pollution in California - Report to the 
California Legislature.  California Environmental P rotection Agency. 
3.  Guo, H.,Kwok, N. H.,Cheng, H. R.,Lee, S. C.,Hung, W . T.,Li, Y. S. (2009). "Formaldehyde 
and volatile organic compounds in Hong Kong homes: concentrations and impact factors." 
Indoor Air 19: 206-217. 
4.  Hodgson, A.T., Rudd, A.F., Beal, D., Chandra, S. (2 000).  “Volatile organic compound 
concentrations and emission rates in new and site-b uilt houses.”  Indoor Air 10: 178-192. 
5.  Kim, S. R.,Halden, R. U.,Buckley, T. J. (2007). "Vo latile organic compounds in human milk: 
Methods and measurements." Environmental Science Te chnology 41(5): 1662-1667. 
6.  Liu, J.,Drane, W.,Liu, X.,Wu, T. (2009). "Examinati on of the relationships between 
environmental exposures to volatile organic compoun ds and biochemical liver tests: 
application of canonical correlation analysis." Env ironmental Research 109(2): 193-199. 
7.  Pellizzari, E. D.,Smith, D. J.,Clayton, A.,Michael,  L. C.,Quackenboss, J. J. (2001). "An 
assessment of the data quality for NHEXAS-Part I: E xposure to metals and volatile organic 
chemicals in Region 5." Journal of Exposure Analysi s and Environmental Epidemiology 11: 
140-154. 
8.  Serrano-Trespalacios, P. I.,Ryan, L.,Spengler, J. D . (2004). "Ambient, indoor and personal 
exposure relationships of volatile organic compound s in Mexico City Metropolitan Area." 
Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epid emiology 14: S118-S132. 
9.  Weisel, C. P.,Alimokhtari, S.,Sanders, P. F. (2008) . "Indoor air VOC concentrations in 
suburban and rural New Jersey." Environmental Scien ce & Technology 42(22): 8231-8238. 
10.  Zhu, J.,Laifeng, Y.,Shoeib, M. (2007). "Detection o f dechlorane plus in residential indoor 
dust in the city of Ottawa, Canada." Environmental Science & Technology 41: 7694-7698. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 18 
 Tris (2-chloroethyl) phosphate (CAS 115-96-8) 
Criteria for inclusion of tris (2-chloroethyl) phos phate in the CHC List: Canadian Environmental 
Protection Act – Persistent bioaccumulative  & inhe rently toxic. 
 
The presence of tris(2-chloroethyl) phosphate in hu mans was not identified in biomonitoring 
studies (preliminary literature search). 
 
The presence of tris(2-chloroethyl) phosphate was i dentified in 2 indoor air and/or dust studies 
(preliminary literature search).  
1.  HÅkan Carlsson, Ulrika Nilsson, Gerhard Becker, and  Conny Östman (1997) 
Organophosphate Ester Flame Retardants and Plastici zers in the Indoor Environment: 
Analytical Methodology and Occurrence. Environ. Sci . Technol., 1997, 31 (10), pp 2931-
2936 
2.  Otake, T.,Yoshinga, J.,Yanagisawa, Y. (2001). "Anal ysis of organic esters of plasticizer in indoor 
air by GC-MS and GC-FPD." Environmental Science & T echnology 35(15): 3099-31002. 
 
Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate; DEHP (CAS 117-81-7) 
Criteria for inclusion of DEHP (di-(2-ethylhexyl) p hthalate) in the CHC List: EU Endocrine 
Disruptor Program - Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of DEHP (di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate);  bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate in humans was 
identified in 9 biomonitoring studies (preliminary literature search). 
1.  Adibi, J. J.,Whyatt, R. M.,Williams, P. L.,Calafat,  A. M.,Camann, D.,Herrich, R.,Nelson, 
H.,Bhat, H. K.,Perera, F. P.,Silva, M. J.,and Hause r, R. (2008). "Characterization of phthalate 
exposure among pregnant women assessed by repeat ai r and urine samples." Environmental 
Health Perspectives 116(4): 467-473. 
2.  Adibi, J. J.,Pepera, F. P.,Jedrychowski, W.,Camann,  D. E.,Barr, D.,Jacek, R.,Whyatt, R. M. 
(2003). "Prenatal epposures to Phthalates among wom en in New York City and Krakow, Poland." 
Environmental Health Perspectives 111(14): 1719-172 2. 
3.  Becker, K.,Seiwert, M.,Angerer, J.,Heger, W.,Koch, H. M.,Nagorka, R.,Robkamp, E.,Schluter, 
C.,Seifert, B.,Ullrich, D. (2004). "DEHP matabolite s in urine of children and DEHP in house 
dust." International journal of Environmental Healt h 2007: 409-417. 
4.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 005).  Third National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
5.  Guo, Z. Y.,Gai, P. P.,Duan, J.,Zhai, J. X.,Zhao, S.  S. (2010). "Simultaneous determination of 
phthalates and adipates in human serum using gas ch romatography-mass spectrometry with solid-
phase extraction." Biomedical Chromatography 24: 10 94-1099. 
6.  Main, K.,Mortensen, G. K.,Kaleva, M. M.,Boisen, K. A.,Damgaard, I. N.,Chellakooty, 
M.,Schmidt, I. M.,Suomi, A. M.,Virtanen, H. E.,Pete rsen, J. H.,Andersson, A. M.,Toppari, 
J.,Skakkebæk, N. E. (2006). "Human breast milk cont amination with phthalates and alterations of 
endogenous reproductive hormones in infants three m onths of age." Environmental Health 
Perspective 114(2): 270-276. 
7.  Peters,R.J.B. (2005) Man-made chemicals in maternal  and cord blood.  TNO Report. B&O-A R 
2005/129. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 19 
 8.  Weuve, J.,Hauser, R.,Calafat, A. M.,Missmer, S. A., Wise, L. A. (2010). "Association of exposure 
to phthalates with endometriosis and uterine leiomy omata: Findings from NHANES, 1999-2004." 
Environmental Health Perspectives 118(6): 825-832.  
9.  Wolff, M. S.,Teitelbaum, S. L.,Windham, G.,Pinney, S. M.,Britton, J. A.,Chelimo, C.,Godbold, 
J.,Biro, F.,Kushi, L. H.,Pfeiffer, C. M.,Calafat, A . M. (2007). "Pilot study Of urinary biomarkers 
Of phytoestrogens, phthalates, and phenols In girls ." Environmental Health Perspectives 115 (1): 
116-121  
 
The presence of DEHP (di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate);  bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate was identified 
in 10 indoor air and/or dust studies (preliminary l iterature search).   
1.  Adibi, J. J.,Pepera, F. P.,Jedrychowski, W.,Camann,  D. E.,Barr, D.,Jacek, R.,Whyatt, R. M. 
(2003). "Prenatal epposures to Phthalates among wom en in New York City and Krakow, Poland." 
Environmental Health Perspectives 111(14): 1719-172 2. 
2.  Adibi, J. J.,Whyatt, R. M.,Williams, P. L.,Calafat,  A. M.,Camann, D.,Herrich, R.,Nelson, 
H.,Bhat, H. K.,Perera, F. P.,Silva, M. J.,and Hause r, R. (2008). "Characterization of phthalate 
exposure among pregnant women assessed by repeat ai r and urine samples." Environmental 
Health Perspectives 116(4): 467-473. 
3.  Becker, K.,Seiwert, M.,Angerer, J.,Heger, W.,Koch, H. M.,Nagorka, R.,Robkamp, E.,Schluter, 
C.,Seifert, B.,Ullrich, D. (2004). "DEHP matabolite s in urine of children and DEHP in house 
dust." International journal of Environmental Healt h 2007: 409-417. 
4.  Bornehag, C. G.,Lundgren, B.,Weschler, C. J.,Sigsfa ard, T.,Hagerhed-Engman, L.,Sundell, J. 
(2005). "Phthalates in indoor dust and their associ ation with building characteristics." 
Environmental Health Perspectives 113(10): 1399-140 4. 
5.  California Air Resources Board (2005).  Indoor Air Pollution in California - Report to the 
California Legislature.  California Environmental P rotection Agency. 
6.  Fromme, H.,Lahrz, T.,Piloty, M.,Gebhart, H.,Oddoy, A.,Ruden, H. (2004). "Occurrence of 
phthalates and musk fragrances in indoor air and du st from apartments and kindergartens in 
Berlin (Germany)." Indoor Air 14: 188-195. 
7.  Kolarik, B.,Naydenov, K.,Larsson, M.,Bornehag, C. G .,Sundell, J. (2008). "The association 
between phthalates in dust and allergic diseases am ong Bulgarian children." Environmental 
Health Perspective 116(1): 98-103. 
8.  Otake, T.,Yoshinga, J.,Yanagisawa, Y. (2001). "Anal ysis of organic esters of plasticizer in indoor 
air by GC-MS and GC-FPD." Environmental Science & T echnology 35(15): 3099-31002. 
9.  Roberts, J. W.,Wallace, L. A.,Camann, D. E.,Dickey,  P.,Gilbert, S. G.,Lewis, R. G.,Takaro, T. K. 
(2009) "Monitoring and reducing exposure of infants  to pollutants in house dust." Reviews of 
Environmental Contamination & Toxicology 201: 1-39.   
10.  Rudel, R. A.,Camann, D. E.,Spengler, J. D.,Korn, L.  R.,Brody, J. G. (2003). "Phthalates, 
alkylphenols, pesticides, polybrominated diphenyl e thers, and other endocrine-disrupting 
Ccmpounds in indoor air and dust." Environmental Sc ience & Technology 37(20): 4543-4553. 
Hexachlorobenzene (CAS 118-74-1) 
Criteria for inclusion of hexachlorobenzene in the CHC List: EU Endocrine Disruptor Program - 
Category 1 probable, Global Harmonization System - Category 1A for known reproductive or 
germ cell mutagenicity. 
 
The presence of hexachlorobenzene in humans was ide ntified in 7 biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search).  
1.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 005).  Third National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 20 
 2.  Damgaard, I. N.,Skakkebaek, N. E.,Toppari, J.,Virta nen, H. E.,Shen, H.,Schramm, K. 
W.,Petersen, J. H.,Jensen, T. K.,Main, K. M.,Group,  T. N. C. S. (2006). "Persistent pesticides in 
human breast milk and cryptorchidism." Environmenta l Health Perspectives 114(7): 1133-1138. 
3.  Muckle, G.,Ayotte, P.,Dewailly, E.,Jacobson, S. W., Jacobson, J. L. (2001). "Prenatal exposure of 
the Northern Québec Inuit infants to environmental contaminants." Environmental Health 
Perspectives 109(12): 1291-1299. 
4.  Peters,R.J.B. (2005) Man-made chemicals in maternal  and cord blood.  TNO Report. B&O-A R 
2005/129. 
5.  Ribas-Fitó, N.,Torrent, M.,Carrizo, D.,Júlvez, J.,G rimalt, J. O.,Sunyer, J. (2007). "Exposure to 
hexachlorobenzene during pregnancy andcChildren’s s ocial behavior at 4 years of age." 
Environmental Health Perspectives 115(3): 447-450. 
6.  Shen H, Main K, Andersson A, Damgaard I, Helena E. Virtanen H,  Skakkebaek E, Toppari J, 
and Schramm K (2008). Concentrations of persistent organochlorine compounds in human milk 
and placenta are higher in Denmark than in Finland.  Human Reproduction Vol.23, No.1 pp. 201–
210 
7.  Woodruff, T.J., Zota, A.R., Schartz, J.M.  (2011). Environmental chemicals in pregnant women 
in the United States: NHANES 2003-2004. Environment al Health Perspectives 119:878-885. 
 
The presence of hexachlorobenzene was not identifie d in indoor air and/or dust studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
Ethyl paraben (CAS 120-47-8) 
Criteria for inclusion of ethyl paraben in the CHC List: EU Endocrine Disruptor Program - 
Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of ethyl paraben in humans was identif ied in 2 biomonitoring studies (preliminary 
literature search). 
1.  Calafat, A. M.,Yang Wong, L.,Ye, X.,Reidy, J. A.,Ne edham, L. L. (2008). "Exposure of the U.S. 
population to bisphenol A and 4-tertiary-octylpheno l: 2003-2004." Environmental Health 
Perspectives 116(1): 39-44. 
2.  Ye, X.,Kuklenyik, Z.,Bishop, A. M.,Needham, L. L.,C alafat, A. M. (2006). "Quantification of the 
urinary concentrations of parabens in humans by on- line solid phase extraction-high performance 
liquid chromatography-isotope dilution tandem mass spectrometry." Journal of Chromatography 
B 844: 53-59. 
 
The presence of ethyl paraben was identified in 1 i ndoor air and/or dust study (preliminary 
literature search).  
1.  Camann R, D. E.,Spengler, J. D.,Korn, L. R.,Brody, J. G. (2003). "Phthalates, 
alkylphenols, pesticides, polybrominated diphenyl e thers, and other endocrine-disrupting 
Ccmpounds in indoor air and dust." Environmental Sc ience & Technology 37(20): 4543-
4553 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 21 
 Benzophenone-2; (Bp-2), 2,2',4,4'-tetrahydroxybenzo phenone (CAS 
131-55-5) 
Criteria for inclusion of benzophenone-2 (BP-2), 2, 2',4,4'-tetrahydroxybenzophenone in the CHC 
List: EU Endocrine Disruptor Program - Category 1 p robable. 
 
The presence of benzophenone-2 (BP-2), 2,2',4,4'-te trahydroxybenzophenone in humans was not 
identified in biomonitoring studies (preliminary li terature search). 
 
The presence of benzophenone-2 (BP-2), 2,2',4,4'-te trahydroxybenzophenone was not identified 
in indoor air and/or dust studies (preliminary lite rature search). 
 
Compound detected in consumer products. 
2,4-Dihydroxybenzophenon; Resbenzophenone (CAS 131- 56-6) 
Criteria for inclusion of 2,4-dihydroxybenzophenon;  resbenzophenone in the CHC List: EU 
Endocrine Disruptor Program - Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of 2,4-dihydroxybenzophenon; resbenzop henone in humans was identified in 1 
biomonitoring study (preliminary literature search) . 
1.  Muckle, G.,Ayotte, P.,Dewailly, E.,Jacobson, S. W., Jacobson, J. L. (2001). "Prenatal exposure of 
the Northern Québec Inuit infants to environmental contaminants." Environmental Health 
Perspectives 109(12): 1291-1299. 
 
The presence of 2,4-dihydroxybenzophenon; resbenzop henone was not identified in indoor air 
and/or dust studies (preliminary literature search) . 
Mono-n-butylphthalate (CAS 131-70-4) 
Criteria for inclusion of mono-n-butylphthalate in the CHC List: EU Endocrine Disruptor 
Program - Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of mono-n-butylphthalate in humans was  identified in 3 biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search).  
1.  Main, K.,Mortensen, G. K.,Kaleva, M. M.,Boisen, K. A.,Damgaard, I. N.,Chellakooty, 
M.,Schmidt, I. M.,Suomi, A. M.,Virtanen, H. E.,Pete rsen, J. H.,Andersson, A. 
M.,Toppari, J.,Skakkebæk, N. E. (2006). "Human brea st milk contamination with 
phthalates and alterations of endogenous reproducti ve hormones in infants three months 
of age." Environmental Health Perspective 114(2): 2 70-276. 
2.  Wolff, M. S.,Teitelbaum, S. L.,Windham, G.,Pinney, S. M.,Britton, J. A.,Chelimo, 
C.,Godbold, J.,Biro, F.,Kushi, L. H.,Pfeiffer, C. M .,Calafat, A. M. (2007). "Pilot study Of 
urinary biomarkers Of phytoestrogens, phthalates, a nd phenols In girls." Environmental 
Health Perspectives 115 (1): 116-121  
3.  Woodruff, T.J., Zota, A.R., Schartz, J.M.  (2011). Environmental chemicals in pregnant 
women in the United States: NHANES 2003-2004. Envir onmental Health Perspectives 
119:878-885. 
 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 22 
 The presence of mono-n-butylphthalate was not ident ified in indoor air and/or dust studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
4-tert-Octylphenol; 1,1,3,3-Tetramethyl-4-butylphen ol (CAS 140-66-
9) 
Criteria for inclusion of 4-tert-octylphenol; 1,1,3 ,3-tetramethyl-4-butylphenol in the CHC List: 
EU Endocrine Disruptor Program - Category 1 probabl e. 
 
The presence of 4-tert-octylphenol; 1,1,3,3-tetrame thyl-4-butylphenol in humans was identified 
in 5 biomonitoring studies (preliminary literature search). 
1.  Calafat, A. M.,Wong, L. Y.,Silva, M. J.,Samandar, E .,Preau, J. L. J.,Jia, L. T.,Needham, L. L. 
(2011). "Selecting adequate exposure biomarkers of diisononyl and diisodecyl phthalates: Data 
from the 2005-2006 National Health and Nutrition Ex amination Survey." Environmental Health 
Perspectives 119(1): 50-55. 
2.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 009).  Fourth National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
3.  Chen, G. W.,Ding, W. H.,Ku, H. Y.,Chao, H. R.,Chen,  H. Y.,Huang, M. C.,Wang, S. L. (2010). 
"Alkylphenols in human milk and their relations to dietary habits in Central Taiwan " Food and 
Chemical Toxicology 48: 1939-1944. 
4.  Lopez-Espinosa, M. J.,Freire, C.,Arrebola, J. P.,Na vea, N.,Taoufiki, J.,Fernandez, M. 
K.,Ballesteros, O.,Prada, R.,Olea, N. (2009). "Nony lphenol and octylphenol in adipose tissue of 
women in Southern Spain." Chemosphere 76: 847-852. 
5.  Wolff, M. S.,Teitelbaum, S. L.,Windham, G.,Pinney, S. M.,Britton, J. A.,Chelimo, C.,Godbold, 
J.,Biro, F.,Kushi, L. H.,Pfeiffer, C. M.,Calafat, A . M. (2007). "Pilot study Of urinary biomarkers 
Of phytoestrogens, phthalates, and phenols In girls ." Environmental Health Perspectives 115 (1): 
116-121  
 
The presence of 4-tert-octylphenol; 1,1,3,3-tetrame thyl-4-butylphenol was not identified in 
indoor air and/or dust studies (preliminary literat ure search). 
Octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane (CAS 556-67-2) 
Criteria for inclusion of octamethylcyclotetrasilox ane in the CHC List: EU Endocrine Disruptor 
Program - Category 1 probable, Canadian Environment al Protection Act – persistent  
bioaccumulative  & inherently toxic. 
 
The presence of octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane in hum ans was not identified in biomonitoring 
studies (preliminary literature search). 
 
The presence of octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane was id entified in 1 indoor air and/or dust study 
(preliminary literature search). 
1.  Lu, Y.,Yuan, T.,Yun, S. H.,Wang, W.,Gian Wu, G.,Kan nan, K. (2010). "Occurrence of cyclic and 
lsnear Siloxanes in indoor dust from China, and imp lications for human exposures." 
Environmental Science Technology 44(16): 6081-6087.  
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 23 
 Benzene, pentachloro- (CAS 608-93-5) 
Criteria for inclusion of benzene, pentachloro- in the CHC List: EU Endocrine Disruptor 
Program - Category 1 probable, Canadian Environment al Protection Act - 
PersistentBioaccumulative  & Inherently Toxic. 
 
The presence of benzene, pentachloro- in humans was  identified in 2 biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search).  
1.  Damgaard, I. N.,Skakkebaek, N. E.,Toppari, J.,Virta nen, H. E.,Shen, H.,Schramm, K. 
W.,Petersen, J. H.,Jensen, T. K.,Main, K. M.,Group,  T. N. C. S. (2006). "Persistent pesticides in 
human breast milk and cryptorchidism." Environmenta l Health Perspectives 114(7): 1133-1138. 
2.  Peters,R.J.B. (2005) Man-made chemicals in maternal  and cord blood.  TNO Report. B&O-A R 
2005/129. 
 
The presence of benzene, pentachloro- was not ident ified in indoor air and/or dust studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
2,2',3,3',4,4',5,5',6,6'-Decabromodiphenyl ether; B DE-209 (CAS 
1163-19-5) 
Criteria for inclusion of 2,2',3,3',4,4',5,5',6,6'- decabromodiphenyl ether; BDE-209 in the CHC 
List: Washington State PBT Program and confirmed by  ME-CDC with review of peer-reviewed 
scientific publications. Reports to the Maine State  Legislature by the MEDEP and MECDC 
reviewed numerous peer-reviewed studies documenting  adverse endocrine and developmental 
effects of deca BDE, including effects on thyroid h ormones and developmental neurotoxicity. 1 
 
The presence of 2,2',3,3',4,4',5,5',6,6'-decabromod iphenyl ether; BDE -209 in humans was 
identified in 1 biomonitoring studiy (preliminary l iterature search). 
1.  Gomara, B.,Herrero, L.,Ramos, J. J.,Mateo, J. R.,Fe rnändez, M. A.,Garcıa, J. F.,Gonzälez, M. J. 
(2007). "Distribution of polybrominated diphenyl et hers in human umbilical cord serum, Paternal 
serum, maternal serum, placentas, and breast milk f rom Madrid population, Spain." 
Environmental Science & Technology 41(20): 6961-696 8. 
 
The presence of 2,2',3,3',4,4',5,5',6,6'-decabromod iphenyl ether;  BDE -209 was identified in 2 
indoor air and/or dust studies (preliminary literat ure search). 
1.  Allen, J. G.,McClean, M. D.,Stapleton, H. M.,Nelson , J. W.,Webster, T. F. (2007). "Personal 
exposure to polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) in residential indoor air." Environmental 
Science & Technology 41(13): 4574-4579. 
                                                 
1  Brominated Flame Retardants: A Report to the Joint Standing Committee on Natural Resources, 122nd Main e 
Legislature, Prepared by:  Maine Bureau of Health ( now the Maine Center for Disease Control and Preven tion) and 
the Maine Department of Environmental Protection,  February 2005.  Brominated Flame Retardants: A repo rt to the 
Committee on Natural Resources, 122nd Maine Legisla ture, Prepared by the Center for Disease Control an d 
Prevention and Department of Environmental Protecti on, February 2006.  Brominated Flame Retardants: Th ird 
annual report to the Maine Legislature, Prepared by  the Maine Center for Disease Control & Prevention and the 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection, Janua ry 2007.  
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 24 
 2.  Zhu, J.,Newhook, R.,Marro, L.,Chan, C. C. (2005). " Selected volatile organic compounds in 
residential air in the City of Ottawa, Canada." Env ironmental Science & Technology 39(11): 
3964-3971. 
Methyl tert-butyl ether; MTBE (CAS 1634-04-4) 
Criteria for inclusion of methyl tert-butyl ether; MTBE  in the CHC List: EU Endocrine 
Disruptor Program - Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of methyl tert-butyl ether; MTBE in hu mans was identified in 4 biomonitoring 
studies (preliminary literature search).  
1.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 009).  Fourth National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
2.  Kim, S. R.,Halden, R. U.,Buckley, T. J. (2007). "Vo latile organic compounds in human milk: 
Methods and measurements." Environmental Science Te chnology 41(5): 1662-1667. 
3.  Lin, Y. S.,Egeghy, P. P.,Rappaport, S. M. (2008). " Relationships between levels of volatile 
organic compounds in air and blood from the general  population." Journal of Exposure Science 
and  Environmental Epideniology 18: 421-429. 
4.  Woodruff, T.J., Zota, A.R., Schartz, J.M.  (2011). Environmental chemicals in pregnant women 
in the United States: NHANES 2003-2004. Environment al Health Perspectives 119:878-885. 
 
The presence of methyl tert-butyl ether; MTBE was i dentified in 4 indoor air and/or dust studies 
(preliminary literature search).  
1.  Kim, S. R.,Halden, R. U.,Buckley, T. J. (2007). "Vo latile organic compounds in human milk: 
Methods and measurements." Environmental Science Te chnology 41(5): 1662-1667. 
2.  Serrano-Trespalacios, P. I.,Ryan, L.,Spengler, J. D . (2004). "Ambient, indoor and personal 
exposure relationships of volatile organic compound s in Mexico City Metropolitan Area." Journal 
of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology  14: S118-S132. 
3.  Weisel, C. P.,Alimokhtari, S.,Sanders, P. F. (2008) . "Indoor air VOC concentrations in suburban 
and rural New Jersey." Environmental Science & Tech nology 42(22): 8231-8238. 
4.  Zhu, J.,Laifeng, Y.,Shoeib, M. (2007). "Detection o f dechlorane plus in residential indoor dust in 
the city of Ottawa, Canada." Environmental Science & Technology 41: 7694-7698. 
Perfluorooctanyl sulphonic acid and its salts; PFOS  (CAS 1763-23-1) 
Criteria for inclusion of perfluorooctanyl sulphoni c acid and its salts; PFOS in the CHC List: 
Washington State PBT Program and confirmed by ME-CD C with review of peer-reviewed 
scientific publications.  As part of ongoing review  of PFOS at MECDC, a recent scientific 
publication was identified that reported serum leve ls perfluorooctane sulfonate were positively 
associated with chronic kidney disease. 2 The authors examined the relation of serum PFOS (a nd 
PFOA) and chronic kidney disease in 4,587 adult par ticipants from combined National Health 
and Nutritional Examination Surveys for whom serum measurements were available. The 
association was independent of confounders such as age, sex, race/ethnicity, body mass index, 
diabetes, hypertension, and serum cholesterol level . It is also noteworthy that the European 
Union designates PFOS as persisitent, bioaccumulati ve, and toxic to mammalian species, and 
recommends ultimate phase-out.3   
                                                 
2 Shankar, Anoop; Jie Xiao and Alan Ducatman (2011-1 0-15). "Perfluoroalkyl Chemicals and 
Chronic Kidney Disease in US Adults". American Jour nal of Epidemiology 174 (8): 893–900.  
3  http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?u ri=OJ:L:2006:372:0032:0034:en:PDF  
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 25 
  
The presence of perfluorooctanyl sulphonic acid and  its salts; PFOS in humans was identified in 
5 biomonitoring studies (preliminary literature sea rch).  
1.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 009).  Fourth National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
2.  Fei, C.,McLaughlin, J. K.,Tarone, R. E.,Olsen, J. ( 2007). "Perfluorinated chemicals and fetal 
growth: A study within the Danish National Birth Co hort." Environmental Health Perspectives 
115(11): 1677-1682. 
3.  Haug, L. S.,Huber, S.,Becher, G.,Thomsen, C. (2011) . "Characterisation of human exposure 
pathways to perflourinated compounds - comparing ex posure estimates with biomarkers of 
exposure." Environmental International 37: 687-693.  
4.  Peters,R.J.B. (2005) Man-made chemicals in maternal  and cord blood.  TNO Report. B&O-A R 
2005/129. 
5.  Woodruff, T.J., Zota, A.R., Schartz, J.M.  (2011). Environmental chemicals in pregnant women 
in the United States: NHANES 2003-2004. Environment al Health Perspectives 119:878-885. 
 
The presence of perfluorooctanyl sulphonic acid and  its salts; PFOS was identified in 3 indoor 
air and/or dust studies (preliminary literature sea rch).  
1.  Bjorklund, J. A.,Thuresson, K.,De Wit, C. A. (2009) . "Perfluoroalkyl compounds (PFCs) in 
indoor dust: Concentrations, human exposure estimat es, and sources." Environmental Science & 
Technology 43(7): 2276-2281. 
2.  Haug, L. S.,Huber, S.,Becher, G.,Thomsen, C. (2011) . "Characterisation of human exposure 
pathways to perflourinated compounds - comparing ex posure estimates with biomarkers of 
exposure." Environmental International 37: 687-693.  
3.  Shoeib, M.,Harner, T.,Webster, G. M.,Lee , S. C. (2 011). "Indoor sources of poly- and 
perfluorinated compounds (PFCS) in Vancouver, Canad a: Implications for human 
exposure." Environmental Science and Technology 45 (19): 7999-8005 
Phenol, 4-octyl- (CAS 1806264) 
Criteria for inclusion of phenol, 4-octyl- in the C HC List: EU Endocrine Disruptor Program - 
Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of phenol, 4-octyl- in humans was iden tified in 2 biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
1.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 009).  Fourth National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
2.  Ye, X.,Kuklenyik, Z.,Needham, L. L.,Calafat, A. M. (2005). "Automated on-line column-
switching HPLC_MS/MS method with peak focusing for the determination of nine environmental 
phenols in urine." Analytica Chemistry 77(16): 5407 -5413. 
 
The presence of phenol, 4-octyl- was identified in 1 indoor air and/or dust study (preliminary 
literature search).  
1.  Rudel, R. A.,Camann, D. E.,Spengler, J. D.,Korn, L.  R.,Brody, J. G. (2003). "Phthalates, 
alkylphenols, pesticides, polybrominated diphenyl e thers, and other endocrine-disrupting 
Ccmpounds in indoor air and dust." Environmental Sc ience & Technology 37(20): 4543-4553. 
                                                                                                                                                             
 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 26 
 2-Naphthalenol, 1-[(4-methyl-2-nitrophenyl)azo]- (C AS 2425856) 
Criteria for inclusion of 2-naphthalenol, 1-[(4-met hyl-2-nitrophenyl)azo]- in the CHC List: 
Canadian Environmental Protection Act – persistent bioaccumulative  & inherently toxic. 
 
The presence of 2-naphthalenol, 1-[(4-methyl-2-nitr ophenyl)azo]- in humans was not identified 
in biomonitoring studies (preliminary literature se arch). 
 
The presence of 2-naphthalenol, 1-[(4-methyl-2-nitr ophenyl)azo]- was not identified in indoor 
air and/or dust studies (preliminary literature sea rch). 
 
Compound detected in consumer products. 
2-Ethyl-hexyl-4-methoxycinnamate (CAS 5466773) 
Criteria for inclusion of 2-ethyl-hexyl-4-methoxyci nnamate in the CHC List: EU Endocrine 
Disruptor Program - Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of 2-ethyl-hexyl-4-methoxycinnamate in  humans was not identified in 
biomonitoring studies (preliminary literature searc h). 
 
The presence of 2-ethyl-hexyl-4-methoxycinnamate wa s not identified in indoor air and/or dust 
studies (preliminary literature search). 
 
Compound detected in consumer products. 
Mercury & mercury compounds (CAS 7439976) 
Criteria for inclusion of mercury & mercury compoun ds in the CHC List: Global Harmonization 
System - category 1A for known reproductive or germ  cell mutagenicity, California Prop65 - 
developmental effects (substantiated by ME-CDC revi ew), Washington State PBT Program 
(confirmed by ME-CDC). 
 
The presence of mercury & mercury compounds in huma ns was identified in 3 biomonitoring 
studies (preliminary literature search).  
1.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 005).  Third National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
2.  Muckle, G.,Ayotte, P.,Dewailly, E.,Jacobson, S. W., Jacobson, J. L. (2001). "Prenatal exposure of 
the Northern Québec Inuit infants to environmental contaminants." Environmental Health 
Perspectives 109(12): 1291-1299. 
3.  Woodruff, T.J., Zota, A.R., Schartz, J.M.  (2011). Environmental chemicals in pregnant women 
in the United States: NHANES 2003-2004. Environment al Health Perspectives 119:878-885. 
 
The presence of mercury & mercury compounds was ide ntified in 1 indoor air and/or dust study 
(preliminary literature search).   
1.  California Air Resources Board (2005).  Indoor Air Pollution in California - Report to the 
California Legislature.  California Environmental P rotection Agency. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 27 
 Nickel & nickel compounds (CAS 7440020) 
Criteria for inclusion of nickel & nickel compounds  in the CHC List: NTP Report on 
Carcinogens – nickel compounds are known human carc inogens; metallic nickel is reasonably 
anticipated to cause cancer I humans. 
 
The presence of nickel & nickel compounds in humans  was identified in 3 biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search).  
1.  Bernhard, D.,Rossmann, A.,Henderson, B.,Kind, M.,Se ubert, A.,Wick , G. (2006). "Increased 
serum Cadmium and Strontium Levels in Young Smokers  - Effects on Arterial Endothelial Cell 
Gene Transcription." Arterioscler Thrombosis Vascul ar Biology 26:833-838. 
2.  Guan, H.,Piao, F. Y.,Li, X. W.,Li, Q. J.,Xu, L.,Yok oyama, K. (2010). "Maternal and fetal 
exposure to four carcinogenic environmental metals. " Biomedical and Environmental Sciences 
23: 458-465. 
3.  Nunes, J. A.,Batista, B. L.,Rodrigues, J. L.,Caldas , N. M.,Neto, J. A. G.,Barbosa, F. J. (2010). "A 
simple method based on ICP-MS for estimation of bac kground levels of arsenic, cadmium, 
copper, manganese, nickel, lead, and selenium in bl ood of the Brazilian population." Journal of 
Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part A 73: 878 -887. 
 
The presence of nickel & nickel compounds was ident ified in 2 indoor air and/or dust studies 
(preliminary literature search).  
1.  Lemus, R.,Abdelghani, A. A.,Akers, T. G.,Horner, W.  E. (1996). "Health risk from exposure to 
metals in household." Reviews on Environmental Heal th 11(4): 179-189. 
2.  Roberts, J. W.,Wallace, L. A.,Camann, D. E.,Dickey,  P.,Gilbert, S. G.,Lewis, R. G.,Takaro, T. K. 
(2009) "Monitoring and reducing exposure of infants  to pollutants in house dust." Reviews of 
Environmental Contamination & Toxicology 201: 1-39.   
Arsenic & Arsenic compounds (CAS 7440382) 
Criteria for inclusion of arsenic & arsenic compoun ds in the CHC List: NTP Report on 
Carcinogens - known human carcinogen, EPA Integrate d Risk Information System - 1986 
criteria, known carcinogen, IARC - Group 1 known hu man carcinogen, Global Harmonization 
System - category 1A known human carcinogen, Global  Harmonization System - category 1A 
for known reproductive or germ cell mutagenicity. 
 
The presence of arsenic & arsenic compounds in huma ns was identified in 6 biomonitoring 
studies (preliminary literature search).  
1.  Caldwell K, Jones R, Verdon C, Jarrett J, Caudill S  and Osterloh J (2008). Levels of urinary total 
and speciated arsenic in the US population: Nationa l Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
2003–2004. Journal of Exposure Science and Environm ental Epidemiology (2009) 19, 59–68. 
2.  Clayton, C.,Pellizzari, E.,Quackenboss, J. (2002). "National Human Exposure Assessment 
Survey: Analysis of exposure pathways and routes fo r arsenic and lead in EPA Region 5." Journal 
of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology  12(1): 29-43. 
3.  Guan, H.,Piao, F. Y.,Li, X. W.,Li, Q. J.,Xu, L.,Yok oyama, K. (2010). "Maternal and fetal 
exposure to four carcinogenic environmental metals. " Biomedical and Environmental Sciences 
23: 458-465. 
4.  Nunes, J. A.,Batista, B. L.,Rodrigues, J. L.,Caldas , N. M.,Neto, J. A. G.,Barbosa, F. J. (2010). "A 
simple method based on ICP-MS for estimation of bac kground levels of arsenic, cadmium, 
copper, manganese, nickel, lead, and selenium in bl ood of the Brazilian population." Journal of 
Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part A 73: 878 -887. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 28 
 5.  Pellizzari, E. D.,Smith, D. J.,Clayton, A.,Michael,  L. C.,Quackenboss, J. J. (2001). "An 
assessment of the data quality for NHEXAS-Part I: E xposure to metals and volatile organic 
chemicals in Region 5." Journal of Exposure Analysi s and Environmental Epidemiology 11: 140-
154. 
6.  Seifert, B.,Becker, K.,Helm, D.,Krause, C.,Schulz, C.,Seiwert, M. (2000). "The German 
Environmental Survey 1990/1992 (GerES II): Referenc e concentrations of selected 
environmental pollutants in blood, urine, hair, hou se dust, drinking water and indoor air." Journal 
of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology  10: 552-565. 
 
The presence of arsenic & arsenic compounds was ide ntified in 5 indoor air and/or dust studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
1.  Clayton, C.,Pellizzari, E.,Quackenboss, J. (2002). "National Human Exposure 
Assessment Survey: Analysis of exposure pathways an d routes for arsenic and lead in 
EPA Region 5." Journal of Exposure Analysis and Env ironmental Epidemiology 12(1): 
29-43. 
2.  Lemus, R.,Abdelghani, A. A.,Akers, T. G.,Horner, W.  E. (1996). "Health risk from 
exposure to metals in household." Reviews on Enviro nmental Health 11(4): 179-189. 
3.  Pellizzari, E. D.,Smith, D. J.,Clayton, A.,Michael,  L. C.,Quackenboss, J. J. (2001). "An 
assessment of the data quality for NHEXAS-Part I: E xposure to metals and volatile 
organic chemicals in Region 5." Journal of Exposure  Analysis and Environmental 
Epidemiology 11: 140-154. 
4.  Roberts, J. W.,Wallace, L. A.,Camann, D. E.,Dickey,  P.,Gilbert, S. G.,Lewis, R. 
G.,Takaro, T. K. (2009) "Monitoring and reducing ex posure of infants to pollutants in 
house dust." Reviews of Environmental Contamination  & Toxicology 201: 1-39.  
5.  Seifert, B.,Becker, K.,Helm, D.,Krause, C.,Schulz, C.,Seiwert, M. (2000). "The German 
Environmental Survey 1990/1992 (GerES II): Referenc e concentrations of selected 
environmental pollutants in blood, urine, hair, hou se dust, drinking water and indoor air." 
Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epid emiology 10: 552-565. 
Beryllium & Beryllium compounds (CAS 7440417) 
Criteria for inclusion of beryllium & beryllium com pounds in the CHC List: NTP Report on 
Carcinogens - known human carcinogen, EPA Integrate d Risk Information System – 1996 B1 
probable human carcinogen, IARC - Group 1 known hum an carcinogen, Global Harmonization 
System – Category 1A known human carcinogen. 
 
The presence of beryllium & beryllium compounds in humans was identified in 4 biomonitoring 
studies (preliminary literature search).  
1.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 005).  Third National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
2.  Guan, H.,Piao, F. Y.,Li, X. W.,Li, Q. J.,Xu, L.,Yok oyama, K. (2010). "Maternal and fetal 
exposure to four carcinogenic environmental metals. " Biomedical and Environmental Sciences 
23: 458-465. 
3.  Navas-Acien, A.,Francesconi, K. A.,Silbergeld, E. K .,Guallar, E. (2011). "Seafood intake and 
urine concentrations of total arsenic, dimethlyarsi nate and arsenobetaine in the US population." 
Environmental Research 111: 110-118. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 29 
 4.  Shirai, S.,Suzuki, Y.,YOshinaga, J.,Mizumoto, Y. (2 010). "Maternal exposure to low-level heavy 
metals during pregnancy and birth size." Journal of  Environmental Science and Health Part A 45: 
1468-1474. 
 
The presence of beryllium & beryllium compounds was  not identified in indoor air and/or dust 
studies (preliminary literature search). 
Cadmium (CAS 7440-43-9) 
Criteria for inclusion of cadmium in the CHC List: NTP Report on Carcinogens - known human 
carcinogen, IARC - Group 1 known human carcinogen  
 
The presence of cadmium in humans was identified in  8 biomonitoring studies (preliminary 
literature search). 
1.  Bernhard, D.,Rossmann, A.,Henderson, B.,Kind, M.,Se ubert, A.,Wick , G. (2006). "Increased 
serum Cadmium and Strontium Levels in Young Smokers  - Effects on Arterial Endothelial Cell 
Gene Transcription." Arterioscler Thrombosis Vascul ar Biology 26:833-838. 
2.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 005).  Third National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
3.  Guan, H.,Piao, F. Y.,Li, X. W.,Li, Q. J.,Xu, L.,Yok oyama, K. (2010). "Maternal and fetal 
exposure to four carcinogenic environmental metals. " Biomedical and Environmental Sciences 
23: 458-465. 
4.  Nunes, J. A.,Batista, B. L.,Rodrigues, J. L.,Caldas , N. M.,Neto, J. A. G.,Barbosa, F. J. (2010). "A 
simple method based on ICP-MS for estimation of bac kground levels of arsenic, cadmium, 
copper, manganese, nickel, lead, and selenium in bl ood of the Brazilian population." Journal of 
Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part A 73: 878 -887. 
5.  Padilla, M. A.,Elobeid, M.,Ruden, D. M.,Allison, D.  B. (2010). "An examination of the 
association of selected toxic metals with total and  central obesity indices: NHANES 99-02." 
International Journal of Environmental Research and  Public Health 7: 3332-3347. 
6.  Pellizzari, E. D.,Smith, D. J.,Clayton, A.,Michael,  L. C.,Quackenboss, J. J. (2001). "An 
assessment of the data quality for NHEXAS-Part I: E xposure to metals and volatile organic 
chemicals in Region 5." Journal of Exposure Analysi s and Environmental Epidemiology 11: 140-
154. 
7.  Seifert, B.,Becker, K.,Helm, D.,Krause, C.,Schulz, C.,Seiwert, M. (2000). "The German 
Environmental Survey 1990/1992 (GerES II): Referenc e concentrations of selected 
environmental pollutants in blood, urine, hair, hou se dust, drinking water and indoor air." Journal 
of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology  10: 552-565. 
8.  Shirai, S.,Suzuki, Y.,YOshinaga, J.,Mizumoto, Y. (2 010). "Maternal exposure to low-level heavy 
metals during pregnancy and birth size." Journal of  Environmental Science and Health Part A 45: 
1468-1474. 
 
The presence of cadmium was identified in 2 indoor air and/or dust studies (preliminary 
literature search).  
1.  Lemus, R.,Abdelghani, A. A.,Akers, T. G.,Horner, W.  E. (1996). "Health risk from exposure to 
metals in household." Reviews on Environmental Heal th 11(4): 179-189. 
2.  Seifert, B.,Becker, K.,Helm, D.,Krause, C.,Schulz, C.,Seiwert, M. (2000). "The German 
Environmental Survey 1990/1992 (GerES II): Referenc e concentrations of selected 
environmental pollutants in blood, urine, hair, hou se dust, drinking water and indoor air." Journal 
of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology  10: 552-565. 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 30 
 Quartz (CAS 14808-60-7) 
Criteria for inclusion of quartz in the CHC List: I ARC - Group 1 known human carcinogen, 
Global Harmonization System - Category 1A known hum an carcinogen. 
 
The presence of quartz in humans was not identified  in biomonitoring studies (preliminary 
literature search). 
 
The presence of quartz was not identified in indoor  air and/or dust studies (preliminary literature 
search). 
 
Compound detected in consumer products. 
Butylated hydroxyanisole (CAS 25013-16-5) 
Criteria for inclusion of butylated hydroxyanisole in the CHC List: EU Endocrine Disruptor 
Program - Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of butylated hydroxyanisole in humans was not identified in biomonitoring studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
The presence of butylated hydroxyanisole was not id entified in indoor air and/or dust studies 
(preliminary literature search). 
 
Compound detected in consumer products. 
 
Hexabromocyclododecane; HBCD (CAS 25637-99-4) 
Criteria for inclusion of hexabromocyclododecane in  the CHC List: Washington State PBT 
Program and confirmed by ME-CDC with review of peer -reviewed scientific publications. 
Maine CDC documents peer-reviewed studies reporting  endocrine and developmental effects of 
HBCD, including developmental neurotoxicity in huma ns.  Studies were also identified with data 
on levels of HBCD in humans. 4  It is also noteworthy that the US EPA has an acti on plan for 
HBCD based on concerns for reproductive, developmen tal, and neurological effects. 5 
 
The presence of hexabromocyclododecane in humans wa s identified in one biomonitoring study 
(preliminary literature search).  
1.  Covaci, A.,Gerecke, A. C.,Law, R. J.,Voorspoels, S. ,Kohler, M.,Heeb, N. V.,Leslie, H.,Allchin, 
C. R.,Deboer, J. (2006). "Hexabromocyclododecanes ( HBCDs) in the environment and humans: 
A review." Environmental Science & Technology 40(12 ): 3679-3688. 
 
The presence of hexabromocyclododecane was identifi ed in 2 indoor air and/or dust studies 
(preliminary literature search).  
                                                 
4 Rationale for Concurrence by Maine Center for Disea se Control and Prevention on the Designation of Bro minated 
Flame Retardants as a Priority Chemical, November 2 2, 2010  
5 http://www.epa.gov/existingchemicals/pubs/actionpla ns/hbcd.html .   
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix III  /circle6 31 
 1.  Peters,R.J.B. (2005) Man-made chemicals in maternal  and cord blood.  TNO Report. B&O-A 
R 2005/129. 
2.  Stapleton, H. M.,Allen, J. G.,Kelly, S. M.,Konstant inov, A.,Klosterhaus, S.,Watkins, D.,McClean, M. 
D.,Webster, T. F. (2008). "Alternate and new bromin ated flame retardants detected in U.S. house 
dust." Environmental Science & Technology 42(18): 6 910-6916. 
Phenol, (1,1,3,3-tetramethylbutyl)-; Octylphenol (C AS 27193-28-8) 
Criteria for inclusion of phenol, (1,1,3,3-tetramet hylbutyl)-; octylphenol in the CHC List: EU 
Endocrine Disruptor Program - Category 1 probable. 
 
The presence of phenol, (1,1,3,3-tetramethylbutyl)- ; octylphenol in humans was not identified in 
biomonitoring studies (preliminary literature searc h). 
 
The presence of phenol, (1,1,3,3-tetramethylbutyl)- ; octylphenol was not identified in indoor air 
and/or dust studies (preliminary literature search) . 
 
Compound detected in consumer products. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern 
Process Documentation 
 
 
Appendix IV 
References for Candidate Chemicals 
July 1, 2012  
 
 
 
Part 1: Toxicology Databases 
 
Part 2: MECDC References for Biomonitoring and Indoor  Air and Dust 
Exposure Candidate Chemicals for List of Chemicals of Hig h Concern 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental & Occupational Health Programs 
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention 
286 Water Street, 3 rd  Floor, Augusta, ME 04333 
207.287.4311 /circle6/circle6 /circle6/circle6 866.292.3474 

Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix IV  /circle6 1 
 Part 1: Toxicology Databases  
 
California Office of Environmental Health Hazard As sessment (OEHHA) Proposition 65 List of 
Chemicals. CA Environmental Protection Agency.  
Available at http://www.oehha.ca.gov/prop65/prop65_list/Newlist. html  
 
Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999 Publica tion of the final decision on the screening 
assessment of 145 substances on the Domestic Substa nces List (subsection 77(6) of the Canadian 
Environmental Protection Act, 1999) Canadian PBiT L ist. Persistent, bioaccumulative and 
inherently toxic Available at 
http://canadagazette.gc.ca/rp-pr/p1/2008/2008-06-07 /html/notice-avis-eng.html#d101  
 
European Commission (EC) Endocrine Disruptor Progra m. Final Report: Towards the 
establishment of a priority list of substances for further evaluation of their role in endocrine 
disruption. November 10, 2000: Annex 13.  Available at 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/endocrine/strategy/ substances_en.htm  
 
Environmental Protection Agency Integrated Risk Inf ormation System (IRIS)  
http://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/iris/index.cfm?fuseaction =iris.showSubstanceList  
 
European Union Risk Assessment Report Tris (2-Chlor oethyl) Phosphate, TCEP EINECS-No.: 
204-118-5 July 2009.  
European Union Commission Regulation (EU) No 757/20 10 of 24 August 2010. Amending 
Regulation (EC) No 850/2004 of the European Parliam ent and of the Council on persistent 
organic pollutants as regards Annexes I and III. Av ailable at http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:201 0:223:0029:0036:EN:PDF  
European Union Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council 
of 16 December 2008 on classification, labelling an d packaging of substances and mixtures, 
amending and repealing Directives 67/548/EEC and 19 99/45/EC, and amending Regulation (EC) 
No 1907/2006 European Union Directive on Dangerous Substances (Directive 67/548/EEC).  
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?u ri=OJ:L:2010:223:0029:0036:EN:PDF  
 
Globally Harmonized System of Classification and La beling of Chemicals (GHS). Third revised 
edition United Nations 2009. 
Available at http://www.unece.org/trans/danger/publi/ghs/ghs_rev 03/03files_e.html  
 
International Agency for Research of Cancer Monogra phs  
Available at http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/PDFs/index .php  
 
National Toxicology Program Report on Carcinogens. 12th Edition. U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services 2011 
Available at http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/?objectid=72016262-BDB7-CE BA-FA60E922B18C2540  
 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix IV  /circle6 2 
 NTP-CERHR Monographs on the Potential Human Reprodu ctive and Developmental Effects. 
Available at http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/?objectid=974B2C24-030F-D3 08-60E11D088F83FADB  
 
Washington State Department of Ecology Chapter 173- 333 WAC Persistent, bioaccumulative 
toxins (PBT) list. January 2006. Available at http://www.ecy.wa.gov/programs/swfa/pbt/list.html  
 
 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix IV  /circle6 3 
 Part 2: MECDC References for Biomonitoring and Indo or Air and Dust 
Exposure Candidate Chemicals for List of Chemicals of High Concern 
 
Abdallah, M. A. E.,Harrad, S.,Covaci, A. (2008). "H exabromocyclododecanes and 
tetrabromobisphenol-A in indoor air and dust in Bir mingham, UK: Implications for human 
exposure." Environmental Science & Technology 42 : 6855-6861. 
  
Adgate, J. L.,Church, T. R.,Ryan, A. D.,Ramachandra n, G.,Fredrickson, A. L.,Stock, T. 
H.,Morandi, M. T.,Sexton, K. (2004). "Outdoor, indo or and personal exposure to VOCs in 
children." Environmental Health Perspectives 112 (14): 1386-1392. 
 
Adibi, J. J.,Pepera, F. P.,Jedrychowski, W.,Camann,  D. E.,Barr, D.,Jacek, R.,Whyatt, R. M. 
(2003). "Prenatal epposures to phthalates among wom en in New York City and Krakow, 
Poland." Environmental Health Perspectives 111 (14): 1719-1722. 
  
Adibi, J. J.,Whyatt, R. M.,Williams, P. L.,Calafat,  A. M.,Camann, D.,Herrich, R.,Nelson, 
H.,Bhat, H. K.,Perera, F. P.,Silva, M. J.,and Hause r, R. (2008). "Characterization of phthalate 
exposure among pregnant women assessed by repeat ai r and urine samples." Environmental 
Health Perspectives 116 (4): 467-473. 
  
Allen, J. G.,McClean, M. D.,Stapleton, H. M.,Nelson , J. W.,Webster, T. F. (2007). "Personal 
exposure to polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) in residential indoor air." Environmental 
Science & Technology 41 (13): 4574-4579. 
   
Barr, D. B.,Barr, J. R.,Bailey, S. L.,Lapeza, C. R.  J.,Beeson, M. D.,Caudill, S. P.,Maggio, V. 
L.,Schecter, A.,Masten, S. A.,Lucier, G. W.,Needham , L. L.,Sampson, E. J. (2000). "Levels of 
methyleugenol in a subset of adults in the general U.S. population as determined by hgh 
resolution mass spectrometry " Environmental Health  Perspectives 108 (4): 323-328. 
   
Becker, K.,Seiwert, M.,Angerer, J.,Heger, W.,Koch, H. M.,Nagorka, R.,Robkamp, E.,Schluter, 
C.,Seifert, B.,Ullrich, D. (2004). "DEHP matabolite s in urine of children and DEHP in house 
dust." International journal of Environmental Healt h 2007 : 409-417. 
  
Bernhard, D.,Rossmann, A.,Henderson, B.,Kind, M.,Se ubert, A.,Wick , G. (2006). "Increased 
serum cadmium and strontium levels in young smokers  - effects on arterial endothelial cell gene 
transcription." Arterioscler Thrombosis Vascular Bi ology 26 :833-838. 
  
Bjorklund, J. A.,Thuresson, K.,De Wit, C. A. (2009) . "Perfluoroalkyl compounds (PFCs) in 
indoor dust: Concentrations, human exposure estimat es, and sources." Environmental Science & 
Technology 43 (7): 2276-2281. 
   
Bornehag, C. G.,Lundgren, B.,Weschler, C. J.,Sigsfa ard, T.,Hagerhed-Engman, L.,Sundell, J. 
(2005). "Phthalates in indoor dust and their associ ation with building characteristics." 
Environmental Health Perspectives 113 (10): 1399-1404. 
   
Calafat, A. M.,Wong, L. Y.,Silva, M. J.,Samandar, E .,Preau, J. L. J.,Jia, L. T.,Needham, L. L. 
(2011). "Selecting adequate exposure biomarkers of diisononyl and diisodecyl phthalates: Data 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix IV  /circle6 4 
 from the 2005-2006 National Health and Nutrition Ex amination Survey." Environmental Health 
Perspectives 119 (1): 50-55. 
   
Calafat, A. M.,Yang Wong, L.,Ye, X.,Reidy, J. A.,Ne edham, L. L. (2008). "Exposure of the U.S. 
population to bisphenol A and 4-tertiary-octylpheno l: 2003-2004." Environmental Health 
Perspectives 116 (1): 39-44. 
  
Calafat, A. M.,Yang Wong, L.,Ye, X.,Reidy, J. A.,Ne edham, L. L. (2010). "Urinary 
concentrations of four parabens in the U.S. populat ion: NHANES 2005-2006." Environmental 
Health Perspectives 118 (5): 679-685. 
 
Caldwell K., Jones R., Verdon C., Jarrett J., Caudi ll S. and Osterloh J. (2008). “Levels of urinary 
total and speciated arsenic in the US population: N ational Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey 2003–2004.” Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology, 1-10. 
 
California Air Resources Board (2005).  Indoor Air Pollution in California - Report to the 
California Legislature.  California Environmental P rotection Agency. 
 
Carlsson H., Nilsson U., Becker G., Östman C. (1997 ) “Organophosphate Ester Flame 
Retardants and Plasticizers in the Indoor Environme nt: Analytical Methodology and 
Occurrence.” Environ. Sci. Technol., 1997, 31 (10), 2931–2936. 
 
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 005).  Third National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
 
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) (2 009).  Fourth National Report on Human 
Exposure to Environmental Chemicals.  Centers for D isease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Ga. 
   
Chen, G. W.,Ding, W. H.,Ku, H. Y.,Chao, H. R.,Chen,  H. Y.,Huang, M. C.,Wang, S. L. (2010). 
"Alkylphenols in human milk and their relations to dietary habits in Central Taiwan " Food and 
Chemical Toxicology 48 : 1939-1944. 
  
Clayton, C.,Pellizzari, E.,Quackenboss, J. (2002). "National Human Exposure Assessment 
Survey: Analysis of exposure pathways and routes fo r arsenic and lead in EPA Region 5." 
Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epid emiology 12 (1): 29-43. 
  
Covaci, A.,Gerecke, A. C.,Law, R. J.,Voorspoels, S. ,Kohler, M.,Heeb, N. V.,Leslie, H.,Allchin, 
C. R.,Deboer, J. (2006). "Hexabromocyclododecanes ( HBCDs) in the environment and humans: 
A review." Environmental Science & Technology 40 (12): 3679-3688. 
   
Damgaard, I. N.,Skakkebaek, N. E.,Toppari, J.,Virta nen, H. E.,Shen, H.,Schramm, K. 
W.,Petersen, J. H.,Jensen, T. K.,Main, K. M.,Group,  T. N. C. S. (2006). "Persistent pesticides in 
human breast milk and cryptorchidism." Environmenta l Health Perspectives 114 (7): 1133-1138. 
   
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix IV  /circle6 5 
 Elliott, L.,Longnecker, M. P.,Kissling, G. E.,Londo n, S. J. (2006). "Volatile organic compounds 
and pulmonary function in the Third National Health  and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1988-
1994." Environmental Health Perspectives 114 (8): 1210-1214. 
  
Fei, C.,McLaughlin, J. K.,Tarone, R. E.,Olsen, J. ( 2007). "Perfluorinated chemicals and fetal 
growth: A study within the Danish National Birth Co hort." Environmental Health Perspectives 
115 (11): 1677-1682. 
  
Fromme, H.,Lahrz, T.,Piloty, M.,Gebhart, H.,Oddoy, A.,Ruden, H. (2004). "Occurrence of 
phthalates and musk fragrances in indoor air and du st from apartments and kindergartens in 
Berlin (Germany)." Indoor Air 14 : 188-195. 
  
Gomara, B.,Herrero, L.,Ramos, J. J.,Mateo, J. R.,Fe rnändez, M. A.,Garcıa, J. F.,Gonzälez, M. J. 
(2007). "Distribution of polybrominated diphenyl et hers in human umbilical cord serum, paternal 
serum, maternal serum, placentas, and breast milk f rom Madrid population, Spain." 
Environmental Science & Technology 41 (20): 6961-6968. 
   
Guan, H.,Piao, F. Y.,Li, X. W.,Li, Q. J.,Xu, L.,Yok oyama, K. (2010). "Maternal and fetal 
exposure to four carcinogenic environmental metals. " Biomedical and Environmental Sciences 
23 : 458-465. 
  
Guo, H.,Kwok, N. H.,Cheng, H. R.,Lee, S. C.,Hung, W . T.,Li, Y. S. (2009). "Formaldehyde and 
volatile organic compounds in Hong Kong homes: Conc entrations and impact factors." Indoor 
Air 19 : 206-217. 
 
Guo, Z. Y.,Gai, P. P.,Duan, J.,Zhai, J. X.,Zhao, S.  S. (2010). "Simultaneous determination of 
phthalates and adipates in human serum using gas ch romatography-mass spectrometry with 
solid-phase extraction." Biomedical Chromatography 24 : 1094-1099. 
   
Haug, L. S.,Huber, S.,Becher, G.,Thomsen, C. (2011) . "Characterisation of human exposure 
pathways to perfluorinated compounds - comparing ex posure estimates with biomarkers of 
exposure." Environmental International 37 : 687-693. 
 
Hodgson, A.T., Rudd, A.F., Beal, D., Chandra, S. (2 000).  “Volatile organic compound 
concentrations and emission rates in new and site-b uilt houses.”  Indoor Air 10 : 178-192. 
    
Jones, E. A.,Wright, J. M.,Rice, C.,Buckley, B. T., Magsumbol, M. S.,Barr, D. B.,Williams, B. L. 
(2010). "Metal exposures in an inner-city neonatal population." Environment International 36 : 
649-654. 
  
Just, A. C.,Adibi, J. J.,Rundle, A. G.,Calafat, A. M.,Camann, D.,Hauser, R.,Silva, M. J.,Whyyatt, 
R. M. (2010). "Urinary and air phthalate concentrat ions and self-reported use of personal care 
products among minority pregnant women in New York city." Journal of Exposure Science and  
Environmental Epidemiology 20 : 625-633. 
   
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix IV  /circle6 6 
 Kerger, B. D.,Schmidt, C. E.,Paustenbach, D. J. (20 00). "Assessment of airborne exposure to 
trihalomethanes from tap water in residential showe rs and baths." Risk Analysis 20 (5): 637-651. 
  
Kim, S. R.,Halden, R. U.,Buckley, T. J. (2007). "Vo latile organic compounds in human milk: 
Methods and measurements." Environmental Science Te chnology 41 (5): 1662-1667. 
  
Kolarik, B.,Naydenov, K.,Larsson, M.,Bornehag, C. G .,Sundell, J. (2008). "The association 
between phthalates in dust and allergic diseases am ong Bulgarian children." Environmental 
Health Perspectives 116 (1): 98-103. 
  
Koziel, J.,Noah, J.,Pawliszyn, J. (2001). "Field sa mpling and determination of formaldehyde in 
indoor air with solid-phase microextraction and on- fiber derivatization." Environmental Science 
& Technology 35 : 1481-1486. 
 
Kutting, B.,Goen, T.,Schwegler, U.,Fromme, H.,Uter,  W.,Angerer, J.,Drexler, H. (2009). 
"Monoarylamines in the general population - A cross -sectional population-based study including 
1004 Bavarian subjects." International Journal of H ygiene and Environmental Health 212 : 298-
309. 
   
Lakind, J. S.,Naiman, D. Q.,Hays, S. M.,Aylward, L.  L.,Blount, B. C. (2010). "Public health 
interpretation of trihalomethane blood levels in th e United States: NHANES 1999-2004." Journal 
of Exposure Science and  Environmental Epidemiology  20 : 255-262. 
  
Lemus, R.,Abdelghani, A. A.,Akers, T. G.,Horner, W.  E. (1996). "Health risk from exposure to 
metals in households." Reviews on Environmental Hea lth 11 (4): 179-189. 
   
Lin, Y. S.,Egeghy, P. P.,Rappaport, S. M. (2008). " Relationships between levels of volatile 
organic compounds in air and blood from the general  population." Journal of Exposure Science 
and  Environmental Epidemiology 18 : 421-429. 
  
Liu, J.,Drane, W.,Liu, X.,Wu, T. (2009). "Examinati on of the relationships between 
environmental exposures to volatile organic compoun ds and biochemical liver tests: Application 
of canonical correlation analysis." Environmental R esearch 109 (2): 193-199. 
  
Lopez-Espinosa, M. J.,Freire, C.,Arrebola, J. P.,Na vea, N.,Taoufiki, J.,Fernandez, M. 
K.,Ballesteros, O.,Prada, R.,Olea, N. (2009). "Nony lphenol and octylphenol in adipose tissue of 
women in Southern Spain." Chemosphere 76 : 847-852. 
  
Lu, Y.,Yuan, T.,Yun, S. H.,Wang, W.,Gian Wu, G.,Kan nan, K. (2010). "Occurrence of cyclic 
and linear siloxanes in indoor dust from China, and  implications for human exposures." 
Environmental Science Technology 44 (16): 6081-6087. 
  
Luceri, F.,Pieraccini, G.,Moneti, G.,Dolara, P. (19 93). "Primary aromatic amines from side-
stream cigarette smoke are common contaminants of i ndoor air." Toxicology and Industrial 
Health 9(3): 405-413. 
  
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix IV  /circle6 7 
 Main, K.,Mortensen, G. K.,Kaleva, M. M.,Boisen, K. A.,Damgaard, I. N.,Chellakooty, 
M.,Schmidt, I. M.,Suomi, A. M.,Virtanen, H. E.,Pete rsen, J. H.,Andersson, A. M.,Toppari, 
J.,Skakkebæk, N. E. (2006). "Human breast milk cont amination with phthalates and alterations 
of endogenous reproductive hormones in infants thre e months of age." Environmental Health 
Perspectives 114 (2): 270-276. 
   
Miller, S. L.,Branoff, S.,Nazaroff, W. W. (1998). " Exposure to toxic air contaminants in 
environmental tobacco smoke: An assessment for Cali fornia based on personal monitoring data." 
Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epid emiology 8(3): 287-311. 
  
Muckle, G.,Ayotte, P.,Dewailly, E.,Jacobson, S. W., Jacobson, J. L. (2001). "Prenatal exposure of 
the Northern Québec Inuit infants to environmental contaminants." Environmental Health 
Perspectives 109 (12): 1291-1299. 
   
Navas-Acien, A.,Francesconi, K. A.,Silbergeld, E. K .,Guallar, E. (2011). "Seafood intake and 
urine concentrations of total arsenic, dimethlyarsi nate and arsenobetaine in the US population." 
Environmental Research 111 : 110-118. 
   
Nunes, J. A.,Batista, B. L.,Rodrigues, J. L.,Caldas , N. M.,Neto, J. A. G.,Barbosa, F. J. (2010). "A 
simple method based on ICP-MS for estimation of bac kground levels of arsenic, cadmium, 
copper, manganese, nickel, lead, and selenium in bl ood of the Brazilian population." Journal of 
Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part A 73 : 878-887. 
  
Otake, T.,Yoshinga, J.,Yanagisawa, Y. (2001). "Anal ysis of organic esters of plasticizer in 
indoor air by GC-MS and GC-FPD." Environmental Scie nce & Technology 35 (15): 3099-31002. 
  
Padilla, M. A.,Elobeid, M.,Ruden, D. M.,Allison, D.  B. (2010). "An examination of the 
association of selected toxic metals with total and  central obesity indices: NHANES 99-02." 
International Journal of Environmental Research and  Public Health 7: 3332-3347. 
  
Palmiotto, G.,Pieraccini, G.,Moneti, G.,Dolara, P. (2001). "Determination of the levels of 
aromatic amines in indoor and outdoor air in Italy. " Chemosphere 43 : 355-361. 
  
Pearce, E. N.,Leung, A. M.,Blount, B. C.,Bazrafshan , H. R.,He, X.,Pino, S.,Valentin-Blasini, 
L.,Braverman, L. E. (2008). "Breast milk iodine and  perchlorate concentrations in lactating 
Boston-area women." The Journal of Clinical Endocri nology & Metabolism 92 (5): 1673-1677. 
  
Pellizzari, E. D.,Smith, D. J.,Clayton, A.,Michael,  L. C.,Quackenboss, J. J. (2001). "An 
assessment of the data quality for NHEXAS-Part I: E xposure to metals and volatile organic 
chemicals in Region 5." Journal of Exposure Analysi s and Environmental Epidemiology 11 : 
140-154. 
 
Peters,R.J.B. (2005) Man-made chemicals in maternal  and cord blood.  TNO Report. B&O-A R 
2005/129. 
   
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix IV  /circle6 8 
 Ribas-Fitó, N.,Torrent, M.,Carrizo, D.,Júlvez, J.,G rimalt, J. O.,Sunyer, J. (2007). "Exposure to 
hexachlorobenzene during pregnancy and children’s s ocial behavior at 4 years of age." 
Environmental Health Perspectives 115 (3): 447-450. 
  
Roberts, J. W.,Wallace, L. A.,Camann, D. E.,Dickey,  P.,Gilbert, S. G.,Lewis, R. G.,Takaro, T. 
K. (2009) "Monitoring and reducing exposure of infa nts to pollutants in house dust." Reviews of 
Environmental Contamination & Toxicology 201 : 1-39.  
  
Rodriques, J. L.,Batista, B. L.,Nunes, J. A.,Passos , C. J. S.,Barbosa, F. J. (2008). "Evaluation of 
the use of human hair for biomonitoring the deficie ncy of essential and exposure to toxic 
elements." Science of the Total Environment 405 : 370-376. 
   
Rudel, R. A.,Camann, D. E.,Spengler, J. D.,Korn, L.  R.,Brody, J. G. (2003). "Phthalates, 
alkylphenols, pesticides, polybrominated diphenyl e thers, and other endocrine-disrupting 
compounds in indoor air and dust." Environmental Sc ience & Technology 37 (20): 4543-4553. 
   
Sandau, C. D.,Ayotte, P.,Dewailly, E.,Duffe, J.,Nor strom, R. J. (2002). "Pentachlorophenol and 
hydroxylated polychlorinated biphenyl metabolites i n umbilical cord plasma of neonates from 
coastal populations in Quebec." Environmental Healt h Perspectives 110 (4): 411-417. 
  
Schettgen, T.,Muller, J.,Fromme, H.,Anderer, J. (20 10). "Simultaneous quantification of 
haemoglobin adducts of ethylene oxide, propylene ox ide, acrylonitrile, acrylamide and 
glycidamide in human blood by isotope-dilution GC/N CI-MS/MS." Journal of Chromatography 
B 878 : 2467-2473. 
  
Schettgen, T.,Musiol, A.,Alt , E.,Ochsmann, E. (200 9). "A Method for the quantification of 
biomarkers of exposure to acrylonitrile and 1, 3-bu tadiene in human urine by column-switching 
liquid chromatography- tandem mass spectrometry." A nalytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry 
393 : 969-981. 
  
Schreiber, J. S.,Hudnell, H. K.,Geller, A. M.,House , D. E.,Aldous, K. M.,Force, M. S.,Langguth, 
K.,Prohonic, E. J.,Parker, J. C. (2002). "Apartment  residents’ and day care workers’ exposures to 
tetrachloroethylene and deficits in visual contrast  sensitivity." Environmental Health 
Perspectives 110 (7): 655-664. 
   
Seifert, B.,Becker, K.,Helm, D.,Krause, C.,Schulz, C.,Seiwert, M. (2000). "The German 
Environmental Survey 1990/1992 (GerES II): Referenc e concentrations of selected 
environmental pollutants in blood, urine, hair, hou se dust, drinking water and indoor air." Journal 
of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology  10 : 552-565. 
   
Serrano-Trespalacios, P. I.,Ryan, L.,Spengler, J. D . (2004). "Ambient, indoor and personal 
exposure relationships of volatile organic compound s in Mexico City metropolitan area." Journal 
of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology  14 : S118-S132. 
  
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix IV  /circle6 9 
 Sexton, K.,Adgate, J. L.,Fredrickson, A. L.,Ryan, A . D.,Needham, L. L.,Ashley, D. L. (2006). 
"Using biologic markers in blood to assess exposure  to multiple environmental chemicals for 
inner-city children 3 - 6 years of age." Environmen tal Health Perspectives 114 (3): 453-459. 
 
Sexton, K.,Adgate, J. L.,Church, T. R.,Ashley, D. L .,Needham, L. L.,Ramachandran, 
G.,Fredrickson, A. L.,Ryan, A. D. (2005). "Children 's exposure to volatile organic compounds as 
determined by longitudinal measurements in blood." Environmental Health Perspectives 113 (3): 
342-348.  
   
Shen H., Main K., Andersson A., Damgaard I, Helena E. Virtanen H.,  Skakkebaek E., Toppari 
J., and Schramm K. (2008). “Concentrations of persi stent organochlorine compounds in human 
milk and placenta are higher in Denmark than in Fin land.” Human Reproduction 23  (1): 201–
210. 
 
Shoeib, M.,Harner, T.,Webster, G. M.,Lee , S. C. (2 011). "Indoor sources of poly- and 
perfluorinated compounds (PFCS) in Vancouver, Canad a: Implications for human exposure." 
Environmental Science and Technology 45  (19): 7999-8005  
  
Shirai, S.,Suzuki, Y.,YOshinaga, J.,Mizumoto, Y. (2 010). "Maternal exposure to low-level heavy 
metals during pregnancy and birth size." Journal of  Environmental Science and Health Part A 45 : 
1468-1474. 
 
Stapleton, H. M.,Allen, J. G.,Kelly, S. M.,Konstant inov, A.,Klosterhaus, S.,Watkins, 
D.,McClean, M. D.,Webster, T. F. (2008). "Alternate  and new brominated flame retardants 
detected in U.S. house dust." Environmental Science  & Technology 42 (18): 6910-6916. 
   
Thomsen, C.,Lundanes, E.,Becher, G. (2002). "Bromin ated flame retardants in archived serum 
samples from Norway: A study on temporal trends and  the role of age." Environmental Science 
& Technology 36 (7): 1414-1418. 
  
Tricker, A. R. (1997). "N-nitroso compounds and man : Sources of exposure, endogenous 
formation and occurrence in body fluids." European Journal of Cancer Prevention 6: 226-268. 
 
Vesper, H. W.,Caudill, S. P.,Osterloh, J. D.,Meyers , T.,Scott, D.,Myers, G. L. (2010). "Exposure 
of the U. S. population to acrylamide in the Nation al Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
2003- 2004." Environmental Health Perspectives 118 (2): 278-283. 
    
Weisel, C. P.,Alimokhtari, S.,Sanders, P. F. (2008) . "Indoor air VOC concentrations in suburban 
and rural New Jersey." Environmental Science & Tech nology 42 (22): 8231-8238. 
  
Weuve, J.,Hauser, R.,Calafat, A. M.,Missmer, S. A., Wise, L. A. (2010). "Association of 
exposure to phthalates with endometriosis and uteri ne leiomyomata: Findings from NHANES, 
1999-2004." Environmental Health Perspectives 118 (6): 825-832.  
  
Wolff, M. S.,Teitelbaum, S. L.,Windham, G.,Pinney, S. M.,Britton, J. A.,Chelimo, C.,Godbold, 
J.,Biro, F.,Kushi, L. H.,Pfeiffer, C. M.,Calafat, A . M. (2007). "Pilot study of urinary biomarkers 
Deriving Chemicals of High Concern Process Document ation, Appendix IV  /circle6 10 
 of phytoestrogens, phthalates, and phenols in girls ." Environmental Health Perspectives 115  (1): 
116-121.  
 
Woodruff, T.J., Zota, A.R., Schartz, J.M.  (2011). Environmental chemicals in pregnant women 
in the United States: NHANES 2003-2004. Environment al Health Perspectives 119 :878-885. 
 
Yazbeck, C.,Kloppmann, W.,Cottier, R.,Sahuquillo, J .,Debotte, G.,Huel, G. (2005). "Health 
impact evaluation of boron in drinking water: a geo graphical risk assessment in Northern 
France." Environmental Geochemistry and Health 27 : 419-427. 
 
Ye, X., Bishop, A.M., Needham, L.L., Calafat, A.M. (2008).  Automated on-line column-
switching HPLC-MS/MS method with peak focusing for measuring parabens, triclosan, and 
other environmental phenols in human milk.  Analyti ca Chimica Acta 622 :150-156. 
  
Ye, X.,Kuklenyik, Z.,Bishop, A. M.,Needham, L. L.,C alafat, A. M. (2006). "Quantification of 
the urinary concentrations of parabens in humans by  on-line solid phase extraction-high 
performance liquid chromatography-isotope dilution tandem mass spectrometry." Journal of 
Chromatography B 844 : 53-59. 
  
Ye, X.,Kuklenyik, Z.,Needham, L. L.,Calafat, A. M. (2005). "Automated on-line column-
switching HPLC_MS/MS method with peak focusing for the determination of nine 
environmental phenols in urine." Analytica Chemistr y 77 (16): 5407-5413. 
  
Zhang, J.,Wilson, W. E.,Lioy, P. J. (1994). "Source s of organic acids in indoor air: a field study." 
Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epid emiology 4(1): 25-47. 
  
Zhu, J.,Laifeng, Y.,Shoeib, M. (2007). "Detection o f dechlorane plus in residential indoor dust in 
the city of Ottawa, Canada." Environmental Science & Technology 41 : 7694-7698. 
  
Zhu, J.,Newhook, R.,Marro, L.,Chan, C. C. (2005). " Selected volatile organic compounds in 
residential air in the City of Ottawa, Canada." Env ironmental Science & Technology 39 (11): 
3964-3971. 
  
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
             PATRICIA W. AHO                
                       COMMISIONER                 
 
APPENDIX V  
 
Chemicals of High Concern  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
Process Documentation  for 
Investigating Chemical P resence in Consumer Products  
 
June 29, 2012  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
17 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0017  
(207) 287 -7688  
 
   

Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
Chemicals of High Concern Process Documentation  
 
June 2012    Page 2 of 14 
 
 
Review Process  
Maine law requires  that development of Maine’s list of Chemicals of High Conce rn (CHC) is to 
be cooperatively  determined by the Maine Department of Health and Human Services, Maine 
Center for Disease Control and Prevention  (“Maine CDC”) , and t he Maine Department of 
Environmental Protection ( “Department ”).  (38 M.R.S.A. § 1693 -A(1)) .  An agreement  of shared 
responsibility for res earch of chemical classification criteria  was established  between the 
agencies.  The Department assumed responsibility  for research of  evidence that  chemicals are 
present in consumer products.  Evidence of pre sence in consumer products exists if  “…the 
chemical has been added to or is present in a consumer product used or present in the home.” (38 
M.R.S.A. § 1693 -A(2)(C)) .   
 
The Department undertook an extensive review of publically available resources  meeting the 
“credible scientific evidence ” standard detailed in law.  Maine law  requires strong , credible 
scientific evidence as the standard for  classify ing chemicals of high concern  and defines credible 
scientific evidence as, “the results of a study, the experi mental design and conduct of which have 
undergone independent scientific peer review, that are published in a peer -reviewed journal or 
publication of an authoritative federal or international governmental agency…” (38 M .R.S.A. § 
1691 (8 -A)).  Chemicals fro m the Maine chemicals of concern list meeting the criteria of 
evidence of presence in consumer products based upon the literature review were documented in 
the CHC list  (details are provided in the Department’s chemical candidate spreadsheet) . 
The Danish E nvironmental Protection Agency (DEPA)  has a  comprehensive  consumer product 
chemical an alysis program .  Due to the comprehensive nature of the program and the analysis, 
the Department  cites this reference extensively and includes  the individual summary repo rt 
numbers on the spreadsheet of candidate chemicals published on the Department’s website  
(which includes citations for each reference described here ). 
References  
The Department utilized the following references in the evaluation of the list of candidate 
chemicals for presence in consumer products:  
Chemical Assessment and Management Program (ChAMP)  
The Chemical Assessment and Management Program (ChAMP) is no longer updated, and was 
superseded by other initiatives in 2009.  Under ChAMP, the U.S. EPA evaluat ed and assigned 
priority for follow -up action on high production volume (HPV) and medium production volume 
(MPV) chemicals. EPA produced a number of monograghs for a limited number of chemicals 
that included information on chemical properties, toxicity, an d in some instances product 
information.  
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
Chemicals of High Concern Process Documentation  
 
June 2012    Page 3 of 14 
 
 
Danish Environmental Protection Agency (DEPA)  
The Danish Environmental Protection Agency (DEPA) conducts a consumer products program.  
This includes a series of reports on chemicals present in consumer products as tested by the 
Danish EPA.  This database was used to identify chemicals in children’s and other household 
products.  All Danish Ministry of the Environment references may be found at the end of this 
document and  at the following internet address: 
[http://w ww.mst.dk/English/Chemicals/consumers_consumer_products/]  
 
Dutch Reports  
The Netherlands Food and Consumer Product Safety Authority (NL) monitors food and 
consumer products to safeguard public health.  This Authority controls entire production chains, 
from raw materials and processing aids, to end products and consumption.  Dutch references 
cited  may be found at the end of this document and at following internet address: 
[http://www.vwa.nl/]  
 
Environmental Health Perspectives (EHP)  
A monthly journal of pee r-reviewed research and news, EHP is published by the U.S. National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, and the Department of 
Health and Human Services.  EHP serves as a forum for the discussion of the interrelationsh ips 
between the environment and human health by publishing peer -reviewed research in a balanced 
and objective manner.  EHP is the third -ranked monthly journal in environmental sciences.  
Receiving more than 1,200 research manuscripts each year, EHP has an acceptance rate of 22%.  
Research articles are published within 24 hours of acceptance as Ahead of Print (AOP) articles 
and are citable using the CrossRef DOI system.  [http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1104052]  
 
Environmental Science and Technology (ES&T)  
Published peer -reviewed studies provide added value to Maine’s exposure research, to the extent 
that more current data strengthens evidence and develops the analysis of predetermined data sets.  
ES&T is an authoritative source of information utilized by a wid e range of environmental 
disciplines.  ES&T publishes original research, which is reviewed by the editor and other 
scientists who assess the significance, originality, and validity of the work, as well as its 
appropriateness for publication.  Widely utiliz ed as a reference across disciplines, ES&T ranks 
number one in total citations in the Environmental Engineering and Environmental Sciences 
categories (as reported by the 2010 Journal Citation Reports®).  ES&T studies referenced are 
cited at the end of this  document.  
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
Chemicals of High Concern Process Documentation  
 
June 2012    Page 4 of 14 
 
 
EPA Inventory Use and Reporting (IUR) Database  
The IUR database, now known as Chemical Data Reporting (CDR), collects quality screening -
level, exposure -related information on chemical substances and makes this information available 
for use by the U.S. EPA and the public.  The CDR data are used to support risk screening 
assessment, priority setting and management activities, and constitute the most comprehensive 
source of basic screening -level, exposure -related information on chemicals available  to the EPA.   
The CDR data bank may be found at the following internet address: 
[http://epa.gov/iur/index.html]  
 
ESIS Risk Assessment Reports  
The ESIS (European chemical Substances Information System) of the European Commission 
Joint Research Centre Inst itute for Health and Human Protection is a complex, heterogeneous 
information system that provides information on chemicals.  Several aspects of the ESIS system 
are managed by the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA).  This resource was used to identify 
chemic al use in consumer products by review of Risk Assessment Reports (RAR).  The ESIS 
website may be found at the following internet address: [http://esis.jrc.ec.europa.eu/]  
 
German Federal Environment Agency  (German FEA)  
The German Federal Environment Age ncy (Umwelt  Bundes  Amt (UBA) ) was founded within 
Germany’s central federal authority on environmental matters  and is the scientific environmental 
authority under the jurisdiction of the Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature 
Conservation and Nuclear Safe ty.  The UBA is mandated to provide scientific support to the 
Federal Government of Germany, implement environmental laws, and inform the public 
regarding e nvironmental protection efforts; e xperts within the UBA utilize in -house laboratories , 
in addition t o commissioning research to scientific institutions.  The agency has adopted an 
interdisciplinary approach in its activities, to include economists, chemists, biologists, and legal 
experts working in unison to outline whole solutions to environmental risks .  The UBA is an 
acting partner for many of Germany’s international organizations, including the World Health 
Organization.  The UBA report reference  may be found at the end of this document and at the 
following internet address: [http://www.  umweltb undesa mt.de /] 
 
Hazardous Substances Data Bank  
The Hazardous Substances Data Bank (HSDB) of the National Library of Medicine is a 
toxicology data file that focuses on the toxicology of potentially hazardous chemicals.  All data 
are referenced and derived from a core set of books, government documents, technical reports 
and selected primary journal literature.  HSDB is peer -reviewed by the Scientific Review Panel 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
Chemicals of High Concern Process Documentation  
 
June 2012    Page 5 of 14 
 
 
(SRP), a committee of experts in the major subject areas within the data banks scope. The HSDB 
data ba nk may be found at the following internet address: [ http://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov ] 
 
Household Products Database  
The Household Products Database (HPD) is sponsored by the National Library of Medicine, uses 
information  gathered from publicly available sources.  Neither NLM nor its contractor (Database 
Providers) test products or investigate to determine if information listed is complete or accurate.  
The HPD database may be found at the following internet address: [http ://hpd.nlm.nih.gov/]  
 
Substances in Products in the Nordic Countries (SPIN)  
SPIN is a database formulated by the combination of the Product Registries of Norway, Sweden, 
Denmark, and Finland.  Financed by the Nordic Council of Ministers  Chemi cal Group, the  
database provides  information about the chemical compounds register.   National legislation in 
these Nordic Countries requires manufacturers and importers to declare chemical substances and 
products to the product registers.  Data compiled in the registers  includes information on 
chemical function, industrial category, classification , composition, and quality.  The se register s 
provide  a valuable reference for national authorities, and  are generally used as support for risk 
assessments, statistical calculati ons, substance flow analysis, supervision activities, as well as 
poison information centers.  SPIN is the result of a common Nordic initiative to gather non -
confidential information from the Nordic product registers on the common use of chemical 
substances  in different types of products and industrial areas.  No specific product names are 
included within the data stored in SPIN, only the identity of commonly used chemical 
substances, their inherent properties and the product categories they are reported to have been 
used in are specifi ed.  It should be noted that each country comprising the Nordic group 
producing SPIN does not require registration of information equal ly.  Denmark and Norway 
require information on all constituents for the products which manda te a declaration of 
ingredients.  The Swedish government provides a provision allowing substances that are not 
classified as dangerous and make up less than 5% of a product to be omitted from the declaration 
of information.  Finland registers information o n the composition of products from safety data 
sheets.  Therefore, complete information on the exact composition of all product categories is, 
consequently, not necessarily provided within SPIN.  The SPIN database may be found at the 
following internet add ress: [ http://188.183.47.4/dotnetnuke/Home/tabid/58/Default.aspx ] 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
Chemicals of High Concern Process Documentation  
 
June 2012    Page 6 of 14 
 
 
U.S. EPA Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) Work Plan Chemicals  
The U.S. EPA uses its statutory authorities, including TSCA, as well as voluntary activities in 
implementing programs that  address pollution prevention, risk assessment, hazard and exposure 
assessment and characterization, and risk management for chemical substances in commercial 
use.  The U.S. EPA has evolved its approach to its chemicals management program to include an 
identified group of TSCA Work Plan Chemicals (“Work Plan”) for risk assessment under TSCA.    
The screening process for identifying chemicals for the Work Plan list include the following 
factors: potentially of concern to children’s health; neurotoxic effects ; persistent, 
bioaccumulative, and toxic; probable or known carcinogens; used in children’s products; 
detected in biomonitoring programs.  In March 2012, the U.S. EPA identified a work plan of 83 
chemicals for further assessment under TSCA, seven of these for risk assessment during the year 
2012.  Each of the 83 chemicals identified in the Work Plan scored high in this screening process 
based on their combined hazard, exposure, and persistence and bioaccumulation characteristics. 
The TSCA Work Plan Chemical s may be found at the following internet address: 
[http://www.epa.gov/opptintr/existingchemicals/pubs/workplan.html]  
 
Voluntary Children’s Chemical Evaluation Program (VCCEP)  
This program, sponsored by the U.S. EPA, asks companies that manufacture or impor t selected 
chemicals, to voluntarily provide information on health effects, exposure, risk, and data needs.  
Companies involved collect and/or develop health effects and exposure information on their 
selected chemical(s) and integrate that information in a  risk assessment.   The VCCEP data 
referenced may be found at the following internet address: [ http://www.epa.gov/oppt/vccep/ ] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
Chemicals of High Concern Process Documentation  
 
June 2012    Page 7 of 14 
 
 
Published Report and Journal  References  
Denmark  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Tonning, K athe; 
Jacobsen, Eva; Pedersen, Eva; Nilsson, Nils; and The Danish Technological Institute.  
“Phthalates in products that children are in direct contact with. ” Survey of chemical substances in 
consumer products , No. 109 (2010).  
Danish Ministry of the Enviro nment, Environmental Protection Agency. Tonning, Kathe; 
Jacobsen, Eva; Pedersen, Eva; Nilsson, Nils; and The Danish Technological Institute.  
“Phthalates in products with large surfaces .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer 
products , No. 108  (2010) . 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Pro tection Agency. Tonning, Kathe; 
Malmgren -Hansen, Bjorn; Jacobsen, Eva; Pedersen, Eva; Nilsson, Nils ; and The Danish 
Technological Institute.  “ Phthalates in plastic sandals .” Survey of chemical substance s in 
consumer products , No. 107  (2010) . 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Andersen, Thrine; 
Rasmussen, Dorte; Cohr, Karl -Heinz; and The Danish Institute for Water and Environment, 
Nylen, Dorte and The Danish Toxicology Ce ntre.  “Survey of chemical substances in cleaning 
products for ovens, cookers and ceramic cooktops .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer 
products , No. 10 6 (2010) . 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Tonning, Kathe; 
Jacobsen, Eva; Pedersen, Eva; Brunn Pedersen, Pia and FORCE Technology .  “Survey and 
Health Assessment of Products for Interior Car Care .” Survey of chemical substances in 
consumer products , No. 105  (2010) . 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental P rotection Agency. Tonning, Kathe; 
Jacobsen, Eva; Pedersen, Eva and The Danish Technological Institute; Brunn Pedersen, Pia; 
Strange, Marianne  and F ORCE  Technology ; Moller, Lise; Boyd, Helle and DHI (Danish 
Institute for Water and Environment) .  “Survey and  Health Assessment of the exposure of 2 
year-olds to chemical substances in Consumer Products .” Survey of chemical substances in 
consumer products , No. 10 2 (2009 ). 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Cited using summary 
available at: [http://www.mst.dk] .  “Survey of nickel migration from mobile phones; Five mobile 
phones release more nickel than the limit .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , 
No. 10 1 (2009 ). 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
Chemicals of High Concern Process Documentation  
 
June 2012    Page 8 of 14 
 
 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental P rotection Agency. Nilsson, Nils; 
Malmgren -Hansen, Bjorn; Sognstrup, Uffe; and The Danish Technological Institute.   “Mapping, 
emissions and environmental and health assessment of chemical substances in artificial turf .” 
Survey of chemical substances in cons umer products , No. 10 0 (2008 ). 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Feilberg, Anders; 
Tonning, Kathe; Jacobsen, Eva; Hemmersam, Anne -Gry and The Danish Technological 
Institute; Soberg, Inge; Cohr, Karl -Heinz and The Danish I nstitute for Water and Environment .  
“Survey and Health Assessment of Possible Health Hazardous Compounds in Proofing Sprays .” 
Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 98 (2008 ). 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection A gency. Norgaard, Dorthe; 
Sorensen, Hanne; Larsen, Jette ; Cohr, Karl -Heinz and The Danish Institute for Water and 
Environment ; Andersen, Jorgen; Analycen, Lantmannen .  “Survey and safety assessment of 
Chemical substances in artificial nails and nail hardene rs.” Survey of chemical substances in 
consumer products , No. 9 5 (2008).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Strandesen, Maria; 
Poulsen, Pia and FORCE Technology .  “Survey and health assessment of chemical substances in 
jewe lleries .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 9 4 (2008).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Lassen, Carsten; 
Havelund, Sven; Mikkelsen, Sonja and COWI; Bondgaar, Inge and Eurofins; Silberschmidt, 
Martin  and ms consult .  “Survey and Health Assessment chemical substances in essential oils 
and fragrance oils .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 92 (2008).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Tonning, Kath e; 
Pedersen, Eva; Drojdahl, Anette; Malmgren -Hansen, Bjorn; Woin, Per; Moller, Lise; Bernth, 
Nils and The Danish Technological Institute .  “Survey , emission and health assessment of 
chemical substances in baby products .” Survey of chemical substances in co nsumer products , 
No. 9 0 (2008).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Nilsson, Nils and The 
Danish Technology Institute .  “Analysis of chemical substances in balloons .” Survey of chemical 
substances in consumer products , No. 89 (2007). 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Poulsen, Pia; Schmidt, 
Anders and FORCE Technology .  “Survey and Health Assessment of cosmetic products for 
children .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 88 (2007). 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
Chemicals of High Concern Process Documentation  
 
June 2012    Page 9 of 14 
 
 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Poulsen, Pia ; Svendsen, 
Nanna; Bjarnov, Erik and FORCE Technology. “Survey as well as health assessment of 
chemical substances in school bags, toy bags, pencil cases and eraser s.” Survey of chemical 
substances in consumer products , No. 84 (2007). 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Hansen, Paul; Tonning, 
Kathe; Pommer, Kristen ; Malmgren -Hansen, Bjorn;  Hansen, Ole; Poulsen, Mikael, and The 
Danish Technological Institute. “Survey and Health risk assessment of products for treatment of 
sports injuries and pains .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 79 (2006). 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Han sen, Paul; Tonning, 
Kathe; Pommer, Kristen; Malmgren -Hansen, Bjorn  and The Danish Technol ogical Institute. 
“Survey and health assessment of chemical substances in pleasure gel .” Survey of chemical 
substances in consumer products , No. 76 (2006).  
Danish Mini stry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Jensen, Allan and 
FORCE Technology; Knudsen, Henrik and SBi -Danish Building Research Institute. “Total 
health assessment of chemicals in indoor climate from various consumer products .” Survey of 
chemical substances in consumer products , No. 75 (2006).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Borling, Pernille; 
Engelund, Birgit; Sorensen, Hanne; Cohr, Karl -Heinz , and Danish Technological Institute  Health 
and Environment, bu siness unit of DHI Water and Environment. “Survey, migration and  health 
evaluation of chemical substances in toys and childcare products produced from foam plastic .” 
Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 70  (2006).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Larsen, Jette and The 
Danish Toxicology Centre; Andersen, Trine and DHI Water and Environment. “Survey of liquid 
hand soaps, including health and environmental assessments .” Survey of chemical substances in 
consumer products , No. 69  (2006).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Glensvig, Dorte and 
COWI A/S; Ports, Jane and Eurofins Denmark A/S. “Mapping of perfume in toys and children’s 
articles .” Survey of chemical substances in c onsumer products , No. 68  (2006).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Svendsen, Nanna; 
Pedersen, Soren; Hansen, Ole; Pedersen, Eva; Bernth, Nils and The Danish Technological 
Institute.  “Survey and release of chemical substan ces in ‘slimy’ toys .” Survey of chemical 
substances in consumer products , No. 67 (2005 ). 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
Chemicals of High Concern Process Documentation  
 
June 2012    Page 10 of 14 
 
 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Mortensen, Peter and 
Eurofins A/S.  “Emission and evaluation of chemical substances from selected electrical and 
electronic products – part 2 .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 66  
(2005).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Bernth, Nils; Hansen, 
Ole; Hansen, Steen; Pedersen, Eva and Teknologisk In stitut. “Survey of chemical substances in 
kohl and henna products .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 6 5 (2005).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Hansen, Ole; Pedersen, 
Eva and The Danish Technologi cal Institute .  “Migration and health assessment of chemical 
substances in surface treated wooden toys .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer 
products , No. 6 0 (2005).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Egmose, Kurt; P ors, 
Jane and Eurofins. “Survey of chemical substances in textile colorants .” Survey of chemical 
substances in consumer products , No. 58  (2005).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Hansen, Ole and The 
Danish Technological I nstitute. “Screening for health effects from chemical substances in textile 
colorants .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 5 7 (2005).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Nielsen, Tenna; 
Bjarnov, Erik; B undgaard, Ole and FORCE Technology. “Survey of chemical substances in toys 
for animals .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 5 6 (2005).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Larsen, Jette; 
Holmberg, Rikke.  “Survey of lip care products with fragrance and flavour .” Survey of chemical 
substances in consumer products , No. 5 5 (2005).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Nilsson, Nils; Feilberg, 
Anders; Pommer, Kirsten and The Dani sh Technological Institute .  “Emissions and evaluation of 
health effects of PAH’s and aromatic mines from tyres .” Survey of chemical substances in 
consumer products , No. 5 4 (2005).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Ankjae rgaard, Claus .  
“Survey of chemical substances in dandruff shampoo .” Survey of chemical substances in 
consumer products , No. 5 3 (2005).  
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
Chemicals of High Concern Process Documentation  
 
June 2012    Page 11 of 14 
 
 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Engelund, Birgit; 
Sorensen, Hanne and The Danish Toxicology Centre. “Mapping and health assessment of 
chemical substances in shoe care products .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer 
products , No. 5 2 (2005).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Nilsson, Nils; Pedersen , 
Vibeke and The Danish Technological Institute.  “ Mapping and release of chemical substances 
from products made of chloroprene .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 
51 (2004). 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protectio n Agency. Witterseh, Thomas  and 
Danish Technological Institute.  “ Emission of chemical substances from products made of exotic 
wood ” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 49 (2004 ). 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protec tion Agency. Hansen, John; Hansen, 
Ole; Pommer, Kirsten and The Danish Technological Institute. “Release of chemical substances 
from tens and tunnels for children .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 46 
(2004 ). 
Danish Ministry of the E nvironment, Environmental Protection Agency. Svendsen, Nanna; 
Pedersen, Soren; Hansen, Ole; Mossing, Jakob; Bernth, Nils and The Danish Technological 
Institute. “Survey of chemical substances in toothbrushes .” Survey of chemical substances in 
consumer prod ucts, No. 42  (2004). 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Dilani, Anne; Nielsen, 
Anders;  Feilberg, Anders; Hansen, Paul; Pommer, Kirsten  and The Danish Technological 
Institute. “Survey of fluorescent substances in consumer p roducts .” Survey of chemical 
substances in consumer products , No. 40 (2003 ). 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency . Eggert, Torben; 
Hansen, Ole  and The Danish Technological Institute.  “Survey and emission of chemical 
substance s from incense .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 39 (2004 ). 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Nilson, Nils; Pedersen, 
Soren; Hansen, Paul; Christensen, Ivan  and The Danish Technological Institute . “Survey and 
liberation of chemical substances in joint sealants. ” Survey of chemical substances in consumer 
products , No. 38 (2004 ). 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
Chemicals of High Concern Process Documentation  
 
June 2012    Page 12 of 14 
 
 
 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Hansen, Ole; Eggert, 
Torben  and The Danish Technol ogical Institute . “Survey, emission and evaluation of volatile 
organic chemicals in prineted matter .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 
36 (2003 ). 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Abildgaard, Anne; 
Mikkelsen, Sonja; Stuer -Lauridsen, Frank and COWI. “Survey of Chemical Substances in Paper 
Handkerchiefs and Toilet Paper.” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 34 
(2003 ). 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agen cy. Abildgaard, Anne; 
Mikkelsen, Sonja; Stuer -Lauridsen, Frank and COWI . “Survey of Chemical Substances in Paper 
Handkerchiefs and Toilet Paper.” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 34 
(2003).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environ mental Protection Agency. Ferdinand, Jacob; 
Kaysen, Ole; Petersen, Lause and Econet AS. “Report of Natural Toys Made of Plan Fibres, 
Woollen Fibres and Solid Wood .” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , No. 33 
(2003).  
Danish Ministry of the E nvironment, Environmental Protection Agency. The Danish 
Technological Institute: Malmgren -Hansen, Bjorn; Olesen, Steen; Pommer, Kirsten; Funch, Lis; 
Pedersen, Eva; and Technical University of Denmark: Willum, Ole; Olsen, Stig.  “Emission and 
evaluation of c hemical substances from selected electrical and electronic products .” Survey of 
chemical substances in consumer products , No. 32 (2003).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Nilsson, Nil; Jensen, 
Malene and Danish Technologi cal Institute – Centre for Environment and Waste . “Survey and 
assessment of chemical substances in hobby adhesives .” Survey of chemical substances in 
consumer products , No. 29 (2003).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Pors, Jane; Fuhlendorff, 
Rene . “Mapping of chemical substances in earplugs, Phase 2: Analysis of substances .” Survey of 
chemical substances in consumer products , No. 2 8 (2003).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Laursen, Sore n; Sansen, 
John; Drojdahl, Anette; and The Danish Technological Institute, Clothing and Textile; Hansen, 
Ole; Pommer, Kirsten; and The Danish Technological Institute, Environmental and Waste 
Technology; Pedersen, Eva; Bernth, Nils; and The Danish Technolog ical Institute, Chemical 
Technology . “Survey of chemical compounds in textile fabrics. ” Survey of chemical substances 
in consumer products , No. 2 3 (2003).  
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
Chemicals of High Concern Process Documentation  
 
June 2012    Page 13 of 14 
 
 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Glensvig, Dorte and 
COWI A/S; Mo rtensen, Peter and Eurofins Danmark A/S . “Mapping of chemicals in dry -cleaned 
textiles from Rynex and hydrocarbon dry -cleaning shops .” Survey of chemical substances in 
consumer products , No. 2 1 (2003).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Prot ection Agency. Lundskov, Birgit; 
Pedersen, Anne; Andersen, Erik; and The Danish Technological Institute, Chemical Department.  
“Investigation of chemical substances in products containing decorative liquids .” Survey of 
chemical substances in consumer produc ts, No. 2 0 (2003).   
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Laursen, Jette; Trap, 
Lone; and Chemtox A/S . “Survey of chemical substances in consumer products .” Survey of 
chemical substances in consumer products , No. 19 (2002 ). 
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Kristensen, Lene; 
Jorgensen, Lis; Lindgren, Erik; Waksman, Peter; and Altox A/S .  “An investigation of chemical 
substances in ‘do it yourself’ cosmetics.” Survey of chemical substances in consumer products , 
No. 1 0 (2002).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Eggert, Torben; Bodker, 
Jorn; Hansen, Ole . “Chemical ingredients in candles sold in Danish retail shops .” Survey of 
chemical substances in consumer produ cts, No. 06 (2002).  
Danish Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protection Agency. Pors, Jane; Fuhlendorff, 
Rene. “Phthalates and organic tin compounds in PVC products .” Survey of chemical substances 
in consumer products , No. 01 (2001 ). 
 
Netherlands  
Dutch Inspectorate for Health Protection and Veterinary Public Health. Bouma, K.; Nab, F.M.; 
“Teats and Soothers: Migration of nitrosamines, nitrosatable substances and 2 -
Mercaptobenzthiazol (MBT), Screening of other migrants, Mechancical safety of soother s.” 
Report Number: NDTOY003/01, (2002).  
Dutch Inspectorate for Health Protection and Veterinary Public Health . “Migration of N -
nitrosamines and N -nitrosatable Substances from Latex Balloons.” Report Number: 
ND04o063/02, (2005)  
 
 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
Chemicals of High Concern Process Documentation  
 
June 2012    Page 14 of 14 
 
 
 
Dutch Food and Consumer Pr oduct Safety Authority. Bouma, K.; Reus, H.R; “Market 
Surveillances on Toy Safety: Isophoron and phenol in floatable toys, Lead and cadmium in 
wooden toys, Wood preservatives in wooden toys, Azo dyes in textile toys, Flammability of 
textile toys.” Report N umber: ND04o063/01, (2004)  
Dutch Food and Consumer Product Safety Authority. “Screening of Plastic Toys for Chemical 
Compositi8on and Hazards: Market Surveillance in the Netherlands.” Report Number: 
ND05o610/01 (2005).  
Dutch Food and Consumer Product Safe ty Authority . “Cosmetische protucten voor kinderen: 
Inventarisatie van de markt en de veilgheidsborging door produceten en importeurs (Summary in 
English).” Report Number: ND04o065/ND05o170, (2007).  
 
Germany  
German Federal Environment Agency (Umweltbundesa mt), Federal Ministry of the 
Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety. Kalberla, Fritz; Schwartz, Markus. 
“Substances classified as carcinogenic, mutagenic and toxic for reproduction (CMR) and other 
substances of concern in consumer products.” R eport No. (UBA -FB) 001434, (2011).  
 
Publications  
Stapleton, Heather et al (2011). “Identification of Flame Retardants in Polyurethane Foam 
Collected from Baby Products.” Environmental Science & Technology , 45: 5323 -5331.  
Apelberg, Benjamin et al (2007). “ Determinants of Fetal Exposure to Polyfluoroalkyl 
Compounds in Baltimore, Maryland.” Environmental Science & Technology , 41: 3891 -3897.  
Lincoln, John et al (2007). “Leaching Assessments of Hazardous Materials in Cellular 
Telephones.” Environmental Science & Technology , 41: 2572 -2578.  
Washburn, Stephen et al (2005). “Exposure Assessment and Risk Characterization for 
Perflurooctanoate in Selected Consumer Articles.” Environmental Science & Technology , 39: 
3904 -3910.  
Dodson, Robin et al (2012). “Endocrine Disr uptors and Asthma -Associated Chemicals in 
Consumer Products.” Environmental Health Perspectives , 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1104052.  
          Mono
0~+5W
POSITIVE POWER T OLERANCE60 CELL
MULTICRYSTALLINE MODULE
260-280W
POWER OUTPUT RANGE
17.0%
MAXIMUM EFFICIENCY
IEC61215/IEC61730/UL1703/IEC61701/IEC62716
ISO 9001:  Quality Management SystemISO 14001:  Environmental Management SystemISO14064:  Greenhouse gases Emissions Veri/f_ication
OHSAS 18001:  Occupation Health and Safety 
                                  Management SystemComprehensive Products 
And System Certi/f_icates
EU-28 W EEE
COMPLIANTRECYCLABLE
PACKAGINGTHE
DUAL GLASS 60-CELL MODULEMulti Solutions
Enhanced safety
• Fire class A certi/f_ied by TUV Rheinland according to /f_ire test IEC 61730-2/MST 23
• Certi/f_ied for /f_ire type13 (UL 1703)
Increased value
• Higher maximum system voltage reduces BOS costs• 30 year linear warranty
• 0.5% annual degradation
• Low thermal coeﬃcents for more energy production at higher temperatures
Certi/f_ied to withstand the most challenging 
environmental conditions
• Module coating resistant to sand, acid, and alkali
• 2400 Pa wind load
• 5400 Pa snow load
• 35 mm hail stones at 97 km/h
Trina standard Standard Step Trina’s DUOMAX Linear WarrantyAdditional value from Trina Solar’s DUOMAX warranty
80%90%100%
97.5%
Years 5 10 15 20 25 30+1.8%
+2.8%
+3.8%
+4.8%Trina Solar’s DUOMAX Linear Performance WarrantyGuaranteed Power0.5% Annual Degradation 
Over 30 yearsHighly reliable due to stringent quality control
• PID resistant and free of snail trails• Increased module robustness to minimize micro-cracks
• 100% EL double inspection
Founded in 1997, Trina Solar  is the world's leading 
comprehensive solutions provider for solar energy. we 
believe close cooperation with our partners is critical 
to success. Trina Solar now distributes its PV products to over 60 countries all over the world. Trina is able to provide exceptional service to each customer in each market and supplement our innovative, reliable 
products with the backing of Trina as a strong, 
bankable partner. We are committed to building strategic, mutually bene/f_icial collaboration with installers, developers, distributors and other partners.
DUAL GLASS 60-CELL MODULE
(Please refer to product warranty for details)WARRANTY
10 year Product Workmanship Warranty
30 year Linear Power WarrantyPACKAGING CONFIGURATION
Modules per box: 30 piecesModules per 40’ container: 780 piecesNOCT: Irradiance at 800W/m², Ambient Temperature 20°C, Wind Speed 1m/s.ELECTRICAL DATA (NOCT)
197
28.26.9834.97.43193
28.06.8934.97.35201
28.37.1134.97.49204 
28.5 7.19 34.9 7.55 208
28.7 7.25 35.0 7.62 Maximum Power-P
MAX (Wp)
Maximum Power Voltage-V MPP (V)
Maximum Power Current-I MPP (A)
Open Circuit Voltage-V OC (V)
Short Circuit Current-I SC (A)ELECTRICAL DATA (STC) 
STC: Irradiance 1000W/m², Cell Temperature 25°C, Air Mass AM1.5.
*Measuring tolerance: ±3%.270
31.1
8.6937.69.2616.4275
31.38.7837.79.3416.7280
31.68.8737.79.4217.0260
30.58.5237.69.1015.8265
30.88.6037.69.2016.1
Peak Power Watts-P MAX (Wp)*
Power Output Tolerance-P MAX (W)
Maximum Power Voltage-V MPP (V)
Maximum Power Current-I MPP (A)
Open Circuit Voltage-V OC (V)
Short Circuit Current-I SC (A)
Module Eﬃciency    m (%)0 ~ +5
CAUTION: READ SAFETY AND INSTALLATION INSTRUCTIONS BEFORE USING THE PRODUCT.
© 2017 Trina Solar Limited. All rights reserved. Speci/f_ications included in this datasheet are subject to change without notice.
Version number: TSM_EN_2017_A www.trinasolar.comI-V CURVES OF PV MODULE(280W)
0 10 20 30 40 50
Voltage(V)Current (A)
1.02.03.04.05.06.07.08.09.010.01000W/m²
800W/m²
600W/m²
400W/m²
200W/ m²
P-V CURVES OF PV MODULE(280W)
0 10 20 30 40 50
Voltage(V)Power (W)
50100150200250300
1000W/m²
800W/m²
600W/m²
400W/m²
200W/ m²Solar Cells
Cell Orientation
Module DimensionsWeight
Front GlassEVABack GlassFrameJ-Box
CablesConnector
Fire TypeMECHANICAL DATA
Multicrystalline 156.75 × 156.75 mm (6 inches)60 cells (6 × 10)
1658 × 992 × 6 mm (65.3 × 39.1 × 0.236 inches)
1662 × 996 × 6 mm with edge banding (65.4 × 39.2 × 0.236 inches)1664 × 998 × 7.6 mm with corner protector (65.5 × 39.3 × 0.299 inches) (Default)
*
23.5 kg (51.8 lb)2.5 mm (0.10 inches), High Transmission, AR Coated Heat Strengthened GlassWhite  (PEG5, PEG5.40); Transparent (PEG5.07, PEG5.47)2.5 mm (0.10 inches), Heat Strengthened GlassFramelessIP 67 or IP 68 ratedPhotovoltaic Technology Cable 4.0 mm² (0.006 inches²) Portrait: 140/285 mm (5.5/11.2 inches)Landscape: 1200/1200 mm (47.2/47.2 inches)MC4 or Amphenol H4/UTX (1500V)Type 131658/65.3 (GLASS TO GLASS)1662/65.4  (EVA EDGE TO EVA EDGE)
960/37.8 349/13.7 349/13.7
196/7.71200/47.2
±10/0.391200/47.2
±10/0.39
196/7.7 600/23.6
992/39.1 (GLASS TO GLASS)996/39.2  (EVA EDGE TO EVA EDGE)
30/1.18
150/5.9Nameplate
Back View (Landscape)25/0.98
6/0.24
1658/65.3 (GLASS TO GLASS)1662/65.4  (EVA EDGE TO EVA EDGE)
960/37.8 349/13.7 349/13.7
196/7.7 196/7.7 600/23.6
992/39.1 (GLASS TO GLASS)996/39.2  (EVA EDGE TO EVA EDGE)
30/1.18
150/5.9Nameplate140/5.5±10/0.39285/11.2±10/0.39
Back View (Portrait)DIMENSIONS OF PV MODULE (mm/inch)
44°C (±2°C)- 0.41%/°C- 0.32%/°C0.05%/°CTEMPERATURE RATINGS
NOCT (Nominal Operating Cell Temperature)
Temperature Coeﬃcient of P MAX
Temperature Coeﬃcient of V OC 
Temperature Coeﬃcient of I SC MAXIMUM RATINGS
Operational TemperatureMaximum SystemVoltage
Max Series Fuse Rating-40~+85°C
1500V DC (IEC)1000V DC (UL)15A
(DO NOT connect Fuse in Combiner Box with two or more strings in 
parallel connection)TSM-PEG5
TSM-PEG5.40TSM-PEG5.07TSM-PEG5.47ClampGecko GripClampGecko Grip265-280W265-280W260-275W260-275W
PRODUCTS POWER
RANGEINSTALLATION 
METHOD
More Options AvailableMORE OPTIONS
2.0mm Glass: 19.7 kg (43.4 Ib) (Only for PEG5.40/PEG5.47)
Compact AR Coating
POE (Polyole/f_in Elastomer) Adhesive9/0.35
*Not applicable to slide-in racking solution 

Solar Spotlight – Maine  
 
  www.seia.org /states   March  2019 At A Glance  
• Solar Installed:  55.3 MW (13.1 MW in 2018)i 
• Enough Solar Installed to Power : 10,000  homes  
• National Ranking:  43rd (40th in 2018)  
• Percentage of State’s Electricity from Solar:  0.56%ii 
• Solar Jobs and Ranking:  635 (41st in 2018)iii 
• Solar Companies in State:   70 companies total; 6 Manufacturers, 36 Installers, 28 Othersiv 
• Total Solar Investment in State:  $ 158.01 million ($28.81  million  in 2018)  
• Price Declines:  47% over the last 5 years  
 
Notable Projects  
• IOS - MEW Phase 1 has the capacity to generate 4.1 MW of electricity -- enough to power over 530 Maine homes.v 
• At 1 MW, NRG Solar Mule, LLC  is among the largest solar installations in Maine. Completed in 2017, this 
photovoltaic project has enough electric capacity to power more th an 194 homes.vi 
• Rocky’s Stove Shoppe & Target have both gone solar in Maine. Target has installed a 0.73 MW project at their 
location in Bangor.vii 
 
 
 

Solar Spotlight – Maine  
 
  www.seia.org /states   March  2019  
 
 
About SEIA  
The Solar Energy Industries Association (SEIA®) is the driving force behind solar energy and is building a  strong 
solar industry to power America  through advocacy and education. As the national trade association for the U.S. solar 
energy industry, which employs more than 242,000 Americans, we represent all organizations that promote, 
manufact ure, install and support the development of solar energy. SEIA works with its 1,000  member companies  to 
build jobs and diversity, champion the use of cost -competitive solar in America, remove market barriers and educate 
the public on the benefits of solar  energy.  
 
References  
i All data from SEIA/GTM Research U.S. Solar Market Insight unless otherwise noted: http://www.seia.org/research -resources/us -
solar -market -insight  
ii Energy Information Administration, Electric Power Monthly: http://www.eia.gov/electricity/monthly/#generation  
iii The Solar Foundation, State Solar Jobs Census: http://www.thesolarfoundation.org/solar -jobs -census/states/  
iv SEIA, National Solar Database: http://www.seia.org/research -resources/national -solar -database  
v SEIA, Major Solar Projects List: http://www.seia.org/research -resources/major -solar -projects -list 
vi Ibid 
vii SEIA, Solar Means Business : http://www.seia.org/campaign/solar -means -business -2016  
                                                          

Solar Panel Disposal: Exploring Your Options and Knowing the Risks 
 
 
JUL, 2017BY JENNIFER D. ACKERMAN, CIC, CRIS  
 
Solar energy is a relatively new technology, so standards fo r disposal of solar panels an d photovoltaic (PV) modules 
are still uncharted waters. However, if you are considering bu ying a green building that uses solar energy, or involved 
in the installation of solar panels or PV cell manufacturing, it is important to think 30 years down the road to your 
potential solar energy liabilities when it comes to disposal. One of the biggest questions in  the industry right now is 
who should be held responsible for sola r panel disposal. Until officials answer  this question, consider the following 
points before you decide to ta ke part in the green movement. 
Solar Panel Life Cycle 
The average lifespan of a PV module is between 25 and 30 year s. Since the first large-scale installations of solar panels 
did not occur until the early 1990s, the first concerns about the dangers of solar panel disposal will not emerge for 
another 10 or 15 years. However, it is still an important poin t to address. According to th e U.S. Department of Energy, 
the industry will skyrocket by 2020 and produce an ever-growing PV waste stream for years to come. Think about 
these risks before you sell your PV prod uct, begin installation or decide to pu rchase green facilities for your business. 
Recycling Programs 
You could be held liable for any hazards PV modules cause du ring the disposable process, even if the product is out 
of your hands and in a landfill at the ti me the incident occurs. Therefore, if yo u know your business is responsible for 
the disposal of PV products, consid er recycling as a less risky option. 
Industry leaders are calling for producers and manufacture rs to consider the environm ental impacts of the green 
movement at all stages of the product life cycle. According to the PV Cycle Association, PV modules contain materials 
that can be recovered and reused to make new modules or ot her products. This holds true for both types of products 
in production today, the th in-film and silicon modules. 

Since there are currently no concrete guidelines to determin e which party is responsible for solar panel disposal, play 
it safe—opt for recycling panels wher e possible. If the manufacturer takes th e panels back for disposal, ask the 
company whether they will be thrown away or recycled to  ensure you know your risks when handing the product 
back. 
Landfill Dangers 
Whole panels or smaller parts that cannot be recycled will inevitably end up in a landfill. In general, experts say that 
solar panels and other PV products are safe for landfills because the PV materi als themselves are encased in glass or 
plastic. However, there is some debate about the amount of  damage PV panels could cause should the encasing crack 
or break while buried. If you are responsible for disposal , you must decide how large of a risk you want to take. 
PV semiconductor manufacturing involves extremely toxi c, carcinogenic materials, including arsine, cadmium, 
dichloromethane, trichloroethylene an d selenium. If the heavy metals leac h into surrounding soil and into the 
groundwater, someone will inevitably be held liable. Given the lack of governme ntal standards on the matter as of 
now, and without proper coverage, it could very well be yo u or your business. If you opt for disposal rather than 
recycling, talk to The Safegard Group, Inc. about what kind of coverage you currently have to protect you if something 
goes wrong in the landfill down the road. 
Get Covered 
Whether you are a business owner going green, a contractor performing solar panel installations or a PV module 
manufacturer, seeking out the proper covera ge for your green risks is crucial. Yo u will need to protect yourself against 
the added hazards of green building if green systems fail to  meet standards and against possible design defects in 
green systems. In addition, do not forget to seek coverage fo r disposal or recycling liabilities, even though it may not 
affect you directly for years to come. Read all contracts carefully to determine whether you are responsible for safe 
disposal to avoid devastatingly costly claims down the road. 
If your current policy does not specifically address green risk s, contact The Safegard Group, Inc. today to find out what 
the limits are and whether you will need  to have a more inclusive policy. 
 
