TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: March 16, 2023 at 1:00 PM. 
L.D. 805 — “An Act to Provide That a Licensed Motor Vehicle Dealer May Claima 
Credit for Sales Tax on the Purchase and Installation of Equipment to Be Used for 
the Charging of Electric Vehicles ” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am 
providing testimony at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against 
LD 805, “An Act to Provide That a Licensed Motor Vehicle Dealer May Claima 
Credit for Sales Tax on the Purchase and Installation of Equipment to Be Used for 
the Charging of Electric Vehicles. ” 
LD 805 proposes a sales tax credit for licensed motor vehicle dealers who 
purchase and install equipment to be used for the charging of electric vehicles 
(EVs). The effect of the proposed credit will vary depending on the type of 
transaction. A motor vehicle dealer may purchase EV charging equipment for 
installation and use at its dealership or may purchase the equipment for resale to be 
installed at a customer ’s residence. If a dealer purchases an EV charging station 
for installation at its dealership, that initial sale of the EV charging station 
equipment to the dealer would be taxable under current law. If a dealer purchases 
EV charging equipment to be installed at a customer ’s residence, such purchases 
may already quality for an exclusion from sales tax as a sale for resale.
1
In addition, the scope of the credit depends on what equipment qualiﬁes as 
eligible equipment. The term “equipment to be used for the charging of electric 
vehicles ” is undeﬁned and could be interpreted broadly to include—along with the 
charging station itself——the foundation for the charging station and electrical 
infrastructure which may also be used for other purposes. 
Lastly, the bill does not specify when a dealer may claim the credit for sales 
tax paid. There are two points where a dealer could claim the credit on their sales 
tax return; (1) the ﬁling period in which the dealer purchases the equipment; or (2) 
the ﬁling period in which the equipment is installed. Accordingly, we recommend 
one of these periods be selected for ease of administration. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
2
