                                                     District 111 : Falmouth  (part)   
                February 14 , 2023  
    Testimony of Rep. Amy Kuhn in support of   
LD 287, An Act to Support Parents by Providing a Sales Tax 
Exemption for Diapers  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation  
 
Good afternoon, Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and esteemed members of the Taxation 
Committee. My name is A my Kuhn and I represent House Di strict 111, which is most of 
Falmouth. I regret that a committee conflict keeps me from testifying in person  today, but I am 
pleased to submit these written comments in support of LD 287, An Act to Support Parents by 
Providing a Sales Tax Exemption for Diapers .  
Diapers are a necessity for young children. Yet, one in three US families cannot afford to buy 
enough  diapers to keep their children clean, dry, and healthy1. Without an adequate supply of 
clean diapers, babies are subjected to  a myriad of health risks , including painful rashes and 
infections. Further, three out of five parents in the US have missed work or school because  they 
cannot afford the diapers required to leave their babies in childcare. Sales tax on diapers makes 
this burden greater, particularly for low -income families.  
Exempting diapers from sales tax would provide much -needed relief to familie s, allowing them 
to redirect these savings towards other essential expenses such as food, housing, and healthcare. 
This exemption would also help to ensure that all children, regardless of their family's financial 
situation, start their lives on equal foot ing with access to clean and dry diapers. This is crucial for 
protecting their health and well -being, and in turn, helping their families succeed.  
I hope you will vote Ought to Pass on LD 287 and join other New England states by exempting 
diapers from sale s tax.  
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
                                                           
1 National Diaper Network: https://nationaldiaperbanknetwork.org   
Amy Kuhn  
20 Old Powerhouse Road  
Falmouth, ME 04105  
(207) 939 -6903  
Amy.Kuhn@legislature.maine.gov  HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333 -0002  
(207) 287-1400  
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711  
 

                                                     District 111 : Falmouth  (part)   
