_.,‘5 “' '- 
" ~ 
,.~ ‘;1"lt"'é:'."# ”!’ -..-'
. 
Eg; - 
,, _-9.: 
Eric Brakey 1315‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, 1\/{E 04333 
Testimony of Senator Eric Brakey 
L.D. 1928, "An Act to Protect Maine Taxpayers 
from Unconstitutional Federal Expenditures" 
Before the Maine Legislature ’s Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Wednesday, May 24, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Taxation, l am Senator Eric Brakey of Androscoggin, representing the people of Auburn, New 
Gloucester, Poland, and Durham. Today, l am here to present L.D. 1928, "An Act to Protect 
Maine Taxpayers from Unconstitutional Federal Expenditures." 
ln this legislature, we have all heard innovative proposals that have died untimely deaths, not 
necessarily because the policy lacked merit, but because state legislators feel handcuffed by 
threats from Washington to cut various federal funding streams used to fund state programs. 
This country began with several sovereign states. Those states created a weak general 
government with limited enumerated powers. All other powers, not expressly prohibited by the 
Constitution, were reserved for the states and the people, as declared in the Tenth Amendment. 
Very quickly, however, many of the founding generation learned that the general government — 
even with its horizontal checks and balances across three branches —— was not prone to police 
the limits of its own power. 
With the passage of the Alien and Sedition Acts under the administration of John Adams, 
Thomas Jefferson and James Madison countered by authoring the Kentucky and Virginia 
Resolutions of 1798 and 1799, ratified in the respective states. 
To quote Madison's Virginia Resolution of 1798: 
“That this Assembly doth explicitly and peremptorily declare, that is views the 
powers of the federal government as resulting from a compact to which the 
states are parties, as limited by the plain sense and intention of the instrument 
constituting that compact, as no further valid than they are authorized by the 
grants enumerated in that compact; and that, in case of a deliberate, palpable, 
and dangerous exercise of other powers, not granted by the said compact, the 
states, who are parties thereto, have the right, and are duty bound, to interpose, 
for arresting the progress of the evil, and for maintaining, without their respective 
limits, the authorities, rights, and liberties, appertaining to them." 
To quote Jefferon ’s Kentucky Resolution of‘1798:
“ ...this government, created by this compact, was not made the exclusive or final 
judge of the extent of the powers delegated to itself, since that would have made 
its discretion, and not the Constitution, the measure of its powers...
“ ...it would be a dangerous delusion were a confidence in the men of our choice 
to silence our fears for the safety of our rights; that conﬁdence is every where the 
parent of despotism: free government is found in jealously, and not in confidence; 
it is jealously, and not confidence, which prescribes limited constitutions to bind 
down those whom we are obliged to trust with power; that our Constitution has 
accordingly ﬁxed the limits to which, and no farther, our conﬁdence may go... 
“ln questions of power, then, let no more be said of conﬁdence in men, but bind 
him down from mischief by the chains of the Constitution." 
Further, Jefferson's subsequent Kentucky Resolution of 1799 declares: 
“That the several states who formed that instrument, being sovereign and 
independent, have the unquestionable right to judge of its infraction, and, Thata 
nulliﬁcation, bu those sovereignties, of all unauthorized acts done under color of 
that instrument, is the rightful remedy.” 
To summarize, when the federal government oversteps its limits of power, Jefferson and Madion 
argued the states must enforce the terms of the constitutional compact, declaring those federal 
usurpations null and void within theirjurisdictions. lf this doctrine seems radical, as some 
advocates for federal supremacy throughout history have contested, I will note that Maine isa 
modern day leader in the active practice of nulliﬁcation. 
Maine was the second state to‘ nullify federal cannabis prohibition, and we continue to pioneer 
our own policies in the legal space created by this nullification to this day. Maine was also the 
first state in New England to nullify FDA prohibitions on access to investigational medicines for 
those with terminal illnesses. 
Still, in many matters large and small, the balance of power has shifted away from the 
decentralized laboratories of innovation and into the hands of centralized national 
bureaucracies. Rather than sovereign states, we have become vassal states, asking for 
permission from our federal servants to determine matters that are within our constitutional 
purview under the Tenth Amendment. 
The single most effective mechanism of control — lacking any clear vertical check and balance 
—— is the power of the federal government to steal our money and ransom it back with strings 
attached. They can do this to enforce any federal policy, whether it is constitutionally authorized 
or not, and we as state legislators are compelled to dance for them like puppets upon those 
strings. 
Under the Articles of Confederation that preceded our Constitution, there was a clear check and 
balance because the general government had to levy assessed taxes from the states. That 
balance was severely weakened with the constitutional power to directly tax the people, 
especially since the ratiﬁcation of the 16th Amendment under President Woodrow Wilson, which 
established the federal income tax. 
While the federal government is constitutionally authorized to directly tax the people, they are 
still obligated to use those funds only for authorized purposes. Whether it is money spent on an 
unconstitutional war on drugs, an unconstitutional surveillance state monitoring the digital 
communications of the America people, unconstitutional and undeclared forever wars abroad, or 
their unconstitutional war on lobster off our shores, the states have a duw to enforce the terms
of the Constitution by protecting the people from this federal abuse of our tax dollars. But what 
can we do about it? 
As Dr. Thomas E. Woods notes in his book on the subject, "Nulliﬁcation: How to Resist Federal 
Tyranny in the 21 st Century” (what should be considered an essential reference guide for all 
state legislators): 
“[States] might consider establishing federal tax escrow accounts. Proposed so 
far in Oklahoma, Georgia, and Washington state, legislation establishing such 
accounts seeks to neutralize the federal government ’s ability to threated and 
intimidate the states. All federal taxes would ﬁrst go to the state's department of 
revenue. From there, legislators would consider the constitutionality of various 
aspects of the federal government's budget and then contribute from the escrow 
account an appropriate amount. Any leftover monies would either be returned to 
the people or spent on projects currently funded by federal grants.” 
Reading that passage over a decade ago led me to presenting this legislation today, which isa 
proposed statutory framework for tax nulliﬁcation in Maine. Passing this legislation would trigger 
no immediate action, but simply establish a legal framework for this Legislature challenging the 
constitutionality of federal appropriations. 
L.D. 1928 would authorize a majority of either chamber to request a solemn occasion from the 
Maine Supreme Judicial Court, contesting the constitutionality of a proposed federal 
expenditure, for which the Maine people are being taxed to pay for. 
Upon a ﬁnding of the court that the expenditure is unconstitutional, the Legislature may direct 
employers in the state to direct withheld federal income taxes to Maine Revenue Services 
instead of the federal IRS. 
From there, those assessed federal taxes will be sent onto Washington, minus the percentage 
that these unconstitutional expenditures account for in the overall federal budget. What is 
leftover may be (1) refunded to the Maine people in direct proportion to the taxes they paid, or 
(2) utilized by the state to supplant any federal funds lost due to retaliation by Washington. 
l understand that, like many acts of nullification, it can be a worrisome prospect to go it alone in 
challenging the federal government. That is why this proposal only establishes a statutory 
framework and triggers no immediate action. lt is my hope that in addition to its passage in the 
Maine Legislature, it will serve as model legislation for other states looking to protect their 
citizens from federal abuse of their tax dollars. When Maine is standing side-by-side with 
dozens of states, we will not be so easily bullied by the federal government and then we can 
proceed together in ending this system in which our tax dollars are stolen from us and 
ransomed back with strings attached. . 
Thank you ~for_your consideration. l will gladly take any questions you have.
