1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: May 24, 2023, at 10:00am 
  
LD 1928 – “An Act to Protect Maine Taxpayers from Unconstitutional Federal 
Expenses” 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good morning, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 1928 – “An Act to 
Protect Maine Taxpayers from Unconstitutional Federal Expenses.” 
 This bill establishes a procedure for the State to avoid paying for federal 
expenditures that are determined by the Maine Supreme Judicial Court to be in 
violation of the United States Constitution.  Upon a determination by the Court that 
a federal expenditure is unconstitutional, the Legislature may require an employer 
in this State that withholds federal income taxes from its employees to remit 
temporarily, for a time determined by the Legislature, those withheld federal 
income taxes to the Department of Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau 
of Revenue Services instead of to the United States Internal Revenue Service. The 
Legislature may also direct the bureau to determine the portion of the 
unconstitutional federal expenditure paid for with income taxes from Maine 
taxpayers and transfer that amount to a segregated account. The funds in the 
segregated account are used to either make up a shortage in federal funding that the 
State is due, as determined by the Treasurer of State, or to provide a refund to 
2 
 Maine taxpayers on a pro rata basis in direct proportion to the amount of federal 
taxes paid by the taxpayer for the prior tax year. 
This bill and the process it lays out are effectively unworkable due to the 
numerous serious concerns it raises under both the United States Constitution and 
the Maine Constitution.  In addition, the bill would directly impact the ability of 
employers to meet their federal income tax reporting and payment obligations 
under federal income tax laws. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
