STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL 
- - AND FINANCIAL REGULATION 
35 STATE HOUSE st/mom 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 
», =-4'i 
‘ '\ '\ 4 =» 
Anne L. Head 
Janet T. Mills Commissioner 
Governor 
TESTIMONY OF JOAN COHEN 
DEPUTY COMMISSIONER, OFFICE OF PROFESSIONAL AND 
OCCUPATIONAL REGULATION 
In Support of L.D. 374 
Resolve, Regarding Legislative Review of Chapter 12: Transportation of Human Remains, 
a Major Substantive Rule of the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation, 
Maine State Board of Funeral Service 
Sponsored by Representative Tiffany Roberts 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INNOVATION, DEVELOPMENT, ECONOMIC ADVANCEMENT AND BUSINESS 
Public Hearing: March 24, 2023, 1:00 PM 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, my name is 
Joan Cohen and I am the Deputy at the Department of Professional and Financial Regulation. I 
am here today to testify on behalf of OPOR in support of LD 374. 
The purpose of this bill is to seek legislative review of major substantive rulemaking on Chapter 
12, Maine State Board of Funeral Service (“Board”). Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A 
requires legislative authorization before the Board can ﬁnally adopt this rule. 
The proposed rule was developed as a result of LD 1214 (enacted by the 130th Legislature and 
signed into law as P.L. 2021, c. 268) which directed the Board to collaborate with stakeholders to 
develop a rule governing the safety of drivers and passengers of vehicles owned, leased or 
otherwise used by a practitioner of funeral service or funeral establishment for the transport of 
human remains. 
The stakeholder group issued a report that was used to develop a draft rule that was presented to 
the Board for its consideration. This draft rule was a result of the stakeholder process, Board 
input, and public input through the APA rulemaking process. The Board voted at its January 
2023 meeting for the provisional adoption of this rule pursuant to 5 M.R.S. § 8072. The required 
OFFICES LOCATIiD AT: 76 NORTI'IliRN AVENUE, GARDINER, MAINE 
PHONP: (107)624-85H (VOICE) TTYusers: call Maine ReIay7H FA><1<2°7)61 ’-4 859‘
documents were subsequently submitted to the Secretary of State’s Office and the Executive 
Director for the Legislative Council, so that the rulemaking can now proceed to the next stage of 
the major substantive rulemaking process, which is review by the Committee. 
In general, the rule provides that if a platform is used in a multipurpose ﬁlneral vehicle, it must 
be securely attached to the ﬂoor of the vehicle when the vehicle is in transit and the platform 
must be on a plane level to the vehicle ﬂoor and below the hinge point to the driver and front 
passenger seats. If a raised platform is used in a multipuipose funeral vehicle, the platform must 
be securely attached to the vehicle while in transit and the raised platform must be located behind 
the passenger seat only. The passenger seat must remain empty. Licensees will have 5 years from 
the effective date of this chapter to make any needed modiﬁcations to multipurpose funeral 
vehicles needed to comply with the rule. Licensees will be required to comply with other aspects 
of the rule, including but not limited to making a good faith effort to secure any transportation 
equipment and cargo in the back of a vehicle with tie downs, and soon as the rule becomes 
effective. The rule also clarifies existing language in Chapter 12 related to the transportation of 
human remains. Those clariﬁcations were non substantive. 
It is anticipated that there may be costs for licensees to comply with this rule, but the Board has 
not evaluated or attempted to quantify what those costs may be, as it may vary depending on the 
licensee and what existing vehicles and/or equipment they already own and use. 
I am happy to answer any questions now or at the work session.
2
