Framework for Occupational License Portability 
To begin, let's walk through the proposed framework for granting licenses to 
professionals who have relocated to Maine from other states. First, if someone wants to apply 
for a Maine occupational license under these provisions they must meet one of three 
prerequisites: 
1. Government License or Certification - They may qualify if they possess an existing 
government-issued license or certification from another state (in good standing with no 
disqualifications, revocations, or pending complaints), which they’ve held for at least one 
year. That license must have issuing requirements that are “substantially similar’ to 
those in place for the profession here in Maine, including on matters of education, 
training, and experience. 
2. Private Certification - lf the individual is moving from a state with no licensing 
requirements for their profession, they may qualify if they have a current and valid 
private certificate (once again, in good standing with no disqualifications, revocations, or 
pending complaints), plus two years work experience in the occupation. 
3. Work Experience - If the individual is moving from a state with no licensing 
requirements for their profession, they may also qualify if they have three years work 
experience in the occupation. 
ln addition to meeting one of these three prerequisites, a state licensing board may 
require an applicant to pass a state law examination, ensuring they are familiar with all the laws 
governing the profession in the state of Maine. 
To apply, there may be an application fee not to exceed $100. The Board must review 
and provide a written decision regarding the application within 60 days. lf denied, the applicant 
may appeal the decision by ﬁling a petition for review in Superior Court. 
Once granted, the holder of that license will submit to the jurisdiction of Maine law 
governing the profession. Further, their license will be limited to the geographic borders of 
Maine, not conferring eligibility for any interstate compact or reciprocity agreement the State of 
Maine may enter into. .' 
,'
_ 
Additionally, this framework includes a preemption clause, establishing counties and 
municipalities may not regulate the issuance of occupational licenses or government 
certificates. Also, occupations regulated by the Maine Supreme Court would be exempted.
Adopting this framework would streamline the ability of professionals to relocate to 
Maine and take up their occupation - something that is desperately needed in this workforce 
shortage. 
Repeal “Good Character ” Requirements 
Finally, as previously mentioned, this legislation also eliminates from state statute all 
"good character ’ requirements for occupational licenses. 
All requirements for a license to work a profession should be based on objective criteria 
not the subjective determinations of any one person. “Good character ” requirements allow 
occupational licensing boards to operate on a “may issue," not a “shall issue” basis, effectively 
legalizing discrimination. 
it should be noted the U.S. Supreme Court recently struck down the “may issue” 
licensing regimes maintained in certain states related to the individual right to keep and bear 
arms. While the issue is different, the point is worth considering here. 
Licensing determinations should be objective, not subjective. If there are any licenses 
that people convicted of certain crimes should not be able to hold, then just make thata 
requirement, rather than leaving it up to a vague standard of “good character. ” 
The workforce shortage is real, as l am sure every member of this committee knows. To 
address that shortage, we can start by streamlining arbitrary barriers to occupation licensing so 
that experienced professionals who come to Maine can get to work. 
Thank you for your time and consideration of this legislation. I would be happy to answer any 
questions to the best of my ability.
