process puts Maine on the forefront of accepting professional and occupational licenses from 
other U.S. jurisdictions. The 130th IDEA committee speciﬁcally rejected the idea that Maine 
should accept any state’s licensing, certiﬁcation or work standard requirements as a substitute for 
Maine’s own, but instead required the out-of-state licensing standards be “substantially 
equivalent. ” 
Maine boards have initiated, and many have completed, the rulemaking necessary to implement 
licensure by endorsement and licenses have already been issued via this pathway. For example, 
since January 1, 2023, the Board of Counseling Professionals Licensure has processed 266 
applications for licensure by endorsement. Therefore, not only is this bill unnecessary but it 
would be an impediment to the endorsement process boards are already implementing. 
In addition to the licensing entities within OPOR, most boards afﬁliated with the Department and 
agencies within the Department already have processes in place to quickly facilitate Maine 
licensure for out-of-state licensees while also allowing those licensing boards and regulatory 
agencies appropriate discretion to accomplish their important public protection roles. Some of 
these agencies and boards have submitted letters on the impact of these bills on their agencies or 
boards and I encourage you to review them at your convenience. 
With respect to the good character requirement, only a few OPOR boards continue to include 
“good character ” as a licensing standard. However, good character is a very important 
consideration for the Department ’s ﬁnancial services agencies. For example, good character is 
an essential consideration when licensing entities or individuals such as pawnbrokers and debt 
collectors, who are licensed by the Bureau of Consumer Credit Protection (BCCP). BCCP notes 
that removal of “good character ” would conﬂict with federal law which preempts state 
legislation. The S.A.F.E. Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 sets minimum standards for states to 
issue licenses to mortgage loan originators including a requirement that the applicant has 
demonstrated ﬁnancial responsibility, character and general ﬁtness such as to command the 
conﬁdence of the community and to warrant a determination that the loan originator will operate 
honestly, fairly and efﬁciently within the purposes of (the SAFE Act). 
I respectfully encourage the Committee to oppose this bill and to allow Maine’s boards and 
regulatory agencies to continue to exercise the discretion and authority they have been granted 
by the Maine Legislature to serve their purpose to protect the public. Thank you and I would be 
happy to respond to questions now or at the work session.
2
