O F FI CE LOCATION: 16 1 CA PITOL ST R EET, AUGUSTA, ME 
PHONE: (207) 287-3601    www.maine.gov/md   FAX: (207) 287-6590  
 
  
 
 
Janet T. Mills  
GOVERNOR S T ATE OF MA I NE 
B OARD OF L ICENSURE I N M EDIC I NE 
137 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA , MA I NE 
04333-0137   
Maroulla S. Gleaton , MD 
CHAIR 
 
Dennis E. Smith, JD  
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR  
 
Timothy E. Terranova  
ASSISTANT EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR  
 
April 25, 2023 
Senator Chip Curry, Chair 
Representative Tiffany Roberts, Chair 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Re:  LD 1586  – “An Act to Enable Occupational License Portability and Prohibit Use of Good Character 
Qualifications in Occupational Licensing” and LD1628 – “An Act to Reform the Occupational Licensing Regime 
by Including Portability and Removing Good Character Requirements”  
Dear Senator Curry and Representative Roberts: 
The Maine Board of Licensure in Medicine (“BOLIM”) licenses and regulates allopathic physicians and physician assistants 
in Maine. BOLIM is composed of 11 members: 6 physicians who actively practice medicine; 2 physician assistants who 
actively render medical services; and 3 public members. BOLIM’s mission is to protect the public by ensuring its licensees 
are ethical, professional and competent. It fulfills this mission by licensing, regulating, and educating physician and physician 
assistants. 
BOLIM offers the following comments in opposition to LD 1586 and 1628: 
The bill would create an unverified fast track to full licensure for physicians who do not meet the post-graduate training 
requirements (PGT) under BOLIM’s existing statute. Other jurisdictions do not require 3 years of PGT as does Maine. This 
bill would allow lesser trained physicians to provide care to Maine patients. Maine law requires all physicians who graduated 
after July 2004 to have successfully completed 36 months of PGT in a program accredited by the Accreditation Council on 
Graduate Medical Education (ACGME). The ACGME, an independent organization, establishes the professional post-
graduate training requirements essential in preparing physicians to deliver competent and safe medical care. The ACGME 
oversees all accredited PGT programs for physicians in the United States. However, some jurisdictions grant licenses to 
practice to physicians with only 12 months of PGT. States with such laws risk harm to the public by issuing licenses to 
inadequately trained physicians because in many specialty residencies the first 12 months of PGT is considered a transitional 
or internship year and the true specialty training does not even begin until the second year.  
 
BOLIM already has a robust and efficient licensing process. Applications for a permanent medical license take an average of 
55 days to process. If a physician requires a license sooner, then BOLIM can issue an emergency license within 24-48 hours 
upon the submission of a letter of need from the facility where the licensee will be working. In addition, BOLIM is a member 
of the Interstate Medical Licensure Compact (IMLC), which expedites licensure for qualified physicians. Licenses are 
processed with 72 hours of receipt of the application under the IMLC.  
 
The term “good standing” as defined in the law is not broad enough to protect the public. It should be expanded to include 
that the individual have no “adverse licensing” or “disciplinary actions” for any similar license in any jurisdiction. Many 
physicians have multiple licenses in multiple jurisdictions. Some physicians have licenses in these other jurisdictions  

O F FI CE LOCATION: 16 1 CA PITOL ST R EET, AUGUSTA, ME 
PHONE: (207) 287-3601    www.maine.gov/md   FAX: (207) 287-6590  
 
  
Page 2 
April 25, 2023 
 
 
disciplined – short of revocation but for unethical conduct, unprofessional conduct or incompetence. BOLIM reviews all of 
this type of information before making a decision regarding a physician’s application for licensure.  This bill would remove 
that discretion of BOLIM not to issue a license where a physician may have adverse action or disciplinary action in another 
jurisdiction for concerning conduct.  
 
The bill’s requirement that BOLIM issue a “decision” on an application for licensure within 60 days with written notification 
to the applicant is too restrictive. As indicated above, there are instances where BOLIM requests additional information from 
other jurisdictions or the applicant regarding adverse actions or disciplinary actions in other jurisdictions, as well as medical 
malpractice settlements involving patient harm – including death. Given the complexity of some of the applications, imposing 
this artificial 60-day time requirement is unreasonable. In addition, BOLIM’s process for denying a license application 
includes compliance with the Administrative Procedure Act, which provides for a notice regarding the decision to 
preliminarily deny a license as well as the opportunity for a hearing. Applicants who request a hearing are placed an 
adjudicatory hearing list. As BOLIM meets once a month, the BOLIM may not be able to afford an individual applicant a 
hearing within 60 days. 
 
The “appeal” right regarding the denial of an application for licensure provided by the bill already exists in Maine law. See 5 
M.R.S. Sections 10005, 11001, 1102.  
 
Finally, the bill is unclear whether the “cost” that is capped at $100 would limit BOLIM from charging its current licensure 
fees.  If so, limiting licensure fees to $100 would result in a significant negative financial impact to BOLIM to the extent that 
it would not be able to perform its operations as mandated by law. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide these questions and comments regarding LD 1586 and 1628.  I would be happy to 
answer any questions at the work session. 
Sincerely, 
 
Timothy Terranova 
Assistant Executive Director 
 

