STATE OF MAINE  
Department of Public Safety  
MAINE STATE POLICE 
45 Commerce Drive - Suite 1 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
 
 
 
 
                       
++ INTEGRITY ++   ++ FAIRNESS ++  ++ COMPASSION ++  ++ EXCELLENCE ++ 
 
(207) 624-7200 (Voice)                    (207) 287 -3659 (Fax)                    TTY User: 711  
 
 
Janet T. Mills  
Governor 
 
Michael J. Sauschuck 
Commissioner 
  
 
 
 
William Ross 
Colonel 
 
LTC. Brian P. Scott 
Deputy Chief 
 
Testimony of Lieutenant Tyler Stevenson  
Maine State Police 
 
In Opposition of (1586) 
 
An Act to Enable Occupational License Portability a nd Prohibit Use of Good Character Qualifications in  
Occupational Licensing.   
 
Sponsored by Representative Smith 
 Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Adv ancement and Business 
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and honorabl e members of the Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business:  My  name is Lieutenant Tyler Stevenson and I have prov ided 
written testimony on behalf of the Maine State Poli ce and the Maine Department of Public Safety to tes tify in 
opposition to LD 1586 “An Act to enable Occupationa l License Portability and Prohibit Use of Good Char acter 
Qualifications in Occupational Licensing.”   
 
The Maine Department of Public Safety currently lic enses and regulates the following professions in th e State; 
Polygraph Examiners, Security Guards and Profession al Investigators.  The purpose of licensure is to e nsure that the 
person meets the necessary qualifications for the j ob to ensure the integrity of the profession while ensuring the 
protection and welfare of Maine people (32 MRS, Cha pters 86, 89 and 93 respectively). 
 
Security Guards are defined in Maine law as any per son who, for any consideration whatsoever, performs  any of 
the following functions: 
 
 Protection of individuals or property from harm or theft of property of any kind; 
 Prevention, observation or detection of any unautho rized activity on private property;   
 Prevention of unlawful intrusion or entry, larceny,  vandalism, abuse, arson or trespass on private pro perty;   
 Street patrol service; or 
 Armored car service. 
 
 
Professional Investigators are defined in Maine law  as any person for any consideration whatsoever, wh o agrees to 
obtain, or to in fact obtain information with refer ence to any of the following: 
 
 A crime or other act committed or threatened agains t the laws or government of the United States, 
any state or territory or any political subdivision  of a state or territory;   
STATE OF MAINE  
Department of Public Safety  
MAINE STATE POLICE 
45 Commerce Drive - Suite 1 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
 
 
 
 
                       
++ INTEGRITY ++   ++ FAIRNESS ++  ++ COMPASSION ++  ++ EXCELLENCE ++ 
 
(207) 624-7200 (Voice)                    (207) 287 -3659 (Fax)                    TTY User: 711  
 
 
Janet T. Mills  
Governor 
 
Michael J. Sauschuck 
Commissioner 
  
 
 
 
William Ross 
Colonel 
 
LTC. Brian P. Scott 
Deputy Chief 
 The identity, habits, conduct, movements, whereabou ts, affiliations, associations, transactions, 
reputation or character of any person; 
 The cause of or responsibility for libels, fires, l osses, accidents or damage or injury to persons or 
property;   
 The location, disposition or recovery of lost or st olen property;   
 Evidence to be used before a court, board, officer or investigative committee, including evidence 
derived through computer forensics; or   
 The detection of surreptitiously installed devices designed for eavesdropping or observation, or both,  
for video and audio devices.   
       
A Polygraph Examiner is a highly trained person who  conducts a polygraph examination.  This polygraph examination 
is a sophisticated and complex process consisting o f a trained examiner using an instrument to measure  and record 
both behavioral and physiological indicators to det ermine deception on human subjects.   These examina tions are 
used to support several critical public safety func tions including criminal investigations and law enf orcement officer 
and public safety personnel screening and hiring.  They are also used by clinicians in the field of me ntal health and 
treatment in post-conviction sex offender treatment .   Oftentimes in Maine polygraph examiners are eit her current or 
retired police officers.   
 
These areas of licensure have aspects that are uniq ue in-terms of the welfare of the public.  They can  involve the 
carrying and use of firearms and other weapons, dec isions regarding when and how to use force, decisio ns regarding 
lawful covert methods of investigation and when how  to interview and interact with members of the publ ic in a 
variety of situations.  Maine has strict licensing requirements to ensure that individuals licensed to  engage in these 
professions have the requisite judgement, decision- making, qualifications and good moral character to do so safely 
and effectively.    
 
The Department of Public Safety receives very few c omplaints each year in these areas.  We believe tha t speaks in part 
to the licensing requirements and qualifications cu rrently in place.   
 
 
On behalf of the State Police and the Department of  Public Safety we appreciate your careful considera tion of these 
issues. Thank  you for your time and we would be happy to work wi th the sponsor and the committee at the 
work session.   
 
Respectfully, 
 
Lieutenant Tyler Stevenson   
 
 
