 
 
 
 
Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen, members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Judith Meyer. I am the editor of the Sun Journal in Lewiston, the Kennebec Journal and the Morning Sentinel.  
I write on behalf of the Maine Press Association in opposition to LD 1731 , An A ct Regarding 
Confidentiality of Juvenile History Record Information.
  
*     *     * 
 
In 2021, through LD 1964, An Act to Limit Access to Juvenile Case Records and Protect the 
Confidentiality of Juvenile History Record Information, the Legislature revised the M aine 
Juvenile C ode to significantly strengthen confidentiality of juvenile case records.  
The changes to the code became effective January 2022, and have now been in effect a little 
more than a year.  
Before January 2022, juvenile records for all crimes that would be felony- level crimes if they 
involved an adult were open to public inspection. Misdemeanor -level records were not. It was all 
very straightforward.  
Under the revisions to the code, multiple tiers were established to set accessibility  of case records 
based on a juvenile’s age and the seriousness of the crime.  
Records involving juveniles under the age of 13 are now presumptively closed for public 
inspection;  records i nvolving the highest -level crimes can be open to the public by court order  
but only after a court weighs  whether the general public’s right to information substantially 
outweighs the juvenile’s interest in privacy or the alleged victim’s interest in privacy. And, if 
granted, access to records is very narrow.  
Access to r ecords involving juveniles age 13 and o lder was  also narrowed,  with all Class B - and 
C-level  cases  now presumptively confidential, open only by court order. Most Class A c ases are 
presumptively open, although the records may be  deemed  confidential by court order.  
Only the highest level felony c ases – murder, felony murder, manslaughter – are always open to 
public inspection for older juveniles . (Outline of current juvenile case restrictions  drafted by Jill 
Ward, who is the director of the Center for Youth Policy and Law, is attached .) 

There are now very significant constriction s on records that had previously been open to public 
inspection, and the  move was made following years of discussion and collaboration between 
more than a dozen prosecutors, defense attorneys, victim advocates , juvenile advocates , 
educators, representatives from the Judiciary Branch , law enforcement , lawmakers  and public 
access advocates.   
It was a comprehensive process  during which stakeholders worked together to meet a 
compromise balance between the ackn owledged  need to protect juvenile confidentiality and the  
public’s right to know, stemming from centuries of case law holding that “ public monitoring of 
the judicial system fosters the important values of quality, honesty and respect for our legal 
system. ” 
The public has a deep and tremendous interest in knowing how juvenile  cases are prosecuted and 
how minors  fare in our criminal justice system.  
Do juveniles deserve greater privacy protections in our courts than their adult counterparts? They 
absolutely do. But, those protections must be fairly balanced against the public’s right to inspect 
documents and observe court proceedings  in th e most serious criminal cases . 
These t ighter restrictions for access to juvenile case records that went in to effect last year are the 
result of the exhaustive work of committed advocates to strike that balance . The bill before you 
rejects that measured work and for that reason  the Maine Press Association – which partic ipated 
in that work -- opposes this bill.  
* * * 
 
The Maine Press Association (MPA), founded in 1864, is one of the oldest professional news 
organizations in the nation. Our goals, as spelled out in our charter and by- laws are to promote 
and foster high ethical standards and the best interests of the newspapers, journalists, and media organizations of the state of Maine that constitute its membership; to encourage improved business and editorial practices and better media environment in the state; and to improve the 
conditions of journalism and journalists by promoting and protecting the principles of freedom of speech and of the press and the public’s right to know. 
 
1 
  All juvenile case records and hearings are CONFIDENTIAL  
unless specifically authorized  by law or court order.  
  
   15 M.R.S. § 3308 -C   CONFIDENTIALITY OF JUVENILE CASE RECORDS   
Charge petitioned  Juveniles age 13 and Older  (at d.o.jc.)  Juveniles under age 13  (at d.o.jc.)  
Murder, Felony 
Murder, 
Manslaughter  Always OPEN to the public  Open to the public on court order only  
Class A crimes  Presumptively open – may be 
confidential by court order  Presumptively closed – may be open to 
the pub lic by court order  
Class B and C crimes  Presumptively confidential  – may be 
open to the public by court order  Presumptively confidential  – may be open 
to the public by court order  
Class D and E crimes  Always CONFIDENTIAL  Always CONFIDENTIAL  
Civil Violations  Always CONFIDENTIAL  Always CONFIDENTIAL  
Competence 
determination 
pending  
regardless of charge   
Always CONFIDENTIAL   
Always CONFIDENTIAL  
Bind -over hearings  Always OPEN to the public  Always OPEN to the public  
 
Highest classification  of crime petitioned  determines whether a petition is confidential or open to public 
inspection.  [§ 3308 -C (2)(D)]  
 
Juvenile petitions that are deemed “open to public inspection”  may be INSPECTED  by any member of the 
public  at the courthouse . [§ 3308 -C (1)] 
 
Juvenile case records may  NEVER  be disseminated  by the court electronically or in paper form  except as 
authorized by statute or court order . [§ 3308 -C (1)] 
 
When a request is made  by any person  to have a presumptively open  petition be made  confidential, or a 
presumptively confidential  petition be open to public inspection, a hearing  must be held where the court 
considers:  
 The purposes of the Maine Juvenile Code  
 The juvenile’s interest in privacy  
 The alleged victim’s interest in privacy  
 The nature of the juvenile crime alleged [as outlined in the bind -over statute]  
 Characteristics of the juvenile [as outlined in the bind -over statute]  
 Public safety concerns [as outlined in the bind -over statute]  
The c ourt must determine whether the “ general public’s right to information substantially outweighs the 
juvenile’s interest in privacy or the alleged victim’s interest in privacy ” [§§3308 -C (2)(B) and 3308 -C (2)(C)(3) ] 
 
If a juvenile petition  is open to public inspection, the public may attend any juvenile court hearing  on the 
petition and may inspect the order of adjudication .  [§ 3308 -D (2)] 
  
Unless proceedings are suspended for a competence determination, Victims  may be present at hearings  or 
inspect orders of adjudication even if the general public is prohibited.   [§ 3308 -D (4)] 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------  
2 
 PERMISSIVE  Shari ng of Juvenile Case Record  Information : 
Criminal justice agencies  may share any information  in juvenile case records for purpose of administering 
juvenile or criminal justice [ § 3308 -C (4)(B)]  
 
Following adjudication of a juvenile crime, any information contained in j uvenile case records m ay be 
disseminated to  persons who directly supervise  or report on the health, behavior or progress of the juvenile, 
school superintendents, criminal justice agencies or agencies such as DOC or DHHS if relevan t to and 
disseminated for purpose  of creating or maintain  individualized plan for rehabilitation or reintegration into a 
school  [§ 3308 -C (4)(C)]  
 
Juvenile case record information in the possession of DOC may be disseminated t o anyone w ith informed 
written  consent  of the juvenile/guardian [ § 3308 -C (4)(D)]  
 
Juvenile intelligence investigative record information , JCCO records  and all other reports of social or clinical 
studies  contained in JCR may be inspected, disclosed or disseminated pursuant to a court o rder  but names of 
victims and minors must be redacted  [§ 3308 -C (4)(E)]  
 
Before ordering disclosure,  dissemination or inspection of confidential juvenile case records, there must be:  
Notice and opportunity to be heard to the juvenile, parent/guardian, juve nile’s attorney, prosecuting 
attorney and any agency given legal custody of the juvenile  
 
At the hearing the court shall The court shall consider:  
Purposes of the Juvenile Code  
The r easons for the request  
The c ourt may restrict further disclosure, dissemination  
 
With consent of the court  and subject to reasonable limitations, redacted  records may be made available to 
“persons having a legitimate interest in the proceedings” or “conducting pertinent research ” [§ 3308 -C (6)]  
 
Following a determination that juvenile case records may be shared, the Court must issue an order  specifying 
which juvenile case records may be inspected, disclosed or  disseminated and to whom [ § 3308 -C (7)]  
--------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
MANDATORY  Sharing of Juvenile Case Record Information  
 
If a juvenile is adjudicated of GSA involving a child under age 13 or involving compuls ion and is committed or 
placed on probation, DOC SHALL disseminate a copy of the judgment and commitment to DHHS, law 
enforcement agencies where the juvenile resides, works or attends school, to the Superintendent of any 
school where the juvenile is enrolled, all licensed day care facilities in the munic ipality where the juvenile 
resides, works or attends school. [§ 3308 -C (4)(F)]    
This section also permits dissemination (DOC MAY) of such a judgment and commitment to any other agency 
or person that the DOC determines is appropriate to ensure public safet y.   
 
Juvenile case records MUST be open to inspection and upon request be disseminated to:  
 The juvenile  
 The juvenile’s parent(s), guardian or legal custodian  
 The juvenile’s attorney  
 The prosecuting attorney  
 Any agency to which legal custody of the ju venile was transferred  
 DHHS prior to adjudication if commitment to their custody is a possible disposition  
  
3 
 An abstract must be sent t o the Secretary of State following adjudication for juvenile crime involving operation 
of a motor vehicle or when the juvenile’s right to operate is ordered suspended [ § 3308 -C (8)]  
 
A copy of the commitment order, order of adjudication, social studies and clini cal or educational reports and 
“information pertinent to the care and treatment of the juvenile” must be transmitted to  DOC and/or DHHS 
when committed to their custody [ § 3308 -C (9)]  
 
 
 
