 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1731 (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt  Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1731, An Act Regarding Confidentiality of Juvenile History Record Information  
 
DA: May 8, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 1731.     
 
 CLAC is aware of the several years of work by multiple stakeholders that resulted in the 
very recent and comprehensive amendments to the confidentiality provisions of the Juvenile Code.   
See P.L. 2021, c.  365.   Participants in this process included prosecutors, juvenile defense attorneys 
and advocates for juveniles , who at times consulted with CLAC .  Policy makers made the effort to 
balance the rights and interest s of juveniles, freedom of access rights o f the press and public , 
including victims, and public safety concerns.    The proposal discards that work shortly after 
implementation.    
 
 Perhaps inadvertently , this effort to protect juveniles would eliminate a basis that counsel 
can currently assert i n support of an argument that a charge be dropped down (and thus be protected 
as a confidential disposition).   In addition, t he proposal provides the same treatment for two 
differen t events in the juvenile process :  It would afford all juvenile dispositions (the result 
documenting the finding that the juvenile committed an offense) the  same confidentiality as juvenile 
competency proceedings, which involve highly sensitive information about individual juveniles , 
and therefore implicate policy considerations warranting a higher level of confidentiality protection 
than the final dispositio n itself.     
 
  
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
