 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ., ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN CIVIL 
LIBERTIES UNION OF MAINE, GLBTQ LEGAL  ADVOCATES & DEFENDERS (GLAD) , 
MAINE PRISONER ADVOCACY COALITION, MAINE INSIDE OUT, MAIN E YOUTH 
JUSTICE, OUT MAINE, AND PORTLAND OUTRIGHT  
 
LD 1731  – Ought to Pass  
 
An Act Regarding Confidentiality of Juvenile History Record Information  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
May 8, 2023  
 Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. On behalf of t he American Civil Liberties Union of 
Maine, GLBTQ Legal Advocates & Defenders (GLAD) , Maine Inside Out , Maine P risoner 
Advocacy Coalition,  Main e Youth Justice,  OUT Maine, and Portland Outright , I urge you to 
support LD 1731 . 
 In 2017 , researchers at the Muskie School released a report titled Unsealed Fate; The  
Unintended Conseque nces of Inadequate Safeguarding of Juvenile Records in Maine .1 The 
researchers found:  
• Widespread lack of understanding of the procedures intended to safeguard juvenile 
records and the sealing process, including confusion around the meaning of the term 
“sealed.”  
• Inconsistencies around juvenile record creation and sharing.  
 
1 Hawes S, King E, Sanchez M, Shaler G. Unsealed Fate: The Unintended Consequences of 
inadequate Safeguarding of Juvenile Records in Maine . Portland, ME: University of Southern Maine, 
Muskie School of Public Service; March, 2017 available at  
https://digital commons.usm.maine.edu/cgi/viewcontcnt.cgi ?article==10l4&context:justice  

  
 
 2 • A record sealing process that many believe does not sufficiently meet the rehabilitative 
goals of Maine’s Juvenile Code or reflect research on adolescent development.  
• Many young people accept pleas without understanding the implications of having a 
record and its subseque nt consequences.  
• The quality of representation contributes to how well records are safeguarded.2  
LD 1731  promises to solve all these problems in one elegant reform. If this bill is enacted, all 
juvenile records, regardless of the crime, will be automati cally confidential  under the Maine 
Criminal History Records Information Act . See generally 16 MRS §70 1 et seq. That will mean 
prosecutors, judges, court employees, and all other stakeholders are bound by one, simple rule: 
all juvenile criminal history reco rd information is confidential; no exceptions.  
Criminal records can push people into second -class status  by making it difficult to get a 
job, housing, an education, educational funding, credit, or even excluding people from certain 
professions. These cons equences could last a lifetime, and dramatically reduce the prosperity, 
freedom, and opportunity of someone with a criminal record. This bill will ensure that laws carry 
only the consequences intended by the legislature, and no other consequences.  Recent advances 
in neuroscience underline the urgency of this bill. For people who were found guilty of crimes as 
children, before their brains have fully developed, it is especially crucial to remove barriers to 
economic, education al, and social success.  This bill would do that.  
We urge you to vote ought to pass .  
Thank you for your time and attention . 
 
2 Id. at 4. 
