_____ 
* In the interest of honesty and disclosure, a personal background statement is available 
on request.  
 
 
 
Testimony in favor of LD 1731 
to the Committee on the Judiciary 
May 8, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the 
Committee: 
My name is Peter Lehman and I live in Thomaston. I am a formerly incarcerated 
citizen, a sociologist and a person in long-term recovery.* I am testifying on behalf 
of the Maine Prisoner Advocacy Coalition whose goal is to promote restorative 
practices in order to increase public safety and the health of our community.  
It is difficult to imagine anything less fair than having a juvenile record follow a 
person all of their life. Most members of the Commission on Criminal Records, 
myself included, assumed that those records are sealed. They should be. 
Last week, some of us grappled with the whole issue of expungement and how 
accessible we should make criminal records. I realized that I never directly talked 
about the relationship between public safety and public criminal records.  
The reality is that making criminal records more accessible doesn’t make us safer. 
Let me repeat that: making criminal records more accessible doesn’t make us safer.  
It does NOT reduce recidivism—the fancy word for re-offending.  
How do I know that? Well, for one thing, jurisdictions that have made them less 
accessible have not experienced more recidivism. In fact, the evidence is just the 
opposite—making them less accessible REDUCES criminal behavior. 1  
 
1 For an excellent recent overview of the literature and research on these issues, see the John Jay 
College of Criminal Justice report, Beyond the Record .  See also a less recent but valuable set of 
literature reviews and materials from the ACLU, Back To Business .  See also, Prescott and Starr, 
Expungement of Criminal Convictions: An Empirical Study, Harvard Law Review, Vol. 133, No. 
8, pp 2460-555 (June 2020).  
Peter M. Lehman, PhD
20 Lawrence Ave.
Thomaston, Maine 04861
(207) 542-1496
Peter@GrowInME.com
May 8, 2023 Lehman, LD 1731 Page 2 
Whole countries, such as France, and in fact the whole of the European Union, hold 
records much more confidential than we do. And they have much LESS repeat 
criminality. 
Corporations and companies that have taken initiatives to hire MORE people with 
criminal records report that not only is recidivism reduced but the quality and 
retention of their workforce has improved. Ask Dave’s Killer Bread or Target.2 
The bottom line is that making criminal records more and more accessible to the 
public is NOT an evidence-based practice for making us safer or reducing repeat 
criminality.  
Making records more accessible turns out to be quite effective in producing exactly 
the opposite result.   
We urge you to support LD 1731 and perhaps take the same approach to adult 
criminal records: Making them confidential in accordance with Maine Title 16, 
Chapter 7, the Criminal History Records and Information Act.  
Thank you for your generous attention. 
I’d be happy to try to answer questions.  
 
 
 
2 Those with criminal records who are hired generally make better employees. The Center for 
American Progress , hardly known for its liberalism, estimates that excluding these people from the 
workforce costs the economy billions of dollars. Economists estimate that the cost of barring these 
individuals from the workforce is roughly $78 to $87 billion in lost gross domestic product 
annually. One study found that putting to work just 100 of such individuals in Philadelphia would 
increase their lifetime earnings by $55 million, income tax contributions by $1.9 million, and sales 
tax contributions by $770,000.  https://www.americanprogress.org/article/expunging-clearing-
criminal-records/  
