1 
         
 
                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                             
                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MAINE PROSECUTORS ASSOCIATION 
ADA TANYA PIERSON, JUVENILE PROSECUTOR 
                                                                                                               
LD 1731 
“An Act Regarding Confidentiality of Juvenile History Record Information”  
 
Public Hearing Date: May 8, 2023 
 
Senator Anne Carney, Chair 
Representative Matt Moonen, Chair 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
 
 
My name is Tanya Pierson and I am an Assistant District Attorney for York County. I have spent the vast 
majority of my 33 year career helping to create and administer a juvenile docket in York County.  I am one 
of approximately eight prosecutors statewide who primarily handle a juvenile caseload.  I am here before 
you today on behalf of the Maine Prosecutors Association submitting testimony in opposition to LD 1731. 
 
From 2019-2021, the juvenile practitioner workgroup spent nearly three years drafting and 
collaborating on significant changes to Maine’s Juvenile Code, primarily focused on limiting access 
to juvenile public record information and juvenile case records.*  All these changes were 
encompassed in LD 1676, a bill sponsored by Speaker Talbot-Ross during the 130th Legislature, 
that was ultimately passed by the legislature, and was signed into law by the governor in 2021.    
 
The final proposal in LD 1676 was a compromise bill, which took into consideration the great 
importance of confidentiality with juvenile justice information, but tried to balance confidentiality 
with concerns over public safety, the rights of victims, concerns of prosecutors, the ability of the 
press to report on serious alleged criminal offenses and the public’s right to know about certain 
alleged crimes.  Although the workgroup strove to strike a balance between the juvenile’s interest in 
confidentiality and these other concerns, the Maine Press Association still expressed its objection to 
LD 1676 regarding the restrictions placed on freedom of the press.   
 
With the passage of LD 1676, aggressive changes were made to the Juvenile Code to restrict public 
access to sensitive juvenile history record information. By definition, Juvenile cases are now 
deemed confidential except as expressly authorized under the juvenile code. A multi-tier approach 
was created to outline public access to any court proceedings and charging documents based on the 
level of the offense charged and the age of the juvenile defendant (Section 3308-C(2)).  Because of 
the extremely sensitive nature of the information presented to the court in a competency hearing, 
LD 1676 designated a competency hearing a closed proceeding.  This designation even excludes 
the victim of an offense from attending the competency hearing.  (Under Section 3318-C(2) the      STATE OF MAINE144 SwedStreet￿
Caribou, ME 04736-2353
207-498-2557
FAX 207-493-3493   _____
27 Riverside Drive￿
Presque Isle, ME  04769-2730
207-764-0504
FAX 207-764-2046  _____
25 School Street￿
Suite 210
Houlton, ME  04730KATHRYN SLATTERY
DISTRICT I
JACQUELINE SARTORIS
DISTRICT II
NEIL MCLEAN
DISTRICT III
MAEGHAN MALONEY
DISTRICT IV
R. CHRISTOPHER ALMY
DISTRICT V
NATASHA IRVING
DISTRICT VI
ROBERT GRANGER
DISTRICT VII
TODD R. COLLINS
DISTRICT VIII
2 
 victim is entitled to inspect the court’s competency order and the victim or their designee cannot be 
excluded from any other juvenile proceeding).  This provision alone was a significant modification 
to ensure the confidentiality of highly personal juvenile information.  Moreover, LD 1676 added in 
three separate civil violation provisions for release of each type of confidential juvenile 
information:  confidential juvenile history record information (Section 3010(6)), juvenile 
intelligence and investigative record information (section 3308-A(7)) and juvenile case record 
information (Section 3308-C(11)).  Additionally, a civil remedy was created for unlawful disclosure 
of confidential records or information (Section 3701).  
 
Statewide, only a small number of juvenile adjudications occur for “felony” offenses; the vast 
majority of felony charges are pled down to misdemeanor adjudications by prosecutors, which then 
become confidential.  LD 1676, went even further and created section 3308-C(C), under which 
misdemeanor adjudications are now automatically sealed upon final discharge from the disposition 
imposed.  The juvenile code currently permits a juvenile to petition the court to seal an adjudication 
for a “felony” offense after three years if the individual has not been adjudicated or convicted of 
any new crimes or have any pending criminal offenses (Section 3308-C(10)).   
 
The seemingly very minor “tweak” proposed by LD 1731 has significant ramifications and could 
actually negate many provisions contained in other portions of the juvenile code.  Maine is already 
far more progressive than many other states in protecting juvenile confidentiality; I am not aware of 
any other state that has created civil penalties for the release of confidential juvenile justice 
information. It is hard to comprehend why LD 1731is being be proposed after all the collaborative 
work that went into creating significant protections for juvenile confidentiality just one legislative 
session ago. 
 
Finally, an unintended consequence of this bill is the likelihood that prosecutors will request more 
bind-over hearings to ensure the public is aware of very serious conduct committed by juveniles.  
Moreover, if all juvenile history record information is confidential, including the most serious 
juvenile offenses, public safety could be compromised, the gravity of such offenses will be severely 
diminished, and the public will never know about the conduct. 
 
Succinctly put, this bill completely disregards the years of work that went into forging compromise 
legislation that balanced a juvenile’s right to privacy in supporting and facilitating rehabilitation, 
the public’s right to be aware of serious criminal offenses, the right of the press to report on these 
matters and the rights of victims to be heard.   
 
Thank you for your attention and time.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*LD 1676 also substantially re-organized the order of many sections of the Maine Juvenile Code 
for better flow and ease of understanding, and defined critical terms used throughout the Code.     
 
