Q STATE OF MAINE 
COMMISSION ON GOVERNMENTAL ETHICST 
AND ELECTION PRACTICES 
er 6. 135 STATE House STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 
04333-0135 
Testimony of Jonathan Wayne, Executive Director of the 
Commission on Governmental Ethics and Election Practices 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
' 
V 
Ap,ril 26, 2023I 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and distinguished members of the 
committee: my name is Jonathan Wayne, and I am the Executive Director of the 
Maine Ethics Commission. Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of L.D. 
1630, which is an Ethics Commission bill to address some issues that have arisen in 
recent years. A summary of the bill is attached. In this testimony, I highlight three 
parts of the bill for your consideration. 
Proposed Documentation Requirement for Maine Clean Election Act Candidates 
Paying Higher Amounts for Campaign Staff (Sec. 18-20) .~ 
In the past two election cycles, the Commission has seen a handful of MCEA 
candidates paying larger amounts to a single individual for campaign services. 
Sometimes the compensation is for several months of work. For example, a few 
MCEA candidates for State Senate have paid a total of $3,000, $4,500, $12,000, 
$17,000 and $21,500 to a single individual for staff services. These are not the norm. 
Most MCEA candidates pay much less for campaign staff. As context, traditionally 
ﬁnanced candidates have paid $7,000, $8,025, or $10,000 to a single individual for 
staff services. 
To the best of our knowledge, the people receiving the compensation have 
provided valuable services that are worth the fees they have received. Nevertheless, 
the Commission believes it might be advisable to require people who are compensated 
with large amounts of MCEA funds for campaign staff services to create a record of 
amount and type of Work they have perfonned, which the candidate Would keep 
among their campaign records to be submitted to the Commission upon its request.
The proposal is intended to provide our department with an additional tool to make 
sure that MCEA funds are being spent appropriately for campaign services. 
The legislation contains a $l,000 threshold for this proposed requirement. 
Keeping time records involves some administrative burden, both for the person 
performing the work and the candidate who must collect them. If the Legislature 
wishes to move forward With this proposal, it may wish to consider a higher threshold, 
such as $3,000 or $5,000." 
“Paid for” Requirement for Text Messages (Sec. 9) 
The Commission proposes that text messages expressly advocating for or 
against candidates sent With the assistance of mass distribution technology at a cost of 
more than $100 must state the name of the person who made or fmanced the 
expenditure, e.g., “Paid for by Citizens for a Better Maine.” 
Using Penalty Revenue for IT (Sec. 4) 
Section 4 of the bill includes a proposal that penalties paid by political action 
committees and ballot question committees be deposited in a special revenue account 
to pay for IT costs. Through a straw vote on March 20, 2023, the Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs (AFA) Committee preliminarily approved a version of this language 
for inclusion in budget legislation, L.D. 258. Consequently, it may be appropriate to 
delete section 4 ﬁrom L.D. 1630 to avoid this bill sitting on the appropriations table. 
We would appreciate the VLA committee ’s consideration of the best course of action. 
Our ofﬁce regrets causing confusion, but thelanguage in L.D. 258 and 1630 are 
slightly different. We prefer the version approved by AFA for L.D. 25 8 because it 
includes one more penalty statute, 21-A M.R.S. § 1014. 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony.
2
Proposed Change in Law Rationale/Comment by Commission 
Statements of sources of income (SOSOI) 
by legislative candidates. Legislative 
candidates (not currently serving in the 
Legislature) are required by 1 M.R.S.§ 
1016-C to file a one-time statement of the 
sources of their income (SOSOI) by August 
15*“ of the election year, similar to the 
annual statements filed by members of the 
Maine Legislature. 
The Commission seeks to clarify that these 
legislative candidates must use the same 
electronic filing system as Legislators and 
are subject to the same enforcement 
procedures if they do not file the 
statement on time. ln July 2022, the Commission notified legislative 
candidates not currently serving in the Legislature 
that they were required to file a SOSOI by 
8/15/2022. Despite multiple communications, 
three candidates did not file the statements. The 
Commission referred two of the candidates to the 
Office of the Attorney General for collection ofa 
$100 penalty. (The third candidate withdrew 
before thedeadline.) The Commission seeks 
explicit authorization in statute that it may assess 
penalties against legislative candidates who do not 
file a SOSOI. 
Penalty procedures for unfiled SOSOls. 
Legislators are required to file an annual 
SOSOI by February 15"‘ of every year. In 
recent memory, 100% of Legislators have 
filed the SOSOls but during an election year 
there may be a handful of legislative 
candidates who-do not file the statement 
as required by law. 
Before each deadline, the Commission 
sends email reminders that a statement is 
due. If no statement is filed by the 
deadline, the Commission mails a letter 
requesting the statement within 15 days. 
The Commission proposes a penalty 
procedure similar to the department's 
enforcement process when a campaign 
finance or lobbyist report is not filed on 
time. if the candidate/Legislator does not 
file the SOSOI within the 15-day period, the 
Commission staff would notify the non-filer 
of a preliminary $500 penalty. The 
respondent would have the option of 
paying the penalty or requesting a waiver. 
If the respondent takes no action, the 
preliminary penalty would become final. The Commission seeks a more streamlined 
procedure for assessing a penalty whena 
candidate (or potentially a Legislator) does not file 
the SOSOI in response to the Commission's email 
reminders and letter. 
The proposed procedures arebased on 21-A M.R.S. 
§§ 1020-A and 1062-A. The procedures would be 
handled by Commission staff, rather than requiring 
action by the members of the Commission ata 
monthly meeting. The Commission members would 
be involved only if the filer requests a waiver of the 
$500 penalty, which would require discretion by 
the Commission. 
The proposal is also designed so that the 
Commission may assess the penalty (determine 
that a penalty is due), which is the normal 
procedure under almost all of the Commission's 
enforcement statutes. For reasons that are not 
clear, current law requires that the S100 fine for 
not filing a SOSOI be "adjudged" by a court.. 
The Commission proposes that the amount of the 
preliminary penalty be S500, which seems more 
commensurate with the violation (particularly for 
Legislators) than the current $100 fine.
Lobbyist disclosure — increasing penalties 
for frequent late filers. Lobbyists are 
required to file monthly reports with the 
Commission disclosing their client, 
compensation, bills lobbied, etc. The late 
filing penalty is $50 (if the report is one day 
late) or $100/month if the report is more 
than one day late. Because some lobbyists 
repeatedly file their monthly reports late, 
the Commission seeks authority to increase 
the penalty by $50 for each successive 
violation in a year. ln the last five years, the staff has identiﬁed 20 
cases in which a lobbyist has filed at least five 
reports late during a lobbying year. These frequent 
late filings by some lobbyists suggest that the 
current fines of $50 and $100/month are 
insufficient to ensure compliance with the law. 
Penalties paid by PACs and ballot question 
committees. Registration fees paid by 
lobbyists are deposited into a special 
revenue account established by Title 3,§ 
320. In 2015, the Legislature amended 3 
M.R.S. § 320 so that the Commission could 
use this revenue to pay for its lT costs 
related to the Commission's campaign 
finance and lobbyist disclosure systems. 
P.L. 2015, ch. 267, part F-3. 
The Commission's proposes that penalties 
paid by PACs and ballot question 
committees would be deposited into one 
of our special revenue accounts to be spent 
exclusively on technology costs. On March 20, 2023, the Appropriations and 
Financial Affairs (AFA) Committee preliminarily 
approved a version of this language for inclusion in 
budget legislation, L.D. 258. Consequently, it may 
be appropriate to delete section 4 from L.D. 1630 
to avoid this bill sitting on the appropriations table. 
We would appreciate the VLA committee's 
consideration of the best course of action. 
Our office regrets causing confusion, but the 
language in L.D. 258 and 1630 is slightly different. 
We prefer the version approved by AFA for L.D. 
258 because it includes one more penalty statute, 
21-A M.R.S. § 1014. 
Meeting by telephone. The Commission 
proposes deleting 21-A M.R.S. § 1002(2), 
which authorizes the Commission to meet 
by telephone. A general statute, 1 M.R.S. § 403-B, authorizes 
boards and commissions to meet remotely, 
provided certain conditions are met. The 
Commission proposes deleting its own telephone 
meeting statute to conform to statewide standards 
and avoid any confusion arising from overlapping 
statutes.
Office procedures during the final 
weekend before an election. The 
Commission proposes a repeal of 21-A 
M.R.S. § 1002(4), which requires the 
Commission office to be open during the 
weekend before an election with adequate 
staff to respond to inquiries and receive 
complaints. This applies to primary 
elections, general elections, off-year ballot 
question elections, and special elections. 
1 Commission employees frequently work overtime 
during election season when the 40-hour work 
week is not sufficient to complete our tasks. With 
respect to the final weekend before an election, 
however, the Commission receives barely any 
contacts from candidates, PACs, political activists, 
or the public. From the perspective of the 
Commission, this weekend requirement seems 
well-intentioned but is an inefficient use of state 
resources that requires Commission employees to 
work and be paid on a day when almost no actual 
assistance is required by the participants in the 
election process or the public. 
Issuing a staff investigative report or 
Commission decision containing financial 
or campaign information. 
Subsection 3-A of the Commission's 
investigations statute, 21-A M.R.S. § 1003, 
requires the Commission to keep 
confidential certain financial or sensitive 
campaign information received in an 
investigation. The Commission has the 
discretion to disclose the information, 
however, when the staff is submittingan 
investigative report or the Commission is 
making a decision on a potential violation. 
This exception is important so that the 
public understands the evidence the 
Commission is relying upon when making 
an enforcement decision. If the Ethics 
Commission is viewed as making 
enforcement decisions in a secretive 
manner, the public’s confidence in the 
Commission may be diminished. The Commission proposes a change in the scope of 
financial or campaign information that may be 
disclosed in a staff investigative report or 
Commission decision. We propose that the 
Commission be given the discretion to disclose 
information that is "relevant" to the report or 
decision, rather than ”materially relevant." The 
term "material" often refers to a fact that is so 
significant that it potentially affects the outcome of 
a decision. A staff report or Commission decision 
that provides a complete picture of a factual 
situation will sometimes include information that is 
relevant but that arguably does not rise to the level 
of materiality. Facts that are relevant should be 
disclosable to the public if they have sufficient 
significance to be included in a staff report or 
Commission decision.
Lawsuits to collect penalties. When PACs, 
candidates, etc., do not pay penalties 
voluntarily, the Office of the Attorney 
General (OAG) brings an action in state 
court to collect the penalties. Some of 
these penalties are quite small ($0-$200) 
and the staff/administrative costs of 
bringing the action exceeds the amount to 
be collected. The Commission proposes 
amending this section to allow the OAG to 
collect up to three times the penalty. Amending the statute will assist the state in 
recovering the staff or administrative costs of 
enforcement and collection, and may promote a 
resolution of the collection action more quickly 
than suing for an amount as little as $0-$200. 
”Paid for" disclosures in text messages. 
Generally, paid communications advocating 
for or against candidates must state who 
paid for them. The law contains exceptions 
for individuals spending S100 or less who 
are acting on their own independently of 
candidates, PACs, and political parties. The 
Commission proposes that text messages 
expressly advocating for or against 
candidates sent with the assistance of mass 
distribution technology at a cost of more 
than $100 must state the name of the 
person whomade or financed the» 
expenditure. The text would be required to identify the person 
who paid for the message, e.g., ”Paid for by 
Citizens for a Better Maine." Due to character 
constraints in text messages, the text would not 
need to contain the person's address ora 
statement whether a candidate authorized the 
expenditure. 
Aggregate contribution limit. Maine 
campaign finance law contains an 
aggregate limit of $25,000 on contributions 
an individual may make to state candidates 
in a calendar year. The Commission 
proposes deleting this limit. In 2014, the U.S. Supreme Court struck downa 
similar federal law in McCutcheon v. FEC, 572 U.S. 
185 (2014). The Commission believes Maine's 
aggregate contribution limit would also be viewed 
as unconstitutional if it were challenged in court.
Independent expenditure reporting. 
Independent expenditures are the costs of 
paid communications expressly advocating 
for or against candidates (mailers, ads, 
etc.). Most often, they are financed by PACs 
or party committees. They require a special 
report which includes a sworn affidavit 
stating that the expenditure was made 
independently of the candidates in the 
race. 
(1) Current law requires the independent 
spender to submit a paper affidavit to the 
Commission shortly after entering the 
transactional information in the 
Commission's eFiling website. The 
Commission proposes replacing the 
affidavit with an online affirmation that 
would be made at the time the filer enters 
the transactional information. 
(2) For communications that do not 
expressly advocate for a candidate, an IE 
report is required for communications 
distributed after Labor Day that name or 
depict a specific candidate, unless the 
independent spender demonstrates to the 
Commission that it did not intend to 
influence an election.0 
(1) The Commission proposes an online (rather 
than paper) affirmation to reduce the 
administrative burden on PACs and party 
committees that make independent expenditures 
and the Commission staff who must track down 
the affidavits which, if not filed, result in late 
filings. 
(2) For non—express advocacy communications that 
name or depict a candidate, the Commission 
proposes language that would focus the~ 
Commission's decision on the objective elements 
of the communication, rather than trying to 
determine the subjective intent of the person that 
funded the communication. 
Automatic waiver of small late-filing 
penalties. When candidates, PACs, and 
others file a campaign finance report late, 
the filer is notified ofa preliminary penalty. 
The late filer may pay the penalty or ask the 
Commission to waive the penalty. The 
Commission proposes that any penalty of 
less than $25 automatically be waived (no 
penalty would be collected). 
Faxing campaign finance reports. The 
Commission staff also proposes repealing 
the language allowing for the provisional 
filing of campaign finance reports by fax. Collecting penalties and administering a process 
for late filers to request waiversrequires time of 
the Commission staff and members. To prioritize 
more important work, the Commission proposes 
expanding the penalties that are automatically 
waived from $10 to $25. 
Virtually all campaign finance reports submitted by 
candidates, PACs, and ballot question committees 
are filed with the Commission's eFiling website. 
Our office almost never receives reports by fax.
Fraudulent qualifying contributions. To 
qualify for Maine Clean Election Act (MCEA) 
funds, candidates must collect a minimum 
number of $5 qualifying contributions (QCs) 
to demonstrate support. The Commission 
seeks to clarify that submitting fraudulent 
QCs to the Commission is a legal violation 
that may be punished with a civil penalty. The Commission's current rules define the term 
”fraudulent qualifying contributions" to cover four 
situations in which the candidate or a supporter 
has taken an improper action such as falsely 
claiming the receipt of $5 or signing a contributor ’s 
name to the Commission's forms. 94-270, Ch. 3, 
§2(4)(l). The Commission would like to confirm 
that candidates or others responsible for these 
actions may be subject to a civil penalty under 21- 
A M.R.S. § 1127(1). 
Using MCEA funds for larger payments of _. 
campaign staff. Title 21-A, § 1125(12-A) 
sets out the records that must be kept by 
MCEA candidates. These records are 
requested by the Commission if a candidate 
is selected for a routine audit or a specific 
compliance concern arises from the 
Commission's review of the candidate's 
campaign finance reports. The Commission 
proposes that if an individual is being paid 
more than $1,000 in MCEA funds, the 
person compensated would keep daily time 
records which the candidate would make 
available to the Commission upon -request. 
The Legislature may wish to consider a 
threshold higher than $1,000. ln the past two election cycles, the Commission_ 
has seen a handful of MCEA candidates paying 
larger amounts to a single individual for campaign 
services. Sometimes the compensation is for 
several months of work. For examplle, a few MCEA 
candidates for State Senate have paid a total of 
$4,500, $12,000, $17,000 and $21,500 to a single 
individual for staff services. As context, 
traditionally financed candidates have paid $7,000, 
$8,025, or $10,000 to a single individual for staff 
services. To the best of our knowledge, the people 
receiving the compensation have provided 
valuable services that are worth the fees they have 
received- . Nevertheless, the Commission believes it 
might be advisable to require people who are 
compensated with large amounts of MCEA funds 
for campaign staff services to create a daily time 
record of the work they have performed, which the 
candidate would keep among their campaign 
records to be submitted to the Commission upon 
its request. The proposal is intended to provide 
our department with an additional tool to make 
sure that MCEA funds are being spent 
appropriately for campaign services. The 
legislation contains a $1,000 threshold for this 
proposed requirement. If the Legislature wishes to 
move forward with this proposal, it may wish to 
consider a higher threshold, such as $3,000 or 
$5,000.
