 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on  Committee on Labor and Housin g  
in support  
LD 1107, Resolve, to Establish a Pilot Project to Impr ove Access to Credit for Low -income Individual s  
March  27, 202 3  
Amy.Winston@ceimaine.org   
Amy Winston, Senior Director, State Polic y  
  
Dear Representativ e Zage r, Representativ e Arat a, and Distin guished Members of the Committee :  
  
My name is Amy Winston. I live in  Edgecom b and am the Senior Policy Director at Coastal Enterprises, Inc. 
(CEI). I am submitting this testimony in support of LD 1107 , Resolve, to Establish a Pilot Project to Improve 
Access to Credit for Low- income Individual s, including our concerns about the potential adverse effects of  
rent reporting  on financiall y insecure renters .  
  
As a no n-profit, mission -driven Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI) based in Brunswick, 
CEI works to build a  just, vibrant and climate resilient future  for people and communities in Maine and 
other rural regions. We do this by  integrating finance, business  expertise , and policy solutions  to make the  
economy more  equitabl e. Our Financial Development Services  team provides  housing, consumer credit 
and budget/debt reduction , including student loan , counseling services  to CEI clien ts.  
 
Low credit scores are often a barrier for renters i n search of housin g, as many  landlord s use credit scores  
to screen  rental applicants.  Helping individuals increase their credit scores by  providin g rent payme nt 
histories to credit reporting agencies can be a benefit  to individuals who are able to make regular and  
timel y payment s. However, the National Consumer Law Center  (2022)  warns:  “Rent reporting risks 
helping some better -off credit invisible consumers at the cost of literally making other renters 
homeless .” Specifically,  reporting programs that use  “full file” report s, which include negative reporting 
on apparent missed or  late payment s as well as on time payments , can harm pr ospective renters and 
their credit  – especially  people of col or1.  
Even reporting only positive payment history could carry some risk s; for example,  if timely payments 
aren ’t recorded or aren ’t shown as paid in full because a tenant paid by cash , money order  or app. For 
this reason, critics of rent reporting advocate that using bank account cashflow information is preferable 
to including the data in credit bureau files –  rent that is missing from bank account transactions could be 
attributable to a cash or money order payment . Further , consumers should have a choice as to whether 
their  rent payments are submitted to the credit bureaus. Not only is it  the right thing to do from a 
consumer privacy and rights standpoint but requiring consumers’ active permission  avoids inclusion of 
harmful negative information that will hurt their rental housing prospects.  For these  reason s, CEI strongly 
encourages that  this program  limit rental payment reporting to positive rent payment information only .  
 
Additionally, although the document does say that the program is  “voluntary ,” CEI would  like to clarify 
that this program would be an “opt -in” program, as even when credit reporting only allows for the 
distribution of  positive  payment information, gaps in payment history can lead  landlord s to make negative 
 
1 A September , 2020 , study  by the Center on  Budget and Policy Priorities showed that renters of color were more likely  to report that their 
household was  behind on rent: about 1 in 4 Black and Asian renters and 1 in 5 Latinx  renters, compared  to 1 in 9 white households.  
 
inferences  regardin g an individual’ s payment history. Structuring this program as mandatory or an opt out 
program could lead to the unintended consequence of harming a renter’s ability to secure housing.  Finally, 
in accordance with the intent o f the bill, it is important  to develop a pilot that is at no cost to the tenant 
or landlord . CEI supports the development of a pilot that anticipates and accounts for the  concerns we 
have  raised above regarding  the potential unintended cons equences of rent reporting .  
