-9 at Mg: tw 
‘~" ~ :'5“T>*1i:_4 . it .. 
.“:3;“ , Rt 
‘es-<1 ., . 
> was s 5 42 5 2%s 
Testimony in Support of 
LD 1107, Resolve to Establish a Pilot Project to Improve Access to Credit for Low-income 
Individuals 
March 28, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing, my name is Greg Payne and I serve as the Senior Advisor on 
Housing Policy in the Governor's Office of Policy Innovation and the Future.\ 
l offer this testimony in support of LD 1107, Resolve to Establish a Pilot Project to Improve 
Access to Credit for Low-income Individuals. 
The Administration is committed to helping eliminate barriers to homeownership, and 
recognizes that many renter households seek to, and are well positioned to, make a sustainable 
shift to becoming homeowners. We also recognize that the long-term impact of 
homeownership can makean enormous difference for families for generations into the future. 
With this in mind, we share Representative Zager’s concerns that renters and homeowners are 
currently not treated similarly when they pay their housing costs on time each month, leaving 
renters at a disadvantage in the marketplace. While mortgage lenders report borrowers ’ 
payment history to the credit bureaus as a matter of course, thus driving up credit scores for 
homeowners who reliably pay their mortgage bill on time, renters rarely get the same benefit 
for their own timely rent payments. This disparate treatment is particularly problematic for. 
those renters who have low credit scores or who have little to no credit history. Lower credit 
scores often translate to higher interest rates and declined credit opportunities for applicants. 
LD 1107 would put Maine in a leadership role in addressing this issue, by joining the small 
number ofjurisdictions actively seeking to establish a more even playing field for renters and 
homeowners. MaineHousing is well positioned to lead this pilot project by assisting hundreds of 
households with voluntary rent payment reporting to the credit bureaus, thus helping them 
build credit in ways that can positively impactitheir purchasing power and future economic 
opportunities. 
We believe this initiative could have a significant impact and are grateful to Representative 
Zager for bringing it forward. 
Thank you for your consideration and please do not hesitate to be in touch with any questions. 
PIIONE 207062407458 WWW.M/\lNE.G()\//FUTURE
