 
 
TO:  
FROM:  
DATE:  
RE:  Members of the Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services  
Rory Whelan, Regional Vice President, NAMIC  
May 2, 2023 --- Public Hearing  
Opposition to LD 1661 --- Towing/Storage Mandate 
on Insurance Companies 
 
The National Association of Mutual Insurance Companies (NAMIC)1 and its members, thank you for 
the opportunity to express strong opposition to LD 1661 and urge you vote ought not to pass.  
 
This bill would require auto insurance policies to cover the “reasonable” costs of towing and storage 
of a policyholder’s vehicle under all circumstances. 
 
LD 1661 is the clearest illustration of legislating and promoting a “moral hazard”2 by requiring auto 
liability insurance policies cover actions by policyholders that are irresponsible and unrelated to any 
insurance liability claim. 
 
Auto insurance is a contract between you and the insurance company that protects you against 
financial loss in the event of an accident or theft. In exchange for your paying a premium, the 
insurance company agrees to pay your losses as outlined in your policy.3  Coverage includes 
property, liability, and medical expenses. 
 
However, this bill would require insurance companies to pay for towing/storage expenses unrelated 
to an accident or theft; examples include a driver who: 
 
• parks in front of a fire hydrant or no parking sign 
• abandons his/her car because it ran out of gas 
• parks in a handicap-only parking space 
• has outstanding parking summons 
• parks in front of a driveway 
 
This bill disincentivizes a driver from making responsible decisions by mandating insurance 
companies (“P&C”) pay for the expense of the driver’s poor, and perhaps willful, decision-making. 
 
 
1 The National Association of Mutual Insurance Companies consists of more than 1,500 member companies, 
including seven of the top 10 property/casualty insurers in the United States. NAMIC member companies 
write $357 billion in annual premiums and represent 69 percent of homeowners, 56 percent of automobile, 
and 31 percent of the business insurance markets.  
2 Moral Hazard - Intelligent Economist  
3 What is auto insurance? | III  
 
2  
Enactment of this legislation will lead to higher insurance premiums for all Mainers because this 
“risk” is not covered nor contemplated in current policies. Maine has a well-documented history of 
providing a robust healthy competitive P&C environment where business and innovation can 
flourish, and where regulations are carefully defined to address specific concerns. These policies 
helped make Maine the 4th least expensive state for auto insurance.4 This proposed measure runs 
counter to this achievement by increasing insurance costs for all policyholders and creating 
uncertainty for P&C insurance services.  
For these reasons, NAMIC and its member companies respectfully ask that you oppose LD 1661 
and vote ought not to pass. Thank you for your consideration.  
 
4 Car insurance rates by state for 2023 – Forbes Advisor  
