Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287-3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
 
April 7, 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: Opposition to LD 784 An Act to Establish Welfare Work Requirements for Able -bodied 
Adults Without Dependents  
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Committee Health and 
Human Services:
 
Thank you for the opportunity to express our strong opposition to  LD 784, An Act to Establish 
Welfare Work Requirements for Able -bodied Adults Without Dependents .  
This bill  requires able -bodied adults without dependents  enrolled in the Supplemental Nutrition 
Assistance Pro gram  also known as SNAP , the MaineCare Program , or a municipal general 
assistance program for longer than three months, to participate in certain work requirements, 
including:  1. Working an average of twenty or more hours per week; 2. Participating in an 
employment or training program or a job search program for an average of twenty hours or more 
per week; or 3. Participating in a placement with public or private  sector employers, including as 
a volunteer.   
Imposing work requirements in the MaineCare Progra m is impermissible absent a waiver granted 
under  Section 1115 of the Social Security Act. Section 1115 waivers allowing for such criteria 
have been challenged nationally in recent years, with numerous courts finding their usage to 
impede access to public health insurance.  In January 2021, President Biden issued Executive 
Order 14009 which compe ls all Medicai d-administering bodies to review “demonstrations and 
waivers, as well as demonstration and waiver policies, that may reduce coverage under or 
otherwise undermine Medicaid or the ” Affordable Care Act  or “(ACA )”. Executive Order 14009 
further i nstructs agencies to “suspend, revise, or rescind”, in accordance with governing 
procedures, all actions that may be inconsistent with its established law and policy.  Enactment of 
this bill would preclude compliance with federal mandate, as it would requir e Maine to take 
action already subject to legal scrutiny.  Aside from the foregoing constraints, Maine has taken 
appreciable steps to promote and preserve MaineCare availability throughout its communities . 
This legislation as offered wholly compromises this  goal.   
Additionally, the Department opposes imposing SNAP federal work requirements on a municipal 
general assistance program.  The General Assistance Program already incorporates adequate 
work requirements into the program structure pursuant to Title 22, § 4316 -A. Current General 
Assistance statute not only requires an applicant to search for work and attend available work -
 
 related trainings, but it  also allows a municipality to impose “workfare” requirements on an able -
bodied applicant  for benefits issued.  The municipality is restricted by statute from requiring a 
recipient to perform any amount o f work that exceeds the value of the applicant’s assistance . 
This bill would directly conflict with current statutory  requirements when the pr oposed  work 
requirement would  require an applicant to perform work in excess of benefits issued .  
This bill also imposes additional requirements for general assistance eligibility which  conflict s 
with Title 22 , § 4308 (2) which states a municipality may provide emergency assistance when 
the municipality determines that an emergency is imminent and that failure to provide assistance 
may result in undue hardship and unnecessary costs , regardless of an applicant being found 
ineligib le for non -emergency general assistance  benefits.  Also, a n eligible person in need of 
emergency assistance may not be required to perform work prior to receiving general assistance  
pursuant to Title 22 §  4316 -A. If an applicant has been denied non-emergenc y general assistance  
as a result of the proposed work requirement, the municipality cannot also  require the applicant 
to complete the work requirement prior to receipt of emergency assistance.  This proposed bill is 
in direct conflict with current municipal General Assistance statutory requirements.  
In summary , the Department opposes this bill  as it would prove  detrimental to Mainers  who need 
assistance , some in dire circumstances  and unable to meet their basic needs and others  eligible 
for and in need of health care  services .  
Sincerely,  
 
Anthony Pelotte, Director  
Office for Family Independence  

