      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
April 7, 2023  
 
Re: LD 778, An Act Regarding Work Requirements for Able -bodied Adults Without Dependents 
Under the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program; LD 784, An Act to Establish Welfare Work Requirements for Able -bodied Adults Without Dependents; and LD 1194, An Act to 
Implement Work Requirements Under the MaineCare Program  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee,  my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of 
Maine or CHOM .  CHOM  works collaboratively to house Maine’s most vulnerable people and 
advocates on their behalf.   I also chair the Maine Homeless Policy Committee, the Maine 
Continuum of Care Board of Directors, as well as the ESAC Long Term Stayers Committee.   
 
I offer testimony in opposition to a number of bills, all of which would make substantive changes 
to safety net programs by establishing work requirements to the detriment of vulnerable people in 
Maine, who are already experiencing hardships.  I testify today in opposition of:    
 
LD 778, An Act Regarding Work Requirements for Able -bodied Adults Without Dependents 
Under the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program  
Beginning January 1, 2024, this bill prohibits the Department of Health and Human Services from requesting certain waivers and exemptions under the federal Supplemental Nutritional Assistance 
Program, or SNAP. It prohibits the department from applying for a waiver under 7 United States 
Code, Section 2015(o)(4), which allows for waivers in specif ic geographical areas that have 
unemployment over 10% or with insufficient jobs available. It also prohibits the department from 
providing exemptions to work requirements for up to 12% of individuals receiving SNAP benefits 
pursuant to 7 United States Code , Section 2015(o)(6)(E).  
 
LD 784, An Act to Establish Welfare Work Requirements for Able -bodied Adults Without 
Dependents  
This bill requires able -bodied adults without dependents enrolled in the Supplemental Nutrition 
Assistance Program, the MaineCare pro gram or a municipal general assistance program for longer 
than 3 months to participate in certain work requirements, including:  
1. Working an average of 20 or more hours per week.  
2. Participating in an employment or training program or a job search for an avera ge of 20 hours 
or more per week.  Or  
3. Participating in a placement with public or private sector employers, including as a volunteer.  
 LD 1194, An Act to Implement Work Requirements Under the MaineCare Program  
This bill establishes work requirements for cer tain individuals as a condition of participating in the 
MaineCare program.  Except for exceptions laid out in the bill, an individual is not eligible to participate in the MaineCare program unless that individual is: 
1. Working 20 hours or more per week, aver aged monthly.  
2. Participating in and complying with the requirements of a work program 20 hours or more per 
week, as determined by the department.  
3. Volunteering 20 hours or more per week, as determined by the department.  
4. Meeting any combination of working and participating in a work program for a total of 20 
hours or more per week, as determined by the department.  Or  
5. Participating in and complying with the requirements of a workfare program as implemented by 
the department.  
 
People with low incomes  in Maine already face challenges with rent affordability, having resources 
to afford food and basic necessities, and access to healthcare – all of which are essential and ought 
to be attainable for everyone in Maine regardless of socioeconomic status.  Ma ineCare, SNAP, and  
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
    
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
TANF are critical safety net programs that remove barriers so that vulnerable populations in Maine can meet their basic 
needs and attain stability.   
 
An individual’s  basic needs should not be dependent upon  meeting arbitrary deadlines .  Exiting poverty does not work that 
way.  Taking benefits away from vulnerable populations does not improve employment outcomes in the long- term.  The 
rationale ignores economic, family, situational, and health situations that create very real barriers to  employment, such as: 
lack of transportation; the need to care for a sick family member; lack of childcare; and health and disability issues including 
mental/behavioral health.   
 
Moreover, the documentation needed to prove adherence to these pr oposed work requirements is itself  a large barrier and 
promotes poor outcomes . 
 It helps none of us to keep people in poverty.  The safety net is there to keep people alive.  Increasing hardships for peopl e 
experiencing poverty is not helpful to them or to any of us.  Please take a look around in Maine.  People who are falling on 
hard times are not our enemies; they are people experiencing hardships, and we are a society that understands this and helps 
out our neighbors.  Instead of putting up barriers for people to access safety net programs, let’s make programmatic changes 
that give families the best possible chance of attaining stability – we will all be better for it.  
 
Thank you for your time and careful consideration.  
 
