.. . was, 
:|' 
>- Y. -’*/\"»...;. “in . 3. 
-- 
§5' ,_1\ _v'i-jL1ZL:»~'¥@-E . . 
-<» 
t. 
Eric Brakey 131*‘ MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 20 Augusta, ME 04333 
Senator Eric Brakey 
L.D. 784, An Act to Establish Welfare Work Requirements for 
Able-Bodied Adults Without Dependents 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Sen/ices 
. 
Friday, April 7, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the Committee on 
Health and Human Services, thank you for allowing me to present L.D. 784, An Act to 
Establish Welfare Work Requirements forAb/e-Bodied Adults Without Dependents. l am 
Senator Eric Brakey and l represent Senate District 20, which includes the towns of 
New Gloucester, Durham, Auburn, and Poland. 
For those who are able-bodied and capable of work, welfare should be a safety net and 
not a hammock. lt is not good for society or the human spirit for those with the capacity 
to contribute to grow permanently dependent on taxpayer-funded handouts with no 
expectation of taking steps to improve your lot in life. 
That is why, during the LePage Administration, the state ceased requesting a waiver 
from federal work requirements in the SNAP program. As a result, those enrolled in the 
SNAP program who fall under the category of able-bodied adults without dependents 
(ABAWDs) were required to work, volunteer, and engage in job training. The results 
were eye-opening. 
As reported in Forbes: 
Maine Gov. Paul LePage’s recent welfare reforms have led to more 
employment, higher wages, and less dependency, according toa 
preliminary report published by the Maine Department of Health and 
Human Sen/ices and the Maine Office of Policy and Management. 
In October-2014, Maine began requiring about 16,000 able-bodied- 
childless adults to work, train, or volunteer on at least a part-time basis in 
order to continue receiving food stamps. Adults who refused to comply 
with the new requirements would cycle off after three months of beneﬁts. 
After implementing these reforms, Maine quickly moved thousands of 
able-bodied adults out of dependency and into self-suf ﬁciency. By January
l
I
| 
2015, the number of able-bodied adults on food stamps had dropped to 
l 
4,500 and has continued to decline. 
[By 2016], just 1,500 able-bodied childless adults [relied] on Maine's food 
stamps program. Those still relying on the program also need less 
assistance overall, as they are working more, with average beneﬁts 
1 dropping 13% since the work requirements went into effect. As a result of 
these changes, taxpayers are now saving between $30 million and $40 
million each year.A 
More importantly, Maine's success story goes far beyond taxpayer 
savings. Maine’s Department of Health and Human Services connected 
with the state’s Department of Labor in order to evaluate the impact of the 
reforms. State ofﬁcials then tracked employment and wage records for 
nearly 7,000 able-bodied adults as they cycled off food stamps when the 
work requirements were ﬁrst implemented. 
The results were impressive. Within a year, these able-bodied adults saw 
their incomes rise by an average of 114%. That increase came as more 
able-bodied adults re-entered the labor force, worked more hours, or 
found jobs with higher wages. Thanks to this higher income, poverty rates 
have declined and now, working able-bodied adults are earning more than 
.enough on average to bring them above the federal poverty line. 
Better still, the higher wages more than offset lost benefits, meaning those 
leaving welfare were better off than when they were trapped in 
government dependency. After Maine implemented its reforms, these 
able-bodied adults saw their incomes go up by a combined $18 million per 
yeah 
To summarize the conclusions, work requirements work. When targeted properly, work 
requirements help to counter the disincentives that welfare programs create for going 
into the workforce and putting yourself on the road to independence and self-suf ﬁciency. 
This legislation would establish in statute the exact same work requirements for 
ABAWDs that'_proved effective during the LePage Administration to the SNAP, 
MaineCade, and General Assistance programs. 
Able-bodied adults without dependents, between the ages of 18 to 50, would be able to 
enroll in these programs for three months before work requirements were enforced. 
Beyond that, to maintain eligibility, ‘ they would be required “ to work, volunteer, or ''
' 
participate in job training.' 
Despite what critics may say, these reforms are in the best interests of those who would 
be affected by the policy change. As Ronald Reagan once said, “The best social 
program is a job.” Right now, there are plenty of jobs. We have a workforce shortage.' 
Unemployment rates are below full employment. And yet, our workforce participation 
rates are among thelowest we’ve ever seen after an expansion of Medicaid that swept 
up able-bodied, working-age ‘ people and then trapped them behind a welfare cliff that 
discourages work.
All-this proposal does is institute work requirement policies, which are already proven 
effective, at a time when we desperately need working age people in the workforce. I 
hope you will adopt these common sense measures and help get Maine back to work. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I will gladly take questions to the-best of my 
ability.
