 
April 5, 2023 
 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 778 An Act Regarding Work Requirements for Able-
bodied Adults Without Dependents Under the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance 
Program 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 784 An Act to Establish Welfare Work Requirements for 
Able-bodied Adults without Dependents.   
Testimony in Opposition of LD 1194 An Act to Implement Work Requirements Under the 
MaineCare Program.   
Senator Baldacci Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee,  
My name is Georgia and I live in Presque Isle. I am a person who lives with a disability and a 
self-advocate on the Board of Speaking Up For Us. I am against LD 778, LD 784, and LD 1194. 
I think these bills all fit together to make it really hard for people to get food to survive.  
I haven’t worked in 21 years and I went on disability in 2005 when I was diagnosed with autism. 
I have cardio myopathy,  a car accident in 1997, a hip replacement, a bone spur. I worked until I 
was 5 months pregnant with my son and haven’t worked since. My ex-husband wouldn’t let me 
work. He said he wanted to be the bread winner, but he couldn’t keep a job. I struggled with a 
relationship filled with domestic violence. There were times that I felt like I lived in a dark room 
and there was no way to get out of it. That is why I moved to Maine.  
I am on a fixed income. I am my own guardian and I have to pay my bills. My body is about to 
fall apart. Just last week I fell at my program and was in the ER all day. I have a lot of medical 
issues and I am struggling. My life has been a nightmare and I would encourage anyone to walk 
in my shoes and see what that is like. Every day is a struggle and I have proven that I can do 
things, even though it is not the way some people think I should.   
I have two degrees and graduated from 2 different colleges. My son was also diagnosed with 
autism and he had issues. I made sure he got diagnosed early because I didn’t find out I also had 
autism until I was an adult.  
I hear stories of the government trying to take more things away. I haven’t been able to work 
because of all these reasons. It is hard to trust and when I hear the state representatives want to 
take away SNAP benefits that is what I use to get food it is a struggle. People need access to 
food. If I lost my SNAP benefits, it would send me back to a dark place. I have no way to get 
myself to the food pantry because I don’t have a car. I am trying to save money to get a car, but I 
can’t save past $2,000. The system is just keeping me back from being independent. I miss being 
able to do things. My family has let me down and people have taken advantage of me. 
I am tired of being treated like I am stupid or something. I struggle, without the food benefit I 
wouldn’t be able to eat. My rent keeps going up. I can barely afford to live. I ask the committee 
not to pass these bills.  
Sincerely, 
Georgia West 
Presque Isle, ME  
Georgiawest26@gmail.com  
 
 
 
 
