April 6, 2023 
 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 778 An Act Regarding Work Requirements for 
Able-bodied Adults Without Dependents Under the Supplemental Nutritional 
Assistance Program 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 784 An Act to Establish Welfare Work 
Requirements for Able-bodied Adults without Dependents.   
Testimony in Opposition of LD 1194 An Act to Implement Work Requirements 
Under the MaineCare Program.   
Senator Baldacci Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee,  
My name is Nicole and I live in Presque Isle. I am a self-advocate, meaning I am a 
person who lives with a disability.  
 
I oppose this bill because of the wording. What is the meaning of Able-Bodied?  
Someone with a mental health condition, emotional conditions, physical disabilities, 
sensory disabilities, blindness or deafness, or developmental disabilities? What exactly 
defines being an able body, is that you could be in perfect physical health but have a 
severe mental health condition or a severe developmental disability.  
Especially in the Northern part of the state, people still discriminate and are not going to 
get hired if they know that a person has a mental health condition or something like that. 
A friend of mine was working and was only getting 30 dollars in food stamps and all of 
her paychecks from work went to bills. I ask, how does it make sense to only give 
someone 30 dollars a month for food when all their paychecks are going to rent and 
bills? I think that they need to look at the wording and have a little bit of common sense 
because the way they're wording is not logical and I’m confused.  
It doesn't make sense because if someone has a child and yes, they might need to go 
to work, but if they work or if they still can't afford daycare? Or what if they're paying for 
their parents or family member who they can't leave alone and for whatever reason 
aren’t getting services?  
There are so many different variables going on, look at things case by case. 
It's important to emphasize because this needs to be clearly defined, exactly who is 
able-bodied and who isn't, and every case is different, and a person may be in perfect 
physical health but could have a severe mental health condition or some type of 
developmental disability prevents them from working. It's also extremely difficult for 
people with developmental disabilities or mental health conditions to find jobs, even if 
they don't have physical limitations. 
It will help to review cases individually and not just Oh well, there's something wrong 
with you physically. It will make sure that people are getting what they need and they're 
determining whether each person is able to work or not and it will be fair. If the bill 
passes, it could mean that people who need their benefits could lose them, or that 
people who can't find jobs will have nothing.  
Just to reiterate that every case is different, and each individual case needs to be 
reviewed. l will be available to answer questions in person by phone or email.  
Sincerely, 
Nicole Easler 
Presque Isle, ME  
easlernicole@gmail.com  
 
