LD 1741
An Act to Promote Educational Opportunity Through the
Educational Choice Tax Credit Program, Eliminating Certain
Restrictions on Charter Schools and Virtual Public Charter
Schools, Allowing More Entities to Authorize Charter Schools and
Clarifying Educational Policy on Immunization Requirements 
Presented by Representative BAGSHAW of Windham. 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs,
My name is Abigail Beal of Cherryfield.  I ask you to either amend or oppose LD 1741. 
I wholeheartedly believe in vaccine exemptions.  Actually,  I believe we should have the freedom to 
accept or reject vaccines without even having to beg for an exemption at all.  
But I strongly oppose the idea of government funding for private schools and homeschools.  
I realize that some of our great allies in the legislature have put forth these bills probably in an effort to 
try to help homeschoolers.  Because some say, “Well, we're paying taxes, so we might as well profit 
from it.  It just isn't fair for us to have to pay for our own children's education as well as the 
indoctrination of public school students.” 
I agree. I know this whole system is wrong, and I don't like it.  Life isn't fair, and it never will be.  But 
life really isn't about fairness at all.  Rather, it's about right and wrong and how to get in the right lane 
and stay there.
So if you want what's right for Maine homeschool families, I'm asking you to please consider that two 
wrongs don't make a right.  If government funding for education is wrong, it's wrong across the board.
  The solution is not to subsidize all students.  The solution is to get the government out of education 
and let families keep their hard-earned money so they can better afford to pay for their own children's 
education.
Previous generations have fought and sacrificed so much to secure the homeschool freedoms we now 
enjoy.  They did that for us.  So if we're concerned about protecting freedom, we have to stay away 
from government money, school vouchers, and any other forms of government hand-outs for the sake 
of remaining free individuals, families, and homeschoolers.
We must stand up, make the sacrifice, and refuse government money because – I repeat – government 
money always comes with government control.
It is for these reasons and many more that I respectfully urge you to oppose LD 1741.  Thank you for 
your time.
