1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Hearing Date: May 25, 2023, at 2:00pm  
  
LD 1920 – “An Act to Authorize a Supplemental Benefit Relief Payment” 
 
 
 Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and members of the Appropriations 
and Financial Affairs Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, 
Associate Commissioner for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and 
Financial Services.  I am providing testimony at the request of the Administration 
Against LD 1920, “An Act to Authorize a Supplemental Benefit Relief Payment.” 
The bill proposes to establish the Supplemental Benefit Payment Program 
(“Supplemental Relief”) to distribute relief payments to help Maine residents 
combat rising costs due to pandemic-induced inflation and supply chain effects and 
to offset some of the expenses that have been incurred as a result of high winter 
energy costs.  The one-time Supplemental Relief payment is equal to $1,300 for 
eligible Maine residents that did not receive a relief payment under the COVID 
Pandemic Relief Payment Program (“COVID Relief”) established by Public Law 
2021, chapter 635, Part L, section 3 or the Winter Energy Relief Payment Program 
(“Winter Energy Relief”) established by Public Law 2023, chapter 1, Part B, 
section 3.  
The Supplemental Relief program mirrors the previous COVID Relief and 
the Winter Energy Relief programs, except it is based on tax year 2022 income tax 
return instead of 2021 returns. 
2 
 The Maine income tax is scheduled to transition to a new computer system, 
“STARS,” on October 9th.  This transition is one of the most important that Maine 
Revenue Services will be administering due to the large number of taxpayers filing 
and paying Maine income taxes and the large amount of revenue at stake.   
The period of October through December is a key part of this transition and 
necessary to ensure the system is ready for the upcoming filing season beginning in 
January or February.  This bill would require MRS to implement a new round of 
checks, including developing new computer programming based on the STARS 
system, at the same time the income tax transition is taking place.  Administration 
of these checks is staff intensive and would likely pull staff resources away from 
the income tax transition during this crucial time period.  This subjects the 
transition to substantial risk of delay, which extends similar risks and 
administrative burdens onto the upcoming income tax filing season.  Thus, we are 
strongly cautioning the Committee against LD 1920. 
  
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is not currently available. 
The estimated administrative costs are being reviewed to determine the one-
time computer programming required to verify that taxpayers did not receive a 
COVID Relief or Winter Energy Relief payment, and printing and mailing costs 
for Supplemental Relief payments. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions.  
