Nicole Grohoski P.O. Box 1732 
Senator, District 7 Ellsworth, ME 04605 '";§1‘§j;‘; ll 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Nicole Grohoski 
In Support of LD 1920, “An Act to Authorize a Supplemental Beneﬁt Relief Payment” 
Before the Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
25 May 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Rotundo, Representative Sachs, and esteemed members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Appropriations and Financial Affairs. My name is Nicole Grohoski, and 
I have the honor of serving the 22 coastal towns and island communities that make up Senate 
District 7. Today, I am pleased to introduce LD 1920, “An Act to Authorize a Supplemental 
Beneﬁt Relief Payment. ” 
In 2022, this legislative body voted to send relief checks to hundreds of thousands of Mainers, 
intended to offset the surge in costs due to inﬂation and supply chain issues. Earlier this year, we 
sent another round of relief checks. Both were based on 2021 income for returns ﬁled by October 
31, 2022. Since then, I have heard from numerous constituents about eligibility issues and 
complications they’ve faced regarding relief checks. 
The bill before you would create a process for the State to retroactively deliver relief checks for 
Mainers who slipped through the cracks of the COVID Pandemic Relief Payment Program or the 
Winter Energy Relief Payment Program. Put simply, this bill provides a supplemental beneﬁt 
relief payment to eligible residents who did not receive a relief payment because they had not 
met the residency requirement in 2021 but who were full residents in 2022, or who were not able 
to ﬁle a tax return in time. 
I’d like to highlight some constituents of mine who dealt with ﬂaws in how these relief checks 
were distributed. For example, Woody and his partner, both from Blue Hill, met the basic income 
requirements to be eligible for these relief checks. However they moved to our great state 
partway through 2021, and weren’t considered full time residents under the requirements. Since 
moving, they’ve been active members of the Blue Hill community, and deserve the ﬁnancial 
relief as they faced the same rise in costs as their neighbors in the years in which the checks 
actually arrived, although they weren’t eligible for the same relief as their neighbors. 
Another couple from Orland in their 80s faced similar struggles when trying to receive their 
relief checks. They ﬁled their taxes on time with a preparer. While investigating why they had 
3 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 
State House (207) Z87-1515 * Fax (207) 287-1585 * Toll Free l-800-423-6900 * TTY7ll 
Nicole.Gr0hoski@legislature.maine.gov * legislature.maine.g0v/senate
not received checks, they leamed that their ﬁling had not gone through. Therefore, they are 
ineligible for these checks, by no fault of their own, at a time when the ﬁnancial assistance 
would be helpful. 
I have another constituent who is a retired IRS agent. Due to a one-time inheritance, he and his 
wife were ineligible for these checks despite that their income is well below the eligibility 
thresholds in other tax years, including those in which the checks were received. This constituent 
explained to me that the federal relief check program included a lookback provision — meaning, 
if you were ineligible based on your income, the IRS would review if you would be eligible 
based on your next year ’s income, and if yes, send a check. This bill is not drafted exactly that 
way, but that is something I hope I could address through an amendment. 
I am sure that many members of this body have received similar calls from constituents 
wondering if there was any way to receive these relief checks retroactively, as the need is still 
great. It is my hope, to Work with this committee, and legislators on both sides of the aisle, to 
authorize a legislative ﬁx that delivers relief to those who were eligible and those who fell 
outside the requirements, unbeknownst to them at the time. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
