Senator Brenner, Repr esentaƟve Gramlich, and esteemed members of the commiƩee on Environment 
and Natural Resources.  
My name is Alex de Koning, and I am part owner, and CEO of Hollander and deKoning Shellﬁsh Farms in 
Bar Harbor Maine which employs over 15 people. I moved to the US at 14 years old from the 
Netherlands where my family has been farming mussels since the 1770’s, I graduated from Umaine with 
an engineering degree and at age 21 I became a US ciƟzen. I provide te sƟmony to you today urging you 
to vote Ought Not To Pass on LD 508.  
While as a shellﬁsh farm this bill would not impact me directly, the indirect impacts are very real and 
concerning. As a shellﬁsh farmer our animals clean the water by feeding, which mean s my enƟre family’s 
livelihood is dependent on clean waters and a healthy marine ecosystem. The biggest challenge our farm 
has faced in the last decade is the decrease in seed recruitment driven by the increase in green crab 
which love our rapidly warming waters. We decided over 5 years ago that we could no longer rely on 
wild inter Ɵdal seed se Ʃlement events to supply our farms, so a Ōer much research and communica Ɵon 
with our European colleges we seƩled on a system that would provide  for our farms seed needs today 
and in the future. In 2019 I submi Ʃed my ﬁnal lease applica Ɵon to apply for a site to house this passive 
seed colle cƟng network. That was in 2019, and even being a non-discharge system we have s Ɵll not 
received a decision . This is because the leasing regula Ɵons for aquaculture are strong , and strict. In fact 
the regula Ɵons surrounding discharge from a net pen farm and a lan d based farm are the same.  
I am against this proposal because it will absorb an unreason able amount of Ɵme from DMR and DEP 
staﬀ to man the study, and educate the variety of stakeholders regarding what the current regulaƟons 
are. As an industry that’ s growing environmentally restora Ɵve food in a changing ecosystem we cant 
aﬀord that delay, nor is it a good use of public resources. The root of this proposal is the American 
Aquafarms project which failed very early into the process with the DMR.  
That project is pointed at as an example of the rules failing us, when in fact it’ s a fantas Ɵc example of the 
rules doing their job and preven Ɵng a bad proposal. There were numerous criteria within the leasing 
regulaƟons that par Ɵcular farm would have failed, however they didn’t even make it to the point of 
having a complete applica Ɵon to evaluate.  
Lastly, the makeup of this commiƩee seems to presuppose a decision. We are discussing regula Ɵng net 
pen ﬁnﬁsh, yet there is no member of the net pen ﬁn ﬁsh industry on the commiƩee. Out of 17 
members there is one member fr om a trade organiza Ɵon, and one “small aquaculture” member which 
precludes the company farming ﬁsh in Maine. There are two non-proﬁt organizaƟon spots, two wild 
harvesters (three if you count the lobster industry rep in there), and yet only one seat set aside for 
aquaculture. Th is is like discussing solar regula Ɵons on a board where  there is no seat at the table for a 
solar project developer, and instead saying we have it covered by including a seat for a person with 
rooŌop solar on their house.  
Maine’s aquaculture regula Ɵons are strong, and an inspiraƟon to other states. Please let us fulﬁll the 
promise of low impact food produc Ɵon without ge ƫng further wrapped up in red tape.  
Thank you.  
 
