Andy Spalding
Freeportr
LD 508
Good afternoon, Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich - and the members of the 
joint standing committee on the Environment and Natural Resources Committee.
My Name is Andy Spalding and I writing this testimony for your consideration as I 
am away this week from Maine. I am a lobsterman from Freeport, and I support the 
passage of LD 508 and here is why - 
I come from the point of a commercial lobster fisherman, as well as multigenerational
islander, harbor master, and holder of a Bachelors Degree in Human Ecology from the
College of the Atlantic, I strongly oppose any fin fish aquaculture operations off the 
coast of Maine.
The Maine lobster industry in recent years has been inundated new federal regulations
aimed at protecting the North Atlantic right whale. The claim from the federal 
regulators is that the Gulf of Maine is critical habitat for right whales. Large scale 
industrial aquaculture in critical habitat of an endangered species cannot be allowed, 
as any adverse effects from such operations on the health of right whale population 
would immediately be used to further implement more regulations on wild fisheries. 
At a time when we are desperate to grow the right whale population, why would ever 
introduce more hazards and obstacles into their recovery?
The waste that is produced from fish farm operations would end up in prime lobster 
habitat. The lobster pollution is already facing pressures related to warming waters, 
reduced juvenile settlement, and increased predation from predatory fish such as 
black sea bass. Building fish pens that would pollute the surrounding areas would 
only create new hazards to the health of the lobster population. 
Maine lobster fishermen is also facing the loss fishing grounds due to seasonal 
closures for migrating right whales, and in the near future, the construction of 
offshore windmills. Losing more area to industry scale aquaculture would add to the 
already significant challenges the lobster industry.
Andy Spalding
Freeport
Email: roguewave9840@yahoo.com

