Antonia Small
PORT CLYDE
LD 508
John Cotton + Antonia Small
ICE HOUSE OYSTERS
Port Clyde, ME
04855
April 17, 2023
Dear Distinguished Members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee,
We are writing today in OPPOSITION to LD 508. 
We own a small, relatively new, oyster farm in Port Clyde, Maine. We would like to 
add our voices to the rejection that the current environmental permitting system is 
somehow insufficient or broken, or that yet another “working group” needs to look at 
reforming the way leases for aquaculture are approved - with too little representation 
from the aquaculture industry. We have found the current leasing system to be 
thorough, rigorous, yet supportive of folks looking to earn a living on the coast of 
Maine. 
Over the last 30 years we have had 24 studies on aquaculture in the state, most of 
those have focused on aquaculture development and regulation. Many of these studies
have come as a result of political pressure from groups opposed to aquaculture and 
working waterfronts. Often, they have been driven by controversial lease applications 
and the fact that opponents do not believe the existing leasing system guarantees a 
denial of that specific lease in their “backyard.” This proposal is no different and is 
driven by the American Aquafarms proposal in Frenchman Bay. The existing 
regulatory system would have ensured that proposal got a fair hearing and would 
likely have not been not approved because the Maine system and criteria are some of 
the strictest in the world. We do not need to “adjust” the existing system to ensure 
“bad” proposals don’t make it through the existing system, they won’t. That’s why the
Maine regulatory system is viewed as a gold standard and why regulators come from 
all over the world to learn more about how Maine manages aquaculture.
Currently aquaculture operations on land and in marine waters are held to the same 
high regulatory standards with respect to discharges into aquatic environments. In 
addition, aquaculture operations in marine waters are held to higher standards than 
those on land with respect to conflicts with other users, impacts on navigation, ability 
to finance a project, and impacts on surrounding wildlife habitat and recreational uses.
Imposing land use standards on marine leases may actually decrease the stringency of 
regulatory oversight and force agencies to use standards not designed for or effective 
in aquatic ecosystems.
The bill directs the DEP to consider whether on-water aquaculture should be subject 
to the same or similar regulatory regime as land-based aquaculture. Marine and 
terrestrial ecosystems are different. Current land use and marine resource 
management methods acknowledge those differences and use tools that are designed 
to be effective in fundamentally different types of ecosystems. Trying to impose land 
management methods on aquatic ecosystems makes no sense and may result in 
serious unintended ecological and social impacts.
The bill will require that three state agencies commit significant resources and staff 
time to produce yet another study. Study commissions take tax dollars and divert 
agency resources away from their regulatory responsibilities. We are concerned that 
the agencies will not be able to enforce existing regulations while diverting resources 
to staff a study that is politically motivated but will not result in substantive 
improvements to existing regulatory systems.
We support the current efforts of the Department of Marine Resources (add resources 
here!), the Maine Aquaculture Association (and here!), and all of those who have 
gone before us developing the aquaculture industry here in Maine. The constructive 
solutions are inherent in the current process as it stands today. Please take care in 
creating more barriers to an industry we’ll need to feed our people, and protect our 
planet, in the 21st century.
Sincerely,
Antonia Small + John E. Cotton
hello@icehouseoysters.com

