Testimony in favor of LD 508 A Resolve Directing the Department of Environmental 
Protection to Review Its Environmental Permitting Laws 
April 20, 2023 - 
Good Afternoon Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. 
My name is Bailey Bowden and I am a resident of the town of Penobscot. 
I appear today to voice my support for LD 508 A Resolve Directing the Department of 
Environmental Protection to Review Its Environmental Permitting Laws. 
To the best of my knowledge, most of the laws governing site location of development listed 
under Chapter 3, Subchapter 1, Article 6 were written over ten years ago. The laws that 
speciﬁcally mention aquaculture were written in 2007‘ - over ﬁfteen years ago. 
Much has changed within the aquaculture industry in the past ﬁfteen years. The promotion of 
aquaculture by the Department of Marine Resources has led to gold rush mentality creating a 
rapid expansion of the industry. According to the DMR website there are 80 lease applications 
that are deemed complete. The maximum allowable acreage that one person or entity can lease 
has expanded from 100 acres to 1000 acres. 
Today, large scale ﬁn ﬁsh aquaculture operations are facing intense examination of their eﬂ' ect 
on marine ecosystems. The entire west coast of the United States, including Alaska, have barmed 
net pen farming of ﬁsh in the ocean as have Argentina and Denmark, yet Maine is welcoming 
these industrial scale ﬁsh farms with open arms. 
With the passing of time and the increase in the acreage under lease, I believe that it would be 
prudent to examine the accumulative eﬂ' ect that aquaculture is having on the marine environment 
and to review the laws regarding where such projects are located. 
I respectfully request that you to vote “ought to pass “ on LD 508. 
Thank you for your time in considering this resolve and would be happy to answer any questions 
that you may have. 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Penobscot, Maine
