 
State peddling coastal towns to fish farms 
without local officials' knowledge 
 
LINCOLN MILLSTEIN  
JAN 7, 2023 
22 
 
MOUNT DESERT, Dec. 7, 2022 - The State of Maine is shopping its coastal 
towns to industrial fish farms, without the knowledge of local officials. 
In one case the state Department of Economic and Community Development 
began assisting a company in July without even knowing its identity, working 
only through a Seattle broker. After several months of email exchanges and at 
least one meeting with the broker, the state recommended sites in Searsport, 
Bucksport, Eastport and Wiscasset. 
Here is a copy of the  state recommendation  obtained by the QSJ.  
The town manager in Searsport was surprised to learn of the news when told by 
the QSJ. He said he would have told the state Nordic Aquafarms had considered 
Searsport and deemed it inappropriate for its land-based salmon farm and 
moved to Belfast. 
Richard Rotella, director of community and economic development in 
Bucksport, was also kept in the dark. The site the state recommended in 
Buckport is next to another land-based fish farm owned by Whole Oceans, 
which has obtained all the necessary state and town permits but has yet to begin 
construction, leading to speculation about its financial wherewithal. 
“Maybe they know something I don’t,” Rotella said. 

 
 
 
He said he would have told the state siting two fish farms next to each other 
would not be a good idea. 
“I don't think it's even possible, and good luck to two companies trying to find 
500 employees each.” 
(Companies often exaggerated employee numbers to get the state’s attention - 
and free work. This time it worked.) 
The state’s knowledge about the sites seemed tenuous at best. In Wiscasset, it 
recommended the broker contact a regional authority about a property on 
Sheepscot River. 
 

 
 
But the person listed as the contact, Mary Ellen Barnes of the Lincoln County 
Regional Planning Board, stated in an email she knew nothing about the 
proposal. 
“Our organization has worked for years with the Town of Wiscasset on 
brownfields assessments and a clean-up grant for town-owned parcels on the 
larger site. The building -- circled in the illustration -- is privately-owned and 
we don't represent them. Apologies for this error. If I could speak on the owner's 
behalf, I would. But I'm not in a position to.  
“I've been in touch with DECD about this mix-up.” 
Despite the misinformation, the state continued. On Aug. 10, 2022, Charlotte 
Mace, the state’s director of business development, wrote this email obtained by 
the QSJ to Divya Kapuria of Heartland LLC, the Seattle broker: 
“In addition to the sites/communities listed in the attached presentation, 
please let us know if there are others you are interested in and we can 
facilitate communications and gather data you need.” 

On Oct. 6, 2022, Heartland LLC upped the ante and essentially asked to put 
every town on the coast into play. Kapuria wrote: 
“Towns you suggested, Wiscasset, Searsport, and Bucksport do not have 
access to the kind of water depths we need. 
“We have had a chance to use GIS to filter some sites and areas along the 
coast of Maine that fit some of our criteria. Please see below cities/towns we 
are currently investigating. 
For your reference, we have been developing our site characteristics list of the 
proposed project. Please see below: 
• 40-50 acres of Land, could be assembled 
• Proximity (within 3km) to ~50m water depths, closer the better 
• Access to Sea Water, ideally on the coast 
• Access to high power of 36MW 
• Relatively flat 
• Water temperature for operations: 12-14°C 
• Level of production: 36,000 metric ton live weight capacity per year for 
total facility. 
• Salmon Species: Atlantic Salmon 
• System: Hybrid Flow-Through 2/3 recirculation and 1/3 new seawater 
• Jobs: 
• Construction Jobs: ~500 jobs during full buildout 
• Permanent Jobs: ~300 at full operation 
The towns listed were: 
• Pleasant Point 
• Perry 
• Eastport 
• Lubec 
• Trescott Twp 
• Cutler 
• Machiasport 
• Steuben 
• Gouldsboro 
• Winter Harbor 
• Sorrento 
• Hancock 
• Bar Harbor 
• Lamoine 
• Trenton 
• Surry 
• Mount Desert 
• Blue Hill 
• Brooklin 
• Tremont 
• Southwest Harbor 
• Deer Isle 
• Stonington 
• Sedgwick 
• Brooksville 
• Castine 
• Stockton Springs 
• Searsport 
• Northport 
• Lincolnville 
• Camden 
• Rockport 
• Owls Head 
• South Thomaston 
• Saint George 
• Cushing 
• Friendship 
• Bristol 
• South Bristol 
• Boothbay 
• Boothbay Harbor 
• Southport 
• Georgetown 
• Phippsburg 
• Harpswell 
• Cape Elizabeth 
• Biddeford 
Then the company asked the state for political assistance: 
“I have read that there is some pushback and moratoriums on land-based 
aquaculture use. Which towns from the list above are in support of land-based 
aquaculture use? Are there any other towns that I should consider that might 
embrace this use that are not on the list? 
“Overall, I am searching for local contacts at town and county level via the 
internet. I will reach out if there is a particularly interesting site that I can’t 
find any local contact for. The current hurdle for some sites is zoning. 
Aquaculture is a planning board approved use in most towns. Is there any 
flexibility to rezone Shoreland Zoning?” Kapuria wrote. 
In response, Charlotte Mace referred the matter to Maine & Co., the state’s 
unofficial marketing arm which receives state funding and whose board 
members include the state’s economic development commissioner: 
“Maine & Co. specializes in high-end economic development work, 
including site selection for the marine economy and land-based aquaculture 
sectors. So I have cc-ed Peter DelGreco and Ashley Pringle of Maine & Co. 
on this email.” 
The state appeared not to have learned previous lessons. 
On April 23, 2022, the QSJ wrote this 
article, https://theqsjournal.substack.com/p/how-a-norwegian-felon-managed-to , 
on how Peter DelGrego gave American Aquafarms the white glove treatment 
before learning six months later the founder and CEO had spent more than two 
years in a Norwegian prison. Last summer his assets were seized by a 
Norwegian court after an investor accused him of fraud in new charges. 
Does the state have any rules of engagement or protocols to safeguard its 
interests before blindly expending taxpayers’ money to cater to unidentified 
companies? Is there a minimum financial test, for instance? 
The QSJ contacted Charlotte Mace on Wednesday. She said she would have 
someone from the commissioner’s office respond to my questions by the end of 
the week. No one responded. Nor did Divya Kapuria. 
The state is working in its parallel universe at the same time existing fish farm 
initiatives are struggling to gain traction in Down East Coastal Maine. 
One company, Kingfish Company announced a new CEO this week to rescue a 
free-falling stock on the Norwegian stock exchange. 
Under the previous CEO, Ohad Maiman, son of one of the richest man in Israel, 
the company was ranked at the bottom quartile of performers for the fourth 
quarter of 2022; a percentile ranking of 10.3 out of 337 companies listed on the 
Oslo Bors Stock Exchange, according to published reports. The share price 
crashed by 18.66 percent in the forth quarter of 2022 to close at 9.68 
(Norwegina Krone) on Dec. 30. 
Maiman resigned in October. 
But he was able to woo Maine DECD Commissioner Heather Johnson and win 
state approvals for a yellow tail land-based farm in Jonesport before his 
departure. The new CEO’s job is to raise money for that plant. 
In Belfast, Nordic is fighting a Supreme Court appeal charging it did not have 
the necessary legal easements to run its pipes over tidal land. On July 6, the 
company abruptly changed leadership. Founder and USA CEO Erik Heim, the 
visionary behind the land-based farm, was replaced by Brenda Chandler, a 
Mainer who has served as chief financial officer of the USA subsidiary for the 
past three and a half years. 
Heim announced on Facebook he and his wife, Executive Vice President 
Marianne Naess left the business. “It has been eight years since I founded the 
beginning of Nordic Aquafarms in our living room in Norway — a company to 
become one of the most profiled RAS [recirculating aquaculture system] 
companies in the world,” Heim wrote. “We were a pioneer in Norway on 
commercial salmon RAS.” 
The one thing Whole Oceans, Nordic and Kingfish share in common: They all 
convinced the state to hand them operating permits which is their only currency 
at this point. 
 
carrie peabody
Jonesport
LD 508
This info was part of testimony, file got dropped during submission.
Q: Why is Maine & Co assisting Aquaculture companies with choosing aquaculture 
sites and using taxpayer money to offer benefit programs and incentives? How is this 
activity part related to the permitting process?
MAINE & CO  Home Page - Maine & Co. (maineco.org)
Executive Board & Members of the Corporation
Executive Board & Members of the Corporation
Bangor Savings Bank – Robert Montgomery-Rice President & Chief Executive 
Officer 
Bernstein Shur – Tony Perkins Shareholder
The Boulos Company – Drew Sigfridson Managing Director, Brokerage Services
Central Maine Power Company – Joseph Purington President & Chief Executive 
Officer
Cianbro Corporation – Peter G. Vigue Chairman  – VICE CHAIRMAN OF THE 
BOARD
Cross Insurance Agency – Royce Cross President
Dead River Company – Guy B. Langevin Vice President & Chief Administrative 
Officer – CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD
Maine Department of Economic & Community Development (DECD) – Heather 
Johnson Commissioner
Eaton Peabody – David Austin Managing Partner
Finance Authority of Maine (FAME) – Carlos Mello (interim) Chief Executive 
Officer
Firefly Health – Fay Rotenberg Chief Executive Officer
Gorrill Palmer – Alton Palmer President and Principal
Haley Ward – Travis Noyes Chief Operating Officer and Executive Vice President
Included Health – Meryl Fogg Vice President, Member Care 
Key Bank N.A. – Colin March Commercial Sales Leader
Maine Employers’ Mutual Insurance Company (MEMIC) – Catherine Duranceau 
Vice President of Underwriting
MaineHealth – Andrew Mueller, M.D. Chief Executive Officer
Maine State Chamber of Commerce – Julia Munsey President
Maine Technology Institute – Brian Whitney President
Pierce Atwood LLP – David Barry Managing Partner
Ransom Consulting – Elizabeth M. Ransom, P.G. Vice President/Technical Leader – 
Planning & Permitting
The Roux Institute at Northeastern University – Margaret Angell Head of 
Partnerships & Operations
SMRT Architects & Engineers – Ellen Belknap Principal, President – TREASURER 
OF THE BOARD 
Sun Life Financial – Anthony Clurman VP, Strategic Initiatives
TD Bank – Larry Wold State President
Unitil Service Corp. – Cindy Carroll Director, Customer Energy Solutions
University of Maine, Orono – Dr. Joan Ferrini-Mundy, Ph.D. President
University of Maine System – Hon. Dannel Malloy Chancellor
University of New England – Dr. James Herbert President
Unum U.S. – Timothy Smith Vice President, Chief Privacy Officer
Verrill – Scott Anderson Managing Partner
Versant Power – John Flynn President
Wipfli LLP – Graham M. Smith, CPA, CGMA Partner
Members of the Corporation
Bangor Chamber of Commerce
Greater Portland Regional Chamber
Lewiston – Auburn Metro Chamber of Commerce
Kennebec Valley Chamber of Commerce 
Maine International Trade Center 
Manufacturers Association of Maine 
MidMaine Chamber of Commerce 
Sebasticook Valley Chamber of Commerce 
Skowhegan Chamber of Commerce 
Southern Midcoast Maine Chamber 
