 
How a Norwegian felon managed to get a 
white -glove welcome from the State of Maine  
Other news: DMR tells Gouldsboro to stand down; SWH residents start recycling  
 
LINCOLN MILLSTEIN  
APR 23, 2022  
 
SOMESVILLE, April 23, 2022 - The rejection of the salmon farm in 
Frenchman Bay by the state has folks cheering, but others are asking how the 
application got as far as it did.  
Maine has erected a huge “welcome” sign in flashing neon for aquaculture 
industries from around the world to come here. But is it equipped to vet them all 
properly and fully? Are the regulatory resources designed for the volume of 
activity 30 years ago still suitable for today’s demand?  
The state Department of Marine Resources recently pitched the legislature to 
enact a “special fee” of $250,000 to handle applications like that of Amer ican 
Aquafarms. It was an admission that such complicated applications were over -
taxing its staff. But it was also accompanied with an asterick - to give the 
commissioner overriding powers. The proposal was rejected.  
But the problem remains, as well as the politics, the egos and the power plays.  
How does Maine recruit aquaculture businesses and regulate them at the same 
time?  
Maine & Co., a taxpayer -supported chamber of commerce -like non -profit which 
is the state’s unofficial marketing agency, is Maine’s br ight neon beacon for 
attracting outside investment. It’s the centerpiece of Maine’s efforts to lure 

industrial- scale aquaculture companies. Read its s ervice agreement with the 
state.  
“So what we do is we introduce people to resources that they'll be needing. 
When someone comes here, they're going to need a law firm. They're going to 
need an accounting firm. They're going to need a bank,” said Maine & Co. 
President Peter Del Greco in an interview.  
Maine & Co. also introduces them to government officials and insiders.  
In March 2020, American Aquafarms struck up a relationship with Maine & Co.  
Norwegian Mikael Roenes, founder of AA and a convicted felon who spent 
more than two years in prison in Norway, made his first contact with the state 
on April 6, 2020, weeks after he began to be coached by Maine & Co.  
In a letter to the administrator of the the Pine Tree Develop ment Zone Program, 
which reduces, or virtually eliminates, state taxes for up to 10 years for 
businesses that create jobs, Roenes stated he would create 60 jobs paying an 
average $55,000.  
 
 
Mikael Roenes  
When they connected, Del Greco had little information about Roenes, except 
from a few Google and Linked- in searches. That’s not what Maine pays Maine 
& Co. to do. Del Greco’s job is to build that waterfall of incoming inquiries, and 
he does his job well.  
So whose job is it that Maine is assured these companies are the sort which will 
be good corporate citizens?  
When a national company comes “with their Boston- based lawyers and bankers, 
it doesn’t always end well,” Del Greco said. “So, we'll set it up … here are four 
or five different (local) groups that do a good job, and feel free to work with 
them.”  

By the fall of 2020, American Aquafarms had engaged the largest law firm in 
Maine, Bernstein Shur, one of the state’s top marine engineering firms, Ransom 
Cons ulting, and construction giant Cianbro - all paying members of Maine & 
Co. and members of its board, a potpourri of the state’s blue chip 
firms. https://maineco.org/about- u s/executive -board -members -of-the-
corporation/   
Del Greco said his principal sour ce of revenue is from members who pay to 
play. They are not just donating to a non- profit. 
Maine & Co. stated on its website that it “coordinates in -state site visits with 
local public and private sector representatives for the purpose of evaluating 
busine ss location opportunities and addressing technical questions about doing 
business in Maine.”  
Through its well- connected law firm, AA was able to gain access inside the 
state agencies which regulate aquaculture, access it would have had difficulty 
getting on its own. Emails obtained through the Freedom of Access Act shows 
this dynamic.   
The first is a Bernstein Shur request to the state director of aquaculture in which 
the lawyer sought help for site location of the salmon farms from the very 
regulator who would issue the permit.  
From: Mary E. Costigan  
Sent: Tuesday, June 16, 2020 4:49 PM  
To: Nelson, Marcy  
Subject: Norwegian Salmon Farmers Interested in Maine  
Hi Marcy:  
I have clients from Norway interested in bringing closed- pen finfish 
aquaculture to Maine. They have looked at a few potential lease locations and 
would like to meet with you (virtually) to discuss their technology and to 
see if you have any insight into the potential sites they are looking at. I 
have my own insight into a few locations, but it’s a little dated (although I 
do see that the Swansons are still in Blue Hill Bay). They also plan to open 
a processing facility and hatchery should they obtain a lease, so they are 
looking to make a significant investment in Maine.  
Mary 
Nelson forwarded the email to the deputy commissioner of the DMR, Meredith 
Mendelson, who then wrote to the deputy commissioner of economic 
development.  
From: Mendelson, Meredith  
Sent: Wednesday, June 17, 2020 8:59 AM  
To: Garland, Denise  
Subject: FW: Norwegian Salmon Farmers Interested in Maine  
Hi Denise, Just touching base to see if you’ve heard any rumors of a 
Norwegian company interested in coming to Maine for marine- based aquaculture?  
From: Garland, Denise  
Sent: Wednesday, June 17, 2020 9:43 AM  
Garland answered:  
To: Mendelson, Meredith  
Subject: RE: Norwegian Salmon Farmers Interested in Maine  
Hi Meredith,  
Yes, we are aware of a Norwegian Company who is looking to do “closed pen” 
ocean aquaculture. I believe they are looking to harvest Salmon and maybe 
Cod. DECD hasn’t been involved but they are working with Maine & Company. The 
Norwegian Company is planning to make a multi- million dollar investment. They 
have taken steps to hire Consultants and folks on the ground in Maine. From 
what I hear, they do not have a site designated and are just exploring.  
I’d love to hear if you find out more.  
Thanks Denise  
Seven minutes later.  
From: Mendelson, Meredith  
Sent: Wednesday, June 17, 2020 9:50 AM To: Garland, Denise  
Subject: RE: Norwegian Salmon Farmers Interested in Maine  
Good to know they are working with others as well. Thanks, Denise. Will 
definitely keep you in the loop as we learn more. Would you like me to 
suggest they reach out to you (or someone else at DECD) as well?  
Finally.  
From: Garland, Denise  
Sent: Wednesday, June 17, 2020 9:53 AM  
To: Mendelson, Meredith  
Subject: RE: Norwegian Salmon Farmers Interested in Maine  
Thanks Meredith. Yes, probably will be me. Thanks  
Denise  
Garland’s boss, Maine Economic Development Commissioner Heather Johnson 
is also a board member of Maine & Co.  
So connecting all the dots:  
Maine & Co. begins to assist American Aquafarms in March 2020 and 
introduces AA to its members, including a law firm, an engineering firm and a 
construction company. The law firm then seeks help from the Maine regulator 
which issues licenses and permits for aquaculture - the email to Marcy Nelson, 
director of aquaculture for her help to site the salmon farms. The regulator then 
seeks help from the state agency which recruits companies and sits of the board 
of Maine & Co.  
Ten days after her first email the Bernstein Shur lawyer writes another email to 
Peter Del Greco in which the question of actual aquaculture policy being 
considered by the state is raised. Del Greco tried to help.  
From: Mary Costigan  
Date: Friday, June 26, 2020 at 12:02 PM  
To: Peter DelGreco, Ashley Pringle, apringle@maineco.org  
Subject: Economic Recovery Committee  
Hi all:  
You may already know this, but the Governor’s Economic Recovery Committee has 
a proposal that would create a virtual format for the aquaculture lease 
process. I understand it is being forwarded to the Governor. I don’t know any 
more specifics, but will let you know if I hear any more. This would likely 
address the current standstill in the review process.  
Mary 
From: Peter DelGreco  
Sent: Friday, June 26, 2020 12:12 PM  
To: McLaughlin, Phoenix, tax incentive manager, Maine economic development  
Subject: Fwd: Economic Recovery Committee  
Quick question: see below. Do you know anything about this proposal?  
Thanks! Peter  
McLaughlin, Phoenix to Peter DelGreco  
RE: Economic Recovery Committee  
Friday, June 26, 2020 12:15:29  
The Manufacturing and Natural Resources subcommittee discussed that as one of 
their likely recommendations at the full committee this morning. I don’t have 
more details since I’m not staffing that group, but I expect it will be 
circulated soon if it is one of their final recommendations for this “quick-
start” phase. I can let you know if it is indeed going forward.  
Mary Costigan did not return several of the QSJ’s request for an interview.  
The QSJ emailed DMR communications director Jeff Nichols numerous times 
for an opportunity to discuss these matters and did not get a reply.  
Del Gre co didn’t stop there. In an email to his board Oct. 13, 2020, obtained 
through FOAA, he arranged to introduce American Aquafarms to his board 
members at its meeting Oct. 20, 2022 when the governor was scheduled to 
attend.  
“We expect a presentation and discussion from a new aquaculture company 
establishing a significant operation in Maine. We have worked with the 
company since March and they are planning an investment north of $100 million 
in Gouldsboro.  
“The company will announce that they are using a revolutionary new closed pen 
system. As part of this announcement, there will be a discussion of their 
work with Maine partners like Maine Fair Trade Lobster, Ransom Consulting, 
and Cianbro, among others.  
“If both Governor Mills and the new company are available to join us on 
10/20, they will consume the majority of the time during the board meeting.”  
But that presentation never happened, Del Greco said.  
Around the same time, about six months after he started working with AA, Del 
Greco learned from an article sent to him that Mikael Roenes served more than 
two years in a Norwegian prison for fraud.  
“Did that change your relationship at all?” Del Greco was asked.  
“Yeah, it did. Because of what we learned, and when we learned it, w e stopped 
working with them. Frankly, they were going to need a much bigger 
organization than what I was. We're a three- person organization.  
“We really truly believe that what we're doing is good and important. And at the 
same time being a three- person non profit with you know, a fairly minimal 
budget.  
“Sometimes projects get beyond our scope and capabilities.”  
Maine & Co. was started under the Angus King administration to serve as the 
state’s marketing arm. In 2017- 18, it received a two -year service contract for 
$250,000 from the LePage administration. That was reduced during the Mills 
administration to about $70,000, Del Greco said.  
The QSJ emailed Gov. Janet Mills’s chief of staff, Jeremy Kennedy to ask if she 
knew that Mikael Roenes was a convicted felon.  He did not reply.  
How does Maine & Co. feel about being the point of the spear for the state with 
only a three -person staff?  
Is there a vetting process?  
“Not having access to sophisticated tools, we'll do our Google searches, we'll 
ask our networks. Do you know this person, stuff like that? A big part of what 
we do. I mean, in all honesty, is filter out projects because so many projects 
knock on our door and make fairly unrealistic claims and say, hey, you know, if 
the state can give me $50 million, I can create 120 jobs, right?  
“I'm like, great and if the State gave me $50 million, I could create 120 jobs.”  
FOOTNOTE: Last November, American Aquafarms named New  Bedford, 
Mass.- based  Blue Harvest Fisheries’ most recent CEO,  Keith Decker,  as 
its new top execut ive. Roenes said at the time it’s not unusual for founders to 
turn daily operations to a seasoned CEO.  
Two groups, Protect Maine’s Fishing Heritage Foundation and Frenchman Bay 
United, issued a joint statement when Roenes announced he was stepping down,  
“Regardless of who is CEO, the company can’t run from the fact that their 
proposal has no support because of its unproven technology, massive pollution, 
and threats to lobstering, tourism and small -scale aquaculture in and around 
Frenchman Bay.”  
 
Carrie Peabody
Jonesport, Maine
LD 508
Testimony for LD 508 presented in written format only.
Thank you for accepting my submission.
Carrie Peabody
Jonesport Maine
