 
 
 
STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC  
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
     JANET T. MILLS                                     HEATHER JOHNSON  
                                      GOVERNOR                                                                                                    COMMISSIONER  
 
59 STATE HOUSE STATION •AUGUSTA •MAINE •04333 -0059  
PHONE : (207)  624-9800 •FACSIMILE : (207)  287-2681    
WWW .MAINE .GOV/DECD  
 
March 5, 2021  
 
 
Commissioner Melanie Loyzim  
Maine Department of Environmental Protection  
17 State House Station  
28 Tyson Drive  
Augusta , ME 04 333-0017  
 
Dear Commissioner Loyzim:  
 
This letter provides  a Determination of Economic or Social Necessity  of the Kingfish project in 
Jonesport, Maine. This determination is required per  Maine DEP’s Water Discharge Program 
Guidance (6/13/2001) re: Antidegradation (item 10C under Antidegradation Procedures and 
Consideration).  
 
The Maine Department of Economic & Community Development (DECD) relied on  the 
following documents and data to perform  our determination:  
 
1. Economic and Fiscal Impacts of a Proposed Recirculating  Aquaculture Facility in 
Jonesport, Maine  prepare d by the Margaret Chase Smith Policy Center at the University 
of Maine  (July 2020) ; 
2. The Kingfish Company & Kingfish Maine’s But For Letter submitted to Maine DECD on 
December 22, 2020 (required for Kingfish to participate in Maine’s Pine Tree 
Development Z one tax incentive program) ; 
3. Economic conditions in Washington County, ME – specifically, federal economic 
distress criteria as measured by county  per capita income.  
 
 
 
STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC  
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
     JANET T. MILLS                                     HEATHER JOHNSON  
                                      GOVERNOR                                                                                                    COMMISSIONER  
 
59 STATE HOUSE STATION •AUGUSTA •MAINE •04333 -0059  
PHONE : (207)  624-9800 •FACSIMILE : (207)  287-2681    
WWW .MAINE .GOV/DECD  
4. University of Southern Maine’s Center for Business and Economic Research  letter dated 
March 2, 2021 re: economic impact estimates of capital investment and operations of a 
new aquaculture facility in coastal Maine . 
 
The following describes the specific information used from these documents and data to 
inform our determination:  
 
1. The University of Maine ’s Economic Impact Study for the Kingfish Jonesport project  
indicates that the planning and construction of the RAS facility (based on the 
investment of $108 million) will have an annual statewide economic impact of $44 
million and  366 full - and part -time jobs across Maine totaling $19 million in labor 
income (over two years of construction). During annual operations, the facility will 
have a statewide economic impact of $28 million per year and 129 full - and part -time 
jobs across M aine with $8.4 million in labor income in 2023. The economic impact is 
projected to increase annually. By 2026, the annual statewide economic impact from 
facility operations is expected to be $52 million with 155 full - and part -time jobs totaling 
$9.4 mill ion in labor income.  
 
2. Kingfish’s “But For” Letter of December 2020  submitted to Maine DECD indicates that 
the project will result in 100+ new full -time positions at the facility with an average 
annual wage of $60,000.  
 
3. DECD performed an economic  distress analysis for Washington County, Maine using 
the StatsAmerica website . The analysis was performed using the methods suggested by 
the U.S. Department of Commerce ’s Economic Develop ment Administration. The data 
gathered from StatsAmerica indicates that Washington County, ME meets the federal 
economic distress criteria per 13 CFR § 301.3. Specifically, Washington County, ME has 
a per capita income that is 80% or less than the national  average. The most recent data 
from StatsAmerica indicates that Washington County’s per capita income is $41,094, 
 
 
 
STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC  
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
     JANET T. MILLS                                     HEATHER JOHNSON  
                                      GOVERNOR                                                                                                    COMMISSIONER  
 
59 STATE HOUSE STATION •AUGUSTA •MAINE •04333 -0059  
PHONE : (207)  624-9800 •FACSIMILE : (207)  287-2681    
WWW .MAINE .GOV/DECD  
which is 72.7% of the national per capita income of $56,490.1 The per capita income data 
from StatsAmerica is  based on the 2019 U.S. Bureau of  Economic Analysis figures. As 
such, Washington County, ME meets the federal criteria for economic distress.  
 
4. USM CBER’s March 2, 2021 letter to Maine DECD  found that t he capital investment and 
operations of the Kingfish Jonesport facility will provide eco nomic benefits throughout 
the Maine economy, through indirect and induced spending . CBER’s analysis relied on 
data from the Maine Aquaculture Economic Impact Report  produced by the University of 
Maine’s Aquaculture Research Institute in 2017. The economic impact estimates of 
CBER’s letter included a total economic output of $64.4 million during the development 
and construction period and an annual  economic output of $25.7 million associated 
with facility operations.  
 
Based on the information above, Maine DE CD believes that the jobs created by the Kingfish 
project will be jobs that are well above the average per capita income for Washington County.  
This job creation will help to address the economic distress of Washington County, ME.  
 
Maine DECD  also finds  that the economic and social benefits associated with the Kingfish 
project include increases in employment, increases in local/regional income, increases in the 
community tax base, and improved community resiliency . These benefits are directly related 
to th e creation of jobs with higher per capita income than the County average as well as 
economic impacts during construction and annual facility operations.  
 
In summary, it is Maine DECD’s  determination that the economic benefits to Washington 
County and to t he State of Maine are significant and will create needed jobs and investment in 
rural Maine.  
 
 
1 StatsAmerica accessed 3/2/21. https://www.statsamerica.org/distress/distress.aspx  
 
 
 
STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC  
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
     JANET T. MILLS                                     HEATHER JOHNSON  
                                      GOVERNOR                                                                                                    COMMISSIONER  
 
59 STATE HOUSE STATION •AUGUSTA •MAINE •04333 -0059  
PHONE : (207)  624-9800 •FACSIMILE : (207)  287-2681    
WWW .MAINE .GOV/DECD  
I trust that this letter and its contents satisfy Maine DEP’s Antidegradation requirements 
specific to the Kingfish Jonesport project. Please do not hesitate to reach out to  me directly  if 
you have any questions.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Heather Johnson  
Commissioner  
 
 
 
Cc: Denise Garland, Deputy Commissioner, Maine DECD  
 Cindy Dionne , DEP  
 
 
 
 

carrie  peabody
Jonesport
LD 508
April 19, 2023
Dear Environmental and Natural Resources Committee, 
I am the wife of a fourth-generation fisherman whose livelihood is threatened by a 
recent decision to permit Kingfish Maine, a large open-RAS industrial-scale 
aquaculture company, to operate in Chandler Bay. The aquaculture industry poses an 
adverse risk to the future of lobstering in our community and to our pristine waters. I 
am concerned with the encroachment of aquaculture in our waters and how the 
industry will affect the future of coastal Maine communities and our environment.
The Town of Jonesport is known for it’s stringent Shoreland Zone and 
Land-Use/Development ordinances however during the review of the Kingfish 
permit, the Jonesport Planning Board altered existing standards approved by the 
citizens of Jonesport.  Agriculture was redefined to include aquaculture (a procedural 
flaw), less stringent water quality standards were adopted in lieu of more stringent 
standards, and zoning requirements were upended.  The stringent standards approved 
by the townspeople were bypassed to push the permit through, regardless.
As part of the Planning Board determination, the Kingfish operation must test water 
quality once/month from May-Oct. No testing will occur in the winter months and test
samples will not be inventoried.  The Planning Board interviewed water test experts 
that were chosen by Kingfish, which should be seen as a conflict of interest. 
Shouldn’t testing procedures require collection and analysis by experts at the 
Department of Environmental Protection (Dep) level only?  Standards for permit 
review must be tightened to require enforcement of water quality testing year-round, 
water samples should be inventoried, and aquaculture companies should have no 
involvement in choosing the testing entity.
I have attached a Department of Economic and Community Development (DECD) 
letter from Heather Johnson, Commissioner of the State of Maine DECD to Melanie 
Loyzim, Commissioner for Maine’s DEP.  The letter, aka “but for” letter, provides a 
“Determination of Economic or Social Necessity of the Kingfish project in Jonesport 
which is required per Maine DEP’s Water Discharge Program Guidance re: 
Antidegradation.”  Johnson determined that the aquaculture industry is good for 
“economic development and jobs.”   The Determination was applied in lieu of strict 
water quality and zoning ordinance standards during the Kingfish Maine aquaculture 
permit review process by our local Planning Board.  The letter content was cited 
within the Kingfish permit in areas that were found to be problematic for Kingfish, 
i.e. water quality and zoning.  This trade-off also allowed for damage to wetlands on 
the proposed site where the Kingfish operation will construct it’s 500,000 sq ft 
facility.  A facility located within the 75 ft. setback, in close proximity to residential 
neighborhoods, with industrial piping to extend over 2000 ft into Chandler Bay.  
The application of the DECD’s economic/job criteria allows for lesser stringent 
shoreland zoning and water quality standards to be applied, thus permitting discharge 
to be flushed into Chandler Bay.  This reasoning is detrimental to communities in 
ways we cannot predict.  
More must be done to protect our Maine communities from aquaculture companies 
that are functionally water dependent.  The DEP is responsible to enforce regulation 
of our waterways to ensure that the methods used by aquaculture companies use best 
practice technology. There are aquaculture companies that operate on land without 
dependency upon coastal waters.  The State of Maine must ensure that these 
large-scale aquaculture facilities do not cause long-term damage to our existing 
marine environment.
The State of Maine’s DEP, DECD, and other agencies involved in permit review 
processes should not apply economic development reasoning for any reason, nor 
should municipalities.  Economic development is not measurement criteria for water 
quality, zoning, or any ordinance standard.
We must put controls in place to ensure that we are not selling our out resources to 
aquaculture companies just because it’s lucrative. Coastal communities are being 
undermined by the DEP, DECD and Maine & Co.  Pristine environments and 
protected wetlands are being sold out to aquaculture – and for what?  Local 
municipalities are grappling with how to deal with this encroachment. My 
understanding was that my local town ordinances would serve as protection against 
this type of encroachment.  But in Jonesport’s case, our ordinance protection failed as 
a result of the ‘but for’ letter generated by the DECD to allow for leniency in 
standards in support of economic development.
To learn more in depth about what has been going on with Aquaculture and it’s 
encroachment into Maine, refer to the attached articles published by Lincoln 
Millstein, a 2022 Yankee Quill award recipient and a former Hearst executive at 
Acadia National Park.  His articles/documentation below highlight questionable 
activity between State agencies and the aquaculture industry. Just what have the State,
the DECD, DEP, Maine & Co, and others been up to?  The benefits and special 
treatment being offered to aquaculture companies at the expense of taxpayers must be 
exposed and stopped.  
1.State Peddling Coastal Towns to Fish Farms Without Local Officials Knowledge
 https://theqsjournal.substack.com/p/state-peddling-coastal-towns-to-fish
This article by Millstein contains email correspondence between Charlotte Mace, the 
state’s director of business development and Divya Kapuria of Heartland LLC, Seattle
broker.  
“I have read that there is some pushback and moratoriums on land-based aquaculture 
use. Which towns from the list above are in support of land-based aquaculture use? 
…The current hurdle for some sites is zoning. Aquaculture is a planning board 
approved use in most towns. Is there any flexibility to rezone Shoreland Zoning?” 
Kapuria wrote.
Mace responded and “referred the matter to Maine & Co., the state’s unofficial 
marketing arm which receives state funding and whose board members include the 
state’s economic development commissioner: “Maine & Co. specializes in high-end 
economic development work, including site selection for the marine economy and 
land-based aquaculture sectors. So I have cc-ed Peter DelGreco and Ashley Pringle of
Maine & Co. on this email.”
2.How a Norwegian felon managed to get a white-glove welcome from the State of 
Maine
https://theqsjournal.substack.com/p/how-a-norwegian-felon-managed-to 
This article highlights conversations between the deputy commissioner of the DMR, 
Meredith Mendelson and Denise Garland, the deputy commissioner of the DMR, 
Meredith Mendelson, among others. Read about “how American Aquafarms struck up
a relationship with Maine & Co. Norwegian Mikael Roenes, founder of American 
Aquafarms and a convicted felon who spent more than two years in prison in Norway,
made his first contact with the state on April 6, 2020, weeks after he began to be 
coached by Maine & Co.”
What processes are in place to ensure Maine is dealing with companies that are 
legitimate? Are we putting coastal communities at risk by luring companies to Maine 
that might take advantage of us rather than benefit us economically?
3.Maine & Co. Land-Based Aquaculture incentives: 
www.maine.gov/decd/businessdevelopment/landbasedaquaculture; 
https://drive.google.com/file/d/10YdIXlZHmBa-NJUM_AAzZylfPDDXwVgt/view 
and  www.maineco.org/aquaculture. 
Per Millstein, “Garland’s boss, Maine Economic Development Commissioner 
Heather Johnson is a board member of Maine & Co.  Maine & Co., a 
taxpayer-supported chamber of commerce-like non-profit which is the state’s 
unofficial marketing agency, is Maine’s bright neon beacon for attracting outside 
investment. It’s the centerpiece of Maine’s efforts to lure industrial-scale aquaculture 
companies.”  Peter Del Greco, CEO of Maine & Co was interviewed about Maine & 
Co’s role with aquaculture companies interested in doing business in Maine.  Del 
Greco claims they “introduce people to resources that they'll be needing. When 
someone comes here, they're going to need a law firm. They're going to need an 
accounting firm. They're going to need a bank,” Maine & Co. also introduces them to 
government officials and insiders.”
I expect the State of Maine to protect its waters and marine resources. LD508 is a step
in the right direction and should be approved as it underscores the need for protection 
of our waters and our environment from large-scale commercial industrial open-RAS 
aquaculture operations.  Maine’s DEP must apply more stringent regulations to the 
operation of aquaculture facilities. If not, irreparable damage could occur, thus 
eliminating sustainability for all marine industries, including aquaculture.  
We cannot allow large-scale commercial/industrial open-RAS aquaculture industries 
to make their own rules with our resources. The DEP must be held accountable to 
uphold the laws governing the site location of development and the Natural Resources
Protection Act to protect our coastal marine environment.
Please support LD508.
Sincerely
Carrie Peabody
Jonesport, Maine
References: 
1.Quietside Journal – The Quietside Journal | Lincoln Millstein | Substack
2.State Peddling Coastal Towns to Fish Farms Without Local Officials Knowledge
 https://theqsjournal.substack.com/p/state-peddling-coastal-towns-to-fish
3.How a Norwegian felon managed to get a white-glove welcome from the State of 
Maine
https://theqsjournal.substack.com/p/how-a-norwegian-felon-managed-to
4.Maine & Co. Land-Based Aquaculture incentives: - 
Home Page - Maine & Co. 
(maineco.org)www.maine.gov/decd/businessdevelopment/landbasedaquaculture; - 
https://drive.google.com/file/d/10YdIXlZHmBa-NJUM_AAzZylfPDDXwVgt/view 
www.maineco.org/aquaculture

