April 19, 2023 
 
Dear Environmental and Natural Resources Committee,  
I am the wife of a fourth-generation fisherman whose livelihood is threatened by a recent 
decision to permit Kingfish Maine, a large open-RAS industrial-scale aquaculture company, to 
operate in Chandler Bay. The aquaculture industry poses an adverse risk to the future of 
lobstering in our community and to our pristine waters. I am concerned with the encroachment 
of aquaculture in our waters and how the industry will affect the future of coastal Maine 
communities and our environment. 
The Town of Jonesport is known for it’s stringent Shoreland Zone and Land-Use/Development 
ordinances however during the review of the Kingfish permit, the Jonesport Planning Board 
altered existing standards approved by the citizens of Jonesport.  Agriculture was redefined to 
include aquaculture (a procedural flaw), less stringent water quality standards were adopted in 
lieu of more stringent standards, and zoning requirements were upended.  The stringent 
standards approved by the townspeople were bypassed to push the permit through, regardless. 
As part of the Planning Board determination, the Kingfish operation must test water quality once/month 
from May-Oct. No testing will occur in the winter months and test samples will not be inventoried.  The 
Planning Board interviewed water test experts that were chosen by Kingfish, which should be seen as a 
conflict of interest. Shouldn’t testing procedures require collection and analysis by experts at the 
Department of Environmental Protection (Dep) level only?  Standards for permit review must be 
tightened to require enforcement of water quality testing year-round, water samples should be 
inventoried, and aquaculture companies should have no involvement in choosing the testing entity. 
I have attached a Department of Economic and Community Development (DECD) letter from 
Heather Johnson, Commissioner of the State of Maine DECD to Melanie Loyzim, Commissioner 
for Maine’s DEP.  The letter, aka “but for” letter, provides a “Determination of Economic or 
Social Necessity of the Kingfish project in Jonesport which is required per Maine DEP’s Water 
Discharge Program Guidance re: Antidegradation.”  Johnson determined that the aquaculture 
industry is good for “economic development and jobs.”   The Determination was applied in lieu 
of strict water quality and zoning ordinance standards during the Kingfish Maine aquaculture 
permit review process by our local Planning Board.  The letter content was cited within the 
Kingfish permit in areas that were found to be problematic for Kingfish, i.e. water quality and 
zoning.  This trade-off also allowed for damage to wetlands on the proposed site where the 
Kingfish operation will construct it’s 500,000 sq ft facility.  A facility located within the 75 ft. 
setback, in close proximity to residential neighborhoods, with industrial piping to extend over 
2000 ft into Chandler Bay.   
The application of the DECD’s economic/job criteria allows for lesser stringent shoreland zoning 
and water quality standards to be applied, thus permitting discharge to be flushed into 
Chandler Bay.  This reasoning is detrimental to communities in ways we cannot predict.   
 
More must be done to protect our Maine communities from aquaculture companies that are 
functionally water dependent.  The DEP is responsible to enforce regulation of our waterways to ensure 
that the methods used by aquaculture companies use best practice technology. There are aquaculture 
companies that operate on land without dependency upon coastal waters.  The State of Maine must 
ensure that these large-scale aquaculture facilities do not cause long-term damage to our existing 
marine environment. 
The State of Maine’s DEP, DECD, and other agencies involved in permit review processes should 
not apply economic development reasoning for any reason, nor should municipalities.  
Economic development is not measurement criteria for water quality, zoning, or any ordinance 
standard. 
 
We must put controls in place to ensure that we are not selling our out resources to 
aquaculture companies just because it’s lucrative. Coastal communities are being undermined 
by the DEP, DECD and Maine & Co.  Pristine environments and protected wetlands are being 
sold out to aquaculture – and for what?  Local municipalities are grappling with how to deal 
with this encroachment. My understanding was that my local town ordinances would serve as 
protection against this type of encroachment.  But in Jonesport’s case, our ordinance protection 
failed as a result of the ‘but for’ letter generated by the DECD to allow for leniency in standards 
in support of economic development. 
To learn more in depth about what has been going on with Aquaculture and it’s encroachment 
into Maine, refer to the attached articles published by Lincoln Millstein, a 2022 Yankee Quill 
award recipient and a former Hearst executive at Acadia National Park.  His 
articles/documentation below highlight questionable activity between State agencies and the 
aquaculture industry. Just what have the State, the DECD, DEP, Maine & Co , and others been up 
to?  The benefits and special treatment being offered to aquaculture companies at the expense 
of taxpayers must be exposed and stopped.   
1. State Peddling Coastal Towns to Fish Farms Without Local Officials Knowledge 
 https://theqsjournal.substack.com/p/state-peddling-coastal-towns-to-fish  
This article by Millstein contains email correspondence between Charlotte Mace, the state’s director 
of business development and Divya Kapuria of Heartland LLC, Seattle broker.   
“I have read that there is some pushback and moratoriums on land-based aquaculture use. Which 
towns from the list above are in support of land-based aquaculture use? …The current hurdle for 
some sites is zoning. Aquaculture is a planning board approved use in most towns. Is there any 
flexibility to rezone Shoreland Zoning?” Kapuria wrote. 
Mace responded and “referred the matter to Maine & Co., the state’s unofficial marketing arm which 
receives state funding and whose board members include the state’s economic development 
commissioner: “Maine & Co. specializes in high-end economic development work, including 
site selection for the marine economy and land-based aquaculture sectors. So I have cc-ed 
Peter DelGreco and Ashley Pringle of Maine & Co. on this email.” 
2. How a Norwegian felon managed to get a white-glove welcome from the State of Maine 
https://theqsjournal.substack.com/p/how-a-norwegian-felon-managed-to   
This article highlights conversations between the deputy commissioner of the DMR, Meredith 
Mendelson and Denise Garland, the deputy commissioner of the DMR, Meredith Mendelson, 
among others. Read about “how American Aquafarms struck up a relationship with Maine & 
Co. Norwegian Mikael Roenes, founder of American Aquafarms and a convicted felon who spent 
more than two years in prison in Norway, made his first contact with the state on April 6, 2020, 
weeks after he began to be coached by Maine & Co.” 
What processes are in place to ensure Maine is dealing with companies that are legitimate? Are we putting 
coastal communities at risk by luring companies to Maine that might take advantage of us rather than benefit 
us economically? 
3. Maine & Co. Land-Based Aquaculture incentives: 
www.maine.gov/decd/businessdevelopment/landbasedaquaculture ; 
https://drive.google.com/file/d/10YdIXlZHmBa-NJUM_AAzZylfPDDXwVgt/view  and  
www.maineco.org/aquaculture .  
Per Millstein, “Garland’s boss, Maine Economic Development Commissioner Heather Johnson is a 
board member of Maine & Co.  Maine & Co., a taxpayer-supported chamber of commerce-like non-
profit which is the state’s unofficial marketing agency, is Maine’s bright neon beacon for attracting 
outside investment. It’s the centerpiece of Maine’s efforts to lure industrial-scale aquaculture 
companies.”  Peter Del Greco, CEO of Maine & Co was interviewed about Maine & Co’s role with 
aquaculture companies interested in doing business in Maine.  Del Greco claims they “introduce 
people to resources that they'll be needing. When someone comes here, they're going to need a law 
firm. They're going to need an accounting firm. They're going to need a bank,” Maine & Co. also 
introduces them to government officials and insiders.” 
 
I expect the State of Maine to protect its waters and marine resources. LD508 is a step in the right 
direction and should be approved as it underscores the need for protection of our waters and our 
environment from large-scale commercial industrial open-RAS aquaculture operations.  Maine’s DEP 
must apply more stringent regulations to the operation of aquaculture facilities. If not, irreparable 
damage could occur, thus eliminating sustainability for all marine industries, including aquaculture.   
We cannot allow large-scale commercial/industrial open-RAS aquaculture industries to make their own 
rules with our resources. The DEP must be held accountable to uphold the laws governing the site 
location of development and the Natural Resources Protection Act to protect our coastal marine 
environment. 
Please support LD508. 
 
 
Sincerely 
 
 
Carrie Peabody 
Jonesport, Maine 
 
 
 
References:  
 
1. Quietside Journal – The Quietside Journal | Lincoln Millstein | Substack  
2. State Peddling Coastal Towns to Fish Farms Without Local Officials Knowledge 
 https://theqsjournal.substack.com/p/state-peddling-coastal-towns-to-fish  
3. How a Norwegian felon managed to get a white-glove welcome from the State of Maine 
https://theqsjournal.substack.com/p/how-a-norwegian-felon-managed-to  
4. Maine & Co. Land-Based Aquaculture incentives: -  
Home Page - Maine & Co. 
(maineco.org) www.maine.gov/decd/businessdevelopment/landbasedaquaculture ; - 
https://drive.google.com/file/d/10YdIXlZHmBa-NJUM_AAzZylfPDDXwVgt/view  
www.maineco.org/aquaculture  
carrie peabody
Jonesport ME
LD 508
Resubmitting testimony for hearing, files did not go through. had to submit each 
document separately. There are 5 docs total with my submission.
