Daniel  Devereaux 
Mere Point Oyster Farm
LD 508
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and honorable members of the Committee
on Environment and Natural Resources my name is Daniel Devereaux and I am in 
opposition to LD508 for a variety of reasons. I’m a military veteran, a retired Marine 
Warden and Harbormaster, and I’m currently employed as the Brunswick Coastal 
Resource Manager. I have lived and worked to protect the coastal waters and our 
precious marine environment in my community for the last 25 years. We have 
witnessed massive ecological changes in our coastal areas.  Gentrification is at warp 
speed, small seasonal family camps sold and turned into starter mansions. Fishermen, 
blue collar families, working watermen being pushed out and off our coastal waters. 
New landowners are kicking clam diggers off the mudflats in front of their shoreline 
homes now. Waterfront properties being sold for residential develop at astronomical 
prices. Over MPOC’s nearly 100 years of combined experience, we have witnessed 
massive fish kills, shellfish die offs, a near extinction of near shore lobster fishing, 
and ever increasing algal blooms from increased nitrogen pollution from the runoff 
within the watersheds.  
As part of my commitment to the coastal waters we live on, my family and another 
local family founded Mere Point Oyster Company (MPOC). Understanding the 
ecological restorative nature of oyster farming my sons and I were excited when we 
applied for a 40 acre lease in Maquoit Bay in 2017. After all we were going be 
working on the water as a family and doing work that supports the marine ecology 
and our coastal environments. After 2 lengthy years, which comprised of THREE 
public hearings, we were granted 35 acres of shoal water in Maquoit Bay.  In 4 short 
years we have be able to grow MPOC 10 full-time people and over 25 crew in peak 
season.  We now distribute oysters nationwide. 
 
Thank you for allowing me to share my perspective and why I oppose LD 508. 
#1 First and foremost I oppose the way this bill was INTENTIONALLY held until the
very last moment so anyone in opposition would not have time to respond. I was 
notified of this bill late last week and will not be able to stand before you because I 
had scheduled attending a US Coast Guard Master Captain Certification. Bills that are
intentionally held to subvert the voices of constituents are WRONG. It’s dirty politics.
#2 It was made aware LD 508 was proposed to Senator Grohoski by Crystal Canney 
the Executive Director of a group that is claiming to be “Protecting Maines Fishing 
Heritage”, but its crickets when they are asked what they have really done to protect 
our fishing heritage.  They have not contributed a damn this to help solve the right 
whale or offshore wind concerns.  They focus solely of opposing aquaculture.  I have 
a lot of experience with this group, as they were initially created to oppose my 
families oyster farm in Maquoit Bay.  Canney was hired by millionaire seasonal 
shoreline landowners that looked out on our proposed farming area.   Protect Maine 
Fishing Heritage and Crystal Canney are a ruse it’s as simple as that. They distort 
facts, deploy scar tactics, and deceive people who are naive about aquaculture and its 
role and history along our coast. They have created division among our dwindling 
working waterfronts. Quite frankly they are propagandist that are funded by the 
wealthiest people from Maine and around the country.
#3 The bill establishes a working group comprised of multiple (17) “stakeholders”two
come from aquaculture. The bill intentionally stacks the deck against aquaculture and 
is designed to discriminate against the aquaculture industry. Imagine proposing a 
working group to examine how DMR manages the endangered elver fishery with 17 
members only two of which come from fishery?  
#4 In the last couple decades there have been over 20 studies conducted on 
aquaculture many focused on aquaculture development and regulation. Several 
studies have resulted from single controversial lease applications and the fact people 
don’t believe the existing leasing system guarantees a denial of that specific lease in 
their “backyard or better know as public waters. This LD is no different and is driven 
by the American Aqua-farms proposal in Frenchman Bay. The current regulatory 
processes would have ensured that proposal got a fair public hearing and would not 
been not approved if the stringent criteria was not met. The Maine aquaculture criteria
is some of the strictest regulations in the US. It took my boys and I two years and 
additional 1 year of judicial review before we were allowed to farm oysters on the 
water they grew up on. I guess this long wait and intense regulatory scrutiny is why 
our aquaculture regulatory system is viewed superior to all other states.  4. 
Currently aquaculture operations on land and in marine waters are held to the same 
high regulatory standards with respect to discharges into aquatic environments. In 
addition, aquaculture operations in marine waters are held to higher standards than 
those on land with respect to conflicts with other users, impacts on navigation, ability 
to finance a project, and impacts on surrounding wildlife habitat and recreational uses.
Imposing land use standards on marine leases will lead to decrease regulatory 
oversight and force standards not designed for or effective in aquatic ecosystems.  
 5. The bill directs the DEP to consider whether on-water aquaculture should be 
subject to the same or similar regulatory regime as land-based aquaculture. Marine 
and terrestrial ecosystems are different. Current land use and marine resource 
management methods acknowledge those differences and use tools that are designed 
to be effective in fundamentally different types of ecosystems. Trying to impose land 
management methods on aquatic ecosystems makes no sense and may result in 
serious unintended ecological and social impacts.  6.  Study commissions take tax 
dollars and divert agency resources away from their responsibilities. Currently these 
agencies have trouble keeping staff, processing applications, enforcing and regulating 
existing activities.  This bill burdens them even more with politically motivated 
fodder resulting from a controversial aquaculture that was never even submitted. 
I support efforts to find constructive solutions that address public concerns while 
allowing Maine aquaculture businesses to grow. 
PLEASE VOTE OUGHT NOT TOO PASS, This bill is not good for Mainers, 
particularly those Mainers that work on the water and tend to already be 
underprivileged and underserved.  
I’m sorry that this was so long. Thank you for your time.
Respectfully 
