April 20, 2023 
 
Testimony of Erin Adams, Maine Ocean Farms, LLC 
Against LD 508 
 
“A Resolve, Directing the Department of Environmental Protection to 
Review its Environmental Permitting Laws”, mandates that the Department of 
Environmental Protection form a study group to determine whether ocean based 
aquaculture should be regulated like land based aquaculture operations.” 
 
Dear Environment and Natural Resources Committee,  
 
My name is Erin Adams and I am an ocean farmer representing Maine Ocean Farms, a ten acre 
oyster farm in Recompense Cove, Freeport.  I’m also a marine scientist and educator with ten 
years of experience working in fisheries science in New England. It is through this lens that I 
recognize the weakness in proposal LD 508 is the suggestion that one regulation regime can be 
applied to different ecosystems with an expectation of a similar outcome. Each aquaculture farm, 
whether land or marine based has its own ecosystem with different species and different input 
and output variables. An effective management regime needs to take into account these different 
variables which management currently does. For example, all aquaculture operations on both 
land and in the marine environment are held to the same high standards for water discharge 
quality and it is through the existing management regimes, which understand that these 
environments are different, that the same end result is achieved. Conforming one ecosystem to 
another for the sake of regulation is irresponsible and may result in serious unintended ecological 
and social impacts.  
 
From where we stand, as ocean farmers, the vague wording in this proposal is nothing more than 
a tactic to slow down leasing and create additional permitting obstacles that will limit our ability 
in producing sustainable and environmentally beneficial food.  The redundancy proposed will 
require significant state, taxpayer, and industry resources to add an unnecessary layer to an 
already robust permitting review process.  Speaking for myself and on the behalf of my four 
colleagues at Maine Ocean Farms, we oppose LD 508.  
 
Thank you very much for allowing me to share these views.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Erin K Adams 
Maine Ocean Farms, LLC 
 
Erin Adams
Maine Ocean Farms
LD 508
My name is Erin Adams and I am an ocean farmer representing Maine Ocean Farms, 
a ten acre oyster farm in Recompense Cove, Freeport.  I’m also a marine scientist and 
educator with ten years of experience working in fisheries science in New England. It 
is through this lens that I recognize the weakness in proposal LD 508 is the suggestion
that one regulation regime can be applied to different ecosystems with an expectation 
of a similar outcome. Each aquaculture farm, whether land or marine based has its 
own ecosystem with different species and different input and output variables. An 
effective management regime needs to take into account these different variables 
which management currently does. For example, all aquaculture operations on both 
land and in the marine environment are held to the same high standards for water 
discharge quality and it is through the existing management regimes, which 
understand that these environments are different, that the same end result is achieved. 
Conforming one ecosystem to another for the sake of regulation is irresponsible and 
may result in serious unintended ecological and social impacts. 
From where we stand, as ocean farmers, the vague wording in this proposal is nothing
more than a tactic to slow down leasing and create additional permitting obstacles that
will limit our ability in producing sustainable and environmentally beneficial food.  
The redundancy proposed will require significant state, taxpayer, and industry 
resources to add an unnecessary layer to an already robust permitting review process. 
Speaking for myself and on the behalf of my four colleagues at Maine Ocean Farms, 
we oppose LD 508. 
Thank you very much for allowing me to share these views. 

