Gregory Foote
Cape Elizabeth
LD 508
Good Day, My name is Gregory Foote of Cape Elizabeth, Maine and am an active 
oyster and kelp farmer as well as the President of the Maine Family SeaFarm 
Cooperative in Freeport/Yarmouth, Maine.  I am writing to oppose bill LD508 in its 
current form.  
Aquaculture in Maine is a new and growing industry that can help support our other 
fisheries and provide jobs to young people in the State of Maine.  We have already 
done 24 studies on aquaculture here in the state.  Our DMR has been overhauled to 
properly vet lease applications and often screen out poor sites and applications before 
the application process is even complete.  In my position as president of our 
aquaculture co-op, I get to travel to other parts of the country to learn from experts.  
Every state that I travel to talks about Maine's application and vetting process as the 
gold standard for aquaculture leasing and permitting programs. 
This bill would instigate yet another study that would be redudant and a waste of tax 
payer dollars.  On top of that, it would also form a panel of 17 "stakeholders" and 
only TWO of the 17 would be representing the aquaculture industry.  Imagine what 
lobstermen would say if there was a 17 person study group determining the future of 
lobstering and only 2 lobstermen were allowed to be on it.  This bill is completely 
descriminatory and is designed 
to ensure the regulated community (aquaculture) is in the minority.  
I support MAA and their efforts to find constructive solutions that address public 
concerns while allowing Maine aquaculture businesses to grow.  We don't need 
additional regulations, we need a reasonable amount of staff at the DMR to execute 
the process that has already been established.  Maine needs to build on its reputation 
of providing top quality seafood to the nation and world by following the process in 
place to site and regulate aquaculture operations as sustainably, responsibly and as 
quickly as possible to allow this industry to grow at a reasonable pace and for there to 
be continued measured investment.
Thank you for your time,
Gregory Foote
Lastly, 
