Good afternoon. My name is Henry Sharpe. I am the President of Frenchman Bay United, a coalition 
opposing the plan by American Aquafarms to use unproven, heavily polluting technology for the largest 
salmon farm in North America located just 2000 feet from Acadia National Park. 
That project consisted of two lease applications, each with its own DEP MEPDES application. The two 
facilities would have discharged 4 billion gallons of untreated effluent ( 3x the treated effluent from the 
14 municipal sewage treatment plants serving all of Manhattan ). Each of the two facilities would have 
discharged nearly 1.2 tons of nitrogen (think fertilizer) per day. 
The American Aquafarms project exposed some costs and risks that suggest some consideration going 
forward. 
• After 30 years of heavy investments and pursuit of the practice, ocean-based salmon farming 
has been banned on North America’s entire west coast. Argentina has banned the practice 
entirely. A month ago, Nova Scotia put a moratorium on all new applications for net pen salmon 
farming while it engages in a process estimated to take three years to evaluate suitable 
locations. And, in January 2023, Norway imposed a 40% resource use tax on any income derived 
from ocean-based, net pen farming. These bans, moratoriums, and taxes guarantee that Maine 
will be subject to huge financial pressures to develop the industry in territory that’s closest to 
the world’s largest market, the US. Since all these regions have heavily engaged in fin-fishing 
only to ban or reconsider the practice suggests that Maine (which has far less experience) has 
much to learn. The lessons learned from around the world suggest that the long-term costs and 
risks to the community as a whole outweigh any short-term benefits to investors seeking to 
profit by extracting our resources. 
• One key provision of the Clean Air and Water Acts is the intent to produce zero discharge. 
Another key provision is that permitted projects must be reassessed every five years to use the 
“best practicable” technology in pursuit of producing zero discharge. For salmon farming 
specifically, and for finfish production in general, land-based facilities demonstrate proven 
technologies that produce no nutrient, chemical, pharmaceutical, pesticide, bacterial or viral 
discharges, no wild escapes, that can be renewably powered (instead of by diesel, among the 
dirtiest fossil fuels), and that withdraw groundwater once without taxing aquifers. Importantly, 
these land-based facilities can be located at the source of consumer demand, thereby 
eliminating the significant climate impact of transportation. That sets the standard of practice 
for use of the “best practicable technology” that should be required, and which therefore should 
ban ocean-based fin-fishing. As Maine considers fin-fish aquaculture, it should limit production 
to land-based production, and should consider not only ways to sell fish, but the technology 
needed to raise it sustainably on land.  
• At 2.35 tons/day, the total nitrogen discharged by the American Aquafarms project – think 
fertilizer -- depending on the expert you believe, would have been equivalent to the nitrogen 
discharged by Maine’s four to ten largest cities combined: So, at a minimum, more nitrogen 
than Portland, Lewiston, Bangor, and South Portland combined would produce, and perhaps, on 
the upper end, more nitrogen than Auburn, Biddeford, Sanford, Westbrook, and Augusta would 
also have added. All into a small bay that two independent oceanographic models say does not 
flush. The scale of this project, the speed, consequence, and multiple mechanisms for failures 
that could manifest despite efforts to monitor them, the unproven nature of the underlying 
technology, and the limited disclosure of financial capacity to avert harm were all not 
considered during the application process. That should change as we consider aquaculture in 
the future. 
• American Aquafarms filed two separate MEPDES applications. Neither application disclosed that 
the other sister project would be discharging the same volume of untreated effluent just 2.2 
miles away. Both in terms of the proposed nitrogen load (that’s the load that would have been 
discharged), and the permitted nitrogen loads (that’s the load that would supposedly use 20% of 
the remaining assimilative capacity), current DEP regulations make it legal to ignore combined 
impacts. These ignored combined impacts include not only discharges from multiple, but related 
MEPDES discharges as described, but also from other sources like discharges to air and water 
from diesel generators, or from ship and truck traffic, or from fish processing facilities that might 
be part of the same large project, or from other unrelated, perhaps existing projects in the area. 
Additionally, DEP regulations currently have no way to evaluate the carrying capacity of an 
estuarine water body. If we want to assure the abundance of our marine habitats needed to 
support the Public Trust vested in our regulatory agencies, understanding both combined 
impacts, and overall carrying capacity is essential. 
• To detail one aspect of this idea a bit further, the DEP’s permitting process didn’t consider the 
potential adverse impacts from transporting, storing, and burning the proposed 80,000 gallons 
of diesel fuel that would have been required every 7-10 days to generate the power needed to 
pump water for the American Aquafarms project. Although a so-called “new minor source” 
permit may have been required for generator’s air emissions, emissions into the water from this 
activity were not considered. Once again, current regulations provide no way to consider the 
combined, cumulative impacts of these air and water emissions in the scope of the whole 
project. 
• In both MEPDES applications, American Aquafarms assumed that fresh, unpolluted water would 
continually move across the lease sites to transport waste away as it would in a river-based flow 
system. This is a flawed assumption that yields erroneous results. Why? Because the proposed 
discharges are in a coastal estuary where currents don’t simply flow downstream. Instead, they 
are driven by complex, time-varying tidal flows, and by fresh and saltwater density gradients 
that produce recirculating current gyres. Instead of flushing, these recirculating current gyres act 
to both concentrate waste, and transport it further inland to higher, more sensitive 
embayments where it then threatens sensitive eelgrass populations in nursery habitat areas 
where nitrogen concentrations are already near, and in some cases, already exceeding 
maximum limits. In summary, conventional methods used by the DEP for estimating and 
regulating far-field dilution that were appropriate for river-based flows are inadequate for 
understanding the temporal and spatial distribution of nutrients in coastal, estuarine 
environments.  
• Modeling and analysis by American Aquafarms’ water quality consultant was limited to 2D 
Cormix software simulations. They acknowledged that this tool only provided a 15 second planar 
snapshot of nutrient mixing and that it provides virtually no 3D insight into either the temporal 
or spatial distribution of effluent across the bay. Modern, 4D (space and time) hydrodynamic 
modeling tools are available that are cost-effective, well-tested, widely recognized across the 
industry, and open-sourced. They are used in many regions but are not required in Maine. If 
employed, they provide insight into the cumulative impacts of not only individual, but multiple 
projects producing chemical and or nutrient discharges. My former colleague Chris Kincaid, from 
the University of Rhode Island’s Graduate School of Oceanography and I used the Regional 
Ocean Modelling System (ROMS) to definitively demonstrate that discharges from the American 
Aquafarms project would not flush from the bay. 4D modeling tools like ROMS should be a 
prerequisite for any Maine MEPDES application in tidal estuaries. 
• The DEP currently uses two nutrient concentration thresholds to determine a parameter called 
the remaining assimilative capacity that forms the basic criteria evaluated in MEPDES 
applications: the less-stringent “total nitrogen threshold” of (0.32 mg/L), and the more-stringent 
“eelgrass nitrogen threshold” (0.45mg/L) that applies when discharges are in proximity to 
eelgrass populations. Our hydrodynamic modeling in both Frenchman’s Bay and other locations 
suggests that in tidal estuaries like the sites proposed by the American Aquafarms project, 
nutrients are transported away from discharge sites to areas that are higher in bays and further 
inland. When the initial discharge occurs in areas without eelgrass, the less stringent “total 
nitrogen” threshold is applied. However, because data suggests that nutrients are frequently 
transported from the original discharge sites to more sensitive eelgrass areas before they can be 
consumed by biological activity, we therefore recommend elimination of the less stringent, 
(0.32 mg/L) non-eelgrass total nitrogen threshold, so that only the more stringent (0.45 mg/L) 
eelgrass nitrogen threshold is used to calculate remaining assimilative capacity. 
• As our climate becomes warmer and wetter, nitrogen delivered into tidal estuaries from both 
land-based freshwater sources, and from deep ocean currents that intrude into all of Maine’s 
bays are anticipated to rise significantly. This will exacerbate the algal blooms and 
eutrophication that we’ve already seen increasing along our coastlines. In the short term, we 
won’t be able to control those sources so we should limit the nutrient discharges from sources 
like aquafarms and sewage treatment plants that we can control. MA, RI, CT, and NY have 
protected their waters from algal blooms and eutrophication by requiring removal of nitrogen 
from municipal sewage discharges. We should do the same. 
