Testimony of Jacqueline Weaver 
LD 508 public hearing 
April 20, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Brenner, Representative Grohoski, and members of the 
committee. l am Jacqueline Weaver. l live in Gouldsboro. And l am here to speak in 
favor of LD508. 
I am a co-founder of Friends of Schoodic Peninsula. We formed soon after American 
Aquafarms announced their proposal to build a 120-acre salmon farm in Frenchman 
Bay. The company—which is made up largely of Norwegian investors —said they wanted 
to raise 66 million pounds of salmon a year — which would make it the largest salmon 
farm in North America, if not the world. 
To put that number in further perspective, total lobster landings along the coast of Maine 
last year were 98 million pounds. That’s the total for the whole coast. 
No one had ever heard of American Aquafarms until Gouldsboro was hit with the news 
about this project and its mind boggling scale. This was a total stealth operation. By the 
time we got wind of it.... American Aquafarms had already obtained an option ona 
former lobster processing plant in Prospect Harbor. And they proudly shared drawings 
of what they said would be a hatchery... salmon processing plant.... and waste disposal 
operation. That site has never been used for anything other than processing of wild 
caught fish. 
We as a town.... are still reeling from this more than two and one half years later. 
ln October 2021 more than 200 people crowded into the Gouldsboro Community 
Center to vote virtually unanimously to institute a moratorium on any large scale ﬁnﬁsh 
operation in Gouldsboro. And that was at the height of COVlD. 
We spent about $20,000 for initial legal counsel.... And now are well on our way to 
spending an additional $100,000 the town had to allocate to get help in drafting what 
was at the time a ﬁrst of its kind ordinance in Maine.
How did this project get as far as it did without any proper vetting on any level? 
Maine & Company and the Department of Economic Development rolled out the red 
carpet for a Norwegian company headed up by a man who had served prison time for 
investor fraud. Were they not aware of this? 
We need this bill because we need to take a careful look at who we want to welcome 
into our state and, in particular, into our communities, especially small towns such as 
ours that are so ill prepared to deal with a project of this scope and complexity. 
The DEF’ stated that most of the in-water American Aquafarms ’ operation would be in 
territory claimed by Gouldsboro. Technically, that might be true. But in reality, it would 
have a drastic effect on all of our neighbors around the bay. 
We don’t want any other towns to go through what we have been going through. Please 
vote yes on LD 508 and have a broadly drawn group look at DEP’s permitting laws.
