Jennifer Robinson
Pembroke 
LD 508
Members of the Environment and Natural Resource Committee, thank you for the 
opportunity to discuss with you LD 508, “A Resolve, Directing the Department of 
Environmental Protection to Review its Environmental Permitting Laws”, which 
mandates that the Department of Environmental Protection form a study group to 
determine whether ocean based aquaculture should be regulated like land based 
aquaculture operations.
I am writing to you today to strongly ask you to vote Ought Not to pass.  My name is 
Jennifer Robinson and I am the Compliance Officer for Cooke Aquaculture USA and 
a resident of Pembroke, Maine.  I grew up in Parsonsfield (small town in southern 
Maine) and am a proud University of Maine at Machias alum which is how I ended 
up living in Downeast Maine.  
Our company has operations in Franklin, Somerset, Hancock and Washington 
Counties and we employ over 200 people in those 4 Maine counties.  I have been in 
the aquaculture industry since 1998 and have been employed by Cooke Aquaculture 
since 2005.  
Over those 25 years of experience with the industry, I have seen and been involved 
with almost as many studies as my time in the industry.  I am not against another 
study if it makes sense, however, to burden the State agencies with another study that 
is comparing two very different forms of aquaculture doesn’t make sense to me.  Like
the saying goes, it’s like comparing apples to oranges.  Yes, they have some 
characteristics in common but overall are unique.  Or maybe you like the saying “one 
size does NOT fit all”?  Studies have shown that Maine is globally recognized for its 
stringent regulations on the industry.  There’s no coincidence that other jurisdictions 
look to our regulatory framework when forming or updating theirs.
The leasing and permitting process for a marine facility in the State of Maine is by far
one of the most stringent with numerous regulators and stakeholders involved 
throughout the entire process. There are several conditions that are examined that are 
specific to our marine operations that may be lost in translation.  Currently, 
navigation, fishing use, riparian owners ingress egress, existing system support, 
essential habitat, lighting, noise, visual impact are all considered for our marine 
facilities which some are specific to marine environments.  Our current operations, 
whether marine or landbase, already have similar discharge requirements specific to 
the environment in which they discharge into.  Monitoring the physical and ecological
effects on the sediment, flora and fauna, as well as water quality, which ultimately 
achieve the same levels of protection relative to the environment.
I urge you to vote ought not to pass.
Thank you for your time,
Jennifer Robinson

