Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and Natural 
Resources Committee. My name is Jerry Leeman and I am testifying on behalf of Protect 
Maine for the proposed bill LD 508. 
I would appreciate it if everyone took a moment to imagine what they know a fish farm to look 
like. Disturbed natural landscape, overstocked fish pens, hosing and all to mimic our original 
aquatic ecosystem while l tell you a story. 
Tetracycline is an antibiotic used in humans to treat lung infections such as pneumonia. If 
you’ve ever had pneumonia and been treated for it, it is likely that you were administered some 
form of a tetracycline medication. This chemical is used in aquaculture to treat farmed ﬁsh for 
bacterial infections generated by the unnatural population enclosed in close quarters, and as 
proven by studies reviewed and published by the National Library of Medicine, is the a main 
cause of perpetuating antibiotic resistance in the environment. If we remember covid, and how 
quickly it was able to spread across our nation and the world killing our family and friends. 
Imagine continuously being forced to live through that era that we have finally escaped, for your 
entire life. No masks to protect you, no ability to social distance, only medication administered to 
ease your pain as you move through a constricted life. That is part of the reality for fish bred by 
aquaculture fish farms. Tetracycline is an endocrine disrupting chemical, and while it should be 
administered as a medication one takes when experiencing an illness, it should not be 
something that is allowed to flood our home waters. Endocrine disrupting chemicals can be 
referenced as a toxic chemical prohibited for use by Chapter 27 of the Code of Maine Rules 
under the Department of Environmental Protection. In the case of tetracycline, studies on the 
disturbance of endocrine functions are new and limited but point towards complicating 
testosterone production in mammals. Guess what, we are mammals, man or woman doesn’t 
matter, and we all require balanced testosterone levels for a full and happy life. We stand to be 
the mammals that will be eating those farmed fish. We are risking so much by approving leases
for aquaculture fish farms being approved by our state. We should be able to trust the efforts of 
our environments protectors. This needs to be reviewed. 
Biomagni ﬁcation is the process by which an accumulation of chemicals is built up through 
digestive and metabolic processes within an organisms body. Tetracycline is not the only 
antibiotic pumped through these pens, it is just one of many. Aquaculture is a real threat to our 
marine fisheries. I have 28 years at sea. Twenty Eight. I have fished as a captain across4 
different fisheries, all of them being wild han/est. l am telling you, without a fathom of a doubt, 
aquaculture cannot be brought to Maine if we have any hope of preserving this land that we are 
blessed with. The Department of Environmental Protection should be the ones standing whereI 
am today, speaking on behalf of their own need to review what pollutants are allowed by the 
Code of this state that they are obligated by duty to adhere to. 
Wild harvesters deal with these missed opportunities for natural preservation more commonly 
on the federal level, with wind farms risking to disturb the entire balance of the open ocean in 
our Gulf. These risks cannot be ignored by our state. We are the Vacationland, the most 
environmentally preserved state in all of New England. People travel across the globe to see 
our beautiful state. No one hauls to Jersey to see a perfectly preserved coast, they come here. 
To our home. Maine should be on the forefront of preventing these risks to this land, and the 
Mainer‘s traditions. LD 508 brings about a call to action to renew efforts of review. Please, hear 
me as a fisherman and understand that I am only standing here because I know by trade what 
is right by this land and her waters, and that opportunities for reviews to be done by those who 
are charged to protect this State need to be made. Thank you for listening.
