John  Frazier
Jonesboro
LD 508
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and 
Natural Resources Committee. 
My wife and I apologize for not being here today to testify in person. We would have 
dearly liked to, but we are selling a piece of land and the closing is at 1:00 on the day 
the bill is supposed to be heard.
We live in Jonesoboro and fish out of Beals. We are dead set against large scale 
industrial aquaculture especially finfish. We are writing this in support of LD 508.
I, John, have testified before at a rulemaking hearing that we are seeing some dead 
lobsters near the pens.   
The Department of Marie Resources listened at the hearing almost three years ago and
not one person called to follow-up and neither did the agency charged with protecting 
our waters at the Department of Environmental Protection.
There is too much passing the buck between these two agencies for any of us to 
understand who is doing what, who should be called and when you do you get shifted 
from agency to agency.  I know from my own experience - no one wants to hear that 
large scale industrial aquaculture is polluting the water - but it is. 
What we can tell you is that after lobstering all our lives, there is pollution underneath
those pens.
At one meeting where the company was asking for more lease in the area I asked if 
we could inspect underneath the pens, and they said we’re not allowed. 
And that the state lets them know when they are coming. One diver I spoke to said he 
saw a lot of dead lobsters near those pens. 
I am also a periwinkle picker the first one up in Hatchet Harbor, we saw a lot of white
stuff on the mud on the ledges and no wrinkles. Now that that pen has left, the 
wrinkles are coming back in the white stuff disappeared that was many years ago.
The state used to dive under the pens, and they don’t anymore.
Why would any net pen salmon grower need to fallow a site if it was not polluting the
site.
John and Inez Frazier
Jonesboro, Maine

