Kim Davis
Cutler
LD 508
Good Afternoon, Senator Brenner- Representative Gramlich - and members of the 
joint standing committee on the Environment and Natural Resources Committee.
My name is Kim Davis, and I am testifying in support of LD 508. I would have been 
there today but a family commitment has taken me away and I am hoping my 
testimony, although written,
Is given as much weight as those who were able to attend this important hearing 
today.
I want to thank Senator Grohoski for working on this bill as it is critically important 
to the people of Maine up and down the coast.
I have been a selectman in Cutler for three terms and my husband is a lobsterman. 
This past year we passed a moratorium on aquaculture limiting its uses in our bay.
We care deeply about our bay and no longer trust the state of Maine to protect it after 
what happened this year. 
A project for salmon restoration in our bay tried to be sneaked in the backdoor.
Cutler was notified about the “hearing” on election day when our clerk was at her 
busiest. She missed it. No one picked up the phone - and it caused us to scramble 
incredibly. 
Cooke Aquaculture which has over 600 acres of net pen salmon in the water of Maine
was supposed to manage this project. Ironically, it was part of a consent agreement 
around having too many fish in the pens. Here is an excerpt and a link to the entire 
article:
https://www.seafoodsource.com/news/aquaculture/cooke-to-pay-fine-for-overstockin
g-maine-salmon-farms-not-conducting-environmental-testing
Black Harbour, New Brunswick, Canada-based fish farming company Cooke 
Aquaculture will pay a fine of USD 156,213 (EUR 140,000) as part of a consent 
agreement with the Maine Department of Environmental Protection following 
multiple violations at fish farming sites Cooke operates in the U.S. state. Cooke was 
cited by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection for a number of incidents
at its net pen sites in Hancock and Washington counties, including having too many 
fish in pens, failing to conduct environmental sampling, and failing to follow a 
number of procedural measures laid out in the company’s operating permit, including 
on-time filing of pollution sampling reports and fish spill prevention plans. 
Yet, the state wanted us to use our waters with a project overseen by Cooke.
How does this make any sense at all? Why would we want that in Cutler?
We didn’t and after hours and hours of work, attorney fees and finally an open 
hearing. The state pulled the application.  That project was pulled but others around 
the state of Maine have been renewed for 20 years even after a massive die off in 
2021 at Black Island and with no penalties that I am aware of. 
What I like best about this bill is the study committee is made up of towns, 
lobstermen and women, small aquaculturists, and others to weigh in on what appears 
to be the inconsistent regulations in Dep and the inconsistent application. It’s time to 
take a closer look that includes all of us. 
I thank you for your time and I urge you to pass ld 508
Thank you. 
