Krista Tripp
Aphrodite Oysters LLC.
LD 508
04/17/2023
To whom it may concern,
I am an owner of a small oyster farm in South Thomaston, Maine. The name of my 
company is Aphrodite Oysters LLC. I am opposing this bill, LD 508.
I support MAA and their efforts to find constructive solutions that address public 
concerns while allowing Maine aquaculture businesses to grow.
This bill establishes a working group comprised of multiple (17) “stakeholders” only 
two of which come from aquaculture. It is intentionally a “stacked deck” and is 
designed to ensure the regulated community (aquaculture) is in the minority and 
discriminated against in the process. 
Currently aquaculture operations on land and in marine waters are held to the same 
high regulatory standards with respect to discharges into aquatic environments. In 
addition, aquaculture operations in marine waters are held to higher standards than 
those on land with respect to conflicts with other users, impacts on navigation, ability 
to finance a project, and impacts on surrounding wildlife habitat and recreational uses.
Imposing land use standards on marine leases may actually decrease the stringency of 
regulatory oversight and force agencies to use standards not designed for or effective 
in aquatic ecosystems.
The bill directs the DEP to consider whether on-water aquaculture should be subject 
to the same or similar regulatory regime as land-based aquaculture. Marine and 
terrestrial ecosystems are different. Current land use and marine resource 
management methods acknowledge those differences and use tools that are designed 
to be effective in fundamentally different types of ecosystems. Trying to impose land 
management methods on aquatic ecosystems makes no sense and may result in 
serious unintended ecological and social impacts.
Thank you for your time in reading this and I hope you take these points into 
consideration when deciding the fate of the Aquaculture Industry for the state of 
Maine. I do not see the need to alter a system that is already working as the "golden 
standard," which is the reason regulators come from all over the world to learn more 
about how Maine manages aquaculture.
Sincerely,
Krista Tripp
Aphrodite Oysters LLC.
207-542-0121
krtripp08@yahoo.com
