FROM: Lance Tapley, 116 State Street, Suite 201, Augusta, Maine 04330 April 20, 2023 
(207) 859-0044, |ance.tapley@gmail.com 
TO: Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, Maine State Legislature 
Testimony on LD 508, Resolve, Directing the Department of Environmental Protection to 
Review its Environmental Permitting Laws 
l support LD 508, but l strongly suggest the Committee amend it because the Department of 
Environmental Protection has told me that: 
“The Site Location of Development Act (Site Law) and the Natural Resources Protection 
Act (NRPA) do not currently contain prohibitions or standards speciﬁc to global climate 
change, and an applicant for a permit pursuant to those laws is not required to makea 
showing of no impact to global climate. ” (Email from Jami MacNeil, DEP, O2/09/2023) 
LD 508 as written asks the DEP to study whether its permitting authority should “better consider 
climate change." But in the above statement it's clear the Department considers its authority to 
consider climate change is zero. lt has approved projects under this assumption. 
The world is in an enormous climate crisis. We can’t afford to wait until December to get an 
answer we already have. And then wait perhaps another year for a new law, if enacted, to take 
effect. You may wish to substitute this amendment below for LD 508 as written because “habitat 
connectivity, ecological resilience, and the coastal marine environment" are all considerations 
within global climate change. 
1. The Department of Environmental Protection shall consider global climate change in 
its environmental permitting, including the Site Location of Development Act and the 
Natural Resources Protection Act. 
2. The Department shall adopt rulemaking pursuant to this requirement as quickly as 
possible under the laws governing rulemaking. 
3. The Department shall report to the Committee on its implementation of this permitting 
change by December 6, 2023. 
A poll by The Lancet found that 75 percent of 10,000 young people worldwide feel the 
future is "frightening" and “Respondents rated governmental responses to climate change 
negatively and reported greater feelings of betrayal than of reassurance." 
Let's help their future be less frightening. Let’s not betray them.
