Michael Hyde
Trenton
LD 508
Testimony regarding LD 508
Michael Hyde
100 Road Not Taken
Trenton, Maine 04605
Hancock County
A predatory industry, banned in many countries, wants to exploit the pristine waters 
of coastal Maine.  Our state’s economic developers are going flat out to bring more 
industrial scale fish factories here, and our regulators are doing all they can to see that
these installations continue to operate with near-complete autonomy. Politicians and 
lobbyists in Augusta are welcoming these global pariahs with open arms.  Ordinary 
Mainers are fighting to stop them.  Its time to rethink our policies, and LD 508 is the 
first step toward badly-needed change.
Many countries with extensive seafood industries have banned ocean-based finfish 
farming outright, others are trying to kill them with stiffer regulations and steep taxes.
Every state on the west coast of the US has banned sea-based fish factories, as have 
most of the first nations along the Pacific coast of Canada.  British Columbia and 
Canada’s Maritime Provinces are also moving to ban this form of aquaculture.
Outside of Augusta Mainers know that these enormous floating factories pose grave 
risks for lobstering, other traditional fisheries, and tourism – all multi-billion-dollar 
drivers of the state’s economy.  Unelected state officials are luring foreign 
corporations to build fish factories here with minimal environmental restrictions, 
cheap financing, and zero taxes.  Meanwhile, ordinary Maine people are fighting to 
stop industrial scale finfish farms both on land and sea. 
For instance, Nordic Aquafarm’s proposed Belfast operation has just been torpedoed 
by the state Supreme Court, American Aquafarms’ proposed sea-based installation in 
Frenchman Bay generated massive opposition, and citizen lawsuits have delayed a 
planned finfish farm in Jonesport.  Industrial scale installations in Bucksport and 
Millinocket are dead or dying in the face of legal challenges from local residents.  
How is it that our elected officials and the bureaucrats they appoint are so out of sync 
with the Maine people on this vital issue?  Well, everyone loves to take credit for “job
creation” -- even if the jobs aren’t particularly good ones.  The true costs imposed on 
the State by this industry go unstated in the rush to claim an economic victory.  
In all of North America, which is a multi-billion-dollar market for seafood, there is no
better place to raise salmon and many other finfish than the clear, cold waters along 
the coast of Maine.  And no state has less stringent licensing and environmental 
monitoring requirements than Maine.  Even the most inept economic developers 
could bring foreign seafood conglomerates to Maine!  We will see an unprecedented 
number of finfish farm applications in the coming years, and we are unprepared for 
the onslaught.
Our aquaculture regulations were last updated 19 years ago.  Way back then Maine 
lawmakers envisioned a new aquacultural cottage industry.  They hoped for a 
proliferation of small mom and pop operators who needed an alternative to fishing 
and lobstering.  So they drafted regulations that would balance environmental 
protection against economic opportunity.  
Today multinational corporations have wiped out small fish farmers in Maine and 
around the world.  Today’s fish factories are operating at ever-increasing scale, with 
single installations that produce millions of pounds of fish per year.   Budget 
pressures have gutted enforcement of the minimal environmental restrictions 
nominally required by the state.  Unrelenting pressure from politicians and lobbyists 
has allowed corporate interests to capture and control our regulators.
Today capital insiders are pursuing vampire industries and ordinary Mainers are 
pleading for them to stop.
It’s time to take a fresh look at Maine’s regulations on finfish factories.  Let’s pause 
and consider how we want to deal with the threat they pose to our coastal waters.  
Let’s devise a new set of regulations that allows aquaculture to thrive, but also 
preserves our delicate and unique marine resources.
Please enact LD 508. 
Thank you! 

