 Morgan Rielly 
 16 Blue Spruce Farm Road, Apt #6 
 Westbrook, ME 04092 
 Phone: (207) 228-5767 
 Morgan.Rielly@legislature.maine.gov  H  OUSE OF   R  EPRESENT ATIVES  
 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
 AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
 (207) 287-1400 
 TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
 April 20, 2023  
 Testimony of Repr esentative Mor gan Rielly in opposition to  
 LD 508,   Resolve, Dir ecting the Department of Envir onmental Pr otection to Review Its  
 Envir onmental Permitting Laws  
 befor e the Joint Standing Committee on Envir onment and Natural Resour ces 
 Good   afternoon   Senator   Brenner ,  Representative   Gramlich,   and  distinguished   members   of  the 
 Joint   Standing   Committee   on  Environment   and  Natural   Resources.   I  am  Representative   Morgan 
 Rielly ,  representing   House   District   127,  which   includes   part  of  Westbrook.   I  cannot   testify   in 
 person today , but I am submitting my written testimony   in opposition to LD 508   . 
 LD  508  was  brought   to  my  attention   yesterday .  I’m  concerned   that  this  legislation   will  enact  
 regulatory   changes   that  will  further   slow   the  leasing   process   and  create   additional   permits,  
 hurting   our  small   aquaculture   farms,   like  our  oyster   farmers.   I  am  also  worried   this  bill  will  have  
 serious   ramifications   regarding   our  working   waterfront   with  the  potential   to  damage   coastal   and 
 island communities' ability to diversify their economic base.  
 I  also  want   to  flag  to  the  committee   that  LD  508  will  direct   the  DEP   to  consider   whether  
 on-water   aquaculture   should   be  subject   to  the  same   or  similar   regulatory   regime   as  land-based  
 aquaculture.   These   are  two  entirely   different   ecosystems,   and  the  imposition   of  land  management  
 methods   on  the  water   could   result   in  serious   unintended   ecological   impacts   .  And  marine  
 aquaculture   operations   are  already   held  to  higher   standards   than  those   on  land.   The  imposition   of 
 land  use  standards   on  marine   leases   might   end  up  decreasing   regulatory   oversight   ,  which   could  
 lead to state agencies   using standards not meant for aquatic ecosystems   . 
 I  urge  my  colleagues   on  the  Environmental   and  Natural   Resources   Committee   to  please   vote 
 ought not to pass   . Thank you so much for your time and consideration.  
 District 127: Westbrook 

