 
 
131st MAINE LEGISLATURE 
THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL 
RESOURCES 
   
Re: Testimony in Opposition to LD 508 
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Peter DelGreco, 
President & CEO of Maine & Co.  My organization exists to find growing companies and 
show them how they can be successful in establishing an operation in Maine.  Created 
during the administration of Governor Angus King, we are a privately funded 501(c)6.  
We compete with states from the entire country and countries around the world to 
attract new jobs and investment to Maine.  We also work with existing Maine 
companies, helping them implement their growth plans.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share why I oppose LD 508.   
 
The bill establishes a working group comprised of multiple (17) “stakeholders” only two 
of which come from aquaculture. It is designed to ensure the regulated community 
(aquaculture) is in the minority and discriminated against in the process. Imagine 
proposing a working group to examine how the lobster community is regulated with 17 
members only two of which come from the lobster fishery. 
 
Perhaps more importantly, creating a working group like this is an attempt to remove 
the influence of science and scientists.  This working group will turn fact-based scientific 
decision making into a political fight.  Nobody can be in favor of politicizing our natural 
resources.  Removing the authority and influence of DEP’s scientists in favor of a 
political body will lead to delays, a coarsening of our discourse, and poor decision 
making.  Radicals against aquaculture may want those results, but those results will lead 
to a harming of our natural resources. 
 
Anyone who has gone through the DEP process knows how rigorous it is.  The scientists 
at DEP are incredibly knowledgeable and trained.  They have studied the science for 
years and have worked a long time to understand the impacts of various activities on 
Maine’s environment.  People who criticize the process are typically frustrated that they 
did not get the results they wanted.  Their criticisms are usually that their vacation may 
be temporarily impacted. However, if the science is correct and there is no political 
influence, the results should be allowed to stand.   
 

Our experience has been that opposition groups do not care about science and 
standards.  It is just the opposite: they want to stifle development that meets the 
scientific standards.  They want to usurp the authority of the scientists and professionals 
at DEP by turning the process into political one.  Upon reading the text of the 
amendment to LD 508, I can only conclude that this is the intent of the legislation. 
 
The State of Maine has an extraordinarily rigorous process for permitting.  It is long and 
detailed.  It is a gauntlet to be sure.  No one gets a free pass.  Bad projects get rejected.  
Good projects can make it through after a lot of time and expense.  Some bad projects 
can become good projects with changes and adjustments based on science and new 
technology.  Inserting a political committee to the middle of this process only serves to 
make a difficult process messy.  In order to maintain Maine’s environmental standards, 
we cannot reduce the influence of the scientists. 
 
Thank you again and I urge this committee to oppose LD 508. 
