Testimony of Ted O'Meara 
L.D. 508 public hearing 
April 20, 2023 
Sen. Brenner, Rep. Gramlich, and members of the committee, I am Ted O'Meara, 
a founding member or Frenchman Bay United. l am testifying in support of L.D. 
508, Bill "Resolve, Directing the Department of Environmental Protection to 
Review its Environmental Permitting Laws." 
Our coalition has led the fight Americans Aquafarms' ill-conceived and destructive 
proposal to put a massive industrial fish in the waters of Frenchman's Bay, just off 
Acadia National Park. Our coalition is broad and deep, representing lobstermen 
and woman, small-scale aquaculture, tourism-related businesses, year-round 
residents, seasonal residents, and organizations as diverse as the Bar Harbor 
Chamber of Commerce and the Natural Resources Council of Maine. 
We learned a lot in taking on this fight. While the American Aquafarms project is 
dead for now, its backers, led by a man convicted of financial fraud, have 
promised to return. And from what we know about the state of large-scale of 
finfish aquaculture around the world, American Aquafarms won't be the last 
foreign company seeking to exploit the cold, clean waters of the Maine coast for 
the bargain-basement price ofjust $100 an acre per year. 
We also learned that massive projects on or in the water are treated differently 
and with far less scrutiny that similar projects on land. This legislation seeks to 
address that issue. With places like Washington state and British Columbia
shutting down finfish farming in pens and countries like Norway imposing massive 
new taxes on aquaculture, we should be prepared for an onslaught of new 
projects along the Maine coast, and we should make sure that our environmental 
laws and regulations and permitting processes protect this unique and precious 
resource. 
In August of 2021, in response to numerous requests for the Board of 
Environmental Protection to assume jurisdiction of the American Aquafarms 
applications, the DEP commissioner wrote in a letter denying those requests that 
the department had ”determined that the proposed project boundaries and 
environmental impact are limited to within the Gouldsboro town lines” and that 
"the Department has received no compelling evidence to support a finding that 
the proposed project will have economic impact in more than one municipality..." 
To the extent that these statements reflect the current attitudes and thinking 
within the department, it is indeed time for a broad group of stakeholders to 
review our environmental permitting laws. As anyone who has ever spent any 
time on or near our coastal wasters knows, water pollution, air pollution, noise 
pollution, and light pollution, do not respect municipal boundaries drawn 
generations ago. 
Like many bays along Maine's coast, Frenchman's Bay is shared by the multiple 
communities — seven in this case. Tides, currents, winds do not follow municipal 
lines. The impacts of industrial development in these bays are felt by all 
communities around the bay, and our environmental laws need to reflect that.
Finally, I urge you to think about the future. 150 years ago, the pulp and paper 
industry was welcomed to Maine, with promises of good-paying jobs, new tax 
revenue and a major boost to the Maine economy. While generations of Maine 
families and communities prospered, the ultimate cost was high: the destruction 
of our rivers and lakes, massive air pollution, toxic landﬁlls and a host of other 
environmental issues that have cost us billions of dollars to mitigate and that we 
still live with today, even as the pulp and paper industry has largely disappeared. 
Let us not make the same mistake with our coastal waters. Owner-operated, 
small-scale aquaculture is an important and growing addition to the Maine 
economy, but as we see more and more investor-backed, industrial-scale projects 
like American Aquafarms, backed by foreign interests with no regard for our 
history or our values, let's make sure they come here on our terms, not theirs. We 
cannot let them do to our coast what pulp and paper did to our inland waters. 
This legislation can be an important step in protecting our coastal waters for 
future generations, and we are grateful to Sen. Grohoski for introducing it. 
Thank you.
