LD 508: Resolve, Directing the DEP to Review its Environmental Permitting Laws 
I am here today to testify against LD 508. My current role is Senior Scientist at Atlantic Sea 
Farms, a mission-driven kelp aquaculture company which partners with ocean farmers to grow kelp and 
provide an additional income stream for about twenty-seven ﬁshermen and women throughout the State.I 
have been directly involved in sustainable aquaculture in some form or another for over l5 years. 
Maine’s existing permitting process is robust, thorough and is effective at keeping out bad actors. 
Both the Experimental and Standard lease application processes include public notiﬁcation and an open 
comment period, a DMR site evaluation and report, and public hearings. Each application thoroughly 
describes the species involved, the husbandry involved, gear type, how the gear will be deployed, where it 
will be stored and when it will be removed from the site. Throughout this process. leases can be modiﬁed, 
withdrawn or denied in response to concerns from stakeholders and the DMR. It currently takes roughly 
l8 months for a three-year experimental lease to go from submission of the application to ﬁnal decision, 
and standard leases can take over three years. This thorough process already does a great job protecting 
Maine’s coastal ecosystems, protecting stakeholders, and ensuring the continued vibrancy of Maine’s 
working waterfronts. LD 508 places an additional burden on applicants and state agencies for no tangible 
beneﬁt to the State or its people and cites problems in our regulatory system where there currently are 
none. This burden would stifle the otherwise reasonable, responsible growth of a sector that is helping to 
growjob opportunities for Mainers — including those who are seeing signiﬁcant changes to their ﬁsheries 
because of a changing climate. 
Land-based aquaculture is fundamentally different from ocean-based aquaculture in every way. It 
does not make any sense to apply the standards of land-based aquaculture to ocean-based lease sites as 
LD 508 proposes. Ocean-based aquaculture are inherently open systems inﬂuenced by weather, wind and 
tides. Land based aquaculture are semi-closed systems, sometimes with a single water input and efﬂuent 
pipe. Unlike land-based sites which often sit on privately owned land, ocean leases sit on a publicly 
shared resource and are temporary. Broadly speaking. the biggest operating costs of land-based farms are 
energy, the cost of the land and infrastructure, and labor. In contrast, ocean-based farmers are primarily 
concerned with storms, their boat, their crew and their gear. These are all marine-based concerns, and the 
Department of Marine Resources is the proper agency to oversee permitting of ocean-based farms in 
Maine coastal waters. 
Finally, the men and women of Maine’s working waterfront need additional support from policy 
makers, not spurious permitting regulations that create barriers to our coastal communities looking for 
sustainable diversiﬁcation opportunities in the face of a changing climate. Maine has over 5,000 
experienced commercial ﬁshermen operating out of dozens of harbors throughout the state. In 2022, 
lobster made up almost 70% of the entire value of Maine’s commercial landings and our overdependence 
on this one species makes our coastal communities vulnerable. Throughout the world, Maine is known for 
its maritime heritage. Aquaculture is an opportunity to diversify Maine’s working waterfronts and allow 
opportunities for Mainers to continue building a future in meaningful, year-round careers on the water. 
Ultimately this is aboutjobs, and LD 508 will prevent and delay our skilled maritime workforce from 
obtaining the leases they need to continue to make a living on the water with absolutely no beneﬁt to our 
oceans. This effort by riparian landowners — many of whom are only here seasonaly — will stiﬂe one of 
the key, environmentally sustainable opportunities for our working waterfront communities in the state. 
For those reasons I urge you to reject LD 508 
Thank you 
Thew Suskiewicz 
Senior Scientist 
Atlantic Sea Farms
