Tom Sorby
Lamoine 
LD 508
Senator Stacy Brenner, Representative Lori Gramlich and members of the Committee 
on Environment and Natural Resources, , thank you for the opportunity to submit 
testimony.
 
I’m Tom Sorby, Operations Manager for Kingfish Maine. I’ve been raising multiple 
species of fish in several countries over the last 15 years. I earned my Bachelor of 
Science in Marine Biology and Chemistry from Sparsholt College, Hampshire UK. 
And I also have my Master of Science in Sustainable Aquaculture from Stirling 
College.
 
I am speaking in opposition to LD 508.
 
In Maine, the current permitting process is extremely robust and stringent, and this 
applies not only to land-based aquaculture but also to off-shore aquaculture. At 
present, it can take years to permit a project due to the numerous agencies involved 
that review and comment on the applications. The current permitting process already 
looks into any potential environmental impacts, which is inclusive of costal marine 
water quality and habitat.
 
It seems rather odd that the aquaculture industry is vastly underrepresented in the 
suggested working group composition. Of the 17 suggested members of the working 
group, only 2 would have any aquaculture experience. Of those 2, only one would be 
an individual actively working in the industry and there would be no representation 
from anyone with large (greater than 50 acres) lease holdings. Why is the aquaculture 
industry vastly underrepresented?
The latest amendment to the bill changes the scope of the bill to focus “on-water net 
pen finfish aquaculture”. Therefore, surely the committee should include 
representation from current net-pen finfish farming operations.
 
In addition, opponents to aquaculture projects already claim that the agencies that 
review the permitting process are understaffed and not able to adequately review the 
applications already in front of them. Why then, would you want to divert valuable 
resources away from these agencies to review the already robust environmental 
permitting laws.
 
Perhaps it would be prudent for the committee to pass legislation to further fund the 
DEP and DMR to increase staff numbers and strengthen the departments.
 
I implore the committee to trust the existing system and not waste time and money on 
the formation of a committee to answer a question that is already well defined.
