TESTIMONY OF BRENDAN MCQUADE 
Ought to Pass——LD I290 
An Act to End the Maine Information and Analysis Center Program 
Submitted to the 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee 
May 4, 2020 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, thank you for this opportunity to address you today. My name is Brendan McQuade. I 
am an associate professor of criminology at the University of Southern Maine. While I do not speak on 
behalf of my employer, I do speak as an expert on fusion centers. live published six academic articles and 
the only book on the subject. ‘ I coordinated the production of The MIAC Shadow Report, which we 
delivered to this committee last year? On this basis of this work, I urge you to vote yes on LD 1290. 
As a result of the whistleblower lawsuit and hacks, we know the MIAC maintains records on 
people without criminal predicate and monitors social movements. We know that the MIAC spams police 
with unnecessary and inaccurate information. We know that the MIAC violates its own privacy policies. 
While I am happy to talk more about these matters, today, I will detail on the MIAC’s hyper-focus on 
‘ Brendan McQuade, Pacijj/ing the Homeland: Intelligence Fusion and Mass Supervision (Oakland: University of 
California Press, 2019); Brendan McQuade, "The Puzzle of Intelligence Expertise: Spaces of Intelligence Analysis 
and the Production of ‘Political ’ Knowledge," Qualitative Sociology 39, no. 3 (2016); Brendan McQuade, "Police 
and the Post-9/ ll Surveillance Surge: ‘Technological Dramas’ in ‘the Bureaucratic Field."‘ Surveillance & Society 
14, no. 1 (2016); Brendan McQuade, “From the Carceral Leviathan to the Police State: Policing Decarceration in 
New York State.” In After Prisons? Freedom, Decarceration, and Justice Disinvestment, edited William Martin and 
Joshua Price, 53-75 (Lanham: Lexington Books, 2016); Rajiv Shah and Brendan McQuade “Surveillance, Security, 
and Intelligence-Led Policing in Chicago, ” In Neoliberal Chicago, edited by Euan Hague, Larry Bennet and Roberta 
Garner, 243-259 (Urbana: University of Illinois Press); Brendan McQuade, "World Histories of Big Data Policing," 
Journal of World-Systems Research 27, no. l (2021); Brendan McQuade, Lorax B. Horne, Zach Wehrwein, and 
Milo Z. Trujillo. "The secret of BlueLeaks: security, police, and the continuum of paciﬁcation." Small Wars& 
Insurgencies 33, no 4-5 (2021). 
2 Cushing, Chris; Michael LeComte; Brendan McQuade; Mark Sayre and Maxine Secskas, The MIAC Shadow 
Report: Reporting on MIAC Auditing Processes Supplemental to the DPS Report. The Church of Safe Injection; the 
Electronic Privacy Information Center, the Maine Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, the Maine Democratic 
Socialists of America, Maine Youth Justice and the Muslim Justice League, April 1, 2022. 
https://legislature.maine.gov,/doc/8516
property crime and its impact on vulnerable populations. These two issues reﬂect the core the MIAC’s 
work, contradict the claims of the MIAC’s defenders, and reveal how the MIAC hanns public safety. 
During debates over a 2021 bill to close the MIAC, the then-MIAC director cited the disruption 
of a mass shooting, the prevention of suicide, and the location of a sex offender as examples of the 
MIAC’s work.3 These selections, obviously chosen for their feel-good optics, do not accurately represent 
the work of the MIAC. 
In 2021, I worked with two data scientists to analyze the MIAC’s email access logs. We found 14 
of the 15 most downloaded documents concern property crime. The MIAC largely ignores domestic 
violence. The most downloaded ‘wanted poster’ for a domestic assault circulated roughly as frequently as 
a wanted poster for someone who had stolen a coin collection. Maine has one of the lowest crime rates in 
the United States. There are about 20 homicides annually. Over half are connected to domestic violence. 
The MIAC ignores one of the most pressing public safety issue in the state in favor of property crime, the 
least serious and hardest crime to solve.4. 
The hacked MIAC records published in 2020 also include at least 89 bulletins on people with 
suicidal feelings, mental health issues, disabilities, and/or chronic illness. One of these concerns Joshua 
Hussey, an individual wanted for violation of a protection of abuse orderand a known risk of “suicide by 
cop.” Despite MIAC intelligence waming about this danger, the Maine State Police sent their tactical 
team to bring him into custody. In the subsequent confrontation, Hussey shot himself in the head and 
eventually died.5 This incident begs the question: does the MIAC make a measurable and positive impact 
3 Michael Johnston, “Testimony of Lieutenant Michael Johnston, Maine State Police, in Opposition to LD 1278” 
April 12, 2021, https://mainelegislature.org/legis/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=151607. 
4 Brendan McQuade, Lorax B. Horne, Zach Wehrwein, and Milo Z. Trujillo. "The secret of BlueLeaks: security, 
police, and the continuum of paciﬁcation." Small Wars & Insurgencies 33, no 4-5 (2021). 
5 Cushing, Chris; Michael LeComte; Brendan McQuade; Mark Sayre and Maxine Secskas, The MIAC Shadow 
Report: Reporting on MIAC Auditing Processes Supplemental t0 the DPS Report. The Church of Safe Injection; the 
Electronic Privacy Information Center, the Maine Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, the Maine Democratic 
Socialists of America, Maine Youth Justice and the Muslim Justice League, April 1, 2022. 
https1//legislature.maine.gov/doc/8516, 47-48.
on public safety issues related to mental illness, substance abuse, and homelessness? Should a secretive 
police intelligence center be part of the public response to these social problems? 
The problems posed by MIAC, then, are not just the fact of surveillance and related concerns 
about privacy but the structural bias of law enforcement: the overcriminalization of the crimes of the 
powerless. There are pressing public safety problems in Maine like domestic violence, crimes against 
children, and the opioid epidemic. The MIAC makes these problems worse by keeping us locked into 
punitive responses. When you have a hammer, everything looks like a nail. To bring real public safety to 
Maine, we need more tools. Put down the hammer. Close the MIAC. Vote yes on LD 1290. 
Please note: if you would like a copy of any of the material cited in this comment, please contact me at 
brendan.i.mcquade@gmail.com
