nix 
Janet T. Mills J‘ A Douglas A. Famham 
Govemor , . 
Major General 
State of Maine ., Commissioner 
(207) 287-3531 ._. ,3?' 
(207) 430-6000 
Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management 
33 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333-0033 
LD 1290, “An Act To End the Maine Information and Analysis Center Program” 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
May 4, 2023 
Good Afternoon, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. My name is 
Doug Famham, and I am Commissioner of the Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency 
Management. I am providing testimony in my role as the Governor ’s Homeland Security 
Advisor and here in opposition to LD 1290, An Act To End the Maine information and Analysis 
Center Program. 
While you will hear plenty of testimony related to the law enforcement contributions and 
value, I would like to point out the importance of the MIAC relative to Homeland Security 
efforts in our state and nationally. In 2021, at the Spring Conference of the Govemors Homeland 
Security Advisor Council, the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, Secretary 
Mayorkas, addressed the Council. He discussed how his security strategy prioritizes 
collaboration and that fusion centers (MIAC) are key in that effort. He said, "I am a big believer 
in fusion centers." In particular, the challenges we see from domestic violent extremists requires 
information be shared both from the national level down to states and local officials and, from 
local agencies up through the state to the federal government. information must be shared 
both to insure all the necessary agencies are both prepared for and alerted to potential threats. He 
said we need to rely heavily on fusion centers. 
We currently face a more dynamic, more volatile, and more complex environment than 
after 9/ 1 I. Protecting our citizens and critical infrastructure from terrorism, cyber-attacks and 
other threats requires information sharing at all levels of government. Today's challenges require 
more sharing, not less. The source of threats is even more dynamic ...domcstic extremist, foreign 
criminal elements, and foreign adversaries with both strategic and tactical motives are real 
threats to homeland security. Without an effective MIAC, Maine would be putting its citizens 
and the entire national information sharing infrastructure at risk. 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak on this important subject and I stand by to answer 
your questions regarding my testimony.
