1 
 Testimony of Jeff McCabe 
Maine Service Employees Association, SEIU Local 1989  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
May 4, 2023,  
State House Room 436 and Electronically  
In Support of the Concept of : LD 1492, An Act to Increase the Transparency and Accountability of the Maine 
Information and Analysis Cente r 
In Opposition to : LD 1290, An Act to End the Maine Information and Analysis Center Program  
Senator  Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury , members of the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety , my name is Jeff McCabe, Director of Politics and Legislation for the Maine Serv ice Employees 
Association, Local 1989 of the Service Employees International Union. The Maine Service Employees 
Association represents over 13,000 workers across the state.    I spend a lot of time in the S tate House and C ross O ffice Building helping members share their stories and 
hearing powerful lived experiences , which is important. However,  this isn’t an option for all state employees ; 
the type of work that many state employees do can create a conflict with them appearing in public and tal king 
about their work. This can occur for folks in C orrections, state hospitals, law enforcement  work, child protective  
services and others state positions.  
In our G reat S tate of Maine , state law enforcement is supported by numerous civilian employees. These 
employees often have specific skills and training for the tasks and jobs they perform . It has taken them years to 
obtain these skills and training. These civilian employees put in long hours, deal with short staffing and 
noncompetitive wages that have not kept up with the tasks they perform.  The civilian employees working with 
state law enforcement often have jobs that are so specific that transferring to other position is limited. Ci vilian 
employees are often supervised by sworn officers and work with sworn officers who are eligible for special plan retirement after 25 years. This is different from many other states.  
Civilian analysts at the Maine Information and Analysis Center ( MIA C): 
There are three State positions that are civilian in the MIAC.  The other positions  are Maine State Police sworn 
and liaison personnel from other members of the Maine law enforcement community.  They also have 
representation from the federal analysts who are attached to the MIAC.   
We have folks who have been at the MIAC over 10 years and I might even say since the beginning of MIAC . 
The MIAC structure is set up to have frequent changing of l eadership . Attached I have provided a 
reclassification request from 2016 that one of the analyst s provided as a reference.  
In closing, we are supportive of improving transparency and oversight of state agencies. We live in a time when 
we are seeing an increase in threats against schools, publ ic figures and government entities. The recent activities 
by Neo Nazis in Portland show a scary trend and should give us pause about eliminating a tool like MIAC. 
https://www.bangordailynews.com/2023/04/10/news/portland/maine -antisemitism- neo-nazi-rally/  
Other recent articles : 
Jan. 6 insurrection at the U.S. Capitol allegedly made several threatening phone calls to Rep. Chellie Pingree’s 
office in 2020, court documents reveal https://www.newscentermaine.com/article/news/crime/court- documents -
reveal -maine -man-arrested -in-connection -with-january- 6-capitol -riots-made -several -threatening -calls- to-rep-
chellie- pingrees -office/97 -501a6741- 9a6a -4bb4- ae56 -cf7985635568 
2 
 Portland residents call for action after violent neo -Nazi march  
https://www.mainepublic.org/news/2023- 04-11/portland- officials -vow-to-respond -following- neo-nazi-
demonstration 
Thank you and I am happy to answer any questions . 
  
3 
  
 
PLANNING AND RESEARCH ASSOCIATE II (0040)  RECLASSIFICATION FJA 
 
Location: Maine Information and Analysis Center  
File Date: 11 October 2016  
 
 
PURPOSE : Reclassify the Planning and Research Associate II  (0040) positions located within the Maine Information and 
Analysis Center (MIAC), to the appropriate classification of Intelligence Analyst , which is fully aligned with the assigned 
job duties.  
• 24 FY 06/07 Executive Order by the Governor of the State of Maine, established the Maine Information and 
Analysis Center.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
FUSION CENTER PERSONNEL GUIDELINES  
 
 
• Fusion center analysts have a requirement to live a life suitable to obtain and further maintain a Department of 
Homeland Security Clearance, that is re -evaluated and renewed every 10 years at the secret level and every 5 
years at the top-secret level.  
• Recommended minimum criminal intelligence training standards were developed for Fusion Center Intelligence Analysts  
 
 Yearly Training in areas of Privacy, Civil Rights and Civil Liberties  
 The individual selected must possess a robust analytical capacity for evaluating information and have the ability to 
establish systems to share this information. The position will analyze information gathered/reported from the field to 
develop intelligence  products which will be shared with MIAC partners on the Federal, State, Local and Tribal level.  
 
 
 
 
  TO UNDERSTAND THE INTELLIGENCE ANALYST JOB ROLE , ONE MUST UNDERSTAND HOW FUSION CENTERS WORK  
WHAT IS A FUSION CENTER ? 
Fusion centers operate as state and major urban area focal points for the receipt, analysis, gathering, and sharing of 
threat-related information between federal, state, local, tribal, territorial, and private sector partners (DHS, 2018).  
 
WHAT DO FUSION CENTERS DO? 
Fusion centers contribute to the Information Sharing Environment through their role in receiving threat information from the federal government; analyzing that information in the context of their local environment ; disseminating 
that information to local a gencies; and gathering tips, leads, and suspicious activity reporting (SAR) from local 
agencies and the public. Fusion Centers analyze the information and develop relevant products  to disseminate to 
their customers (DHS, 2018). 
 
4 
  
