STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD 
Joe Villers 
Co-chair, National Fusion Center Association- Northeast Region 
Director, New Hampshire Information and Analysis Center 
Maine Legislature 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Statement Regarding LD No. 1290, An Act to End the Maine Information and Analysis Center  
 
May 4, 2023 
 
Chairwoman Beebe-Center, Chairwoman Salisbury, members of the committee, thank you for allowing 
me to appear before you today.  My name is Joe Villers, and I am a Co-chair of the National Fusion 
Center Association’s (NFCA) Northeast Region, which is comprised of the 18 fusion centers that range 
from Ohio and Washington D.C. up to Maine. I serve on the NFCA Executive Board and I am the 
Director of the New Hampshire Information and Analysis Center, which is New Hampshire’s version of 
the Maine Information and Analysis Center (MIAC).    
On behalf of the NFCA, which represents the 80 recognized state and major urban area fusion centers 
around the nation, I urge the committee to support the sustainment of the MIAC because it is the focal 
point for information sharing about threats to residents and critical infrastructure in Maine. Without the 
MIAC, it would become very difficult to ensure information from around the country that may be relevant 
to Maine is shared in a timely way with the right public safety agencies in the state. It would also become 
much more difficult for information discovered in Maine regarding threats to public safety or critical 
infrastructure in another part of the country to be shared with the appropriate agencies who could take 
action. 
The National Network of Fusion Centers was created after the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001. 
The attack, which took the lives of nearly 3,000 people, forced leaders to acknowledge that the U.S. 
public safety community had an information sharing problem. The solution, in part, was fusion centers, as 
fusion centers are designed to facilitate the sharing of information across all levels of government and the 
private sector. The mission of fusion centers is to analyze and share information that can help prevent 
attacks and protect our citizens from our greatest threats. Fusion centers assist in the identification, 
prevention, mitigation, response and recovery of terrorist acts and other major threats to public safety. No 
other information sharing network exists that can do what the fusion center network can do. The network 
allows centers like the MIAC to share classified and unclassified threat information with state, local and 
federal partners. The network helps to prevent information silos and promotes threat information sharing. 
We are living in dangerous times. Threats from both domestic and foreign terrorists, nation states and 
criminals are persistent. Criminals and terrorists continue to evolve. Many threat actors are leveraging 
new technologies and information sharing networks of their own to aid with attacks and criminal actions. 
Threat actors can hurt us from afar by attacking our critical infrastructure through cyberattack; by seeking 
to divide us through disinformation and misinformation campaigns; and by stealing from our businesses 
and citizens via sophisticated, internet facilitated ransomware and phishing attacks.  Foreign terrorists 
continue to attempt to radicalize our citizens to violence. Extremists of all types here in the United States 
continue to plot attacks against civilians, law enforcement, public officials and infrastructure. The MIAC 
provides intelligence support to FBI-led Joint Terrorism Task Force terrorism investigations, federal, state 
and local criminal investigations and to cyber investigations. Fusion centers receive threat intelligence 
from the U.S. Intelligence Community which includes the FBI, the Department of Homeland Security 
Office of Intelligence Analysis, the Drug Enforcement Administration and the branches of the U.S. 
Armed Forces. We also receive information from agencies such as the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure 
Security Agency and the Multi-state Information Sharing and Analysis Center. 
As a representative of your neighboring state’s fusion center, I want you to know that the NHIAC shares 
threat information on almost a daily basis with the MIAC. Our states share a 177-mile border, and we all 
know that criminals move across borders. I would be remiss if I didn’t tell you that information sharing 
between the MIAC and the NHIAC is just as important to the safety of the citizens of New Hampshire as 
it is to the citizens of Maine. Threat information that the NHIAC and the MIAC share includes 
information on armed and dangerous suspects, theft rings, human trafficking suspects, bomb threats, 
cyberattacks and missing persons. Both the NHIAC and that MIAC are also part of a larger threat 
information sharing apparatus- the National Network of Fusion Centers. It is vital that all states have 
fusion centers and that this network is complete. The MIAC shares threat information they receive with 
Maine public safety officials and first responders. This information is used to inform both strategic and 
tactical decision making. 
On a personal note, I would like you to know the following: I served for 27 years in the Army with U.S. 
Army Special Operations. As a Special Forces Soldier, I completed five combat tours and lost many close 
friends. I have spent the majority of my adult life serving to protect this country and our Constitution – 
including its First Amendment. My love of this country, our Constitution and our way of life is second to 
none. I could not be a part of this fusion center network if I felt that it was ineffective or if I felt that it 
was infringing upon our citizens’ privacy rights or civil liberties. We learned on 9/11 that failure to share 
threat information will lead to disaster. The threats are real and we need to have fusion centers sharing 
threat information. But with this great responsibility, we also have the great responsibility of protecting 
our citizens’ privacy, civil rights and civil liberties. This is a responsibility that the NFCA takes very 
seriously. The NFCA provides fusion centers with privacy training, resources and education. The MIAC 
has a privacy policy which I am sure they have already provided for your review.  
On behalf of the NFCA, I strongly urge that the proposed legislation to abolish the MIAC be 
reconsidered. We need all states to participate with the information sharing efforts of the National 
Network of Fusion Centers. Fusion centers help protect America. I am happy to provide any additional 
information you may need, and I appreciate the opportunity to share the importance of the MIAC to my 
state and to the rest of America. 
