Public Comments in Support of LD 1290 “An Act to End the Maine Information and Analysis Center” 
Members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee 
My name is Lewis Kingsbury and I am a resident of Nobleboro, Maine 
On December 8, 2006 Gov. John Balducci signed an executive order establishing the Maine 
Information and Analysis Center. MIAC was established as Maine’s Fusion Center within the 
information sharing network of the Department of Homeland Security. 
Fusion Centers were established as a result of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 as a way of 
expediting the sharing of security information between the various federal intelligence gathering 
agencies and state and local law enforcement on terrorist activities. 
The original Executive Order issued by Gov. John Balducci establishing MIAC states in paragraph 4: 
“WHEREAS, the overall goal of these efforts is to assist law enforcement, emergency management, 
and other public and private officials in securing Maine’s citizens and infrastructure from the threat of 
terrorism. ” 
Responding to citizen and legislative concerns with activities occurring under the auspices of MIAC’s 
charter, oversight legislation was passed which contained the requirement to issue an annual report to 
the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee with an overview of MIAC’s activities for the 
preceding year. On March 15, 2022 MIAC released a four and a half page report providing a high level 
statistical analysis of 2021 activities. 
In the introduction to the 2021 report, the first paragraph states: “The overall goal of the Center is to 
assist law enforcement, emergency management, and other public and private sector officials in 
securing Maine’s citizens and infrastructure from the threat of terrorism and other criminal and 
public safety threats. ” 
It is unknown when or how the intent of the original executive order was changed, allowing warrantless 
surveillance of Maine’s citizenry and is not in compliance with our constitutional right of due process. 
I sat through the opening day of the George’Loder trial. Loder, a state police officer, had been assigned 
to MIAC from 2013 to 2018 and had tried to report what he believed to be illegal data collection on 
Maine citizenry by MIAC personnel. He also refused to comply with demands he felt violated federal 
privacy laws. He sued on the grounds of retaliation by his superiors. 
On December 2, 2022 a jury found in favor of Loder and awarded him $300,000.00. The State Police 
said they would conduct an outside review of MIAC’s practices to determine if federal privacy law, 28 
CFR part 23, applied to fusion centers. It is unknown if such a review has occurred. 
On May 2, 2023, in preparation for this public hearing on LD 1290, I searched the legislature ’s online 
report database for the MIAC annual report, due on April 1*‘ , on 2022 activities. It had not been posted. 
Lew Kingsbuiy 
kingsburyk@hotmail.com
