_ PO Box 7860 
ii: Portland, ME 04112 
_ (207) 774-5444 
'1 
-" if-i"‘" 
www.aclumaine org 
AMEFHBAN Gillil UBERTIES UNION 
Mame 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
LD 1290 - Ought to Pass 
An Act To End the Maine Information and Analysis Center Program 
Joint Standing Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
May 4, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, greetings. My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am Policy Counsel of the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and 
U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I urge you to support LD 1290 because it would 
strengthen the constitutional rights of people in Maine. 
If passed, this bill would end the Maine Information Analysis Center (“MIAC” or 
“Maine’s Fusion Center”). Originally created to improve the sharing of anti-terrorism 
intelligence among different state, local and federal law enforcement agencies, the scope of 
Fusion Centers’ mission has quickly expanded to cover “all crimes and all hazards. ” The types of 
information they seek for analysis has also broadened over time to include not just criminal 
intelligence, but also public and private sector data. Participation in Fusion Centers has grown to 
include not just law enforcement, but also other government entities, the military and even select 
members of the private sector — including, in Maine, an agent of Central Maine Power. 
Fusion centers raise very serious privacy issues at a time when new technology, 
government powers are combining to pose unprecedented threats to Americans ’ privacy. There 
are serious questions about whether data fusion is an effective means of preventing terrorism in 
the ﬁrst place, and whether funding the development of these centers is a Wise investment of 
ﬁnite public safety resources. In a democracy, the collection and sharing of intelligence 
information need to be carried out with the utmost care. That is because more and more, the 
amount of information available on each one of us is enough to assemble a very detailed portrait 
of our lives. And because security agencies are moving toward using such portraits to proﬁle
ACLU of Maine-- 2 
how “suspicious ” we look. Institutions like fusion centers must be planned in a public, open 
manner, and their implications for privacy and other key values carefully thought out and 
debated. And like any powerful institution in a democracy, intelligence gathering must be 
constructed in a carefully bounded and limited manner with sufficient checks and balances to 
prevent abuse. Maine’s fusion center has not conformed to these vital requirements. 
A shroud of secrecy cloaks the MIAC. In 2020, the brave act of a whistleblower 
momentarily removed that shroud. #BlueLeaks showed us that the MIAC is notjust ineffective, 
but also harmful. We learned from a document titled “CIVIL UNREST DAILY REPORT” that 
Maine’s Fusion Center was closely surveilling racial justice and other activists from Portland to 
Presque Isle. In his federal lawsuit against MIAC, State Police Trooper George Loder stated that 
our Fusion Center “has kept an illegal database of gun owners, illegally conducted surveillance 
on peace activists and regularly circumvented federal privacy laws.”‘ Those are the words of an 
eyewitness, a whistleblower. As you all know from your work in criminal justice, it is no small 
matter for a police ofﬁcer to impugn a policing institution. The MIAC is exactly what watchdogs 
feared it was: a highly secretive threat to fundamental constitutional rights. Our First 
Amendment rights to assemble, petition our government, and speak freely are among the rights 
threatened by Maine’s Fusion Center. The MIAC has an immigration official in its midst, 
suggesting that it aids in our country’s profoundly harmful practice of separating families 
through deportation. 
This bill would safeguard the constitutional rights of people in Maine. I urge you to 
strengthen our civil liberties by voting ought to pass. 
Thank you for your time and attention. 
‘ Matt Byme, Maine trooper says he was retaliated against for reporting illegal police surveillance of citizens, May 
14, 2020, Press Herald, available at https://www.pressherald.com/2020/05/14/maine-trooper-says-he-was-reta1iated- 
against~fo1'-reporting-illegal-police-surveillance~of~citizensl ?auth0Authentication=true
