ii’ 
‘=5 a.
, ° 
%isi® 
Pinny Beebe-Center THE MAINE SENATE 3 gram Hgusg Station 
Senator, District 12 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator Pinny Beebe-Center introducing 
LD 1290, “An Act to End theMaine Information and Analysis Center Program” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
May 4, 2023 
Good afternoon, Representative Salisbury and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. I am Senator" Pinny Beebe-Center, and I represent all of Knox 
County, except for Isle Au Haut and the town of Washington. I am pleased to present to you LD 1290 
“An Act to End the Maine Information and Analysis Center Program. ” 
The time has come to close the Maine Information and Analysis Center. The MIAC is the State of 
Maine’s node in the National Network of Fusion Centers, recognized by the Department of Homeland 
Security. At this point in time, I believe the program is unnecessary, and can be intrusive on the lives of 
Maine residents. 
Fusion centers are analytic nodes information in sharing networks. While managed by police, fusion 
centers have agreements with other entities that allow them to remotely access their records. They buy 
databases from private brokers. Using specialized software, intelligence analysis create intelligence 
sophisticated products from massive datasets: social network analyses, various forms of mapping, and 
visualizations of telephone metadata. Fusion centers, then, share this information and intelligence with 
other government agencies and the private sector. 
The privacy of Mainers should be something we strive to protect, not exploit. This bill would officially 
defund MIAC, deappropriating their general fund for ﬁscal years 2023-24 and ﬁscal year 2024-25. In 
Maine, we need programs that are effective and work to better serve the needs for the state. Based on the 
history of the program and where we are currently as a state, this program no longer ﬁts that description, 
and we would be better without it. 
I thank you for your time and consideration, I invite you to direct any questions you may have to Brendan 
McQuade who is here to testify on behalf of the bill. 
Chair, Criminal ’ Justice and Pubiic Saﬁly Committee * Mamie R£’S()il!‘C€S Cozmnirfee 
.S'tare House: (207) 287-1515 * Fax: (207) 287-1585 * T011Free.' 1-800-423-6900 * TTY: 711 
Pinny.Becbe —Cenfe2'@1egisF(11z11'e. nzainegov * 1 e?gz's1a2 ‘m'e. maine. gov/senaie
