MA|NE MUN|C|pAL l—800—l+52—8786(in state) 
» 
(T) 207-a23~sa2s 
ASSOCIATION 5iNCE wee (F) 2O,_62,_Om 
60 Community Drive I Augusto, ME 04330-91486 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1290- An Act to End the Maine Information and Analysis Center Program 
May 5, 2023 
Sen. Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury and distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I providing testimony, in support of LD 1290, An 
Act to End the Maine Information and Analysis Center Program on behalf of the Maine Municipal 
Association, which represents the interests of municipal government before the Legislature. The positions 
of the Association are established by our 70-member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC), who are 
elected by the councils and selectboards of municipalities in each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts. 
As the committee reviews the merits of this bill it is important to understand the role of the Maine 
Information and Analysis Center (MIAC) as a force multiplier for gathering intelligence and patterns of 
criminal activity that cannot be accomplished at the local level. Municipal policing is local in its scope, 
community orientated, and well suited to addressing very localized threats on limited budgets with direct 
agency and input from the people who are paying for the service. 
Fusion centers are by in large operate as a reﬂection of the communities in which they are 
constructed. For this reason alone, the MIAC is cannot be evaluated in comparison to centers established 
in other states, which often have far more robust urbanized surveillance systems that are not authorized in 
Maine. While part of the intelligence analysis is derived from scouring voluntarily shared, publicly 
accessible data on social media platforms, the sharing of such information still must meet the existing 
reasonability test for criminal activity. 
The scope and need for the state police to provide a larger intelligence role in watching and 
assessing threats to Maine communities from criminal elements outside municipal boundaries is not new. 
In 1968 the Criminal Intelligence Unit of the Maine State Police was formed to focus on a growing 
problem with white collar crime that could not be tracked or understood without linking localized 
knowledge of criminal activity that would seem unrelated without knowledge of a shared pattern of crime 
capture by municipal and county law enforcement. 
Unsubstantiated, often highly biased, complaints are received and logged in all law enforcement 
databases. From irrational neighbors, overly cautious citizens, complaints, even very obvious non-law 
enforcement related ones, are logged and remain in these databases in perpetuity. The MIAC is similar, 
except that unsubstantiated intelligence it receives is purged within the federal guidelines. The MIAC’s 
value is the fast sharing of information for investigation purposes and substantiated threat disruption from 
both classiﬁed and public sources distilled in a credible and actionable way to local agencies. 
Community threats that extend beyond municipal boundaries need additional scope, skills and 
authority to be aware of external threats and track violent criminal elements across political boundaries.
This is evidenced by the relatively immediate capture of murder suspects from shocking and high-pro ﬁle 
murders in just the past two years from idyllic rural Acadia and Machias to densely populated Auburn. 
Increasingly perpetrators of violent crime are transitory in their connections to Maine. 
Municipalities manage or contain signiﬁcant critical infrastructure resources. Municipalities 
deliver vast amounts of public goods and services to the people of Maine and have no time, resources, or 
capacity to assess threats to multiple communities let alone what may be coming from inter-state or 
international sources. While the committee may choose to eliminate the MIAC, the need for the types of 
interagency coordination and intelligence will not disappear but may be recreated in ways that have less 
clear ability to establish appropriate operational oversight. 
For these reasons, rather than eliminate the MIAC, officials suggest a better alternative may be to 
clearly deﬁne its mission, and existing operational guidelines in statute as has been recommended at the 
federal level.
