Testimony of Vanessa Corson for Maine Emergency Management Agency, Department of 
Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY 
LD 1290 "An Act To End the Maine information and Analysis Center Program” 
Position — Against 
May 4, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, my name is Vanessa Corson and 
i am the Public Information Officer at the Maine Emergency Management Agency (MEMA). I'm 
here to provide testimony in opposition to LD 1290 ”An Act To End the l\/iaine information and 
Analysis Center Program" . 
This bill terminates the Maine information and Analysis Center (MIAC), which results in 
a Federal Expenditures Fund deallocation of $100,000 beginning in fiscal year 2023-24 to the 
Department of Defense, Veterans and Emergency Management. 
The $100,000 in question and resulting services rendered by the MIAC are part of the 
Homeland Security Grant Program (HSGP). HSGP is one of the grant programs that constitutes 
the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)/Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 
focus on enhancing the ability of state, local, tribal, and territorial governments, as well as 
nonprofits, to prevent, protect against, respond to, and recover from terrorist attacks.' 
Effective homeland security operations rely on access to, analysis of, and the timely 
sharing of open source, unclassified, and classified information, suspicious activity reports, tips 
and leads, and actionable intelligence on indicators and behaviors to accurately identify, assess, 
and mitigate a wide array of threats against the United States, including terrorism, threats to 
life, targeted violence, and other threats. Accordingly, the MlAC works diligently to enhance 
intelligence collection, integration, analysis, and information sharing capabilities to ensure 
partners, stakeholders, and senior leaders receive actionable intelligence and information 
necessary to inform their decisions and operations. Cooperation and information sharing 
among state, federal, and local partners across all areas of the homeland security enterprise, 
including counterterrorism — including both international and domestic terrorism, 
cybersecurity, border security, transnational organized crime, and other areas, is critical to 
homeland security operations and the prevention of, preparation for, protection against, and 
responding to acts of terrorism, and other threats to life and criminal acts of targeted violence. 
Given the importance of information sharing and collaboration for effective homeland 
security solutions, the Homeland Security Grant Program (HSGP), Notice of Funding 
Opportunity iNOFOl, requires that at least one investment must be in support of the State's
efforts to enhance information sharing and cooperation with DHS and other federal agencies. 
This requirement must include at least one dedicated fusion center project. The MIAC is 
Maine's only dedicated fusion center. As such, eliminating the MIAC would put at risk of up to 
the $4.8 million allocated to Maine for Federal Fiscal Year (FFY) 2022 and the $4.8 million 
allocated to Maine for FFY 2023. 
Beyond the potential for lost grant funds - the Agency and State would lose a critical 
partner in intelligence and information sharing. 
With these things in mind, we encourage you not to pass LD 1290. This concludes my 
testimony and I'm standing by for any questions you may have. Thank you.
