Testimony in support of LD1290 An Act to End the Maine Information and Analysis Center 
Program 
 
May 4, 2023 
 
Good morning Senator Pinny Beebe-Center, Representative Suzanne Salisbury, and 
distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee. 
  
I am here to testify in support of LD1278, An Act to end the Maine Information and Analysis 
Center Program (MIAC). This is one of a network of fusion centers that, among other things, 
have been monitoring legal protest activity while distributing lists of drug arrests and 
recirculating information from other governmental agencies about drug sales in the New England 
area. 
  
The MIAC is one of the latest in state agencies created to expand failed drug interdiction efforts. 
More than 50 years of efforts have failed to achieve their goal, in a “whack a mole” policy. Like 
the boardwalk game, interdiction efforts focus on suppressing drug shipments and sales in one 
area – whacking the mole – only to have them pop up again. These efforts will not achieve our 
goals of reducing the negative health and economic impacts of opioid and other substance use 
disorders. 
  
I reviewed the MIAC 'opioid arrest bulletins,' leaked documents now in the public record. These 
documents provide photos, names, and addresses of people arrested for opioids but there's no 
analysis. As part of my work with the Maine Drug Policy Lab at Colby College, I have 
interviewed many people like those whose mug shots are circulated by the MIAC, people 
arrested for drug trafficking crimes in Maine. 
 
Listening to their stories, I find people who are victims – of sexual assault and childhood trauma, 
of untreated mental illnesses, of systemic neglect and mistreatment from the institutions charged 
with protecting them. They are people charged with trafficking because of the amount of drugs 
they use, because Maine’s antiquated drug laws define possession of small quantities of drugs as 
trafficking. Or they are selling drugs to support their habit, to not become dopesick, to quiet the 
inner torment of anxiety, depression and despair. 
  
One person charged with trafficking said, the MDEA treated me as if I was the Mexican drug 
lord El Chapo, but I am a homeless drug user, living in a tent, selling what I can to support my 
habit and find food. 
  
Maine cannot afford to throw good money after bad. We say, we can’t arrest our way out of this, 
that problematic drug use is a public health problem. The money we are spending on failed 
policing efforts like the MIAC means we cannot spend that money where it is needed. 
  
There are many bills before the Legislature this session requesting money for recovery services, 
harm reduction initiatives, housing and detox beds. Because Maine does not have treatment for 
everyone who wants it, we do not even have recovery centers available for people seeking 
connection, resources and support, we do not have detox beds for those ready to seek recovery 
now. These services are desperately needed community supports for people with substance use 
disorder. 
  
Why am I discussing funding for recovery centers when we are talking about MIAC? Because 
we are being told that there is not enough money. This bill would make that money available.  
Money that could go directly to investing in recovery, in our communities, in a brighter future 
for struggling people. 
  
Maine communities cannot afford to keep funding failed policies. It is time to put our money 
where our mouth is: to fund recovery supports, public health infrastructure and invest in 
communities. 
  
Thank you for your time. I am happy to answer any questions you might have. 
  
Winifred Tate 
Associate Professor of Anthropology 
Director of the Maine Drug Policy Lab at Colby College 
wltate@colby.edu  
207-859-4701 
 
 
 
 
Maine Drug Policy Lab at Colby College  
The Maine Drug Policy Lab at Colby College brings together policymakers, scholars and 
students, providing evidence-based analysis for addressing critical drug policy issues in our state 
and beyond, and conducts research on problematic drug use and access to treatment in Maine.  
 
 
 
 
 
