1, Housa or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE Housa STATION 5.3 ~_'4 
:.1I. -"x" -x’ 
‘ll 
%._=. ‘ZjZ'§ AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 ‘ ' 
(207) 287-1440 
TTY: (207) 287-4469 
Chad R. Perkins 
POB 251 
Dover-Foxcroft, ME 04426 
Residence: (207)279-0927 
Fax: (207) 305-4907 
Chad Perkins@legislature.maine.gov 
. 02 Apr 23 
MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD 
SUBJECT: LD 1242 An Act to Eliminate Certain Motor Vehicle Inspections 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and distinguished membersfof the Joint 
Standing Committee on Transportation, 
Thank you for allowing me to bring forward LD 1242, An Act to Eliminate Certain 
Motor Vehicle Inspections. 
Maine was one of the first states to implement periodic vehicle inspections, starting 
back in 1930. Of course, almost 100 years ago the number of fatalities per mile driven in 
a Model T was 8 times higher than what we see in the cars on the road today, engineered 
and built with modern safety considerations. 
From 1967-1976, the US Department of Transportation had the ability to withhold 
ftmding from states that did not have periodic inspecﬁons. In the heyday of that time 
period, there were 31 states that implemented inspection programs. Since then, the 
number of states with inspection programs has dropped to less than half of that number, 
with the latest state to drop their program doing so in 2018 (Utah). 
Why have so many states dropped their programs, and why does that number continue 
to decrease? Simply because there is no evidence that the presence of a periodic motor 
vehicle inspection program has any signiﬁcant impact on motor vehicle crashes or motor 
vehicle crash fatalities. .A 
From 2015-2019, only 3% of all vehicles involved in a motor vehicle crash hada 
mechanical defect that was a contributing factor to the crash, and it was not the only 
contributing factor in every one of those crashes. In the same time period, in the State of 
Maine, that ntnnber was 1.75%. Additionally, just because the vehicle had a defect, there 
is no indication that the vehicle had the defect at the time of the vehicle inspection. In 
other words, the vehicle could have passed a vehicle inspection, then had a component 
failure a week later and that inspection would not have made any difference. 
House District 31 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville 
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis
According to the 2015 study entitled, “Vehicle Safety Inspections ” by the Government 
Accountability Office: 
“There is little recent empirical research on the relationship between vehicle safety 
inspection programs and whether these programs reduce crash rates. What is available 
has generally been unable to establish any causal relationship. Since GAO last 
conducted a review on vehicle safety inspection programs in 1990, there have been three 
econometric studies conducted examining the relationship between vehicle inspections 
and crashes in the U.S. and three studies examining these programs in other countries. 
Among the three studies of U.S. vehicle inspection programs, none were able to establish 
a statistically significant effect of safety inspection programs on crashes involving either 
fatalities or injuries. Specifically, the studies examined crash rates in all 50 states and 
did not find statistically significant differences in crash rates in states with inspection 
programs compared to those without. International studies have also not been able to 
establish a link between safety inspection programs and crash rates involving either 
fatalities or injuries.” 
Also cited in the report were the 1989 and 1990 studies, with commentary on both. In 
regard to the 1989 study it stated that while inspection programs reduced the number of 
vehicles with mechanical issues, they did not reduce accident rates, and in regard to the 
1990 study (a relook at the 1989 data) it stated that it could see no significant difference 
in accident rates. 
Modern cars are more durable, they are more reliable and they are safer. In addition, 
they come outﬁtted with a bevy of onboard warning indicators and diagnostic tools that 
let the owner/operator know-of almost any mechanical defect or potentially unsafe 
operating condition. 
That is why LD 1242 proposes that the periodic inspection requirement be removed for 
most motor vehicles. It does not remove the inspection requirement for commercial 
vehicles, nordoes it remove the inspection requirement for vehicles sold through a 
dealer, ensuring that Maine consumers are still offered the constuner protections currently 
afforded them. 
The bill also does not remove the minimum set of standards of what constitutes a safe 
motor vehicle, and allows for continued enforcement of operating a defective motor 
vehicle under Title 29-A §1768-5. 
What the bill does is save Maine consumers between $10 millionh and $14 million 
dollars per year in both direct and indirect non-repair related costs associated with 
inspections (which is important since Maine is already the 3“ highest vehicle tax 
burdened state); it eliminates the problem of an aging inspection system that will struggle 
keeping pace with an ever increasing technological rise in modern safety systems such as 
tire pressure monitoring systems, LED lights, autonomous driving systems, advanced 
accident avoidance systems, radar systems, electrical charging systems, fuel cells, et al.; 
it will lower the regulatory cost to the state in monitoring and regulating the inspection
/ 
» 
House District 31" 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville 
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis
station ecosystem and it will protect Mainers from unscrupulous or fraudulent inspection 
station operations (In 2013, the last year for which I had access to data, the Maine State 
Police received 559 complaints from drivers about inspection stations, issued 129 
warnings, and suspended 37 stations and 78 technicians for violating inspection program 
rules). 
Detractors to this bill may bring forth concerns about consumer protections, but I would 
like to reiterate that this bill does not remove inspections for vehicles sold at dealers (and 
there is currently no requirement for a vehicle inspection in a private sale). 
Additionally, there would would be no reason to anticipatean increase in accidents 
should the inspection program be eliminated as the studies show no causal effect. In fact, 
when New Jersey eliminated their inspection program their motor vehicle crash fatalities 
went down signiﬁcantly for almost a decade before they began to rise again. 
We would also likely not see a rise in insurance rates. Data from 2016' show that the 
average premium for liability insurance in states that did not have inspections mandatest 
was $517 per year, compared to $548 in states with mandatory inspections. The same 
dataset shows that out of the 10 most expensive states for liability insurance, five have 
inspections and five don’t. Out of the 10 most affordable states for liability insurance, , 
three have inspections and seven don’t. Simply put, inspection requirements do not 
significantly affect insurance rates. 
In closing, I would like to share one real world example of our inspection system 
unable to keep up with the technology of modern automobiles and the realistic standard 
of what an unsafe motor vehicle is. 
My son, in his early 20s, had a Hytmdai that was about 10 years old. There was a sensor 
on the bottom of the passenger seat that failed. As this sensor was tied into the airbag 
system it would indicate a failure on the dashboard diagnostics. He was told by an 
inspection station that it would not pass an inspection. As this was a common fault for the 
model, the inventory of replacement parts had dried up around the nation and they were 
not being made. We spent weeks on the phone trying to find a part from anywhere inthe 
country. To compound the issue, we were told by an OEM dealer that the airbag would 
still work because of the presence of another sensor. We even tried to get a second 
opinion on the inspection. In the end, the car, which was totally safe but for this one 
sensor which did not impede operation or make it any less safe in any way, made it so we 
could not obtain an inspection sticker, despite two months of very frustrating effort. My 
son, in his twenties and with a new family, had to spend money he did not have to replace 
an otherwise perfectly good car. 
House District 31 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville 
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis
The requirement for a periodic motor vehicle inspection in the State of Maine is an idea 
whose time has come and gone - it probably should have gone a few decades ago. 
Lacking any evidence that it contributes any public safety benefit, continuing an almost 
100 year tradition because “that is the way we have always done it” or because some 
agency is invested in it is poor policy when it comes with real costs to our citizens. 
I thank you for your polite consideration in this matter and ask that the committee give 
this bill a vote of “Ought To Pass” . I will gladly make myself available for questions and 
for any future work sessions. 
Respectfully, 
Q;/,<%¢M, 
Rep. Chad R. Perkins 
District 31 
ATT: 
CF:r 
Committee Chair Senator Chipman 
Committee Chair Representative Williams 
Committee Members 
House District 31 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville 
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis l
