Testimony for LR #1379 An Act to Reimburse Counties for Judicial Costs
Amber Jones, Sagadahoc Count Administrator for the Hearing on February 28th at 1:00p.m.
Per MRS Title 4 § 115 PLACE FOR HOLDING COURT; SUITABLE QUARTERS, Sagadahoc County is required 
to provide space for Superior Court in the County Courthouse, designated by the Chief Justice of the 
Supreme Judicial Court or their designee.
In Sagadahoc County this space is most of the third floor, with the exception of the Probate, EMA, and 
Programs Deputy offices.
The lease Sagadahoc County had with Maine Superior Court is dated September 8, 1987, which provided 
2,000 square feet in use by Maine Superior Court on January 1, 1976. In this agreement the term of the 
lease was 20 years, ending on September 1, 2007, which would be automatically extended by the Lessor 
(County) unless the lessor gave notice 60 days prior to the completion of the prior term. The Court had 
the option of renewal for two terms of five years each with the same covenants and condition except for 
rent, negotiated unless the Court gave (60 days) notice of intention to terminate.
The rental fee was calculated at $28,896 per year, or $2,408 per month. During the term of the lease, 
which was actually terminated in 2005, and the Lessor (County) never renegotiated increases (at the 5-
year intervals) to the rental fee, which could have been done to accommodate the rising cost of utilities 
and janitorial services. 
In 2005 the Court and Lessor negotiated changes to the agreement, (I have not located copies of this) 
which essentially gave back space on the third floor to accommodate the County’s need for the Probate 
Office space, and EMA office space. I have a copy of an email that confirms Maine Superior Court 
stopped paying rent.
In April of 2022 I became Administrator of Sagadahoc County and have been seeing the County through 
unprecedented cost-of-living increases and responding to a large influx of new Maine residents. In a 
very real and tangible way, Sagadahoc County must grow. We need to increase staffing to adequately 
meet the demands of our taxpayers.
In our Communications Department, assessment software shows that for us to have the recommended 
number of dispatchers, we would need to hire 4 more. There is no physical space for this recommended 
growth, we are at capacity.
Our Emergency Management Agency, in order to have the recommended set up for an EOC (Emergency 
Operating Center) this office would have a meeting space. The EMA office is one room with two staff, 
and no room for the meeting space or the third staff member they need to hire. The Probate Office is 
also running out of space. In fact, every department in Sagadahoc County will be employed to capacity 
by July 2023, with zero space for growth.
The real rub of this scenario is that Superior Court rarely uses the space at the County Courthouse. We 
estimate they use it 5 times a year (!) and the rest of the time, we are heating the space and maintaining 
it for it to lie fallow. Space has a value, and we would like to retain control over the use of our third 
floor.  The HVAC system for the Superior Court Room also needs to be replaced and the County is not 
willing to shoulder that cost alone without changes to our agreement.
This testimony is to support Franklin County’s request for compensation of the space the Court uses 
there. It appears that their current agreement/relationship with Superior Court is an even more 
compelling case than Sagadahoc’s, as Superior Court uses the space about 50% of the time, and isn’t 
financially supporting Franklin County. Where we are similar is that we are both looking for a change in 
our agreements with the state superior court. In the current economy we cannot continue to allow the 
use of space for free.      
  
   
