2/28/23
Administrative Office of the Courts
P.O. Box 4820, Portland, Maine 04112-4820
Tel: (207) 822-0792 FAX:  (207) 822-0781 TTY: (207) 822-0701
Julia Finn, Esq. Tel:  (207) 822-0767
Legislative Analyst julia.finn@courts.maine.gov
Judicial Branch testimony neither for nor against LD 543, An Act to Reimburse 
Counties for Judicial Costs:
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Julie Finn and I represent the Judicial Branch. I would like to provide testimony 
regarding this bill.
For the last 47 years, many of the state’s courts have been located in county buildings. Some of 
these buildings date back to the nineteenth century.  The counties have been required to provide such 
quarters, facilities, furnishings and equipment to the Judicial Branch as were in use in 1976.  When 
renovations have been necessary within courtrooms, clerks’ offices or other Judicial Branch space, 
these issues have been resolved as suggested in LD 543: representatives of the Judicial Branch and 
representatives of the county have met and agreed upon a course of action and share the cost of repairs. 
This bill requires the Judicial Branch to do more and to reimburse counties for the cost of 
maintenance, supplies, cleaning and utilities.   If this bill were to become law, it would require a dollar-
for-dollar fiscal note, to cover the listed costs. Amounts spent on maintenance, cleaning and utilities 
are hard costs and non-negotiable. Several of my colleagues at the Judicial Branch are working hard to 
provide solid estimates of these costs but that analysis is not ready today. There are 12 buildings 
presently where the courts share space with county government; we expect the amount sought for 
reimbursement to exceed one million dollars.
That said, jointly developing estimates for these costs would be difficult and imprecise, at best. 
Utility costs are not on separate meters and would thus be hard to equitably divide. Similarly, most 
locations share the same HVAC units, including boilers, air handlers and heat pumps, making a fair 
distribution of expenses difficult or impossible.
According to the bill, discussions around the division of costs would occur annually. The 
analysis and negotiations could take a significant amount of time, for what is essentially a mechanism 
to shift costs from the counties to the state. 
Thank you for your consideration.
