131st Legislature
Senate of 
Maine 
Senate District 24 
Senator Eloise Vitelli
Senate Majority Leader
3 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333-0003
Office (207) 287-1515
Testimony of Senator Eloise Vitelli supporting
LD 543, An Act to Reimburse Counties for Judicial Costs
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
March 8, 2023
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Eloise Vitelli, and I proudly represent Senate District 24, 
which includes all of Sagadahoc County and Dresden. Today I am pleased to testify in favor or 
LD 543, “An Act to Reimburse Counties for Judicial Costs.”
Today, you’ll hear from Sagadahoc County Administrator Amber Jones who will provide the 
details for how the Maine Superior Court does not provide financial compensation to the County. 
Currently, the Maine Superior Court shares part of the third floor with Sagadahoc County 
Emergency Management Agency and the Probate Office inside the Sagadahoc County 
Courthouse. The Court uses this space approximately five times per year. When the Court 
doesn’t use the space, it must sit empty. This is a challenge because the County’s growing 
population and increasing need for emergency and safety services place additional demands on 
the County administration and the services it provides. Simply put, the County is stretched to 
provide sufficient office space and workers to fulfill their responsibilities. Despite this, and the 
rising costs of janitorial services and utilities, the Maine Superior Court no longer pays any rent 
– not even the originally agreed-upon rent that was negotiated in 1987. (Any rental agreement 
entered into almost 40 years ago has certainly not kept up with inflation.) It’s only right that the 
Maine Superior Court should pay its fair share of rent to the County where it operates.
I would urge the committee to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 543.
Thank you for your consideration and time.
Eloise Vitelli
Senate Majority Leader, Senate District 24
Sagadahoc County and Dresden
