 
 
 
 
 
 
LD 543, An Act to Reimburse Counties for Judicial Costs  
March 8, 2023 
 
Chai r Carney, Chai r Moonen, and members of the Joi nt Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is Stephen Gorden 
and in addition to serving as a member of  the board of com missioners for Cumberland County, I am writing today in 
my role as chair of the legislative policy committee of the Mai ne County Commissioners Association . We appreciate 
the opportunity to provide testimony to the Committee in support of LD  543. 
 
About MCC A.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist Maine’s 
county government in providing vital services to Maine citizens in a responsive, efficient, and credible manner. The 
Association is based in Augusta , represent s all 16 of Maine’s counties , and is governed by a board with representation 
from each participating county .  
 
Discussion.  Under current law, county government in some  count ies is responsible for providing facilities, 
furnishings, and equipment in existin g county buildings for the use of the Superior  Court , without charge . In some 
countie s, the State  has built replacement court facilities and now operate those buildings , alleviating those counties of 
the burden to provide Superior  Court facilities without charge.  However, those countie s that do stil l provide facilities 
for Superior Court  use do so without charge. Thu s, a discrepancy exists between counti es with newer Superior Court 
facilities  – where the State has taken over operation of those building s – and those counties with older buildings  – in 
which case  counties  are still required to provide them  for Superior Court use , without ch arge.  
 
Even though county government does not operate the Superior Cou rt themselves, and our court system is statewide, 
county taxpayers of certain  counties are left to foot the bill for these court facilities through their property taxes. Under 
LD 543, the Chief Justice of the Maine Supreme Judicial Court or the Chief Justice’s designee would be required to 
reimburse counties for the cost of maintenance , supplies , cleaning, heat, and electricity at a rate per square foot to be 
determined annually by the county and the Chief Justice for each county building utilized by the Courts. 
 
Those counties tha t still provide buildings f or Superior Court use expend significant  annual resources on the 
maintenance , upkeep, and other costs associated with providing those  facilities. The buildings are large and very old  
and therefore  the costs to maintain the buildings are h igh. Under  LD 543, the cos t of these important, stat ewide court 
facilities would be borne through the State ’s genera l fund  through sa les and income taxes, which is ap propriate for this 
statewide function.  Local property taxe s are not the right way to fund  these facilities.  
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the op portunity to pr ovide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
addition al informat ion, please do not hesitate to let us know.  
 
Respe ctfully submitted,  
 
Stephen Gorden  
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, MCCA Board President  
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, L LP, MCCA Legisl ative Counsel  
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2  Augusta, ME 04330 , 207-623-4697  
www. mainecounties.o rg 
 
