 
Heather Manchester, MSAD 17, President 
Niki Chan, RSU 24, President Elect 
Deb Taylor, RSU 12, Treasurer 
Joanne Dowd, RSU 23, Secretary  
Debra McIntyre, Executive Director 
 
      
Testimony of Debra McIntyre, Executive Director, on behalf of the members of the Maine 
Curriculum Leaders Association, testifying in opposition to LD 1315 An Act to Require 
Instruction in Schools on Substance Abuse Prevention and Administration of Naloxone 
Hydrochloride 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, my name is Debra McIntyre, and I am the Executive Director of the Maine 
Curriculum Leaders Association. On behalf of the members of MCLA, I offer testimony in 
opposition to LD 1315 An Act to Require Instruction in Schools on Substance Abuse Prevention 
and Administration of Naloxone Hydrochloride. 
 
As I have stated before, the Maine Learning Results standards provide a set of clear expectations 
as to what students should know, understand and be able to explain as they progress through each 
K-12 grade level. The health standards, which were recently revised in 2021, include substance 
use prevention starting in the middle grades and continuing through in the high school 
standards.  In addition, state statute 4723 refers to a secondary course of study must have 
instruction in the effects of alcoholic drinks, stimulants and narcotics including the impact on 
consent.   
 
Therefore, we believe that the instruction is already required, although not on an annual basis, 
which would be impractical in the high school setting.  Typically, this instruction occurs in a 
students’ health class, not in other content areas.  We are opposed to the additional 
requirement of including instruction at each grade level.  Furthermore, we are concerned with 
students being trained in the administration of Naloxone Hydrochloride in the school setting.  
 
For these reasons, MCLA is opposed to LD 1315. 
Thank you for your time.  
