 
            Steven W. Bailey                                                                                                Eileen E. King    
      MSBA Executive Director                                                                                   MSSA Execu tive Dire ctor  
49 Community Drive , Augusta, ME  04330  
Telephone: (207) 62 2-3473    Fax: (207) 626-2968    
Website:  www.msmawe b.com 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY REGARDING  
 
L.D. 1315  
 
AN ACT TO REQUIRE INSTRUCTION IN SCHOOLS ON SUBSTANCE ABUSE PREVENTION AND 
ADMINISTRATION OF NALOXONE HYDROCHLORIDE  
  
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee. I 
am Eileen  King,  deputy executiv e director of Maine School Management Association , testifying on behalf of 
the legislative committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Supe rintendents 
Association, regard ing L.D. 1315 – MSBA is neither for n or against and MSSA is opposed.   
  
The Maine School Superintendents Association are opposed to this bill because of the language in requiring 
“appropriate assistance to an overdose victim,” including administration of Naloxone .  
  
Superintendents support having access to  Naloxone in spr ay form in schools, but do not support having 
students trained to administer an opioid antidote unless the students choose to receive that training ; and, 
depending on their age , there is parent permission . School Boards support efforts to save a life in our schools 
in the case of a drug overdo se, but are concerned about the administration of Naloxone by students.  
  
The impact on a student who  attempt s to save a fel low-student’s life and fails could be devastating. It also is 
unclear how the student would get the antidote, since typically it would be stored in the nurse’s office .  
  
We also oppose curriculum mandates.  Instructional programs on the use and misuse of d rugs are already part 
of the Maine Learning Results. Programs around the use and misuse of controlled substances are often 
included in the health curriculum, and that training should be age -appropriate and include warnings of what 
happens when the drug is abused .  
 
