Jeanne Marquis
China
LD 1315
Greetings:  Sponsor, Senator Pouliot and Committee Chair, Senator Joe Rafferty and 
the honorable Committee on Educational and Cultural Affairs. I am Jeanne Marquis, 
an organizer for the Maine Advocacy Recovery Project and a parent of a son in 
recovery. 
I am testifying in FAVOR of LD1315: An Act to Require Instructions in Schools on 
Substance Abuse Prevention and Administration of Naloxone. This proposed 
legislation was written by youth who are experiencing substance use in their families 
and are part of the youth caucus for the Maine Recovery Advocacy Project and plan 
to take a role in the implementation of this legislation. 
These youth know, first hand, that more can be done through their schools. We have 
heard from their own voices that they don’t want to be told ‘just say NO.” – They 
want to hear more about prevention and what to do if their family members and 
friends are using substances. They have learned how easy it is to administer nasal 
naloxone and want to teach it to their peers. LD1315 was written listening to the 
voices of youth and has bipartisan support.  
This bill will require secondary schools to annually provide students with an 
age-appropriate instructional program on the use and misuse of drugs and controlled 
substances, the dangers of substance abuse, and substance abuse prevention. The 
instructional program will also include instruction on providing appropriate assistance
to an overdose victim, such as how to administer naloxone. 
Why should we teach young people to save lives? The unfortunate truth is that opioid 
addiction has reached epidemic proportions, crosses into all segments of our society, 
and has touched many of our families. Young people across Maine witness substance 
use by their parents, older siblings, and classmates. They often are the only ones home
when a crisis occurs. It is better to prepare the youth to administer this simple nasal 
spray and call 911 then let a parent die in front of their eyes. 
I urge you to support LD1315. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Jeanne Marquis
China, Marquis

