295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony Neither Fo r Nor Against  LD 1315  
"An Act to Require Instruction in Schools on Substance Abuse 
Prevention and Administration of Naloxone  Hydrochloride " 
Sponsored by Senator Pouliot  
April 11, 2023  
 
Good afternoon  Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and esteemed  members 
of the Health and Human Services  Committees.   My name is  Malory Shaughnessy 
and I am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health 
Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of 
Maine’s community based mental health and substance use treatment providers , 
providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and c hildren . The Alliance 
advocates for the implementation of sound policies and evidence -based practices 
that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care 
system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to share some informa tion for you to 
consider as you discuss  LD 1315, “An Act to Require Instruction in Schools on 
Substance Abuse Prevention and Administration of Naloxone Hydrochloride ” and 
to make a recommendation to the committee regarding the language.  The bill 
requires secondary schools to annually provide to students an age -appropriate 
instructional program on the use and misuse of drugs and controlled substances, 
the dangers of substance abuse and substance abuse prevention.  The 
instructional program must include a component on providing appropriate 
assis tance to an overdose victim, including training in how to administer an opioid 
antidote, such as naloxone hydrochloride.  
 
First, I would like to make a recommendation around “ instructional program on 
the use and misuse of drugs and controlled substances .” It is very important that 
the language includes evidence -based programming. E vidence -based programs 
are programs that have been rigorously tested, proven effective, and translated 
into practical models that are available to community -based organizations. 
Additionally, evidence -based programs have had their evaluation s subjected to 
critical peer review . I respectfully suggest the committee amend the bill to say 
“Instructional evidence -based program…”  
 
Second, it is important to remember the reasons that adolescents turn to 
substances to create programming which will help reduce SUD prevalence. 
Adolescence is a key period for experimentation with a wide range of behaviors 
and lifestyle patterns. An adolescent’s drive to experiment with new beh aviors 
occurs for a number of reasons that are typically linked to psychosocial 
development. Trying out new and different behaviors is part of a natural process 
of separating from parents, gaining acceptance and popularity with peers, 
developing a sense of  identity, autonomy, independence, and maturity, seeking 
fun and adventure, and/or rebelling against authority.  
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
 
Unfortunately, from an adolescent’s point of view, engaging in alcohol, tobacco, and other drug use 
may be seen as a functional way of achievin g independence, maturity, or popularity, along with other 
developmental goals. The most effective prevention approaches incorporate an understanding that 
substance use behaviors can fulfill a variety of developmental needs. Therefore, teaching children to 
“just say no” to substance use is not sufficient for behavior change.  The most effective interventions 
target salient risk and protective factors at the individual, family, and/or community levels and are 
guided by relevant psychosocial theories regarding the causes  of substance use and misuse1. 
 
I would like to thank Senator Pouliot for putting forth this proposal. I urge committee members to 
amend the bill by adding evidence -based as a program descriptor in the language . Thank you and I 
am happy to answer any questions you have for me.  
 
 
 
                                                           
1 Griffin KW, Botvin GJ. Evidence -based interventions for preventing substance use disorders in adolescents. Child 
Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am. 2010 Jul;19(3):505 -26. doi: 10.1016/j.chc.2010.03.005. PMID: 20682218; PMCID: 
PMC2916744 . 
