 
1 
 Testimony of the Wabanaki Alliance  in support of  
LD 25 An Act to Provide Indigenous Peoples Free Access to State Parks  
Presen ted for the Public Hearing Before the  Maine Legislature’s  
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
January  25, 202 3 
 
Sen. Ingwersen , Rep. Pluecker , and members of the  Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry ; my name is John Dieffenbacher -Krall. I reside in Old 
Town, and I am the Executive Director of the Wabanaki Alliance . The group was founded in 
June 2020 by the five federally re cognized nations in what we today call the State of Maine, the 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, Mi’kmaq Nation, Passamaquoddy Tribe at Motahkmikuk, 
Passamaquoddy Tribe at Sipayik, and Penobscot Nation.  The Wabanaki Alliance was created to 
educate the peop le of Maine about the need for securing the sovereignty of  Wabanaki Nations .  
 
The Wabanaki Alliance supports LD 25 An Act to Provide Indigenous Peoples Free 
Access to State Parks . We thank Sen. Hickman for introducing the bill and the multiple 
legislators who have co -sponsored the bill.  
 
 Before European arrival in what we today recognize as the State of Maine all of the 
current Pine Tree State’s territory was Wabanaki land.  The Wabanaki Alliance perceives this bill 
as recognizing that historica l reality and in some small but meaningful way having Maine State 
Government acknowledge the Wabanaki connection to creation, in this context state-owned 
parks or historic site s managed by the State . Honoring the Wabanaki connection to creation, to 
all of the Wabanaki’s relations, signifies Maine State Government ’s respect for the Wabanaki 
worldview and the unique connection that the Wabanaki have to this place called Maine.  
 
 The displacement of Wabanaki Peoples and theft of Wabanaki land involves far more 
than an economic loss. It separated the Wabanaki from what they view as their relations, all of 
creation, with a duty to defend and to protect it. LD 25 represents an aspect of the growing land 
back movement to recognize the Wabanaki connection to the land and for settler governments 
and institutions to take meaningful steps to restore Wabanaki access and stewardship to 
traditional Wabanaki territory.  
 
 The State of Maine would not be the first settler government  in the United States to take 
the step of providing free Indigenous access to public parks. Indigenous people have enjoyed 
free access to National Parks by showing their tribal ID. Two years ago, Minnesota passed a law 
granting to the citizens of the 11 fe derally recognized tribal nations residing within the boundary 
of that state  free access to its state parks . 
 
 The State of Maine owes much to the Wabanaki. Passage of LD 25 would represent 
another discrete but important step in acknowledging Wabanaki Peop les as the Original Peoples 
of this land. The Wabanaki Alliance urges the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry  to vote ought to pass on this bill.  
 
