Testimony  in support of LD 25, An Act to Provide Indigenous Peoples Free Access to State 
Parks  
To the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry  
by Josh Caldwell, Climate & Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator  
January  25, 2023  
  
Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker , distinguished members of the  Committe on 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry . My name is Josh Caldwell. I am the Climate and Clean 
Energy Outreach Coordinator at the Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM), and I am 
submitting this testimony today in support of LD 25, An Act to Provide Indigenous Peoples Free 
Access to State Par ks. 
 
The Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM) is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit membership 
organization with more than 25,000 supporters statewide and beyond. For  more than  60 years, 
NRCM has been protecting, restoring, and conserving Maine’s environment, now and for future 
generations. We work statewide to:  
• Protect the health of Maine’s rivers, lakes, streams, and coastal waters;  
• Promote sustainable communities through initiatives that reduce toxics pollution and 
waste;  
• Decrease air and climate -changing pol lution through energy efficiency and renewable 
sources;  
• Conserve Maine lands and wildlife habitat, including our treasured North Woods; and  
• Defend the federal environmental policies and programs that help protect Maine.  
Our work is conducted upon unceded  Wabanaki land, and it is incumbent upon us as an 
environmental advocacy organization to support the Indigenous peoples of this land. NRCM 
recognizes and honors the Penobscot, Passamaquoddy, Mi’kmaq Nation, and Maliseet Tribes of 
Maine. These Tribes have stewarded Maine for generations, stretching back to before colonial 
settlers forcibly occupied the area, and have experienced  a legacy of broken treaties and 
genocide. In defiance of these injustices, the Wabanaki maintain spiritual, cultural, and physical 
connection to these lands.  
 

We acknowledge this history and recognize Indigenous sovereignty. NRCM is committed to 
actively  using our voices, our resources, and our power to support Tribes of the Wabanaki 
Confederacy. We know how important it has been over the 63 years since our organization was 
founded — and how essential it will continue to be — to work together with the Wab anaki 
knowledge -keepers to protect the land, air, water, and wildlife of Maine.   
 
Enabling free access for members of federally recognized Indian nations, tribes , or bands to 
State-owned parks is an important step in the process of land justice. It may be a small step 
relative to the magnitude of the historic injustices perpetrated against the tribes in Maine, but it is 
unquestionably the right thing to do as soon as possible.  
 
For these reasons we urge the Committee to support the passage of this important bill. Thank you 
for your consideration.  
 
 
 
 
