 
  
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
January 2 5, 2023  
RE: LD 25 – An Act to Provide Indigenous Peoples Free Access to State Parks  
Senator Ingwersen , Representative Pluecker , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I am the Government 
Relations Director  for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate this opportunity to 
testify in support of LD 25, An Act to Provide Indigenous Peoples Free Access to State 
Parks.  
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to conserv ing 
the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we create innovative, on -the-
ground solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that nature and people can thrive together. 
We use a collaborative approach that engages local commun ities, governments, the private 
sector, and other partners.  The Nature Conservancy has  been leading conservation in Maine for 
more than 60 years and is the 12th largest landowner in  the state, owning and managing roughly 
300,000 acres.  
 
Supporting the voice, choice, and action of Indigenous Peoples is key to The Nature 
Conservancy’s vision of a world where people and nature thrive.  Here in Maine, we continue to 
learn about the historical and ongoing injustices faced by the Wabanaki Tribes. We acknowledg e 
the urgency of addressing these injustices, and support meaningful action in this direction. 
Providing free access to Maine’s state parks and historic sites is a small but important step.  
 
Beyond the bill in front of us today, we must continue to strengt hen the voice, choice, and action 
of the Wabanaki Communities. TNC remains committed to supporting tribal sovereignty and 
forging relationships based on mutual support and trust. We do not speak for Indigenous Peoples, 
but by working together we can elevat e their voices and priorities and advance our shared goals. 
Our work should aim to build rather than burden the capacity of our Indigenous neighbors and 
providing them free access to Maine’s parks and historic sites is a step towards recognizing their 
long history and ongoing connection to all parts of our State.  
 
We urge this committee to support LD 25. Thank you for the opportunity to comment.  

