DV‘ 101 Western Ave. 
W P.O. Box 5188 
The Maine Coalition Augusta, ME 04332-5188 
to End Domestic Violence 2O7_43O_3334 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso, on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
OPPOSED to LD 761: An Act to Amend the Laws Governing the Crime of Endangering the 
Welfare of a Child & Create the Crime of Aggravated Endangering the Welfare of a Child 
Monday, March 27, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, I am writing on behalf of the 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)‘ in opposition to LD 761, “An Act to 
Amend the Laws Governing the Crime of Endangering the Welfare of a Child and to Create 
the Crime of Aggravated Endangering the Welfare of a Child.” 
Criminalizes Domestic Violence Survivors 
Though not the intention, this bill would criminalize victims of domestic violence for 
being victims, and for no other reason than they are also parents. When we expect victims 
of domestic violence to “leave,” it is because we worry that the adult victim or any children 
who are in the home may be seriously injured or even killed. Victims know that those risks 
are not necessarily eliminated by taking steps to separate from the person choosing to harm 
them. in fact, at least in the short term, separation often increases the likelihood of that 
level of violence occurring, and separating also commonly comes with worsening economic 
factors that push survivors and their children into poverty. Our laws should not require 
victims to take actions that they know will result in increased risk of abuse to themselves or 
their children. Our laws should not create categorically unrealistic expectations that victims 
of domestic violence have the ability predict the future of someone else’s behavior with 
pinpoint precision. This bill creates those expectations. Failure to protect bills like this one, 
which criminalizes caregivers (predominantly women) for consciously disregarding a risk to 
their child, has led to incarcerating domestic violence victims for not “leaving” an abusive 
partner in other states. We would expect to see that same result here. 
Creates Disincentives to Seeking Intervention or Help 
If caregivers are afraid of being prosecuted and jailed for failing to protect their 
children from abuse, there is no incentive for them to reach out to law enforcement, the 
‘ MCEDV represents a membership of victim service providers, including the regional domestic violence 
resource centers across Maine as well as the Immigrant Resource Center of Maine. Last year, our programs 
provided sen/ices to more than 12,000 survivors of domestic abuse and violence and their children in our state. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
MCEDV Page 2 of2 
courts or any organization that might be able to provide supportive services to them and 
their children. Passing this bill will cause non-abusing parents to think twice before seeking 
potentially life-saving medical attention for their children. Further, any child old enough to 
understand that their non-offending parent might be held responsible for the child's abuse 
at the hands of another would be less likely to seek help, instead seeking to protect that 
non-offending parent, whom they rely on for protection and care. Compelling victims of 
child abuse to live through (and possibly to participate in) a prosecution of their non-abusive 
parent will only compound that child’s trauma. 
Does Not Support Child Abuse Prevention Efforts 
Children deserve to live in a home where they are loved and safe. We must do 
everything we can to strengthen families to ensure they can be ~ to give families what they 
need to be healthy and thriving. We know what that is. It's access to education and 
employment opportunities, and childcare sufficient to make these opportunities real. It's 
low-barrier access to economic supports like SNAP, TAN F, WlC and direct cash payments to 
those who need it. It's viable and reliable transportation. And, for victims of domestic abuse 
and violence, it's also access to robust, well-resourced victim services and a timely, well- 
informed and resourced civil justice response. lnstead of making investments in those 
supports that we know would help lessen adverse childhood experiences in the first place, 
this bill would create new felony crimes, and in doing so necessitate the appropriation of 
additional funds into the criminal legal system response - for the Department of Corrections 
to house people longer, for District Attorneys to prosecute more felony cases, and for 
defense attorneys to defend them.- 
Few in our communities can appreciate the truth of the fact that we cannot 
prosecute, convict and incarcerate our way towards safer homes than domestic violence 
survivors. Our criminal legal system has largely failed in that endeavor for the last three 
decades. This bill proposes that we double down on that failed approach. This bill, if 
enacted, will not result in fewer children harmed; it will only result in more Maine mothers 
being incarcerated for the choices they have made to survive and protect their children as 
best they can manage in the face of relentless abuse and insufficient community supports. 
We urge you to vote ought not to pass on LD 761. Thank you for the opportunity to be heard 
on these important issues. 
Contact Information: 
Andrea Nlancuso, Esq. 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph: (207) 650-4356 
Email: andrea@mcedv.org
