Testimony of Melissa Hackett 
Policy Associate, Maine Children's Alliance 
In opposition to LD 761, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing the Crime of Endangering the Welfare ofa 
Child and to Create the Crime of Aggravated Endangering the Welfare of a Child 
March 27, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and esteemed members of the Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety Committee. My name is Melissa Hackett, and lam offering testimony in opposition to LD 
761 on behalf of the Maine Children's Alliance. Our organization is a public policy, nonproﬁt improving 
the lives of Maine children, youth and families through research, collaboration, and advocacy. 
If we want to prevent future tragedies, we need to work together to prevent child abuse and neglect in 
our state. We know what the risk factors are for child maltreatment, and we know what can work to 
prevent and lessen harm. 
Effective strategies impact individual behaviors and acknowledge the relationships of family, school, 
community, and societal factors that inﬂuence risk and protective factors for violence. ‘ This includes 
modifying policies, practices, and societal norms to create safe, stable, nurturing relationships and 
environments for children. Targeted efforts include policy solutions to provide economic and concrete 
supports to families in times of need, and public beneﬁts programs that ensure critical supports like child 
care, home visiting, and primary care are available to families." 
The conditions in households that lead to the risk for child abuse and neglect are complex and nuanced, 
often involving parental challenges like unmet mental health needs, unmanageable substance use 
disorder, or domestic violence. Economic hardship and social isolation often exacerbate those 
challenges. This can create an overwhelming burden on families that makes it impossible for them to 
function in safe and healthy ways. In order to prevent harm in these situations, we need to intervene 
with supports to families in these times of need. Punishment after the fact will do nothing to stabilize 
families experiencing challenges, or to prevent future tragedies resulting from a lack of effective 
intervention. 
Since 2018, there have been many entities that have developed and released recommendations to 
improve Maine's child welfare system, including Casey Family Programs, the Maine Child Welfare Action 
Network, OPEGA, and annually, from the state's citizen review panels. None of these sets of 
recommendations reference the further criminalization of neglect as a means of improving the 
effectiveness of Maine's child welfare system. 
The challenges to safety and stability are signiﬁcant for families right now. We also know that social 
stigma and fear of losing a child to state custody often prevent parents from seeking help when they 
need it to address challenges. This is especially true for women who are victims of domestic violence and 
pregnant or parenting mothers with SUD.‘" When we show up publicly and entertain policy proposals to 
further criminalize these challenging situations for families, we underscore that fear and stigma, and
perpetuate a system where parents are afraid, rather than encouraged, to seek help. This makes children 
less safe. 
We need to focus our collective action and efforts toward ensuring families have what they need, when 
they need it, to care for themselves and their children. Focusing on efforts to increase punishment after 
the fact are not only a distraction from where our efforts need to be to prevent child abuse and neglect, 
but they damage our ability to honestly and effectively work with families to address challenges when 
they experience them. 
We all care deeply about the safety and well-being of Maine's children. We cannot prosecute our way to 
improving outcomes for them and their families. l strongly urge the committee to vote ought not to pass 
on this legislation. Thank you. 
‘ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Violence Prevention, Prevention Strategies 
https://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/childabuseandneglect/prevention.html 
“ Chapin Hall, A Key Connection: Economic Stability and Family Well-being. Addressing economic hardship asa 
factor in child welfare involvement https://wwwchapinhall.org/proiect/a-key-connection-economic-stability-and~ 
family~well-beingl 
"‘ Association of State and Territorial Health Ofﬁcials, Stigma Reinforces Barriers to Care for Pregnant and 
Postpartum Women with Substance Use Disorder, https:[/www.astho.org[globalassetybrief/stigma-reinforces- 
barriers-to-care-for-pregnant-and~postpartum~women-with-substance-use-disorderspdf
