K 
g .»j PO Box 7860
1 C i-‘V7’! _ (207)774-5444 
' 
www.aclumaine org Portland, ME 04112 
AMERICAN Blllll. UBERTIES UNIUN 
Maine 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
Ought Not to Pass - LD 761 
An Act to Amend the Laws Governing the Crime of 
Endangering the Welfare of a Child and to Create the Crime of 
Aggravated Endangering the Welfare of a Child 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CRIMINAL JUSTICE & PUBLIC SAFETY 
March 27, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety, greetings. My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am the Policy Counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed 
to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to reject this bill. 
Under current law, a parent, foster parent, guardian or other person responsible for the 
long-term care of a child faces up to ﬁve years in prison if they recklessly endanger the child ina 
manner that leads to the child’s physical injury. l7-A MRS §554 (l)(B-2). Depending on the 
facts of the case, the accused can be charged and convicted for multiple counts of this same 
crime, and face a decade, or even multiple decades, of prison time. See 17-A MRS §554 (l)(B- 
2); §l608 (deﬁning circumstances in which a court can order multiple sentences of 
imprisonment). The bill before you would create three new felony crimes if a person who hasa 
duty of care over a child is found to have been reckless or consciously disregarded a risk, leading 
to injury of that child. 
Imposing tougher punishments for behavior that is already criminalized will only swell 
failed systems. It punishes after the fact but does not prevent the victimization of children. It will 
not get to the root of the problem: the exploitation of impoverished families and their children, 
especially families and communities of color, in whom the government does not invest sufficient 
resources.
l
Imposing tougher penalties will, however, open the door to the increased criminalization 
of poor women, especially Women of color. Laws that punish a failure to protect can lead to 
outcomes where victims of domestic violence end up with longer prison sentences for failing to 
protect their children than the abusive parent themselves. ‘ This bill Will also likely 
disproportionately punish parents, particularly women, Whostruggle with substance use. Policies 
that threaten women with criminal prosecution and the loss of their children drive women away 
from health care and discourage them from seeking help and safety. 
Maine should only expand its criminal code when existing law is insufﬁcient to address 
the problem at hand. That is not the case here. We urge you to vote ought not to pass. 
1 See Juana Summers, Gabe O’Connor, Ashley Brown, Are ‘failure to protect’ laws 
failing m0thers?, Aug. 17. 2022, available at 
https://WWW.npr.0rg/2022/O8/17/1 1 18009546/are-failure-to-protect-laWs-failing- 
mothers.i
2
