CLAC MEMORANDUM/TESTIMONY 
LD 761 (Support Sections 1-4; Oppose Section 5) 
TO: Senator Anne Beebe-Center 
Representative Suzanne Salisbury 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC) 
c/o laura.yustak@,maine. gov 
RE: LD 761, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing the Crims of Endangering the Welfare ofa 
Child and to Create the Crime of Aggravated Endangering the Welfare of Child 
DA: March 27, 2023 
The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following 
testimony regarding LD 761. 
CLAC supports Sections 1-4 of the bill. The current § 554(l)(C) classiﬁes certain conduct 
that endangers the health, safety or Welfare of a child as a Class D crime. The proposal in sections 
2 and 3 recognizes that conduct endangering the health, safety or welfare of a child and resulting in 
a more serious outcome——serious bodily injury or death of a child——should be classiﬁed as a more 
serious crime. This approach is similar to that employed across the criminal statutes, most 
obviously in the assault and aggravated assault statutes, Where a more serious result element leads 
to a higher classiﬁcation for aggravated assault. Compare l7-A M.R.S. § 207(l)(A) (ClassD 
assault-result element of offensive physical contact or bodily injury) with § 208(l)(A), (A-l) 
(Class B and A aggravated assault, result elements based on forms of serious bodily injury). 
CLAC supports the proposed placement of the term “recklessly ” in sections 2-4 to clarify 
that the culpable mental state applies to the actor’s violation of a duty of care or protection. 
CLAC opposes section 5 of the bill as unnecessary in light of sections 2-4. Section 5 would 
create a Class B form of endangering if the result is “bodily injury to the child that creates a 
substantial risk of death or extended convalescence necessary for the recovery of physical health.” 
This result is already covered by proposed section 3, which identiﬁes a result element of “serious 
bodily injury to the child.” The Criminal Code deﬁnition of “serious bodily injury” is “bodily 
injury which creates a substantial risk of death or which causes serious, permanent disﬁgurement or 
loss or substantial impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ, or extended 
convalescence necessary for the recovery of physical health.” l7-A M.R.S. § 2(23). 
Isolating and repeating just a portion of the “serious bodily injury” deﬁnition in section 5 
would also make the two proposed statutes internally inconsistent, because the same conduct and 
result could be charged as Class C under proposed section 3 (endangering with serious bodily 
injury), but as a Class B crime under proposed section 5 (aggravated endangering with subset of 
serious bodily injury—substantial risk of death or extended convalescence).
Section 5 of the bill also omits the portion of the “serious bodily injury” deﬁnition that the 
Legislature previously recognized as more serious in aggravated assault, 17-A M.R.S. § 208(l)(A- 
l)—the sub-category of serious bodily injury Where the victim has suffered “serious, permanent 
disﬁgurement or loss or substantial impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.” 
*CLAC is an advisoiy body established by the Legislature. 17-A M.R.S. §§ 1351-1357. It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General. Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine Bar Counsel, and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration. In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co-Chairs of the Legislature ’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants. The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC. CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.
