 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 *Resident Board Representatives  
**
Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
Dee Kerry, BS Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185 
 www.maineaap.org
  
 
Testimony against  LD 761, "An Act to Amend the Laws Governing the 
Crime of Endangering the Welfare of a Child and to Create the Crime of 
Aggravated Endangering the Welfare of a Child" 
 
Sen. Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury and members of the CJPS committee:  My name is Sydney R. Sewall, MD MPH and I am  a resident of Ha llowell and  a 
pediatrician .  I write representing the Maine Chapter of the American Academy 
of Pediatrics , an organization of over 300 health care providers who focus on the 
care of children.  Our members are often on the front lines of child abuse 
evaluations.  While the Social Determinants of Health (SDOH) are now recognized as important determinants of many medical conditions, in the area of child abuse and neglec t they are paramount.  A substantial proportion of the perpetrators 
were abused themselves as children.  Poverty, substance use disorder, mental illness, domestic violence – one or more of these factors are universally involved. It is unlikely that enhancing the punishments related to abusive conduct will induce any changes in behavior and decrease the frequency of these events.   The multiple tragic child deaths that occurred last year  were extremely upsetting 
– and certainly are an inducement to  take legislative action to prevent repeat 
events.   We worry that this bill as crafted, however, may have unintended consequences.     While we as a society wrestle with the complex factors that lead to dysfunctional parenting, a key component of preventi on  are reports from neighbors and 
relatives concerned about a child’s safety.  It is not easy emotionally to make these calls – and we need to emphasize to the public that their primary purpose is to obtain services for the child and not punishment for the involved adults.   This bill has the potential to blur the distinction between DHHS and the police, inhibiting reporting and delaying interventions.    Thus, while we applaud the intent of the bill we fear that the bill as written is in unlikely to achieve its stated goals.         Sincerely,  
 Sydney R. Sewall, MD MPH Hallowell 
      
  
     
  
                                     
 
