  
2021-202 2 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presi dent 
Matthew D. Morgan  
 
Treasur er 
Walt er F.  McKe e 
 
Secretary  
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2021-2022 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd 
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman  
Adam Swanson  
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXE CUTIVE DI RECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau   
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523 -9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
March 17, 2023  
 
 
Senator Anne  Beebe -Center, Chair  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public  Safety  
100 State House Station Room  436  
Augusta, ME 04330  
 
Dear Senator Beebe -Center , Represe ntative  Salisbury, and Mem bers of the Crimin al 
Justice  and Pu blic Safety Committee:  
 
RE: LD 761 --  An Act to Amend the Laws Governing the Crime of Endangering 
 the Welfare of a Child  and to Create the Crim e of Aggravated Endangering  
 the Welf are of a Child  
        
Dear Senator Carney, Representativ e Moonen , and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary,  
 
MACDL opposes  LD 761.  
 
First of all, it is unclear why there needs  to be a change with respect to the culpable 
state of mind.  The statute  as it stands now specifically indicates that there is a 
“reckless” standard as it is.  Changing the statute does not provide anything more than 
what is already t here.   
 
Second, there  is no reason to have the new enhanced penalties .  As it stands now, the 
crimes can be felony crimes based on other statutes.  Adding the se specific, elevated 
provisions in th is statute only c auses more confusion and duplic ates what already may 
be there.   
 
To the extent that there is a suggestion that certain conduct does not yet rate a felony 
level offense  under current law, there ha s been no reason advanced in this bill, or by 
really anyone, th at suggests th at there is a need to have a new felony crime.  MACDL 
has long been opposed to the new felony crimes that are regularly and rout inely 
proposed by legislators.  It is a very easy thing to simply put in a bill like this and ask 
for certain conduct to be come a felony because th at sounds great; the reality , though, 
is that a felony convict ion has disastrous consequences for a de fendant, and these 
consequences are unnecessary when a misdemeanor level offense, and up to 364 
days in jail for such a crime, would completely suffice to address whatever the 
conduc t is at issue.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Legislature pushed back for many years on establishing new felony crimes. 
Having  testified before this Committee for the better part  of two dec ades now, I am 
seeing a shift in the other direction , which is dis turbing , unfair, an d not based on any 
new information  or evidenc e that cries out for the imposition of a new felony crime.  
 
Thank you for the opportuni ty to address this issue.  
 
  Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 Walter F. McKee  
 Chair, Legi slative Committee    
 

