April 11, 2023 
Testimony for LD #665 regarding PL2021 C 672 §4 
TO: Members of the Joint Committee on Housing 
FROM: Amanda Campbell – Town Administrator, Town of Georgetown and Member, Maine Municipal 
Association Legislative Policy Committee – gtwnme@hotmail.com   
RE: Proposed amendments to the Affordable Housing Act (LD 2003, now law)  
As the current Town Administrator in Georgetown and Maine Municipal Association LPC member, I 
submit this testimony with significant concerns regarding the passage and implementation of LD2003– 
and with strong support for LD#665 which proposes to amend the implementation date of the law.  
As a member of the MMA Legislative Policy Committee, it is my job, with others, to debate the merits of 
bills that will have direct impacts on the municipality I serve as Town Administrator. During discussions 
last year surrounding LD2003, the Maine Municipal Association was portrayed by members of the 
legislative bodies as opposing affordable housing. Nothing could be farther from the truth and it should 
be remembered that the MMA advocates who are testifying at hearings are speaking FOR 
representatives from the municipalities of Maine. Their voices are representing ours. And our voices, as 
municipal officials, are representing our residents, the voters. 
There is no doubt that affordable housing is of great concern in the State of Maine, in communities of all 
sizes. What I do doubt, is the ability of the law, as written, to make any impact on the availability of 
affordable housing, in communities of all sizes, and specifically in Georgetown. 
In addition, the deadline of July 1st, for implementation, is unattainable. Statewide housing production 
goals have not been established, rules for administration of the programs outlined by the law remain 
unadopted and municipalities are struggling to amend ordinances to accommodate a law that 
contradicts itself and that most officials do not understand.  
While some aspects of the law do, in fact, make sense on a very basic level, implementation remains 
impossible until contradictions are ironed out and measurable goals are created.  
The simple measure of delaying implementation would allow for unfinished business to become 
complete and for any additional clarifying amendments to be made before communities are required to 
comply. 
I strongly urge the members to consider LD665 as a way to move forward with the affordable housing 
law in a manner that allows municipalities to become part of the discussion and not the recipients of a 
to-do list from a bill that was poorly constructed and not feasible to implement given the limited tools 
and timeline. 
I appreciate the opportunity to provide this testimony and would be pleased to speak with any 
committee member who may have questions. 
