 
 
 
125 Manley Road   •  Auburn, ME 04210  •  Phone: (207) 783 -9186  •  Fax: (207) 783 -5211  •  Web: www.avcog.org  
 
 
Testimony of the Androscoggin Valley Council of Governments in Support of  
An Act to Extend the Date by Which Compliance is Required for Affordable Housing Development, Increased 
Numbers of Dwelling Units and Accessory Dwelling Units  
April 11, 2023  
 
Senator Pierce , Representative Gere , and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing : as the Executive 
Director of the Androscoggin Valley Council of Governments (AVCOG), I write this letter  in support of LD 2003.  
 
Established in 1962, the Androscoggin Valley Council of Governments is a regional planning agency serving 
Western Maine communities in Androscoggin, Franklin, and No. Oxford Counties.  AVCOG is a not for profit, 
501(c)(3) agency establi shed pursuant to MSRS Title 30 Section 2311 as a Council of Governments , exclusively 
owned,  and operated by member municipalities who join on a voluntary basis, AVCOG serves 51 municipalities 
and 3 counties. AVCOG is a leader in the coordination and delive ry of regional planning and municipal services 
concentrated in four targeted areas: Economic Development, Land -Use Planning, Transportation Planning and 
Environmental Management.  
 
As a Regional Planning Commission and Council of Governments, AVCOG provide s extensive technical  
assistance to the municipalities we serve , most of which are  small communit ies with  no planning staff . While  we 
support  the efforts to increase access to much needed affordable housing within  the state , we believe  our 
municipalities  need more time to implement  the LD 2003  law to ensure  that it meets all inten tions of providing 
afforda ble housing most  effectively  at the  local  level .  
For many communities , develop ment  and/or revising  of ordinances  take s a significant  amount of time  and 
requires guidance and assistance from our planning staff . Without the final  rule many communities  have taken a 
wait and see approach  until t hey recei ve final guid ance . Making  changes  without the final rule does not make 
sense  for many communities . This will cause  many to face significant c hallenges associated with writing and 
passing an ordinance  in time  for town meetings , many of which  have already occurred.  
As a technical  assis tance provider to our communities,  we see the impact  this will have,  and we urge you to 
consider passage of the extension  of LD 2003  implementation . We support the advance ment of affordable  
housing in the state  and recognize the importance of the municipalities  taking appropriate  steps to do so, but we 
strongly  believe  more time  is needed for communities  to adequately prepare , access impacts , and develop 
appropriate ordinance s that will most effectively  meet the intent of the law at the local  level .   
 
Thank you f or your consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Amy M. Landry  
Executive Director  
