Thoughts on LD 2003: 
E911:  A house number is assigned a number based on distance from the start of the street to the half 
way point of the driveway in 50 foot increments.  On a street that already has houses at 10– 12- 14- 16- 
18.  And # 12 puts in 2 homes, E911 and the post office is going to have a hard time numbering those 
two new homes.  See attached email from the postmaster of how they handle addressing 
Assessing:  (upfront disclaimer I’m not an assessor) from my understanding the software used by most 
municipalities does not allow for a second home valuation on 1 property.  Or two bills to be generated 
for one parcel.  The question becomes because it is a structure does the principal home owner property 
taxes get doubled because of the added ADU?  How does that percentage of principal vs ADU break 
down?  How could that potentially work with the property tax stabilization currently before towns. 
Code/Building Inspection:  a requirement of the septic system is a minimum ½ acre (20,000 sqft) per 
system hence the common minimum buildable size lot.  In a hypothetical world you own the main 
home.  As your friend, I place the ADU in your backyard.  The septic system is sized for your home.  The 
system should be expanded to accommodate my usage.  Who pays for it?   The following year the tank 
needs to be pumped, again who is paying how much?  1 year later the system fails, again who pays how 
much.  As the “Landlord” is the requirement for the ADU to be I have to put in my own system, you only 
own ¾ of an acre and can’t what then?  3 years from then you move out.  I still am living in the back 
yard.  How does that handle?  Can the new owners evict me/ force me to move my ADU?   Does the 
ADU owner have to have a lease for the ADU like a landlord/ renter?  And how does that work if I own 
my ADU (thinking tiny home).  Lot rent like a mobile home park?  Would I want to live in someone else’s 
back yard, forcing us to both then move together.  Same idea for a shared well, or am I drilling my own. 
Same for power- own service or sub panel off yours?   Do I have to acquire an easement to have own 
well or septic because it’s on your property.  Most towns have a provision for a setback from property 
line to keep buildings away from each other- noise, fire danger, density etc.  Would placing an ADU on 
your property still have to have spacing between your house and mine?  LD 2003 says an ADU has to be 
allowed if a principal home could be placed.  What if the zoning in place wouldn’t allow said ADU/ Tiny 
home to then fit on the property?   There are also parts to this that lower parking rates assigned to 
apartments/ADU.  Towns that have a dense neighborhood and doesn’t allow for on street parking so 
that cars can pass or during a snowstorm/ winter parking bans those requirements of 2 cars per unit or 
3/2 per unit are in place to help with congestion.   
This currently goes live July 2023.  Some parts already have.  This bill was passed under heavy protest by 
MMA (Maine Municipal Association) because of some of these unintended consequences like I 
described above.  There is a lot here.  Please delay.  Thank you for your time. 
 
Chris Bilodeau 
Town of Norway  
 
