Christine Bennett 
Eliot, ME 
Testimony in Support of LD 665 
An Act to Extend the Date by Which Compliance is Required for Affordable 
Housing Development, Increased Numbers of Dwelling Units and Accessory 
Dwelling Units 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and distinguished members of the Committee on Housing, 
my name is Christine Bennett, I am the chair of the Eliot Planning Board’s subcommittee for 
Ordinance Review and I thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD 
665. 
Living in southemmost Maine, I am painfully aware of the housing crisis facing not only the 
state of Maine but our nation. Thinking that the lack of housing and affordable housing is solely 
the result of local zoning is a simple answer to a complex problem. Both you, as our state 
legislative body, and I as an appointed member of my town’s Planning Board do have a role to 
play in addressing this complex problem. To do so requires well-thought-out laws and rules on 
how they will be implemented. 
I have been tracking LD 2003 since its ﬁrst draft and watched as deadlines for guidance and 
rule-making from DECD were not met. 
I and our Town Planner recently submitted a 5-page comment document on the proposed rule- 
making that asked for additional deﬁnition of terms, identified conﬂicts with other state statutes 
and sought clariﬁcation on whether siting of affordable housing developments will be set in time 
on the effective date or allowed to be adjusted in the future. Time does not allow me to dive into 
these particulars but I would be happy to share the document with you for future consideration. 
The statute and rule-making for LD 2003 at this time will not deliver affordable housing in Eliot. 
It will actually prohibit us from allowing the adaptive re-use of accessory structures as accessory 
dwelling units, elevate the income eligibility of affordable housing units beyond whata 
schoolteacher, certiﬁed nursing assistant or a non-profit executive earn and prevent us from 
expanding areas where affordable housing developments are permitted. 
Drafting laws and ordinance well takes time. It takes time to gather feedback from subject matter 
experts and stakeholders, it takes time to consider unintended effects or conﬂicts with other laws 
or ordinance. At the municipal level, it then takes additional time to conduct public hearings and 
meet warrant deadlines. 
One of the unintended effects of LD 2003 is that Eliot needs to update its wastewater and water 
ordinance. We need technical assistance to do this work and the technical assistance grant- 
making has yet to begin. Even if these grants become available to municipalities this summer, 
the earliest we could functionally utilize them for this work would be for proposed ordinance 
amendments in June 2024. 
We, the municipalities, are asking for an extension of the effective date not because we object
to the goals of LD 2003 or the contraction of our home rule authority to establish and enforce 
zoning regulations but because we still have substantive questions that to date, are unanswered. 
Like the solar initiative in 2019, the State of Maine is taking a bold step with LD 2003 to address 
another pressing issue facing our state and country. While I am proud of my State for tackling 
these issues, I am concerned that sticking with the July 1, 2023 effective date, will “put the cart 
before the horse” similar to what has transpired with community solar installations. 
I can’t speak for Planning Boards statewide, but I know that local Planning Boards in southern 
Maine are actively looking for solutions to the housing crisis and we ask that you look at us as 
a partner not as the problem. 
\pi*H" LD 665‘the state and municipalities to get this important legislation right. It will afford you and 
DECD the time necessary to address the substantive questions raised by communities during the 
comment period on rule-making and me as a municipal official, the time we need to educate our 
citizens about the required ordinance changes and more than one opportunity to put it before them 
for a vote. '' 
Thank you for your time.
