      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
April 11, 2023  
 
Re: LD 214, An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Zoning and Land Use Restrictions to Limit 
Certain Requirements to Municipalities with a Population of More than 10,000  
LD 654, Resolve, Directing the Finance Authority of Maine to Establish a Pilot Program to 
Encourage the Development of Accessory Dwelling Units  
LD 665, An Act to Extend the Date by Which Compliance is Required for Affordable Housing 
Development, Inc reased Numbers of Dwelling Units and Accessory Dwelling Units  
LD 1154, An Act Regarding Accessory Dwelling Units and Municipal Zoning Ordinances  
LD 1358, An Act to Clarify Density Requirements for Affordable Housing Developments  
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, 
my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of Maine or 
CHOM , the largest housing provider for homeless populations in Maine.  Our staff of 11 
works collaboratively with more than 50 different service provider organizations to effectively 
and efficiently house more than 1100 of Maine’s most vulnerable people  in 88 properties 
throughout the state .  I am also a member of the Statewide Homeless Coun cil, and I serve as 
President of the Maine Continuum of Care Board of Directors.  I also chair the ESAC Long 
Term Stayers Committee which with 18 participating organizations has housed more than 427  
of the longest stayers in homelessness in Maine over the last eight  years, and also 
demonstrated that this population is as many as 57  times more likely to be in jail and 29 times 
more likely to be in the hospital when unhoused vs housed.  Housing this population saves us a 
lot of money and is a game changer for  each person.   
 
I am testifying in support of  two bills and in opposition to three additional bills for 
consideration by the Committee in today’s Public Hearing:  
 
Testimony For: 
• LD 654, Resolve, Directing the Finance Authority of Maine to Establish a Pilot Program to 
Encourage the Development of Accessory Dwelling Units  
 
This bill directs the Finance Authority of Maine to establish a 2 -year pilot program to 
encourage the development of accessory dwelling units  (ADUs)  in the State. The program must 
buy down interest rates to levels below market rates for up to 100 community bank loans for accessory dwelling units until the program ends. The authority must submit annual reports to 
the joint standing committee of the Legislature having jurisdiction over housin g matters 
regarding the usage of the program, the first such report to be made no later than November 6, 
2024.  
 
• LD 1358, An Act to Clarify Density Requirements for Affordable Housing Developments  
This bill changes the definition of "affordable housing development" in the laws governing affordable housing density to provide that an affordable housing development is a development 
in which a household whose income does not exceed certain levels can afford a majority of the 
units in the development without spending more than 30% of the household's monthly income 
on housing costs. 
 
Both of the aforementioned bills would further enhance the changes made as a result of LD 2003, An Act To Implement the Recommendations of the Commission To Increase Housin g 
Opportunities in Maine by Studying Zoning and Land Use Restrictions .  This landmark bill, 
recognized nationally, made substantive, positive changes to reduce zoning and land use barriers to the development of affordable housing.  Both LD 654 and LD 1358 would build enhance/expand 
these substantive changes by establishing a pilot program to promote the create of ADUs, and further clarify the definition of “affordable housing development” to ensure that the housing truly 
is and remains affordable for people  in Maine with the lowest incomes, many of whom are among 
the state’s most vulnerable populations.   
  
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
    
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
 
 
 
Testimony Against : 
• LD 214, An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Zoning and Land Use Restrictions to Limit Certain Requirements to 
Municipalities with a Population of More than 10,000  
 
This bill makes the following provisions applicable only to a municipality with a population over 10,000:  
1. The requirement that a municipality allow up to 4 dwelling units per lot if that lot does not contain an existing dwelling unit and the lot is located in a designated growth area within a municipality or if the lot is served by a public, speci al district or other centrally managed water system and a public, special district or other comparable 
sewer system in a municipality without a comprehensive plan;  
2. Certain zoning conditions that apply to dwelling units;  
3. The requirement that a municipality allow an accessory dwelling unit on the same lot as a single -family dwelling 
unit in any area in which housing is permitted; and  
4. Other requirements relating to accessory dwelling units.  
 
• LD 665, An Act to Extend the Date by Which Compliance is Required for  Affordable Housing Development, Increased 
Numbers of Dwelling Units and Accessory Dwelling Units  
 
This bill amends, from July 1, 2023 to July 1, 2025, the date by which laws must be implemented regarding affordable 
housing development, increased numbers o f dwelling units and accessory dwelling units enacted by Public Law 2021, 
chapter 672.  
 
• LD 1154, An Act Regarding Accessory Dwelling Units and Municipal Zoning Ordinances  
 
This bill would make changes to municipal zoning requirements. With respect to acces sory dwelling units, municipal 
zoning ordinances may provide for allowing at least one accessory dwelling unit on a lot where a single -family dwelling 
unit is the principal structure. If more than one accessory dwelling unit has been constructed on a lot a s a result of the 
allowance under this section or section 4364‑A, the lot is not eligible for any additional increases in density except as 
allowed by the municipality.  
 
The three  aforementioned bills would unnecessarily restrict provisions as enacted by LD 2003, An Act To Implement the 
Recommendations of the Commission To Increase Housing Opportunities in Maine by Studying Zoning and Land Use Restrictions .   
 
LD 214 would limit th e extent to which the changes made as a result of LD 2003 are applicable to municipalities in Maine .  
This landmark bill  allowed for the creation of ADUs  on the same lot as a single- family dwelling unit and to comply with 
certain other zoning requirements .  LD 214 would restrict this to only municipalities with a population of 10,000 or less.  LD 
665 would add an additional two years to the implementation timeline for the affordable housing development and ADU provisions included within LD 2003 as enacted.  And it appears LD 1154 would reduce the number of dwelling units 
allowed on lots.  These changes would create unnecessary barriers to the creation of ADUs in Maine and further limit the ability to create new affordable housing in Maine’s . 
 
As Members of t his Committee know, there is an overall shortage of affordable housing for all populations in Maine.  I n the 
past few years, resources have only allowed for affordable housing development at a rate that is less than 20% of what 
Maine needs, and even less f or supportive housing development.  There is an extraordinary unmet demand for affordable, 
quality housing for all populations, as well as supportive housing for people experiencing homelessness with complex issues such as serious and persistent mental illness, substance use disorder, and trauma from domestic violence.   
 
MaineHousing and the Legislature are  increasing resources toward this, but we will need other tools as well, and key among 
them is improved zoning processes and eased land use restrictions , including zoning/land use that promotes the development 
of accessory dwelling units (ADUs) – all of which would open the doors for developing vital affordable and supportive 
housing.   
 
All of these changes would assist Maine in increasing its ability to  create new affordable and supportive housing.  The 
changes to zoning, permitting, and land use restriction would also open the door  for the creation of permanent supportive 
housing for long term homeless populations -  the group that costs the system far more to serve while unhoused.  
    
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
 
Please support LDs 654 and 1358 and any other bill that would improve zoning and land use  for the creation of affordable 
housing, including the development of ADUs, which would significantly help Maine end long term and chronic 
homelessness.   And please oppose LDs 214, 665, and 1154 , and any other bill that would impose unnecessary barriers and 
restrict Maine’s ability to do so.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comm ent.   
 
