LD665 April ll, 2023 
To the Joint Select Committee on Housing: 
My name is Deborah Brusini, Maine resident, Chair of the Town of Bridgton Planning Board. I am 
here to testify in support of LD665. 
Representing the Bridgton Planning Board, the timeline for LD2003 implementation does not enable 
Bridgton (pop. ~5400) to amend their Land Use Code to assure orderly growth of the Town ina 
purposeful manner. Bridgton requires a secret ballot referendum to adopt any ordinance or 
ordinance amendment. This requires at least a 90-day lead time before any statewide election, with 
60 of that being state imposed, and 30 being the required review time for the Select Board prior to 
placing on the warrant. To meet the July 1, 2023 deadline, Bridgton must have had ordinance 
amendments prepared by mid-March in order to place them before the voters at our June 13,2023 
Town Meeting. This time has come and gone, so we face a haphazard and legally troublesome 
situation as concerns housing development. 
Signiﬁcant work on amending our consolidated Land Use Code was initiated by the Planning Board 
and Town staff in March 2023, soon after after the DECD draft Ch. 5 Rules were published. A 
successful ordinance amendment process takes time and requires a robust public outreach process as 
well as adherence to these Rules, which can substantially inﬂuence the ordinance drafting process. 
Unfortunately, there are still a number of important items requiring clarity. DECD is generously 
holding many Q&A sessions though May which can provide valuable insight in understanding the 
range of home rule allowed in implementing LD2003 both legally and in intent. Realistically, our 
ordinance process should be informed by these Q&A sessions which address gaps in understanding 
and reveal ways to implement LD2003 in a constructive manner. 
We foresee a solid 10 months before Bridgton can have a sound draft incorporating public input, in 
congruence with our Comprehensive plan, and which truly implements additional and affordable 
housing in a manner suitable for a small, rural tourist Town, with limited infrastructure, lots of open 
land, treasured view sheds, and many environmentally sensitive areas, including 10 lakes, and 
numerable streams and wetlands. This brings us to implementation no earlier than late 2024 ata 
Special Town Meeting. Given the State took a year to develop the Rules (post the April 27, 2022 
passage of LD2003), it seems reasonable that Towns are given at least that much time to integrate 
the requirements of LD2003 into their regulatory framework. 
Additionally, two supporting points: 1) The State appears to be addressing STRs and houseboats, 
which could also trigger changes to ordinances. Having an understanding of those landscapes before 
completing the LD2003 requirements seems logical. . .these are all related. 2) implementing LD2003 
will require legal fees upwards of $25,000, substantial time from an exceptionally busy staff of two, 
and from the Planning Board, whose primary charge is to review Town development applications, 
including subdivisions. Allowing more implementation time enables us to spread out the cost and 
our valuable resource efforts in a way that we do not have to subterfuge other important town 
priorities. 
The Bridgton Planning Board, also with the agreement of our Select Board, urge the committee to 
support LD665, as is, to allow Bridgton and other municipalities time to come into compliance with 
LD2003. 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
