 
93 Exchange Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772-2811 chamber@portlandregion.com • 
PortlandRegion.com 
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • 
Portland • Westbrook 
 
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 665-An Act to Extend the Date by Which Compliance is 
Required for Affordable Housing Development, Increased Numbers of Dwelling Units 
and Accessory Dwelling Units  
 
Joint Select Committee on Housing 
April 11, 2023 
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and members of the Committee on Housing, 
 
My name is Eamonn Dundon, and I am the Director of Advocacy of the Portland Regional 
Chamber of Commerce. We represent 1,300 businesses in our region who employ over 65,000 
Mainers. We are submitting this written testimony today to express our organization's 
strongest opposition LD 665.  
 
Much like our testimony in opposition to LD 214, we are opposed to LD 665 because at a time 
when our housing underproduction has never been more pronounced, passage of this 
legislation would represent a step backwards from the incredible progress we ensured last 
year with the passage of LD 2003. All over our region cities and towns have begun efforts to 
be in compliance with the provisions of LD 2003 requiring amendments at the municipal level, 
and it is very difficult to understand given the information already available to municipalities, 
that the path to compliance would take an additional two years in even the most under-
resourced of municipalities.  
 
The Department of Economic and Community Development issued an exhaustive twenty-
page guidance document earlier this year that goes into detail, both written and graphic, of 
the key provisions of LD 2003, including an FAQ for each section of the law1. Additionally, 
with rulemaking wrapping up soon on both LD 2003 and the associated Housing Opportunity 
Program Grants, additional resources will be flowing towards municipalities soon. Finally, 
 
1 LD 2003 Guidance  
 
93 Exchange Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772-2811 chamber@portlandregion.com • 
PortlandRegion.com 
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • 
Portland • Westbrook 
 
DECD is conducting six Q&A sessions over the next six weeks that will allow ample 
opportunity for additional questions not addressed in the above documents. We are confident 
that given the above resources and a lack of any formal enforcement action in the law, 
municipalities will be able to demonstrate good faith efforts to come into compliance by July 
1st, with formal adoption of land use code amendments shortly thereafter.  
 
We know Maine is experiencing an enormous deficit of supply in the housing market and the 
only way to address that is through building more housing in every community in our state as 
soon as possible. A two-year delay in the implementation of these requirements would be 
devastating to efforts to get more supply online, especially considering that between land 
acquisition, planning and engineering, the entitlement process, and construction we are 
currently looking at project cycles of more than five years. If we delay implementation of this 
law by two additional years, that means it will be seven years before we begin to see projects 
developed under the provisions of this law.  That is seven years we cannot afford if we want 
to house our neighbors, make it possible for both young and old to live in Maine, and grow 
our workforce to meet economic demand.  
 
We thank you for your time and commitment to all Mainers, and we ask for this committee to 
vote Ought Not to Pass on this legislation.  
  
