City of Sanford, Maine  
Land Bank Authority  
919 MAIN STREET, SANFORD, MAINE 04073  
(207) 608- 4101       
  
April 10, 202 3 
 
Dear Joint Select Committee on Housing , 
On March 14, 2023, the Ci ty Council Subcommittee , Municipal Operations and Property, received an 
update on the need to delay the implementation of P ublic Law 672, An Act to Implement the 
Recommendations of the Commission to Increase Housing Opportunities in Maine by Studying Zoning 
and Land Use Restrictions, and including this the bill before you, LD  665, to allow more time to seek 
clarification and iron out any ambiguity  in the law  and expectations of municipalities across  the State.   
Many  of the other bills before you toda y seem to be seeking the same goal, seeking clarification of the 
law before  municipalities are e xpected to make land use ordinance amendments and implement, with a 
public process , before July 1, 2023 , all while the law is being amended .  The implementation should  be 
delayed.  
Sanford has been deliberate i n prioritizing housing development  over the years .   
1. Sanford freed its zoning in its urban core to allow for housing density and a diversity of 
househol d incomes .   
2. Also, Sanford allows accessory dwellings on any residential lot  throughout the city .   
3. Currently , Sanford is developing short term rental regulations at the a dvisement of the So uthern 
Maine Development Commission .   
4. And Sanford continues  to regulat e abandoned housing and rental housing to im prove its 
housing stock.   
5. Sanford is also considering insurance requirements for rental housing.  
To increase  housing supply in Maine, there is no disagreement that more can be done in some cities  to 
remove the restrictions they have put in place to restrict  housing development .  For example,  there is 
ample land  and opportunit ies to develop accessory dwellings in Portland, but Portland requires that one 
and two family dwellings have sprin kler systems .  Neither the International Code Council (ICC) , nor 
National Fire P rotection Association require that one and two family dwellings to have sprin kler systems .  
This is a restriction that needs to be removed.  
Sanford  would be pleased to discuss  any o f its housing polic ies to encourage housing supply.  
Thank you,  
Ian Houseal  
Director of Community Development  
City of Sanford  
207-608-4101  
 
 
