 19 Community Drive ∙ Augusta, Maine 04330 ∙ (207) 622-7501 ∙ Fax: (207) 623-3590  
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS®    
 Testimony in Opposition to LD 665 (“An Act to Extend the Date by Which Compliance is Required for Affordable Housing Development, Increased Numbers of Dwelling Units and Accessory Dwelling Units”)  J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®  April 12, 2023  Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve Government Relations. We represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine Association is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the largest trade association in the country.   The Maine Association of REALTORS® opposes LD 665. This bill would significantly delay implementation of the landmark legislation sponsored by former Speaker Fecteau last session (Public Law Chapter 672, “An Act To Implement the Recommendations of the Commission To Increase Housing Opportunities in Maine by Studying Zoning and Land Use Restrictions”).   PL 672 was a historic step in the right direction to address Maine’s significant need for housing. One critical reason for Maine’s housing shortage is restrictive zoning that inhibits development of additional affordable housing units. Last session’s bill included key provisions to prohibit restrictive municipal zoning and spur housing development. Before the passage of PL 672, we had a patchwork of restrictions with many municipalities prohibiting development and thus adding to Maine’s housing shortage. PL 672 is an example of policy-making that respects incremental growth and community integrity, but also boldly addresses the housing needs of today and tomorrow.  Delaying the implementation by two years would negatively impact available units, creating more strain for thousands of people seeking housing. Restrictive zoning inhibits housing development and prevents economic stability and growth in communities. If passed, LD 665 would postpone growth and development for many communities, both ones who have already spent significant time and resources to implement PL 672’s provisions into their comprehensive plans/ordinances and those who have delayed updates in hopes of the removal of PL 672. Maine needs housing, and PL 672 is a balanced approach to addressing the need while ensuring that private property rights remain protected, allowing owners to use their properties to create more housing. Since it 
  Page 2  
 
has not had a chance to affect any positive changes yet in our communities due to its delayed implementation, further delay will only serve as a detriment to citizens seeking housing.    The Maine Association of REALTORS® believes that every individual should have opportunities to live in safe, decent, and affordable housing. We urge the adoption and integration of housing policies that respond to the individual and collective housing needs of our state. For that reason, we oppose LD 665, as it would cause significant delays to increasing our needed housing supply in Maine. We respectfully urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass. Thank you for your time and consideration.   
