 
I:\INETPUB\WWWROOT\TESTIMONY\RESOURCES\FRANCESCHI133256529280677553.PDF      Page 1 of 1 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE: April 10, 2023 
 
Senator Teresa Pierce 
Representative Traci Gere 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Housing 
Room 216 
 
RE: LD 665 - An Act to Extend the Date by which compliance is required for Affordable Housing Development, 
Increasing Numbers of Dwelling Units and Accessory Dwelling Units 
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Housing: 
 
My name is Jennie Poulin Franceschi. I am the Director of Planning and Code Enforcement for the City of 
Westbrook, and I would like to provide testimony regarding LD665 with the recommendation of OUGHT TO 
PASS.   
 
As a municipality that has been continually active in the LD2003 process, we participated heavily in the review of 
the original LD 2003 language as well as the current rulemaking process.  Westbrook has provided considerable 
feedback on the rulemaking process where we feel some of the rulemaking needed to be amended based on the 
statute process, we participated in last year.  To that point, no ordinance work will begin until the final rulemaking 
is completed, therefore even in our Mayor-Council form of government, we would not be able to meet the 
deadline of July 1st.  With the substantive changes that some municipalities would need to conduct to address 
conflicts that LD 2003 creates, it is only reasonable that the implementation of this rule be pushed out to afford 
municipalities the time they need to have their public meetings with the Planning Board and Councils, Select 
Boards or conduct their Town Meetings.   
 
The funding to conduct the planning efforts for municipalities without the staff to implement LD 2003 would not 
be sought until after rulemaking is completed.  The process then starts for a municipality to go out to RFP to hire 
consultants to write the local ordinance amendments.  Once a document is ready to be provided to the decision 
makers of those communities, it will take a several months to get through public hearings with those boards.  The 
timetables provided in the Original LD2003 are not feasible especially when you factor in the time it took to pull 
together the rulemaking documents.   
 
To not allow this extension will only place most municipalities in a non-compliance status, which should not be 
the goal of any progressive legislation.  The Goal should be to rally all municipalities to work towards 
compliance in a supported fashion. 
 
We thank you for your time and consideration of our comments.  
 
Respectfully Submitted,  
 
 
Jennie Poulin. Franceschi, P.E.      Rebecca Spitella 
Director of Planning and Code Enforcement    Senior Planner 
