 
The Town of Fryebur g                                               
          Settled 1762 - Incorporated 1777  
          Municipal Office  
       16 Lovewell Pond Road  
         Fryeburg, ME 04037  
       207-935-2805 telephone  
            207-935-6008 fax  
 
 
April 5, 2023  
 
RE: LD 665 – An Act to Extend the Date By Which Compliance is R equired for Affordable Housing 
Development, Incre ased Numbers of Dwelling Units and Accessory Dwelling Un its 
 
Dear Members of the Housing Committee:  
 
I am writing in  support of LD 665 .  Locally, there has been debate about the merits of  the statu es resulting from 
LD 2003  but we understood that, regardless of opinions about the law, we needed to take steps to revi se the Town 
of Fryeburg Land Use Ordinance to be in compliance.  
 
While Town Staff or the Planning Board typically takes on ordinance revisions in -house, there was consensus  that 
we needed to seek the assistance of o ur regional planning agency to help us decipher  how to incorporate the 
specific s of the law into our ordinance  (at a cost to the Town).  
 
A publi c hearing was recently held on the proposed ordinance revisions that incorporate LD 2003.  It quickly 
became evident that there are more questions than firm answers  about specifics of the law and how it will impact 
our town.  Seemingly simple questions were asked and the P lanning Board  and planning agency representative  
were not able to answer the question s.  Apparently,  many other professional attorneys and plan ners have sought 
clarification  at a state level and have not be en able to obtain it .    
 
The Town  should not be forced to ask voters to approve ordinance changes  that might have a huge impact on the  
rural nature of our community  when there are so many unanswered questions .  Why should ou r locally a ppointed 
and elected officials have to stand up in front of the voters and try to promote the passage of ordinance standards 
that even we don’t  fully understand ? It is imperative  that we are provided  time and expertise to adopt compliant 
ordinances  that we can confidently explain and administer .  
 
Please support the passage of LD 665.  
 
Regards,  
 
Katie Haley  
Town Manager  
 
 
 
 
 

