 
  
 
TOWN OF KITTERY 
Office of the Town Manager 
200 Rogers Road, Kittery, ME 03904 
Telephone: 207-475-1329 Fax: 207-439-6806 
kamaral@kitteryme.org   
 
 
April 11, 2023 
 
Members of the Housing Committee 
 
Dear Senator Teresa Pierce, Representative Traci Gere, and members of the Housing Committee, 
 
I am writing to offer support for LD665 to extend the date by which compliance is required for 
Affordable Housing Development, Increased Numbers of Dwelling Units and Accessory Dwelling 
Units, MRS § 4364.   
 
The Town of Kittery has been actively engaged in working on the housing crisis that impacts our 
town and region.  We have taken a number of steps, prior to MRS §4364, including adding 
affordable housing requirements for developments of 5 units or more in certain zones, removing 
barriers for ADUs to be developed, and utilizing acquired property for affordable housing 
development.  The support for delaying implementation of MRS §4364 is not coming from a 
place of opposition to the goal of addressing the affordable housing crisis.  
 
There remains a lack clarity on several issues important for the success of the law.  We are still 
unclear how this law interacts with our existing zoning, which is already favorable to affordable 
housing and our community development goals.  The rules for implementation remain in draft 
form and technical assistance will not likely be available until after July 1.  MRS §4364 is simply 
not ready.  
 
We all know from experience, the fastest way to undo a bold stroke effort is to mire it in 
challenge.  If the Legislature does not give DECD, our regional planning agencies, and us as 
communities enough time to implement MRS §4364 effectively, we will be forced to divert scare 
resources to untangling the challenges it causes rather than actively addressing affordable 
housing needs. 
 
Progress on affordable housing is vital to our region and a key component of our long-term 
sustainability as a state.  I ask that you support LD665 for the long-term success of MRS §4364. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Kendra Amaral 
Town Manager Kendra Amaral  
Town Manager 
 

TOWN OF KITTERY  
200 Rogers Road, Kittery, ME 03904  
Telephone: 207- 475-1329 
 
 
REPORT TO TOWN COUNCIL  
 
Date:  February 13 , 2023  
From:  Kendra Amaral, Town Manager  
CC: Matt Brock, Chairperson, Housing Committee  
Subject:  Housing Committee Year in Review Report  
Councilor Sponsor:  N/A  
 
 
OVERVIEW  
The Kittery Housing Committee is pleased to offer the following year in review report to the Council.  
The purpose is to outline the work of the Housing Committee and acknowledge the progres s made in 
addressing the affordable housing crisis in Kittery.    
 
The Housing Committee was established as a formal standing committee in November of 2020.  However, 
its work began in 2019, as a working group.  Since its formation, the Housing Committee ha s proposed 
various Title 16 Land Use Code amendments to incentivize the development of affordable housing units in future developments.  The Committee has advanced efforts to generate affordable housing units on 
town owned property , and through the strateg ic use of American Rescue Plan Act funds (A RPA). 
 
COMMITTEE ACTIONS  
 Accessory Dwelling Units  
• 33 new ADUs have been approved since adoption of the Housing Committee’s permissive ADU 
ordinance.  
• The ADU ordinance became the model used for the ADU portion of LD2003 enacted by the State 
Legislature.  Though various portions of LD2003 are still being debated, the ADU provision has 
been relatively well received.  
• Launched the Accessory Dwelling Unit grant program with funding allocated from ARPA funds.  Awarded two grants of up to $50,000 each to create new ADUs for income qualified property 
owners.  ADUs must be rented to qualified affordable renters.  Four applicants applied.  
 Inclusionary Housing Ordinance  
• Developed amendments to the BL & B -1 Zones.  Adopted amendments increase the opportunity 
for affordable housing in these zones, and make progress towards achieving the Foreside Parking, Transportation and Development study of extending design standards of the Foreside through 
Gourmet Alley.  
• Assisted in the development of amendments to the Cluster/Conservation Subdivision zoning 
requirements.  Adopted amendments include the requirement for inclusionary housing.  
• The Committee conducted an affordable housing workshop in June with Maine Housing.  
Attendees learned about housing characteristics in Kittery, need, and options for affordable 
housing development.  
 

REPORT TO COUNCIL          FEBRUARY 13, 2023  
  2  Generation of Affordable Units  
• Launched the redevelopment of 42 – 44 Old Post into affordable housing.  The Committee guided 
a successful RFP  process, and recommended the selection of Fair Tide to redevelop the site.  An 
MOU is in development, and additional funding is being aligned for the next phase of design.   
Project is expected to generate between 4 -6 affordable units.  
• Guided the process f or selling 18 – 20 Phelps for affordable housing.  The existing two- family has 
been abandoned for years and is no longer fit for human habitation.  The sale will include deed restrictions for the units to be rented or owned by income qualified individuals.   Project will 
generate 2 affordable units.  
 
2023 PRIORITIES   
The Housing Committee has developed an ambitious set of priorities  for the coming year and is eager to 
advance work on them.  
 The 2023 priorities  include:  
• Engage in the Business Park zoning rev iew and advise on affordable housing opportunities  
• Expand inclusionary housing requirements to other zones  
• Develop and host community outreach and forums  
• Monitor and make recommendations/respond to proposed l egislative action on LD2003 and 
develop an impl ementation plan based on guidance expected from the State in early 2023.  
• Gather expert/affordable housing developer feedback on recently adopted inclusionary housing zoning amendments, specifically:  
o Remaining e xisting/perceived barriers  
o Impact of ongoing height restrictions  
o Impact of 25% maximum for payment in lieu program  
 
Phase 3 of the Joint Land Use Study will complete a regional housing inventory and demand analysis and will provide additional guidance on policy and actions the town can take to address  housing needs.  
 
