HOME OF THE UNIVERSITY OF MAINE 
Testimony of Kyle Drexler, Orono Town Planner 
Supporting 
LD 665, An Act to Extend the Date by Which Compliance is 
Required for Affordable Housing Development, Increased Numbers 
of Dwelling Units and Accessory Dwelling Units 
April 11, 2023 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, 
my name is Kyle Drexler, and l am the Town Planner for the Town of Orono. On behalf of the 
Orono Planning Department, I would like to offer strong support for LD 665 to extend the 
compliance date for certain aspects of LD 2003. 
l want to make it clear that the Orono Planning Department supports the intent of LD 2003 and 
particularly the idea of increasing a variety of housing opportunities in our Maine communities. 
This is an important goal that we have been working on and plan to continue working on as we 
head into our next Comprehensive Plan update in the near future. With Orono being home to 
the University of Maine, we are fully aware that communities are made up of a variety of people 
with a diverse range of housing wants and needs. Single-family, exclusionary zoning should not 
be the path fon/vard for any community. In fact, Orono already has no existing zones in town 
where only single-family homes are allowed. At the very least, two-family dwellings and 
accessory dwelling units are allowed anywhere that single-family homes are allowed. 
That being said, additional time to implement these aspects of LD 2003 would be incredibly 
beneﬁcial to this process for Orono, as well as many other communities, I can imagine. While 
certain things are required under LD 2003 and are clear, there are also a number of areas in 
which a municipality will have some ﬂexibility in how they are handled. There are also numerous 
tangential and related land use items that come into play because of the requirements of LD 
2003. LD 2003 and the rulemaking does not necessarily address all of these related land use 
topics and standards. This is the reason that the Orono Planning Department is in full support of 
LD 665 to extend the date for compliance with these various aspects of LD 2003. I believe it 
would be greatly beneficial for communities to have adequate time to go through these things. 
59 Main Street, Orono, Maine 04473 - 
(207) 866-2556 - 
www.orono.org 
The Town of Orono is an equal opportunity employer and service provider that celebrates diversity and 
is committed to creating an inclusive environment for our employees and those we serve.
Some of these discussion areas that l know will require time for Orono in particular to work 
through as we move fomiard with this ordinance update include: 
0 Discussions around the permitting process and what will require site plan review; . 
0 Access standards for lots with multiple detached dwelling units; 
0 Are there areas where the Town would want to be less restrictive than LD 2003 and 
allow more than what is required; 
0 What, if anything, is required to change about our existing Accessory Dwelling Unit 
standards; 
0 Orono has different occupancy limits for dwellings depending on whether or not the 
dwelling is in a zone which allows multi-family dwellings. LD 2003 essentially requires 
that multi-family dwellings (up to 4 units) are allowed anywhere in a growth area on 
undeveloped lots. What changes will need to be made to our Ordinance around 
occupancy? This is a particularly important question to many in Orono as rental housing 
in multi-family dwellings is often dominated by university students and has the potential 
to, on occasion, create neighborhood level behavioral concerns. 
LD 665 would allow the time needed for Town of Orono staff to work with the Town Council and 
public to ﬁgure out exactly what works best for our community rather than rushing to implement 
standards only to find some issue later on. It also gives time to explore additional ways to meet 
housing goals established by the State. lf we are going to open up our zoning and land use 
ordinances to meet the requirements of LD 2003, it is worth the time to explore if there are other 
possible changes that could be made along the way. This would benefit strongly from having 
some additional time to explore these areas. In addition to the time for community discussion 
and input, the compliance extension would also leave time for the ordinance changes to go 
through the usual adoption process which can often take several months to be in full effect. 
59 Main Street, Orono, Maine 04473 - 
(207) 866-2556 - 
www.orono.org 
The Town of Orono is an equal opportunity employer and service provider that celebrates diversity and 
is committed to creating an inclusive environment for our employees and those we serve.
