,, HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
pig; 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Michele Meyer 
58 Odiorne Lane 
Eliot, ME 03903 
Phone: (207) 438-9197 
Michele.Mever@legislature.maine.gov 
April ll, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Michele Meyer Supporting 
LD 665, An Act to Extend the Date by Which Compliance is 
Required for Affordable Housing Development, Increased 
Numbers of Dwelling Units and Accessory Dwelling Units 
Before the Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Good afternoon, Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and esteemed members of the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing. I am Representative Michele Meyer, serving southern Maine’s District 
150, which includes all of Eliot and parts of South Berwick and Kittery. 
As a member of the Health and Human Services Committee for the entirety of my legislative 
service, proudly serving a second term as House chair, I am fully aware of the critical need for 
affordable housing and of the direct health effects of housing instability, particularly on low- and 
middle-income Mainers. 
Housing is undoubtedly an important social determinant of health, recognizing the range of ways 
in which a lack of housing, poor quality housing and housing insecurity can and does negatively 
affect the wellbeing of Mainers statewide. 
I am before you as a co-sponsor of LD 665, not because I oppose what is commonly referred to 
as LD 2003, but because the July l, 2023 deadline for compliance is simply unrealistic and 
places the communities we represent in the very same position I ﬁnd myself in: supporting the 
obvious need for housing, but remiss to enter into sweeping ordinance revision without the time 
or the tools necessary to do it correctly. 
Extending the effective date to July 2025 is necessary, not only to allow for a more thoughtful 
and thorough approach to correctly adjusting ordinances, but to give state government time to 
complete its obligation for the provision of guidance, for ﬁnal rulemaking and funding for 
technical support. Our municipalities have many unanswered questions, and many, such as the 
District l50: Eliot, Kittery (part) and South Berwick (part)
one I live in, must build support from voters for the ordinance changes or the warrant articles are 
at risk for failing on June 13. 
Many town ofﬁces are faced with limited staff, including lacking town planners, and rely heavily 
on volunteer boards to accomplish much in the way of land use ordinance development. In the 
communities I serve, those charged with drafting ordinance changes to achieve compliance with 
LD 2003 see a looming deadline in the face of a process that is far more complicated than simply 
inserting the language contained in statute. It requires multiple adjustments to related ordinances 
and consideration of something We here in the legislature often fail to fully contemplate: 
unintended consequences. 
I am here because the implementation of LD 2003 cannot and should not be driven by a rush to 
compliance with the law by our municipalities. Behind me are others tasked with the work to 
bring municipal land use ordinances into compliance and ﬁnding the fast approaching deadline 
to be untenable and unreasonable. I ask you to reach out to those in your own town halls and add 
their voices to your deliberation on LD 665. 
District I50: Eliot, Kittery (part) and South Berwick (part)
