 
    
 Town of Old Orchard Beach  
1 Portland Ave, Old Orchard Beach, ME 04064  
 
Michael Foster  
Associate Planner  
207.937.56 36 
mfoster@oobmaine.com  
www.oobmaine.com  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL FOSTER, TOWN OF OLD ORCHARD BEACH ASSOCIATE TOWN PLANNER, 
TO THE JOINT SELECT COMMITTEE ON HOUSING  
 
WRITTEN TESTIMONY PROVIDED FOR  LD #665  
“An Act to Extend the  Date by Which Compliance is Required for Affordable Housing Development, 
Increased Numbers of Dwelling Units and Accessory Dwelling Units”  
 
HEARING DATE: Tuesday 11 April 2023  
 
Honorable Senator Teresa Pierce, Honorable Representative Traci Gere, Distinguished Members 
of the Joint Select Committee on Housing:  
 
As the Town of Old Orchard Beach, Maine Associate Town Planner, and former Maine Association 
of Planners Legislative Policy Committee (MAP LPC) member, I am for LD 665 because whi le preserving 
the intentions of LD 2003  [PL 2021, c. 672, §4]  for affordable housing development, increased dwelling 
units and accessory dwelling units, LD 665 will just extend the date by which communities must meet the 
statute by pushing the deadline out  until July 1, 2025 . This will provide the much -needed time for 
communities to get ordinances drafted, reviewed by legal, hold public hearings, and formally adopt 
ordinances.  
 
The Town of Old Orchard Beach has a population of 9,000 year -round residents th at swells to a 
population of up to 75,000 people in the summer. People are always looking for ways to create units for 
short -term summer rentals to take advantage of this demand. As a Town we haven’t differentiated short -
term rentals from long term or year -round rentals until just earlier this year when we added  a licensing 
definition  and a space on rental license applications to identify short -term rental  units . How will we 
ensure dwelling unit allowances and accessory dwelling units aren’t used as short -term r entals? Our 
Town Council is meeting tomorrow night to have a workshop on a Short Term Rental (STR) ordinance. 
Even with these current efforts, additional time is needed to understand how this will be regulated.  
 
We need more time to assess how to best impl ement these new rules to be able to limit the potential 
impacts to people in the community and the environment. This is why I am for LD 665, which will extend  
the date when  communiti es need to  meet the statute to allow both calendar and fiscal year communities 
to accomp lish the work with fully developed state guidance . The  Department of Economic and 
Community Development (DECD) rules for LD 2 003 weren’t posted for public comment until February 8, 
2023, and the public hearing was just last month in March. With rulemaking not completed, it isn’t  
 

 
 Proposal: Modify existing structure and continue existing mixed -use with first 
floor restaurant and second floor residential with new rooftop deck.  
Location: 93 West Grand Ave  
Owner: DURP LLC   
 
 
 
Michael Foster  
Associate Planner  
207.937.56 36 
mfoster@oobmaine.com  
www.oobmaine.com  
 
 
 
 
feasible for many communities to have ordinances enacted by July 1, 2023, less than three months away . 
Unfortunately like many other communities we were waiting for rulemaking to be completed before 
exhausting our resources on this effort.  I am in support of LD 665 because the date should be extended so 
these communities like us that still need to implement ordinances to comply  with the new rules, have the 
appropriate time to evaluate  potential  impacts  and make informed decisions .  
 
Thank you for taking the time to read this testimony.  
 
Sinc erely,  
 
Michael Foster, Town of Old Orchard Beach Associate Town Planner  
 
 

