Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and Members of the Committee, thank you for the 
opportunity to speak. My name is Mike Ray, and I live in Lincolnville. I’m speaking in support of LD 
665. I’m on the Selectboard in town, and while I am not in any way speaking on behalf of our 
Selectboard, I’ve had some experience with our Town’s efforts to comply with LD 2003 -— and just 
wanted to share some of that, and my thoughts on LD 665. 
l. Lincolnville is fortunate as far as timing goes. Thanks to great staff, a willing Selectboard, 
working with the Midcoast Council of Governments, and a good Town Attorney, we should be able to 
present a consistent Land Use Ordianance to the voters by July of this year. (And that’s just squeaking 
in under the deadline.) But not every municipality is able to meet that deadline. Their ﬁscal years, town 
meeting schedules, or available resources and budgets might not allow them to get everything together 
in time. A two-year extension to summon up some technical and ﬁnancial support would go a long way 
in getting more town and cities on board with LD 2003. 
2. Whether or not the voters adopt the ordinance changes on a warrant is another matter, of 
course. I think a couple of years during which there’s technical assistence and funds available to do the 
education would come in handy here. It would help towns present a professionally prepared, vetted 
and convincing package at hearings and Town Meeting. I tend to think that the goals of LD 2003 are 
worthy, and the more buy-in from residents, the better the chances of making headway with Maine’s 
housing situation. 
3. Finally, I hope you consider the cost to municipalities. Our Town Administrator estimates 
local taxpayers have spent just under $2,000 on this so far — what with staff time, MCOG fees, attorney 
time, and printing ballots. This doesn’t break the bank, but I’m sure many local taxpayers would rather 
see that money going to road mainentance or some such project. If it takes more time to set up a system
for up-front funding — and in our case, reimbursement - then so be it. I’ll ﬁnd it easier to look those 
folks in the eye. And maybe 2003 ’s intent ﬁnds itself in more local ordinances. 
Thanks for the time. I’m happy to answer any questions you might have.
