 
 
 
TESTIMONY  OF the SOUTHERN  MAINE  PLANNING  and  DEVELOPMENT  COMMISSION  
to the  
Joint  Standing  Committee  on Housing  
 
SPEAKING  IN SUPPORT  OF  LD  665 
 
“AN ACT TO EXTEND  THE DATE  BY WHICH  COMPLIANCE  IS REQUIRED  FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING  
DEVELOPMENT , INCREASED  NUMBERS  OF DWELLING  UNITS  AND ACCESSORY  DWELLING  UNITS ” 
 
DATE  OF HEARING:  Tuesday , April  11th 2023 
 
Honorable  Senator Teresa  Pierce , Honorable  Representative Traci  Gere,  and  Distinguished 
Members  of the Committee  on Housing:  
 
We, the Executive  Committee  of the Southern  Maine  Planning and Development  Commission,  (SMPDC)  
submit  this letter  of support  for LD 665.  SMPDC  is a Regional Planning Organization  providing technical  
assistance  and planning services  to 39 communities  in York  and southern  Oxford  counties.  Our member  
communities  are both  large  and small,  ranging  from  cities  with  populations  over  20,000 to those  towns  
with  a few hundred  residents.  
While  we are supportive  of the efforts  of the administration  and this committee  to increase  affordable  
housing within  the state as it is a critical issue  in our region,  we believe  more  time  is needed  to assure  
that LD 2003  is a successful  vehicle  to do that on the local  level.  
As we have  worked  with  communities  on this legislation  over  the past  year,  a few things  have  become  
clear:  
• This is a complex  piece  of legislation  requiring a detailed  look  at the planning and zoning 
framework  within  a community.  Many  towns  lack the staff and expertise to undertake  that 
work.  
• The resources,  including technical  assistance,  state  agency  guidance,  and funding intended  to 
assist  towns  has not yet been  provided,  or have  ramped  up too late to complete  the local 
implementation  of LD 2003.  
• The rule guiding implementation  of LD 2003  is still not finalized,  leaving  many  towns  hesitant  to 
proceed.  The time  and challenges  associated  with  writing  and passing an ordinance  at the local 
level  are not worth  pursuing until  detailed  guidance  about  the rule is clear.  
• Finally,  after  waiting  for further  guidance  and assistance,  many  communities  have  passed  the 
deadlines  for ordinance  adoption  at annual  meetings,  making  it impossible  for them  to meet  the 
July 1st timeline.   
 
As an agency  tasked  with  providing  technical  assistance  to our member  communities,  we want  to ensure  
the implementation  of LD 2003 at the local level  fully  advances  the goals  of the legislation  and also the 
communities  that adopt  that legislation.  We believe the current  timeline  makes  that goal  extremely  
difficult  and,  in some  cases,  impo ssible.  
 
 
Southern Maine  Planning &  Development  Commission  
110 Main  St. Suite  1400 Saco, ME  04072 |  207- 571-7065 |  www.smpdc.org  We appreciate  the great  work  being  done  by this committee to advance  the goal  of more  affordable  
housing for Maine  – a goal we fully  support.  We believe  that an extension  to LD 2003  would  provide  a 
better  outcome for both  the state  and for the muni cipalities  to achieve  the end result  we all desire.   
Thank  you for your  consideration,   
SMPDC  Executive  Committee  
Jan Williams , Hiram  
Beth  Della Valle , Sanford  
Kendra  Amaral, Kittery  
Werner  Gillam , Kennebunkport  Chris  Osterrider, Kennebunk  
Denise  Clavette , South Berwick  
Karla Bergeron  Wilcox , Alfred  
Katie  Haley , Fryeburg Keith  McBride , Sanford 
Trac ey Desjardins , Saco  
Justin  Chenette, York  County  
Brian  Phinney , Biddeford  
 
