MA|NE MUN|C| pA|_ 1-aoo-452-avaeun state) 
* 
(T) 207-623-8428 
ASSOCIATION SINCE was (F),O,,6,,_m,9 
60 Community Drive I Augusto, ME 04330-91486 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Support ForA 
LD 665 — An Act to Extend the Date by Which Compliance is Required for Aﬂordable Housing 
Development, Increased Numbers of Dwelling Units and Accessory Dwelling Units 
April ll, 2023 
Sen. Pierce, Rep. Gere, and distinguished members of the Housing Committee, my name is 
Rebecca Graham, and I am providing testimony in support of LD 665 on behalf of Maine Municipal 
Association which represents the interests of municipal government before the state and federal 
government. The positions of the Association are formed at the direction of our 70-member Legislative 
Policy Committee, (LPC) who are elected by the selectboards and council of the municipalities in each of 
the 35 Senate districts in Maine. As a result, the positions represent a wide view of communities with 
varying resources, rural and urban, and those with ample local resources as well as those with none. 
This initiative forms an MMA platform bill at the direction of that same LPC, and we thank Rep. 
Allison Hepler for carrying this effort forward for communities in her own district as well as the rest of 
Maine. 
First let me open with what this bill does not do. This bill does not prevent communities who feel 
ready to move forward from doing so. That said, there are many pieces of rulemaking that are not yet 
ﬁnal and may require an edit of those efforts later. A delay in implementation does not change, stop, or 
slow down those efforts. 
This bill does not prevent communities from continuing their efforts to attract affordable housing 
development into their communities. That said, it remains to be seen how they will positively support 
achieving statewide housing goals for their region, as those goals have not yet been established by the 
department.'
» 
Long before LD 2003 was adopted, communities had moved in a direction to allow ADUs and 
have not seen any signiﬁcant uptick in building, in part because of the same issues that have created the 
housing crisis in Maine —market forces— and limited access to funding for the average working-class 
homeowner coupled with a lack of builders to meet the demand. To answer one piece of these market 
forces, Auburn, has not only created preapproved plans for ADU development, but they have also created 
a grant program to assist homeowners without capacity to build from the plans. 
Over sixty percent of Maine’s 487 towns have no zoning at all, and in order to comply with 
statute they need the rules, technical support to establish density requirements and to adopt ordinances to 
conform with achieving statewide housing goals for their region —again not yet established by the 
department. 
As written, the statute attempts to create statewide definitions for common terms that exist in 
municipal ordinances in several forms. As a result, not only do all communities need to have the
Department of Economic and Community Development (DECD) rules fully established to understand 
how to edit those terms and apply them across their multiple ordinances, but towns also need to adopt 
new ordinances that will allow for broader applications of where accessory dwelling units can be 
constructed. The Association understands it will be May until they are ﬁnalized. 
Absent the funding mechanism required by the constitution when enacted, the statute and 
subsequent rules are voluntary, not mandated, and this is not what was envisioned by the statute. MMA 
understands that DECD is working on an appropriation to reimburse municipalities for this work, in 
addition to the grant program for community organizations to assist them. These pieces need to be in 
place for many towns to even begin this work. 
The date of July 1, 2023 was established in statute without a proper understanding of the due 
process responsibilities for municipal ordinance adoption. Why does this matter? If this body actually 
cares about dedicating resources to housing and not to pockets of trial attorneys it surely must understand 
that without legally defendable positions, all the efforts of municipal volunteer planning boards will invite 
NIMBYism challenges that divert excruciatingly small revenues to legal challenges that could otherwise 
be used to incentivize or provide opportunities for residents without capital that such construction 
requires. 
LD 665 simply allows all the rest of Maine to catch up with resources, and technical support 
ﬁrmly in place to establish defendable ordinances, create community buy-in for the effort and make sure 
they are not using additional resources to run special town meetings for that purpose. Ofﬁcials are asking 
you to vote ought to pass on LD 665, not only for your local government partners, but also in service to 
your constituents who are the legislative body of the municipalities and will either vote in support or in 
opposition of those ﬁnal ordinances based on their appropriate construction.
