/ April 11, 2023 
Joint Committee on Housing 
RE: LD 665 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and distinguished members ofthe Joint Committee on Housing. My 
name is Roberta Boczkiewicz, and I am submitting testimony in support of LD 665 as a member of both the 
Selectboard and Comprehensive Plan Committee of Castine, Maine. 
Castine has a town staff of only five public servants and like every other small town, we have a host of 
dedicated volunteers that give their time on boards and committees. Time is always our most precious and 
limited commodity. 
The enactment of PL 2021 c 672 has caused us great concern, not the least of which was the timeline 
associated with preparations for compliance. We estimate that new law will require us to make six (6) to eight 
(8) major changes to our Zoning Ordinance, at least three (3) minor changes to our Traffic, Sewer, and Water 
ordinances and a complete revision of our Short-term Rental Ordinance before July 1, 2023. Yet, as of today, 
April 11, the Department of Economic and Community Development is still in the process of assembling the 
information necessary to assist municipalities, such as ours, with these tasks. We are being asked to adopt 
necessary ordinances without a clear understanding of statewide housing goals or the rules by which the 
department will administer and enforce the zoning and land use provisions that we need to follow. 
Castine's Annual Town Meeting will be held on May 13, 2023. Our warrant has been finalized for this 
meeting. We are also in the process of completing our Comprehensive Plan which is tentatively scheduled to 
go before the town in August. Not to mention our ongoing work on infrastructure projects that require 
listening sessions, information sessions, and special town meetings. All of which require time. 
We strongly support LD 665 because it will afford us sufficient time to make the necessary ordinance changes 
in concert with our new Comprehensive Plan but, more importantly, with the guidance of the new rules set 
forth by the Department of Economic and Community Development. Without this extended time, we will be 
forced to create insufficient ordinances that will need to be amended or entirely rewritten. Then we will need 
to hold additional town meetings to discuss and adopt those new rules only to ask our residents to reconvene 
once we have received-the necessary information to amend or rewrite those ordinances. This unnecessary 
waste of valuable staff time, valuable resident time, and valuable taxpayer money that can be avoided 
through LD 665. 
Thank you for your attention to this matter and your consideration of the needs of small towns. I am hopeful 
that you will afford all of us the time we need to make thoughtful and informed decisions and ordinance 
revisions that will serve our communities in the best way possible. 
Sincerely, 
Roberta Boczkiewicz 
Selectboard and Comprehensive Planning Committee member, Castine, Maine 
PO Box 182 
Castine, Maine 04421 
rboczkiewiczcsb@gmail.com
