Testimony in Support of LD 214  - An Act to Amend the Laws Regarding Zoning and Land Use 
Restrictions to Limit Certain Requirements to Municipalities with a Population of More than 
10,000 
Dear Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and Honorable members of the Housing Committee.  
My name is Stephanie Anderson, I reside in Cape Elizabeth and am a member of the Cape 
Elizabeth Housing Diversity Committee.   
Cape Elizabeth is a rural town of 9,500 residents.  It is a diverse community consisting of several 
farms, high density neighborhoods, condominium developments, beaches, parks and 850 acres of 
land under conservation easements.   
Like most communities in Maine, we are in the process of grappling with the cost of housing.  
We learned in 2022 that a startling number of households in Cape Elizabeth are cost burdened:  
21% of all households, 65% of households with incomes earning below $50,000, and 29% of all 
senior households.  The entire community is aware of the crisis that is presented and want to 
change that.  We are working to change that.  We will change that.   
LD 2003 was the work product of the Commission to Increase Housing Opportunities in Maine.  
It met 7 times between August 12, 2021 and December 2, 2021.  It was composed of likeminded 
folks and the presenters were for the most part urban developers and officials.  
LD 2003 imposed urban and one-size fits all solutions on rural communities and divested the 
Maine people of the flexibility needed to address their housing issues.  It divested the smaller 
towns of the right and the responsibility to provide housing with ordinances and strategies that 
are conducive to housing diversity and affordability in their communities.  
One of the most problematic provisions of LD 2003 was the enactment of 30-A sec 4364, which 
provided, inter alia, that municipalities may not require more than two parking spaces for every 
three units in developments in which there is affordable housing.  For rural towns without public 
transportation, this provision, instead of encouraging affordable housing developments actually 
makes it more difficult to approve them because it forces the town to add public transportation to 
its infrastructure.   It places an unfair and unnecessary burden on rural communities.  I would 
urge an amendment to LD 214 to eliminate this requirement also.  
Thank you for your service and for your consideration.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 665 
An Act to Extend the Date by Which Compliance is Required for Affordable Housing  
Development, Increased Numbers of Dwelling Units and Accessory Dwelling Units.  
 
Dear Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Honorable members of the Housing Committee. 
My name is Stephanie Anderson, I reside in Cape Elizabeth, and I am a member of the Cape 
Elizabeth Housing Diversity Committee. Like most, if not all, towns in Maine, we are 
scrambling with zoning ordinance/LD 2003 gap analysis and attempting to conform our laws and 
ordinances to the requirements of LD 2003.   
LD 2003 was the work product of the Commission to Increase Housing Opportunities in Maine 
(The Commission).  It met 7 times between August 12, 2021, and December 2, 2021, and 
produced a final report containing 9 recommendations.    
On March 2, 2022, LD 2003 was presented to the legislature and on April 27th, 2022, it was 
signed by the Governor.  That is lightning speed.  
LD 2003 contained most of the recommendations of the Commission, but two recommendations, 
directly related to this bill, did not make it into the legislation.  
They are, from the final report, as follows: 
Recommendation #4. Provide technical and financial assistance for all communities seeking 
support in making zoning improvements and in identifying opportunities for increasing 
affordable housing. (Vote 15-0)  
Recommendation #6. Create a three-year statewide incentive program for municipalities as 
follows: in Year 1, a qualifying community must make a commitment to reviewing zoning 
and land use restrictions. In Years 2 and 3, adopt zoning and land use policies to promote 
housing opportunities; qualifying communities would receive a state financial reward for 
up to three years, so long as they remain in good standing with the program requirements. 
(Vote 14-1)  
The founders of this bill, the Commission, recognized that local governments would need 
additional resources and significant time to proactively plan and successfully execute the goals 
of increasing housing in their communities.  I don’t know why these provisions did not make it 
into the final bill, but it is clear that the July 1, 2023, deadline set for implementation was never 
intended by the Commission.  The Commission knew that the towns needed time.  The 
Commission wanted to give it to them. LD 655 will do that.   
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
 
Stephanie Anderson
Cape Elizabeth
LD 665
Testimony in Support of LD 665 - An Act to Extend the Date by Which Compliance 
is Required for Affordable Housing Development, Increased Numbers of Dwelling 
Units and Accessory Dwelling Units. 
Dear Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Honorable members of the Housing 
Committee.
My name is Stephanie Anderson, I reside in Cape Elizabeth, and I am a member of 
the Cape Elizabeth Housing Diversity Committee. Like most, if not all, towns in 
Maine, we are scrambling with zoning ordinance/LD 2003 gap analysis and 
attempting to conform our laws and ordinances to the requirements of LD 2003.  
LD 2003 was the work product of the Commission to Increase Housing Opportunities 
in Maine (The Commission).  It met 7 times between August 12, 2021, and December
2, 2021, and produced a final report containing 9 recommendations.   
On March 2, 2022, LD 2003 was presented to the legislature and on April 27th, 2022, 
it was signed by the Governor.  That is lightning speed. 
LD 2003 contained most of the recommendations of the Commission, but two 
recommendations, directly related to this bill, did not make it into the legislation. 
They are, from the final report, as follows:
Recommendation #4. Provide technical and financial assistance for all communities 
seeking support in making zoning improvements and in identifying opportunities for 
increasing affordable housing. (Vote 15-0) 
Recommendation #6. Create a three-year statewide incentive program for 
municipalities as follows: in Year 1, a qualifying community must make a 
commitment to reviewing zoning and land use restrictions. In Years 2 and 3, adopt 
zoning and land use policies to promote housing opportunities; qualifying 
communities would receive a state financial reward for up to three years, so long as 
they remain in good standing with the program requirements. (Vote 14-1) 
The founders of this bill, the Commission, recognized that local governments would 
need additional resources and significant time to proactively plan and successfully 
execute the goals of increasing housing in their communities.  I don’t know why these
provisions did not make it into the final bill, but it is clear that the July 1, 2023, 
deadline set for implementation was never intended by the Commission.  The 
Commission knew that the towns needed time.  The Commission wanted to give it to 
them. LD 655 will do that.  
Thank you for your consideration. 
