Testimony in Support of LD 1687  
An Act To Improve Geographic Information System Data Acquisition and Maintenance  
Before  
State and Local Government  Committee  
 
Senator Tim Nangle , Representative Holly Stover , and members of the State & Local Government  
Committee .  My name is Aaron Weston and I am the Business Development Manager for CAI 
Technologies , a Member of the Maine Geolibrary Board,  and live in Newburgh, ME .   CAI 
Technologies provides mapping and GIS services to approxim ately  85 communities in the State 
of Maine.  
 
GIS services currently provided by the State of Maine’s Office of Geographic Information Services 
(MeGIS) and Maine Library of Geographic Information (GeoLibrary) provide critical support to 
our company as well as the communities we work with .  We use the data developed by the  
GeoLibrary and distributed with support from MeGIS daily.  The creation of this data and the 
manner in which it is made available through web services  save s our clients tens of thousands of  
dollars annually.  Furthermore the data and services provided by MeGIS and the GeoLibrary are 
extremely important and valuable to  supporting Maine’s economic and community 
development.   Working with communities on a daily basis we see firsthand that they are an 
invaluable resource supporting tax assessing, emergency service response and code enforcement 
activities.  
 
Authoritative data developed by state agencies supporting the E911 program, transportation, 
environmental assets and many more are used throu ghout Maine’s communities, private 
industry, education and non -profit sectors support s decisions for myriad organizations. The 
GeoLibrary is the  lynchpin for development and connecting the state’s geospatial data with the 
rest of the world.    
 
With our cli ent base spread across all of the Northeast , we have a unique perspective of the 
difficulties municipalities face with trying to acquire GIS data themselves.  These difficulties are 
not only financi al as there are no economies of scale savings, but also th e expertise to even know 
what to contract for and evaluate deliverables.  Over the past several years it has become clear 
that M eGIS and the GeoLibrary as currently structured can’t properly support the wonderful 
programs such as Ortho and Lidar acquisitio ns that the  GeoLibrary  has worked so hard to create  
and fund .  A perfect example we see is that Maine Towns and Cities are becoming  increasing 
frustrated with the delivery and quality of these data and expressing doubts  relative to future 
participation  in such projects.  Should this continue , it could  significantly impact the ability for 
the GeoLibrary to secure matching funds to support  future State wide GIS projects .  Should this 
happen, more  Maine communities  will suffer as cost savings due to econom ies of scale will not 
exist when they attempt similar data acquisition projects on their own.  This potentially  may  
impact not only their ability to  grow , but in many cases impact their ability to operate effectively 
and efficiently.  
 
I believe LD 1687  is a step in the right direction.  The GeoLibrary , in order  to function properly 
and to fulfill its mission to provide access to GIS data to State agencies, municipalities and the 
public, need dedicated staff.   
I urge your approval of this  legislation.  
Thank you for your consideration . 
 
Aaron Weston  
Geolibrary Board Member  
CAI Technologies  
11 Pleasant Street  
Littleton, NH 03561  
207-944-5898  
aweston@cai -tech.com  
Home – 2725 Western Ave.  
Newburgh, ME 04444  
 
