TESTIMONY OF  
JOSEPH YOUNG  
SPEAKING IN SUPPORT OF LD 1687  
DATE OF HEARING : 
May 4 , 2023  
Senator Nangle , Representative Stover , and members of the Committee,  I am Joseph 
Young , Christmas Tree Grower  in Fayette , former Administrator of the Maine Office of 
GIS, Former Chairman and Public Member of the Maine Library of Geographic 
Information  Board of Directors . I am speaking in favor of LD 1687.  
 
The GeoLibrary was first envisioned by the Legislature in  a 2002  repo rt “GIS Needs 
Assessment & Requirements  Analysis and Strategic Plan ” to develop the Maine Library 
of Geographic Information.  Since its subsequent establishment it has struggled to meet 
its mission as established in  MRSA  Title 5, Part 4, Chapter 163 2001 through 2006 . This 
has been done with support from the Maine Office of GIS located in the Office of 
Informati on Technology and the Department of Finance and Administrative Services.  
 
Geographic information systems (GIS) use has grown exponentially over the last 20 
years. These systems , consisting of computers and software operated by trained 
personnel , allow  multi ple sources of  geographic data to be display ed in a geographic 
map , mak ing it easier for decision makers like your selves to understand and draw 
conclusions . An example of  this would be  the search of de velopable land parcels  of a 
certain size, requiring many services and other characteristics .  A community can 
integrate  sewer, water, three phase power , elevation, imagery , soils , parcel,  and many 
other related  data  into one map.  A simple  query  identifies the  parc els where all  or some 
of the attributes  are available .  The GIS system combines  this information in a map 
allowing th e community to visualize where  development is possible , showing limiting 
factors  and how it relates  to other aspects of the c ommunity.  
 
Many of the state’s  communities have developed and staffed their own GIS systems and 
many more have contracted GIS services to provide maps in their community. These 
maps , in many cases , are online and interactive , allowing  people without any training in 
GIS to coordinate the display of multiple layers of data to satisfy  their needs. Larger data 
sets of statewide importance are housed in the GeoLibrary where  communities, state 
agencies and multiple other constituencies can access and use it in their own sy stems .  
 
The GeoLibrary  digital data platform is easily accessible via its website  and is accessed 
hundreds  of times a day . Information such as the Department of Marine Resources  
Aquaculture data, GeoLibrary parcel , ortho -imagery  and elevation data  are accessed  on 
a daily basis .   Data housed within the GeoLibrary  is utilized in platforms such as the 
Emergency Services Bureau ’s Next Generation 9 -1-1 System  and by nearly all  of the 
other State’s agencies .  As a Christmas tree  grower utiliz ing state elevation  data  help ed 
me locate a new driveway for the farm and I frequently view historic al and current 
ortho -imagery related to my farm’s  operations.  
 
The demand for geographic data has grown exponentially since the 2002 study. Having 
that dat a comes at a cost ! Being able to host and efficiently distribute the data for the 
multitude of users throughout the state, nation and even internationally  has outstripped 
the ability of the Maine Office  of GIS to provide  adequate  support  for GeoLibrary 
responsibilities . For most GIS projects  current data is essential  but the cost of a cquiring 
ortho -imagery or elevation and many other data layers for a community is prohibitively 
expensive . However , using GeoLibrary contracts to ac quire data at the state or regional 
level brings the cost down to affordable levels.  In many cases the GeoLibrary can 
coordinate data acquisition with many  partners  willing to collaborate and help pay for 
the data . This coordination has saved the state millions of dollars over the last decade 
and has allowed communities that could not afford to have current high -resolution  data  
to obtain it through GeoLibrary programs.  
 
In closing , I encourage you to support this bill ! The demand for data is ever increasing 
and requires State governme nt support of its acquisition and distribution for the well 
being of all of Maine’s citizens.  
 
