VIEWSHED 
Landscape Architecture, GIS, & Planning 
121 West Main St, Yarmouth, ME  04096      •     www.viewshed.net       •      207- 846-0757 Testimony in Support o f LD 1687 
An Ac t To Im prove Ge ographic In formation System Da ta Acquisition and Maintenance 
Before 
State  and Lo cal G overnment C ommittee  
May 3, 2023  
Good afternoon Senator Na ngle,  Representative  Stover,  and members of the Sta te & Local 
Government C ommittee.  My name is J udy C olby -George,  and I a m the owner of V IEWSHED,  a 
Landscape  Architecture,  GIS, an d Planning f irm located i n Yarmouth, ME where  I also live.  I have a 
staff o f 12 p eople working i n Yarmout h.  My fi rm works wi th m any c lients throughout the s tate, 
including m unicipalities, regional pl anning a gencies,  state g overnment,  and private i ndustry.   
We provide a wide  range o f services w hich all depend o n spatial information provided by t he Maine 
Office  of GIS ( MeGIS) and the M aine Library o f Geographic I nformation (GeoLibrary ).  The in formation 
provided by MeGIS a nd the  GeoLibrary are e ssent ial to our work a nd to supporting pl anning,  
environment al protection, e conomic development a nd almo st all functions o f municipal g over nment .  
Without t he clear au thoritative d ata and ab ility t o provide  this information t o all levels o f government 
and the private s ector, th e state w ould not only reduce its ability to achieve many goals identified by 
government leadership, but it would fall behind other st ates which provid e the data described in this 
bill and more in many cases.   
In working t owar d the g oals o utline d in Maine Wo n’t Wait and many other policies , understanding 
how t he state i s deve loping,  where  development is a nd is not, throug h detailed and current 
orthophotography i s a baseline  necessary t o this w ork.  This dat a provides the ba ckbone o f many 
types of analysis a nd understanding described i n these policies.  I f we don’ t understand where thi ngs 
VIEWSHED  
2 
happen, it  is very difficult to plan for where we w ant them to  go in the future.  The ability of all levels 
of government to have access to this data is more than important, it is ind ispensable.  
Providing wide  access to this data is also a matter of equity . If only the wealthy,  largest private sector 
companies  and largest communities  can afford to access the data , where  does that leave small 
communities or small businesses?  The GeoLibrary is the hub around w hich the sta te’s geospatial  data 
is provided to all the people of the state of Maine  and beyond.  The work of the GeoLibrary board has 
been instrumental in developing the Orthophotography and LiDAR data acquisition in the state.  Most 
individual m unicipalities cannot afford to procure these ser vices on their own, nor do they have the 
in-house experti se to know how to evaluate  proposal or final products from vendors of these services.  
The GeoLibrary has the  expertise to ensure that all parts of the state receive d ata which  meets 
national standards and is reasonable  priced.   
It is very important  that the GeoLibrary receive the support they  need  to continue the work that has 
been done up until now.  I think LD 1687 is  a great step forward  for the S tate of Maine.  
I urge you to approv e this legislation.  
Thank  you for you r consideration,  
J
udy Colby -George ,GISP  
Owner, V IEWSHED  
Board Member of URISA  
Past GeoLibrary Board Member  
Past  Vice President Maine G IS User Group Board  
121 West Main  Street  
Yarmouth , ME 04096  
207- 846-2355 jcg@viewshed.net  
Home – 38 Old Shipyard Rd  
Yarmouth, ME 04096  
