May 4, 2023 
T11eNatur € 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director CO1'1S€I'V2lI1Cy 
The Nature Conservancy in Maine Mame kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org 1 
_ Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
RE: LD 1687 -i 
~ An Act to Improve Geographic Information System Data Acquisition and 
Maintenance 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on State and Local Government, my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo and lam the Government 
Relations Director for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate this opportunity 
to testify in support of LD 1687 - An Act to Improve Geographic Information System 
Data Acquisition and Maintenance. I offer these supportive comments on behalf of 
The Nature Conservancy, Maine Audubon, and Maine Coast Heritage Trust. _ 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. ‘Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on—the—ground solutions to our world's toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners. The Nature 
Conservancy has been leading conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres. 
LD 1687 provides important capacity to the Department of Administrative and 
Financial Services to establish two new staff positions and provide funding for 
acquiring critical spatial data including high resolution aerial images. 
Our organizations strongly support the Maine Library of Geographic Information 
(GeoLibrary) and its board. The GeoLibrary Board provides guidance for acquisition and 
hosting of geographic data of critical importance to all state agencies, land managers 
and users, and communities in the State. Our organizations rely on the up-to~date, 
accurate geospatial information the state maintains for planning land and water 
conservation projects, creating decision support tools, and planning for climate change 
adaptationand mitigation. We know the GeoLibrary and board cannot continue to 
provide this service without increased support from the State.A 
Private industry, town governments, state agencies, non-profits, colleges and. 
universities, and private citizens rely on the Maine GeoLibrary and we hope your 
committee will advance this modest request to keep their programs going. 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment in support of LD 1687. I'm happy to answer 
questions now or at any time.A
/ 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo i 
Eliza Donoghue Jeff Romano 
The Nature Conservancy Maine Audubon Maine Coast Heritage Trust 
14 l\/laine St., Suite 401 Brunswick, Maine 04011 ' 
natureorggmaine
