 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 2, 2023  
 
 
 
Testimony of Leticia vanVuuren  in support of  
LD 1687  an Act to Improve Geographic Information System Data Acquisition and Maintenance  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government  
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and memb ers of the State and Local Government Committee.  My 
name is Leticia vanVuuren, and I am the Geospatial Database Manager for Knox County Emergency 
Management Agency and the Chair of the Maine GeoLibrary  Board.  Thank you for the opportunity to speak 
in support of LD 1687, an Act to Improve Geographic Information System Data Acquisition and Maintenance.  
 
Established through state legislative statute  now over 20 years ago , the Maine GeoLibrary (also known as the 
Maine Library of Geographic Information Systems ) is responsible for maintaining necessary state -wide base 
map layers and is THE “one -stop -shop” for all state and federal authoritative datasets.  GeoLibrary 
coordinated datasets are increasingly integ ral to a number of state, county, municipal, business, non -profit, 
academic, and public  functions .  Th ey feed , for example,  into municipal  planning  and assessing, state 
infrastructure maintenance and modernization, and community resilience efforts.  Within  the emergency 
management cycle, I would like to highlight that the GeoLibrary datasets support hazard vulnerability and risk 
assessments for county hazard mitigation plans, which are required by coded federal regulations.  My agency  
will begin work on the  assessments for our hazard mitigation plan update later this year.  
 
As both Chair of the GeoLibrary Board and an end user, I respectfully request that the Committee support the 
GeoLibrary as outlined in LD -1687, through two State of Maine positions and ma tching funds for mapping 
acquisition and processing projects .  Maintaining the datasets , performing community outreach, developing 
funding partners , managing  the GeoLibrary capacity  has become  a full -time effort , which should be 
performed by a state employee, but is currently only staffed by a part -time consultant.  The GeoLibrary has 
grown and proven their ability to secure matching funds for mapping acquisitions, currently bringing to the 
state a value of over $ 3M.  The requested  funding and staff will ensure that all Mainers, especially those most 
impacted by the digital divide, can fully realize all the  civic, economic, health, educational, social and other 
benefits these resources provide.  
 
I had intended to p rovide testimony in person, but due to the rescheduling of the public hearing to Thursday, 
May 4th I am unable to attend.   Thank you for your consideration and I would be happy to answer any 
questions you might have.  
 
Leticia vanVuuren  
Geospatial Database Manager  
Knox County Emergency Management Agency  
301 Park Street, Rockland, ME 04841  
207.594.5155   lvanvuuren@knoxcountymaine.gov  
