Testimony 
In Favor of LD-1687 
An Act to Improve Geographic Information System Data Acquisition and Maintenance 
Before the Joint Standing Committee On State and Local Government 
04 May 2023 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and Distinguished Members of the Committee 
My name is Mal Carey. A resident of Newcastle, I’m retired from an IT career in municipal 
planning, social science research, and campus IT management. 
In retirement I’ve done a bit pro bono GIS work for my town and for Lincoln County. I’ve also 
regularly attended meetings of the GeoLibrary Board as a citizen observer and served on the 
GeoLibrary ’s Geo-Spatial Data Workgroup. This year I was appointed to the “Public” seat on 
the Board. 
Over the last decade, the practical need for up-to-date, high resolution, GIS data in the business 
community, in govermnent at all levels, in civil society entities, and among independent activists 
and researchers has increased. 
State support for acquisition and distribution of Geo-Spatial data to State agencies, towns and 
counties, and the public has not kept pace with the growth of end-user Geo-Spatial Data needs. 
Climate Change has gone from an academic concern to practical action items about road 
maintenance, sewage treatment plant freeboard, culvert resizing, temperature-enabled invasive 
species adaptations, carbon sequestration in standing and processed Wood, and numerous other 
“now” and “soon or else” matters. 
Municipalities of all sizes and Regional Planning organizations across the State currently 
struggle with the many conﬂicting facets of addressing our housing shortage and improving the 
business environment while seeking to protect the environment. Up-to-date GIS data is essential 
in these efforts. 
The staff augmentation and data acquisition funding proposed by this bill is a needed and 
reasonable incremental step to improve GIS services for State and local governments, the 
business community, and the public. 
Sincerely, 
Mal Carey
