1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: 5/17/23 
  
LD 1595 – An Act to Exempt the Estates of Veterans Who Were Disabled in the 
Line of Duty from Property Taxes 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good morning, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Neither For Nor Against LD 1595 – 
An Act to Exempt the Estates of Veterans Who Were Disabled in the Line of Duty 
from Property Taxes. 
This bill provides a complete exemption from property taxes for veterans 
who were disabled during active military service and who are receiving a pension 
or compensation from the United States Government for total, service-connected 
disability.  Depending on the circumstances, current law provides either a $6,000 
or a $50,000 exemption.   
First, note that the term “estate” is broad and includes all real and personal 
property owned by the taxpayer.  While the exemption is limited to property 
located in the town of the taxpayer’s residence, as written, it could apply to 
vacation property, rental property, and business property, in addition to the primary 
residence, as long as those properties are in the town of the taxpayer’s residence.   
Note also that this proposal will be subject to the 50% State reimbursement 
provision under the Maine Constitution, Article IV, Section 23.  Also, this 
2 
 exemption may significantly impact municipal revenue, particularly for smaller 
towns.  Lastly, we encourage proposals like LD 1595 to be part of a broader 
discussion of property tax relief and possible alternatives to the property tax 
stabilization program.  
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
