Good afternoon.   My name is Jane Conrad and I provide this testimony in 
support of LD 479.
At the most fraught and challenging time in our lives, my late husband and I 
were fortunate to receive palliative care services at Pen Bay Medical Center 
in Rockport.   Conversations with a palliative care doctor helped us 
understand and accept my husband’s prognosis and navigate the healthcare 
decisions he faced in the last year of his life.   
As a result of that care, my husband made thoughtful decisions about the 
care he wanted – and did not want, enjoyed the best quality of life possible, 
and ultimately had a comfortable and peaceful death. 
My profound gratitude for palliative care has led me to advocate for 
expanded palliative care resources in Maine and nationally.  For the last 
several years, I have attended meetings of the Maine Palliative Care and 
Quality of Life Interdisciplinary Advisory Council, which are open to the 
public.  I have been tremendously impressed with the dedication of Council 
members and what the Council has accomplished despite its limited 
resources.
The Council presently consists of a diverse group of healthcare professionals 
and health insurance industry leaders.   Although some Council members 
have themselves been family caregivers or lived with serious illness, there is 
currently no official representative who represents the perspective of a 
consumer of palliative care on the Council.
Adding a representative who has this unique perspective will enrich the 
Council’s deliberations and policy recommendations and demonstrate that 
the Legislature values this perspective.  
I urge this Committee to endorse the addition of a patient or family member 
who has been a consumer of palliative care to the Council.
Respectfully submitted,
Jane Conrad, St. George, Maine
March 15, 2023
Jane Conrad
St. George, Maine
LD 479
Good afternoon.   My name is Jane Conrad and I provide this testimony in support of 
LD 479.
At the most fraught and challenging time in our lives, my late husband and I were 
fortunate to receive palliative care services at Pen Bay Medical Center in Rockport.   
Conversations with a palliative care doctor helped us understand and accept my 
husband’s prognosis and navigate the healthcare decisions he faced in the last year of 
his life.   
As a result of that care, my husband made thoughtful decisions about the care he 
wanted – and did not want, enjoyed the best quality of life possible, and ultimately 
had a comfortable and peaceful death. 
My profound gratitude for palliative care has led me to advocate for expanded 
palliative care resources in Maine and nationally.  For the last several years, I have 
attended meetings of the Maine Palliative Care and Quality of Life Interdisciplinary 
Advisory Council, which are open to the public.  I have been tremendously impressed
with the dedication of Council members and what the Council has accomplished 
despite its limited resources.
The Council presently consists of a diverse group of healthcare professionals and 
health insurance industry leaders.   Although some Council members have themselves
been family caregivers or lived with serious illness, there is currently no official 
representative who represents the perspective of a consumer of palliative care on the 
Council.
Adding a representative who has this unique perspective will enrich the Council’s 
deliberations and policy recommendations and demonstrate that the Legislature values
this perspective.  
I urge this Committee to endorse the addition of a patient or family member who has 
been a consumer of palliative care to the Council.
Respectfully submitted,
Jane Conrad, St. George, Maine
March 15, 2023

