The Joint Standing Committee on INNOVATION, DEVELOPMENT, ECONOMIC ADVANCEMENT 
AND BUSINESS  
Testimony from Agnieszka Carpenter, Executive Director, BioME 
 
In Support Of L.D. 1291 
 
L.D. 1291 
An Act to Establish a Grant Program to Provide for Statewide and Equitable Access to 
Experiential Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education 
 
11 April 2023 
 
Chair Curry, Chair Roberts, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on INNOVATION, 
DEVELOPMENT, ECONOMIC ADVANCEMENT AND BUSINESS: 
 
My name is Agnieszka Carpenter, I am the Executive Director of the Bioscience Association of 
Maine (BioME) and a resident of Gorham. I am here today to present testimony on behalf of 
BioME in support of L.D. 1291. 
 
Bioscience Association of Maine (BioME) is a trade organization representing over 230 
bioscience companies in Maine. BioME’s mission is to advance economic growth and 
opportunities within the life sciences community in Maine by allocation equal involvement in 
the life sciences advocacy, education, economic development, workforce development, and 
attracting out-of-business.  
 
Life sciences is one of the fastest growing industries in Maine. There are over 480 bioscience 
establishments currently employing 9,500 professionals in the state. The average salary for a 
life science employee in Maine is $108,000 which is much higher than all other industries. 
Moreover, life science jobs in Maine have been growing faster than in all other New England 
states. In the past 5 years alone, the high paying bioscience jobs have grown by 42% (compared 
to 5% job growth for all other industries). 
 
With such substantial growth, the Maine life science industry needs workforce for all sorts of 
positions, from manufacturing jobs to post-doctoral scientists. Maine has a unique opportunity 
to become a thriving biotech hub but what the industry currently lacks is appropriate career 
pathways for Maine students, especially in rural areas.  
 
As the only life science industry group in the State, BioME works closely with its members and 
the number one issue for bioscience companies in Maine is difficulty with recruiting skilled 
professionals.  
 
We believe that technically proficient talent starts with investing in students in the K-12 system. 
Most public high schools in Maine do not have access to sophisticated labs and the schools’ 
ability to provide hands-on experiential science programs is very limited. This is especially true 
in rural areas of the State. 
 
Undoubtedly, providing young Maine learners with experiential science, technology, 
engineering and mathematics education opportunities is needed to launch a successful career 
in our field. Student-led research projects are the best way to develop interest and skills 
needed for building a career in science. Those middle and high school level projects done with 
support of teachers and mentor are what helps students explore career pathways, build strong 
STEM skills and nurture entrepreneurship and start-up mindset.  
 
Currently, we see a fair deal of inequities in the distribution of hands-on STEM programs, 
especially when it comes to student led research projects. There are some schools that excel in 
this field and the students who have these types of opportunities and support end up with 
scholarships to top colleges and move on to have successful careers. Our wish is that access to 
experiential STEM programs is granted to more school districts so that we see a lot more of 
these type of success stories throughout the State.   
 
Our industry needs skilled workforce and we strongly believe that training employees should 
begin at the K-12 level. This grant program would allow many students in all areas of Maine to 
develop necessary skills, mindset and confidence to be successful life science and technology 
college majors and professionals in the future.  
 
For those reasons, we urge you to support L.D. 1291. 
 
Sincerely, 
Agnieszka Carpenter 
BioME Executive Director 
 
