 
TESTIMONY OF BRIAN WHITNEY, PRESIDENT OF THE MAINE TECHNOLOGY INSTITUTE, 
REGARDING LD 1291, “ AN ACT TO ESTABLISH A GRANT PROGRAM TO PROVIDE FOR 
STATEWIDE AND EQUITABLE ACCESS TO EXPERIENTIAL SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, ENGINEERING 
AND MATHEMATICS EDUCATION ” 
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business (IDEA), my 
name is Brian Whitney, and I am the President of the Maine Technology Institute , our state -
funded, public -private partnership that helps catalyze innovation in Maine.  I am here today to 
testify neither for nor against Senator Pouliot’s bill, LD 1 291, “An Act to Establish a Grant 
Program to Provide for Statewide and Equitable Access to Experiential Science, Technology, 
Engineering and Mathematics Education .” 
MTI appreciates Senator Pouliot’s proposal to help expand MTI’s programmatic reach and 
influence.   The bill’s purpose is an important one.  It is especially  vital  given our state’s need to 
attract 75,000 people to our talent pool over the next ten years just to keep pace  with our labor 
force challenges.  As a result, exposing students to the opportunities available in science, 
technology, engineering , and math is vital to building a future talent  pipeline  for employers . 
 
As you know, in addition to making direct investments into Maine  organizations to stimulate 
product development  and innovation, MTI’s statut e also mandate s that we work to ensure a 
complementary system of supports exists to help nurture entrepreneurs and promote greater 
interest and engagement in technology and STEM -related endeavors.  We do that through a 
variety of means  including sponsoring events like t he Maine Science Festival, the Maine State 
Science Fair, student symposiums, pitch competitions, and the like .  However, given funding 
constraints, our sponsorship levels are generally more modest than the level proposed in this 
legislation . 
 
If this committee and Legislature advances this proposal and  provides the proposed funding, 
you can feel confident that MTI will be able to carry  out the objective s as described in the bill.  
We obviously have considerable experience administering funding competitions and can easily 
establish a competitive and accountable process for the deployment of these funds . 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration, I am happy to address any questions or concerns 
you may have.  
 
