Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business, my name is Cary James.  I am a former 
public -school  high school chemistry teacher.  I taught at Piscataquis (5 years), Central  (9 years) 
and Bangor (20 years) high schools. I am currently a STEM Specialist for MMSA and a Student 
Success Coordinator for the UMaine College of Engineering.  I am here to testify in favor of LD 
1291.    
 
I am an advocate for transformative apprenticed r esearch (TAR) science, technology, 
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) programs and in particular the Maine State Science Fair 
(MSSF) and Maine Middle School Science and Engineering Fair (MMSSEF).    I have personally 
mentored over 1000 students who have p articipated in events like the MSSF and am very 
familiar with the prog ram. 
 
The key points of my testimony include but are not limited to :  
 
▪ The MERITS of experiential learning  and the MSSF  
▪ The Barriers that need to be overcome for students to participate  
▪ The sustainability of experiential programs like the MSSF and MMSSEF  
 
The MSSF provides opportunities  for students to present authentic evidence -based  research 
projects at state, national, and international adjudicated competitions.  Maine  students  have 
excelled at all levels including the National 1st place winner s of the Intel Science Talent Search  
and Stockholm Junior Water Prize .   The MSSF  provides an avenue for them to meet other  
students from around the sta te and country  develop ing lifelong friends  and colleagues, mentor 
relationships, and build ing self-esteem .  The MSSF  has inspired and impacted hundreds of kids’  
lives  in positive ways  in the process.  
 
Millions of dollars in scholarships from Maine Colleges and Universities have been awarded to 
Maine  students at the MSSF.  12 full tuition scholarships from the University of Maine are 
awarded yearly.  These are life -changing opportunities for students and their parents from 
across the great State of Maine!  In my 34 years of public school teaching no p rogram has had a 
greater impact on students’ lives  than the MSSF.  
 
The MSSF supports teachers with quality professional development for teachers helping them in 
pursuit of experiential learning experiences  for their students .  By impacting a teacher 100 ki ds 
may be impacted.  Yearly workshops are run in the summer with continued support throughout 
the academic year.  As one of the directors of the fair says “we meet t eachers  where they are” 
building the infrastructure needed to develop science fair program s in schools a round  the state.  
The MSSF also aligns with all Next Generation Science Standards helping teachers to meet local 
and national standards in STEM.  
 
The MSSF model  developed by the MMSA,  and the Jackson Laboratory  has ga rnered  national 
attentio n as a model that enrich es the lives of students and teachers from rural areas.  The 
directors of the fair are routinely asked to present their ideas at national level competitions such 
as the International Science and Engineering Fair  (ISEF) and conferences administered by the 
Society of Science and the Public (SSP) and Broadcom Foundation.  
 
Simply put the MSSF model is a game changer for students, teachers, parents, communities, 
and the State of Maine.   An investment in programs like the  MSSF is an investment in the long -
term stability of Maine’s workforce and economy!  
 
As with any program there are barriers to success . These include but are not limited to 
socioeconomic, geographical, institutional, and societal constructs.  The MSSF is a n inclusion 
program.  There is no cost to participants or schools, but discrepancies remain in the STEM 
pipeline.  Currently only 18% of engineers are women . Participation in the T&E components  of 
STEM  remain abysmally low for women.  Representation and in clusion of underserved 
populations in STEM is critical . If we are to move the needle,  we must address these issues.  
MSSF is committed to doing so but it is not an easy task.   The National Science Foundation has 
developed a program called INCLUDES  that looks to find solutions to increasing the 
opportunities of underserved populations.  Program s like the MSSF play a significant role in my 
opinion . 
 
Schools must also change the way STEM is taught in many cases.  This is a sea change for many 
and poses a signi ficant barrier.  The MSSF can be coined as the “road to failure “as with any 
pursuit of knowledge and in particular research it most often ends in failure.   This is a difficult 
adjustment  both teachers and students.  The focus of MSSF is on the “intellectu al merit” of the 
student’s  research and the impact of their  idea s on the world.  By empowering teachers to 
prime and orient students to an inquiry experiential learning approach the model becomes one 
of students working in groups with teachers to learn tog ether as a team  to solved real world 
problems.  
 
Finally, all programs look for sustainability.  The MSSF is no exception and looks to find funding 
streams that will allow the program to continue.  To date hundreds of students have 
participated and/or recei ved scholarships, awards, quality mentoring, and opportunities.  As 
stated previously the MSSF model is a game changer for students, teachers, parents, 
communities, and the State of Maine.  An investment in programs like the MSSF is an 
investment in the lo ng-term stability of Maine’s workforce and economy!  
 
 
 
 
 
 
