The Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement 
and Business 
Testimony from Emma Markowitz, Student, Homeschool 
In Support Qf 
L.D. 1291 
An Act to Establish a Grant Program to Provide for Statewide and Equitable Access to Experiential 
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education 
April 11, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and distinguished members of the Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business, my name is Emma Markowitz, I ama 
homeschooled student from Boothbay, Maine. I support L.D. 1291, “An Act to Establish a Grant Program 
to Provide for Statewide and Equitable Access to Experiential STEM Education. ” 
Although I am homeschooled in Boothbay, I supplement much of my education by participating in 
classes and leadership roles at Boothbay Region High School (BRHS). Boothbay is a small rural ﬁshing 
town on the coast. BRHS is a Title l school, with less than 200 students, where 40% or more come from 
low-income families. Scientiﬁc laboratory equipment, space, and mentorship is very limited which makes 
it difficult to conduct student research, unlike other schools with advanced and well-funded STEM 
programs. 
L.D. I291 would make a signiﬁcant difference for my community by helping bridge the gap of equitable 
access to STEM programs and mentorship here in Maine. I know firsthand what a difference it would 
make because when my high school was no longer able to support my research, a teacher, who couldn’t 
bear to see a kid who loved science be limited due to their circumstances, suggested I connect witha 
mentor. 
This led me to participate in the Maine State Science Fair (MSSF), which has played a critical role in 
shaping my future and opening doors to opportunities I had never dreamed of. This includes but is not 
limited to presenting my research statewide, regionally, nationally, and internationally, while forming 
connections with other young scientists from around the world. Scientists whom I hope to collaborate 
with in the future as peers. 
This one connection with a mentor connected me to different ﬁelds of science, technology, engineering, 
and mathematics that were not, and would not have been introduced to me in school. Through the MSSF, 
I have learned how to create presentable projects, write research papers, overcome challenges, justify 
ideas, gather resources, think outside the box, and expand my network beyond my rural location. All 
critical skills for my future. 
However, my research was self-funded and ahnost fully accomplished in my basement, due to my local 
school did not having the basic equipment to support the majority of my research. At school, students 
often approach me, asking how they can conduct research and have access to the same opportunities I did. 
Grant funds will help more students in Maine gain access to this valuable experience opening doors and 
opportunities to the students that need help and guidance the most. 
Therefore, I ask the members of the committee to vote this bill “ought to pass” . Thank you for your time.
