., 
‘§ 
‘E’ Matthew G_ Pouhot THE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 15" 
- V 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Senator Matt Pouliot 
_ - Sponsor of‘ 
A' 
LD 1-291, “An Act to Establish a Grant Program to Provide for Statewide and Equitable 
Access to Experiential Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education ” 
_-‘
_ 
_ Date: _ April 11, 2023 V_
_ 
Good Afternoon Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and members of the committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement & Business my name is Matt Pouliot. I have 
the honor of representing Senate District 15, including the towns of Augusta; Belgrade; China; 
Mount Vernon; Sidney; and Vassalboro. I am here today to present LD 1291, “An Act to 
Establish a Grant Program to Provide for Statewide and Equitable Access to Experiential 
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education. ” 
Hands-on experiential STEM programs are considered the gold standard in their ability to teach 
technical skills transferable across multiple domains and universal skills including collaboration, 
communication, problem-solving, and critical thinking. All of these are needed to launcha 
successful career in STEM or non-STEM sectors. As we have seen in the talent, innovation, and 
infrastructural strategies described in the Maine Economic Development Strategy plan - these 
skills are also incredibly important to accomplishing the plan’s economic development goals. 
Speciﬁc programs that contribute to this vision advance multiple strategies through a 
combination of actions. For example, programs that help students explore Maine careers, teach 
digital economy skills, promote activities that nurture entrepreneurship and start-up culture, and 
help develop solutions in emerging and heritage industries. Ideally, these programs should be 
available in all Maine schools. Unfortunately, there are still great inequities in the distribution of 
these types of programs. 
The solution to the problem of Maine students lacking equitable access to experiential STEM 
learning is a school-based program that supports knowledge building and skill development . 
within the context of a student-selected research project, with support from a trained teacher and 
a network of professionals from the private sector 
The Maine State Science Fair is the singular program that combines the scalability of a school- 
based curriculum with the personalization and impact of an internship. It provides a structure in 
which students can pursue their own projects across all STEM domains and Maine’s industries. 
State House: (207) 287-1505 * Fax: (207) 287—1527 * TollFree: I-800-423-6900 * TTX" 711 
_ Matt.P0uli0f@legislafure,mainegov * Web Sire: legislature.mai11e.g0v/senate
The Maine State Science Fair is available to students in all Maine schools, and students may 
pursue their own project without prerequisite coursework. Unlike typical science fairs, the Maine 
State Science Fair is an enhanced program including an established professional development 
program that trains and supports teachers who choose to implement this research and engineering 
program in their classroom. In recent years, student scientists and engineers have: 
~ Designed and tested effective treatments for hoof disease in horses, 
- Used nanocellulose from wood ﬁbers to clean water and remove toxins from soil, 
- Designed machine learning algorithms to help predict Alzheimer ’s disease, 
- Developed an effective ski wax using non-petroleum-based ingredients, 
- Used school-based equipment to design a more comfortable and form-ﬁtting ballet shoe, 
- Used freely-available remote learning tools to access subject matter expertise at a Maine- 
based laboratory. 
All of these research projects and many more have been made available to Maine’s emerging 
STEM leaders through participation in the Maine State Science Fair. In the last 5 years, over 
1,100 Maine students have completed an independent or small group project and presented their 
work at the Maine State Science Fair. 
For a bit of context, the Maine State Science Fair was established in 1945 and led by the Maine 
Principals Association for many years. Coneeptually, the Maine State Science Fair belongs to the 
state, but is operated by MMSA (based in Augusta) and The Jackson Laboratory (based in Bar 
Harbor). 
The appropriation outlined in this bill would be awarded in the form of a grant from the Maine 
Technology Institute. Organizations operating the fair shall submit an annual application to MTI 
articulating their plans to ensure mandatory programmatic elements including teacher training 
and ongoing affiliation with the International Science and Engineering Fair in addition to the 
other requirements stated in the language of the bill. MSSF and its coordinating organizations 
shall derive no revenue from either schools or students and will rotate its location at least every 
two years to ensure access by students from all regions of the state. 
If we don’t act to support experiential STEM research and learning opportunities like this 
available to Maine’s students I am conﬁdent that we would be doing a disservice to the young 
people of our state. They should be given the opportunities that students in other rural states 
have available to them - to ﬁgure out a solution to a problem, to work with their hands to create 
and build something important to them, to come up with an interesting research question and 
work toward answering it, to fail and fail again and then ﬁnally succeed - these are the kinds of 
learning experiences that stick with a person, just like it did for me. 
Thank you for your consideration of this bill and I am happy to answer any questions.
