 PUBLIC HEARING TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT OF LD 1291  April 11, 2023  An Act to Establish a Grant Program to Provide for Statewide and Equitable Access to Experiential STEM Education  JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON  INNOVATION, DEVELOPMENT, ECONOMIC ADVANCEMENT AND BUSINESS   Submitted by Michael McKernan, Director, Government and Community Relations,  The Jackson Laboratory  Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, my name is Mike McKernan. I am Director of Government and Community Relations at The Jackson Laboratory.  I am pleased to testify in support of LD 1291, which, if enacted, will help Maine high school students explore their interests and use science, technology, engineering, mathematics and computer science to solve real world problems in their local communities.  The Jackson Laboratory is an independent, nonprofit, 501c3 biomedical research institution headquartered in Bar Harbor. As many of you know, a major focus of JAX’s mission is to educate the next generation of STEM professionals. This includes biomedical scientists who are focused on solving problems in human disease, veterinarians, physicians, data scientists, genetic counselors and STEM-educated students in fields like business, law, logistics and communication.   Experiential education, which is at the heart of this bill, is how we teach and is how our students learn at The Jackson Laboratory. Few learning methods can match experiential learning in its ability to capture a student’s interest and simultaneously build both subject matter expertise and the manual skills needed to complete a project. JAX internships, apprenticeships, postdoctoral fellowships, even graduate school programs are all taught almost exclusively hands-on, with students pursuing their own research questions with guidance from a mentor.  JAX places such a high value on this hands-on experience that in late 2010, when the Maine Principal’s Association was unable to continue to offer the Maine State Science Fair, JAX stepped in to ensure the program’s future. MMSA partnered with JAX in 2014, and next year the two organizations will celebrate their tenth year of joint leadership of the Maine State Science Fair. While our organizations intend the partnership to continue, it is our strong belief that statewide programs like the Maine State Science Fair are deserving of State investment, especially when the goals of the program are so well matched to the 10-year Maine Economic Development Strategy and the Maine Technology Institute Technology Sectors.  

 As the 10-year plan unequivocally states, “The solution starts with talent.” As you know, the talent is in schools and home schools all over Maine. In preparing for this testimony, I ran across some telling key headlines: From the April 8, 2021 Portland Press Herald: “Deering High School Senior wins at state science fair, gets top national scholarship. Linh Nguyen won for her research on finding an inexpensive way to remove arsenic from drinking water systems.” From the March 26, 2022 Bangor Daily News: “Sustainability takes center stage in Bangor-area students’ science fair entries.”   Talent and innovation are the keys to Maine’s economic prosperity and are the focus of experiential STEM education, including the Maine State Science Fair. I ask the committee to vote LD 1291 “ought to pass”. 
