MMSA Maine Mathematics 
“I and Science ~Allianc? e 
Statement for the IDEA Committee 
ln support of LD 1291 Testimony 
”An Act To Establish a Grant Program to Provide for Statewide and Equitable Access to 
Experiential STEM Education" 
April 11, 2023 
Submitted by: Ruth Kermish-Allen, Ph.D. 
Executive Director, Maine Math & Science Alliance (MMSA) 
rkermishallen@mmsa.org 
(207) 691-2504 
Dear Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Honorable Members of the Committee on 
Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement, and Business. My name is Dr. Ruth 
Kermish-Allen and l serve as the Executive Director of the Maine Mathematics and Science 
Alliance (MMSA), a non-profit committed to advancing equitable access to STEM education for 
all PreK-12 students. We accomplish this vision by providing research-based professional 
learning strategies for educators. I also serve as a Commissioner on the Permanent Commission 
on the Status of Women, and l live in Appleton with my two teenage daughters. I am here today 
to stand in strong support of LD1291, which if enacted, will show our great state's commitment 
to Maine's educators and students and the STEM research projects they are passionate about. 
MMSA stepped up to the plate to join the Jackson Labs in 2014 to take on the Maine State 
Science Fair after the Maine Principal's Association decided to no longer facilitate the 
competition. Our expertise in reaching educators and rural schools enabled our partnership to 
truly begin making strides to increase equitable access to research opportunities through the 
MSSF. To make this happen, we utilized a 10-year private grant restricted to out-of-school STEM 
learning opportunities for Maine's students. We believed then, and still do today, that Maine's 
students should have the opportunity to compete with our nation's best and brightest young 
researchers. These hands-on, student-driven learning experiences are instrumental in 
developing the confidence, skills, and creative spark that will stick with that student for many 
years to come.
The STEM competition we are discussing here today is not the "science fair" we grew up with- 
filled with volcanoes and moldy bread; these students are diving deep into the wicked problems 
our society faces - societal challenges today's youth want to DO something about, issues they 
want to design solutions for - designing more cost effective medical devices, addressing the 
problems emerging due to microplastics, growing food to feed a growing population - and that 
is just a sampling of a few of the projects we had the honor of seeing at the MSSF last weekend. 
Given MMSA's expertise in professional development with educators, we decided to take on the 
challenge of making the MSSF a more equitable and inclusive STEM learning opportunity for 
Maine's youth. We designed a teacher fellows program that has supported over 40 teachers as 
they integrated experiential STEM into their classes - resulting in over 700 student participants 
to date. in the past, only a handful of schools consistently participated in the MSSF - today we 
have not only a broader representation of schools from small high schools to some of the 
largest, we also now include multiple career and technical centers. These students ranging from 
Bethel to Machias get to connect with peers they otherwise would never have the opportunity 
to connect with. 
Thanks to our partnerships with Maine colleges and universities, 148 students have been 
awarded over $6 Million over the last seven years. Many of these students have received 
full-tuition scholarships, renewable for all four years of college. We know personally many 
students for whom this was a game-changer: some who were working to support their family 
and then got a full-tuition scholarship; some who did not know what they were going to do for 
college until they got a scholarship; some who are now working in the labs of the veryjudges 
who interviewed them for those scholarships. The opportunity you are discussing supporting 
today changes lives dramatically for Maine's students. In just the past five years over 1,200 
students have competed in the MSSF and we want to see that number grow. 
MSSF Growth, 2014-2023 
- Students - — Projects -- Judges 
300 
r~ ,~ 
r ~*~ I ~ 
1 ~‘~ I "~_.._ Z00 1’ _ - _ ‘ ' ' ~~ ,1 ~\ ’ ‘ \ » '‘ ~ a" _¢ ~ ,' _—* \ \ a’ __- » - _ _ _ - — ‘ '' 
. . . . . - - - ' ' ' ‘ - - - . . ..‘ \---—---"-"’ 
100
O 
Z014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Z019 2020 2021 2022 Z023
We all know the workforce recruitment and retention challenges our state faces. The bill in front 
of you builds on the strategies outlined in Maine's Economic Development Strategy plan to 
enable us to meet the economic development and workforce goals that are critical to our state's 
success. We need to build more opportunities for our youth to find success in STEM here at 
home and this bill will ensure that it supports and provides the only opportunity our youth have 
to compete in STEM research at a national level. We want to make sure that l\/laine ’s youth 
always have access to learning experiences like this no matter where they live, no matter who is 
coordinating the MSSF. Maine's youth almost lost access to this experience 10 years ago - this 
bill will ensure that we never risk that loss again. Supporting this bill will give a vote of 
confidence and support to Maine's next generation of inventors, researchers, and 
entrepreneurs. 
Thank you for your consideration of this bill supporting Maine's future STEM workforce, 
innovators, and problem solvers. l urge you to please vote yes on this bill. it is a minimal 
investment with the potential for exponentially greater outcomes for our young people, our 
STEM workforce, and our ability to recruit and retain the talent we need to meet our goals asa 
state. 
- Ruth Kermish-Allen, PhD.
