 
University of Maine ∙ University of Maine at Augusta ∙ University of Maine at Farmington ∙ University of Maine at Fort Kent ∙ University of 
Main e at Machias ∙ University of Maine at Presque Isle ∙ University of Southern Maine ∙ University of Maine School of Law  
 
 
 
DATE:   April 11, 2023  
TO:   Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
FROM:  Samantha Warren, UMS Director of Government & Community Relations   
                         samantha.warren@maine.edu  / (207) 632 -0389  
RE:   Support for LD 1291, An Act to Establish a Grant Program to Provide  
  for Statewide and Equitable Access to Experiential Science, Technology,  
  Engineering and Mathematics Education  
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Innovation, Development, Economic Advanceme nt and Business: My name is Samantha Warren 
and I am the Director of Government Relations for the University of Maine System (UMS), writing  in 
support of LD 1291, An Act to Establish a Grant Program to Provide for Statewide and Equitable 
Access to Experiential Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Education . 
The United States, and Maine in particular, faces a severe shortage of STEM (science, technology, 
engineering and mathematics) professionals  to support our economy , communities and gl obal 
competitiveness.  
 
For example, unprecedented numbers of engineers are retiring from the workforce at a time when 
technological advances in our lives and our economy require an increasing number of trained 
engineers. It is estimated that 27% of engine ers currently employed in Maine are over the age of 55. 
Moreover, engineering employment in Maine has increased 25% in the last decade. To both replace 
retiring engineers and to meet future growth needs, UMS, led by the R1 U niversity of Maine , has 
committed to doubling our output of engineering and computing graduates over the next 
decade . The opening in 2022 of UMaine’s Ferland Engineering Education & Design Center, thanks  
to generous investment by the Legislature, and our System’s development of a  statewide Maine 
College of Engineering and Computing, led by UMaine and the University of Southern Maine, will 
allow  us to achieve this  for Maine.  
 
In order for Maine’s public universities to deliver on our  important imperative to produc e the 
21st century workforce -ready graduates  and innovations  Maine’s employers and economy 
need,  the state’s PK -12 students  must  have STEM exposure and knowledge , skills and 
abilities  necessary for their  college and  career readiness .  
 
Hands -on, high -impact research learning p rograms  like the Maine State Science Fair , 
organized by our terrific partners  at The Jackson Laboratory and the Maine Math & Science 
Alliance, provide students critical opportunities to showcase and strengthen STEM  interest 
and innovation . UMS, led by UMaine , believes so much in the power of this youth -led program  and 
the promise of the participants  that we host the event  on our Orono campus , provide mentors and 
judges , and annually award 12 students our Maine Top Scholar Award, which covers four years of 
UMaine  tuition and fees . 
 
We invite the Legislature to join us in investing in the future of Maine’s STEM workforce  by 
supporting LD 1291 . Doing so is consistent with recommendations released by the Maine State 
Chamber of Commerce in 2022 and will further foster the  development of the talent and innovation 
that is the foundation of the  State’s 10 -year economic strategy  and the prosperity of Maine and its 
people.    
