Testimony of Keith Hunter, Little Darlings Farm, Unity, ME
In SUPPORT of LD 606 “An Act Regarding Development of a Program to Assist Farmers Affected by 
Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination”
Before the Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee
March 15, 2022
Hello Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry Committee. My name is Adam Nordell.  I co-own Songbird Farm in Unity, which has been 
completely shut down by PFAS contamination.  I am also a campaign manager at Defend Our Health. 
Please accept this testimony in support to LD 606 “An Act Regarding Development of a Program to Assist 
Farmers Affected by Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination.”
My wife and I purchased our farm in 2014.  Signing up for a farm mortgage was a big step for us, but we 
had built our brand and our markets and had honed our abilities as farmers on leased land for the prior 
five years.  We felt that had developed the skills to handle what ever unexpected challenges the years 
ahead might present us, be they foul weather, insect pests or market competition.  The future looked 
fertile with possibility as we transplanted our farm business to our own land.  We looked forward to 
supplying our community with fresh, wholesome food.  
Unbeknownst to us, thirty years prior, someone set us up to fail by spreading PFAS laden sludge on our 
property.  Last winter we discovered that our irrigation and drinking water, our soil and our bodies were 
all severely contaminated with the industrial chemicals.  Our most profitable crops were impacted.  We 
had no choice but to shudder our business.
It has been a severe financial and emotional blow to learn of the contamination.  Our farm was our only 
real asset, and it has been rendered valueless.  We built our lives around the production of clean, 
healthy food for our community, but the contamination of our property makes this impossible.  We 
poured everything - our blood, sweat and tears - into this farm.  As did the farmer before us.  As did the 
farmer before him.  The thought that it will now sit idle, slowly growing up as a scrubby forest is terribly 
sad.
But if our farm can’t serve the community by producing food, perhaps it still has something to offer.  
Our farm can still produce knowledge.  
My hope at this point is to see our land become home to PFAS research projects examining the 
movement of PFAS through the soil, water and crops.  The farming community desperately needs 
research-informed safe cropping strategies, farmer and worker safety, and where possible, remediation 
of the contamination.  I would love to see the University of Maine empowered to spend state money 
from the PFAS Fund compensating PFAS impacted farmers for access to their lands to run these crucial 
experiments.  
This bill will offer a financial lifeline to farmers struggling to adapt their businesses to knowledge of 
contaminations.  It offers the foundation of well-informed farm management guidance for the PFAS 
impacted farm community as a whole.  And it offers a hopeful path forward for the stewards of this 
contaminated land.
Thank you for supporting this bill.
