Testimony of Keith Hunter, Little Darling’s Dairy, Unity, ME
In SUPPORT of LD 606 “An Act Regarding Development of a Program to Assist Farmers Affected by 
Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination”
Before the Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee - March 15, 2022
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Committee. My name is Keith Hunter.  I am a farmer in Unity, ME, where I run a dairy operation and 
produce hay and other forage commercially for off farm sale.  I am here to testify in support to LD 606 
“An Act Regarding Development of a Program to Assist Farmers Affected by Perfluoroalkyl and 
Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination”.
I am a family farmer.  I grew up on a dairy farm run by my parents and their extended family.  In 2005, 
my parents bought a portion of the farm.  My sister and I returned to join them running the business, 
and for 10 years we ran the farm successfully together.  It was raw land when we started, but we built 
up the infrastructure, built the herd and started shipping milk.  Then in 2015, my father passed away 
after a long battle with cancer. My mother ran the farm for several years, but the dairy industry was 
going to pieces at that point, and it was too difficult to manage, so she sold the cows.  In the past several 
years my son and I took over management of the crop land.  The land was incredibly productive and we 
were making high quality hay and selling it for a good price. We had worked for three years to transition 
the fields to certified organic forage, and had just sold our first certified crop.  I also started my own 
dairy herd on the side, feeding hay that I was cutting on my mother’s fields.  My plan was to continue 
building my dairy and the forage business, so that I could retire from my off-farm work in the next ten to 
15 years.  My son left his traveling job for one closer to home, so that he could join me running the farm.  
My retirement dream was to spend my golden years working my family land together with my sons and 
daughter.  I was just finalizing a plan to purchase the property from my mother so she could retire in 
comfort.
Then in 2021, we learned that the land was highly contaminated with PFAS.  Just like that, my business 
and my dreams were flipped on their heads.  Now I’m managing 103 acres of field that  I can’t sell a 
single bale of hay from.  My dairy herd was contaminated.  My family was directly exposed, too.  But the 
expenses don’t stop, and I worry about helping my mother make her FSA payments.  I would hate to 
lose the farm because of this.
My mom and I have been talking to researchers at the University of Maine, and they are interested in 
conducting on farm studies looking at PFAS plant uptake, animal uptake and the effects of biochar on 
contaminated land.  The farming community needs the information that these studies will generate so 
farmers know what is safe to do with PFAS impacted ground.  Like other impacted farmers, my family 
needs this information to make good decisions about our property.  
The university doesn’t currently have the funding to conduct on-farm research.  This bill would allow 
researchers to use a portion of the money from the PFAS fund to help inform the management of PFAS 
impacted farms across the state.  If UMaine researchers are able to rent a portion of my family’s farm it 
will help us make our FSA payments and avoid the anxiety of losing the property.  We’re working to 
transition the fields to produce grains which won’t uptake the chemicals, but that is going to take a few 
years.  Renting some of the property to UMaine Researchers for the next few years will help us bridge 
the gap and stay in business while we make this transition as a family.
Thank you so much for supporting this bill.
