Testimony of Sarah Woodbury, Director of Advocacy, Defend Our Health
In SUPPORT of LD 606 “An Act Regarding Development of a Program to Assist Farmers Affected 
by Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination”
Before the Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee
March 15, 2022
Good morning, Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry Committee. My name is Sarah Woodbury. I am the director of advocacy 
for Defend Our Health. Defend Our Health works to make sure everyone has equal access to safe 
food, safe drinking water, healthy homes, and toxic-free, climate-friendly products. I am here to 
testify in support to LD 606 “An Act Regarding Development of a Program to Assist Farmers 
Affected by Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances Contamination”.
Perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances, are more commonly known as PFAS. PFAS are
called "forever chemicals” meaning they don't break down and remain in our body and
in the environment for years. These chemicals are hazardous to human health and have been
linked to decreased immune system function and decreased vaccine efficacy. PFAS also increase 
the risk of some cancers, may lower a woman’s chance of getting pregnant, and have been 
associated with liver problems and increased cholesterol levels. These toxic chemicals can enter the 
environment and drinking water supply through a variety of sources including firefighting foam, 
sewer and industrial sludge spread on local farmland, and our food packaging and other products 
with leak-proof and grease-proof coatings. 
Last year the Governor allocated $60M dollars in the budget to help PFAS impacted farmers with 
income replacement and farm buybacks along with medical monitoring and research. The bill also 
set up an advisory committee that is tasked with coming up with a plan to appropriately allocate 
those funds. That advisory committee is currently in the process of doing that work and is on track to 
report back to the legislature in May. Part of that funding will be earmarked for research, some of 
which will be done in conjunction with the University of Maine system. It is our understanding that the 
intent of this bill is to make sure that farmers are compensated for any use of their farmland in this 
research. We believe that compensating farmers for the use of their land is an appropriate use of 
funding earmarked for research and falls under the purview of the PFAS advisory committee. The 
original text of this bill was a concept draft so we have provided amendment language below that we 
believe will accomplish the intent of this legislation.
We must continue to support the farmers who the state directly harmed through its promotion of the 
use of contaminated sludge. LD 606 will make sure that farmers are fairly compensated for use of 
their contaminated farms for research purposes. We urge the committee to unanimously pass LD 
606 with the suggested amendments. Thank you for your time
An Act Regarding Development of a Program to Assist Farmers 
Affected by Perfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances 
Contamination
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows:
CONCEPT DRAFT
Sec. 1. 7 MRSA §320-K. Fund To Address PFAS Contamination, as enacted, is 
amended to read:
4.  Purposes.  Allocations from the fund may be made as determined by the 
department upon recommendation of the advisory committee and for the following 
purposes:  
A. Monitoring the health of a person, and members of that person's household, 
whose agricultural land is found to be contaminated by PFAS;   
B. Providing medical care to a person found to have blood levels of PFAS greater 
than the general population or health effects associated with exposure to PFAS;   
C. Relocating a commercial farm when the agricultural land of the farm is found to 
be contaminated by PFAS;  
D. Buying and selling agricultural land found to be contaminated by PFAS;   
E. Investing in equipment, facilities and infrastructure to ensure that a commercial 
farm with land found to be contaminated by PFAS maintains profitability while the 
commercial farm transitions to an alternative cropping system or implements 
remediation strategies, technological adaptations, solar development or other 
modifications to its operations in response to PFAS contamination;
F. Assisting a commercial farm with land found to be contaminated by PFAS with 
developing enterprise budgets for alternative cropping systems, remediation 
strategies or technological adaptations or transitioning to alternative revenue 
streams, including but not limited to land use systems combining agricultural use of 
the land with solar energy production;
G. Providing short-term assistance to a person whose commercial farm is found to 
be contaminated by PFAS, including but not limited to income replacement and 
mortgage payments;
H. Evaluating the capacity of PFAS testing and data management in the State;
I. Conducting research that supports short-term farm management decisions and 
assesses future options for viable uses of agricultural land that has been 
contaminated with PFAS;   
J. Conducting research that quantifies the impact of PFAS on commercial farms and 
agricultural communities in the State;
K. Conducting research on soil and water remediation systems and the viability of 
those systems for commercial farms;  
L. Conducting research on alternative cropping systems, PFAS uptake of different 
crops, the use of livestock systems to mitigate exposure to and for remediation of 
PFAS and food safety criteria for food products;  
M. Developing and implementing educational programs for landowners, including but 
not limited to determining best practices for informing residents about the potential of 
being near or on a site on which sludge or septage application was licensed or 
permitted by the State prior to 2019, and providing information and guidance on 
buying or selling agricultural lands that have had sludge or septage applied;  
N. Long-term monitoring of PFAS contaminated sites and establishing a 
corresponding centralized data repository;  
O. Establishing food safety criteria and guidance for farm products;
P. Assisting commercial farms and others in the agricultural sector not directly 
affected by PFAS contamination with marketing efforts whose branding and 
marketing may be affected by public perception of PFAS contamination in the State; 
and 
Q. Regional planning with other states and the Federal Government to protect food 
supply and farmers in the State from out-of-state PFAS contamination.; and
R. Collaborate with the University of Maine to establish experimental research 
stations utilizing farms contaminated with PFAS in order to carry out research, 
providing payment for the use of affected farmers’ land, infrastructure, equipment 
and expertise.
SUMMARY
This bill is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208.
This bill amends the Fund To Address PFAS Contamination would require the 
development and implementation of a program to develop a program of experimental 
research stations in collaboration with the University of Maine utilizing incentivize and assist 
farmers whose land or crops are affected by perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances 
and paying farmers for the use of their land, infrastructure, equipment and expertise in 
conducting research authorized under the Fund. to remediate the land from contamination, 
including by growing alternative crops.
