 
 
 
April 24th, 2023  
 
Senator Stacy Brenner , Senate Chair  
Representative Lori Gramlich , House Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
RE: MSCC Testimony in OPPOSITION to L.D. 1658: An Act to Verify the Reduction of Global 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions for Certain Electric Transmission Line Projects  
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Environment and Natural Resources Committee:  
 
My name is Ben Lucas, I live in Portland, and I represent the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a statewide 
business organization consisting of a netw ork of more than 5,000 small and large companies across Maine. The 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce is submitting testimony in  opposition to L.D. 1658.  
 
Legislation to further complicate the permitting process in Maine is always of concern to the business 
community. L.D. 1658 proposes to dramatically change the regulatory structure in Maine by additional 
requirements for permitting after qualifications for a permit have already been achieved by the applicant. This 
legislation does not seek to make any changes while a project is going through receiving numerous permits 
from agencies, it seeks to add another layer of regulation once a project is permitted and becomes operational. 
That sends a chilling signal to investors  and further hurts our business reputation – it is concerning that a 
company could have a project get approval, build the project, invest hundreds of millions of dollars, create 
thousands of jobs, help the state achieve our clean energy goals – and one year later, be threatened with fines 
and penalties . 
 
Additionally, we should not be hostile to projects just because they are located outside of the State of Maine.  As 
we work to achieve regional clean energy goals, Maine needs to be seen as a reliable regional partner. 
Furthermore, as we look to grow our eco nomy and create jobs – we should be sending strong regional signals 
that Maine is open for investment. We have seen over the last few years it has been very challenging for 
developments of all shapes and sizes to be built. If we want our economy to grow, t o encourage our kids to live 
and work here after graduation, we all need to be more open to change and new investment as a state. L.D. 1658 
would have a negative impact on our ability to attract business, it is bad for our economy and bad for our clean 
energy development.  
 
 
 
 Our last point, the business community welcomes a robust regulatory environment that provides clear, 
predictable, consistent decisions from state agencies and the Chamber always advocates for that. We already 
have a rigorous and thorough  permitting process in Maine. Maine is urgently responding to the environmental 
and economic challenges that climate change imposes on all of us. It is important that we have a streamlined 
process so various projects can get permitted and come online as so on as possible. We believe L.D. 1658 is 
unnecessary because the environmental impacts and benefits of transmission projects are already thoroughly 
reviewed. Projects of this caliber undergo permitting reviews from the PUC, Maine DEP, LUPC, and federal 
agen cies – we believe that structure works.  
 
We encourage this committee to reject L.D. 1658 and we would respectfully urge an “ought not to pass” report. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I am happy to answer any questions and would be happy to bring 
back additional information for the  work session.  
 
Sincerely,  
Benjamin R. Lucas  
Senior Government Relations Specialist  
Maine State Chamber of Commerce  
Email: blucas@mainechamber.org  
