Testimony on LD 1658:  Dear	Senator	Brenner,	Representative	Gramlich,	and	members	of	the	Committee	on	Environment	and	Natural	Resources,	 My	name	is	Clifford	Krolick,	and	I	am	a	resident	of	Parsonsfield,	Maine.		I	have	a	certificate	in	Environmental	education	from	Tufts	University,	a	Bachelor	Of	Science	from	Ohio	State	University,	and	belong	to	a	small	research	group	with	focus	on	impacts	of	Hydroelectric	projects	on	our	natural	resources	and	climate.	We	urge	the	Committee	to	vote	‘ought	to	pass’	on	LD	1658;	An	Act	to	Verify	the	Reduction	of	Global	Greenhouse	Gas	Emissions	for	Certain	Electric	Transmission	Line	Projects.	 This	legislation	is	necessary	to	help	account	for	the	goals	outlined	in	the	Maine	Won’t	Wait	Climate	Action	Plan.	There	is	no	reason	we	should	be	allowing	GHG	emitting	sources	of	energy	into	Maine	while	we	are	focusing	on	clean	power	generation.	Large	Hydroelectric	energy	transmission	is	a	prime	example	of	this.	 Contrary	to	present	public	opinion,	large	hydroelectric	dams	and	their	reservoir	impoundments	of	100	megawatts	or	greater	can	no	longer	be	considered	carbon	neutral	or	free	of	GHG	emissions.	The	United	States	EPA,	working	through	numerous	organizations	and	following	a	NASA	Jet	propulsion	Lab	study(	https://climate.nasa.gov/ask-nasa-climate/3143/steamy-relationships- how-atmospheric-water-vapor-supercharges-earths-greenhouse-effect/) has	determined	that	large	dams	could	actually	contribute	substantial	amounts	to	the	Earth's	carbon	budget.	Recently	the	EPA	advanced	this	position	to	the	United	Nations	Intergovernmental	Panel	on	Climate	Change	(IPCC)	requesting	nations	to	measure	GHG	emissions	through	satellite	technology.	(https://www.epa.gov/air-research/research-emissions-us-reservoirs)  The	U.S.	has	taken	the	lead	in	this	effort.	It’s	time	for	Maine	to	follow	science,	not	political	expediency.	 As	many	of	us	are	presently	aware,	we’re	in	a	transition	period	to develop and utilize truly clean energy sources. In order to speed this process along and ensure the reliability of using energies free of most GHG emissions, I would suggest a slight amendment to LD 1658.  By the state and legislature moving forward on the development of locally generated, locally distributed, and locally stored energy 
resources using current battery technologies; This would naturally include Rooftop solar, encouraging small municipal solar farms, and locally operated wind resources.  A whole approach like this could provide us clean energy resources with little hassle or constant oversight.  Studies are available and have shown us that there is more than ample energies to be tapped all locally to meet current and future energy needs . I’d be happy to discuss this idea further in a workshop in committee.  Sincerely,	Clifford	Krolick	Parsonsfield  
