Testimony on LD 1658:  An Act to Verify the Reduction of Global Greenhouse Gas Emissions for Certain Electric Transmission Line Projects   Dear	Senator	Brenner,	Representative	Gramlich,	and	members	of	the	Committee	on	Environment	and	Natural	Resources,	  My	name	is	Clifford	Krolick,	and	I	am	a	resident	of	Parsonsfield,	Maine.	I	am	submitting	the	following	testimony	on	behalf	of	Sierra	Club	Maine,	representing	over	22,000	supporters	and	members	statewide.	Founded	in	1892,	Sierra	Club	is	one	of	our	nation’s	oldest	and	largest	environmental	organizations.	We	work	diligently	to	amplify	the	power	of	our	3.8	million	members	nationwide	as	we	work	towards	combating	climate	change.		Personally	I	belong	to	a	small	research	group	with	focus	on	impacts	of	Hydroelectric	projects		on	our	natural	resources	and	climate.		We	urge	the	Committee	to	vote	‘ought	to	pass’	on	LD	1658;	An	Act	to	Verify	the	Reduction	of	Global	Greenhouse	Gas	Emissions	for	Certain	Electric	Transmission	Line	Projects.	  This	legislation	is	necessary	to	help	account	for	the	goals	outlined	in	the	Maine	Won’t	Wait	Climate	Action	Plan.			There	is	no	reason	we	should	be	allowing	GHG	emitting	sources	of	energy	into	Maine	while	we	are	focusing	on	clean	power	generation.	Large	Hydroelectric	energy	transmission	is	a	prime	example	of	this.	  Contrary	to	present	public	opinion,	large	hydroelectric	dams	and	their	reservoir	impoundments	of	100	megawatts	or	greater	can	no	longer	be	considered	carbon	neutral	or	free	of	GHG	emissions.		The	United	States	EPA,	working	through	numerous	organizations	and	following	a	NASA	Jet	propulsion	Lab	study( https://climate.nasa.gov/ask-nasa-climate/3143/steamy-relationships-how-atmospheric-water-vapor-supercharges-earths-greenhouse-effect/)	has	determined	that	large	dams	could	actually	contribute	substantial	amounts	to	the	Earth's	carbon	budget.	Recently	the	EPA	advanced	this	position	to	the	United	Nations	Intergovernmental	Panel	on	Climate	Change	(IPCC)	requesting	nations	to	measure	GHG	emissions	through	satellite	technology.	(https://www.epa.gov/air-research/research-emissions-us-reservoirs) The	U.S.	has	taken	the	lead	in	this	effort.		It’s	time	for	Maine	to	follow	science,	not	political	expediency.	 As	many	of	us	are	presently	aware,		we’re	in	a	transition	period to develop and utilize truly clean energy sources.  In order to speed this process along and totally insure that we’re always using energy free from GHG emissions, I would suggest a slight amendment to LD 1658 If the state and legislature would move forward pushing only locally generated, locally distributed, and locally stored energy resources using current battery technologies, while continuing support of Rooftop solar with net energy billing, and encouraging small municipal solar farms and locally operated wind resources, this would permanently guarantee us clean energy resources with little hassle or oversight required. A long term plan as this, would be more than ample to meet current and future energy needs for our entire state.  I’d be happy to discuss this idea further in a workshop in committee.   Sincerely,	 Clifford	Krolick	 Sierra	Club	Maine	 Energy	Team	Volunteer	 
   
