Chairman Brenner, Chairman Gramlich and members of the ENR committee 
My name is Dick Rogers and l’m here as a concerned lifelong Mainer, and 
representative of the international Brotherhood of Electrical Workers. 
In full disclosure l’m a 40 year retired CMP employee, retired Business Manager of 
IBEW 1837, Master Registered Maine Guide (who loves the North l\/laine Woods) anda 
member of the Maine Affordable Energy Coalition team. 
The proponents have come up with a last-minute scheme to try and kill thejobs that 
NECEC has provided and the much needed sustainable, 24hours a day 7 days a week, 
renewable energy from hydropower that is needed in the New England. 
As a father and grandfather, l’m concerned how they, along with many Mainers, will be 
able to afford electricity if the unregulated and unfettered supply side continue to 
increase at their current pace. The project would bring cleaner cheaper power into the 
mix, hopefully stabilize costs. 
The efforts to stop construction are efforts to deny working families the good paying jobs 
that the corridor provides. 
Even after the State Supreme Court and a jury decided unanimously that construction 
should continue, corridor opponents rushed through a middle-of-the-night scheme to 
keep Maine workers from doing what they want-—going back to work building 
infrastructure. 
Everything is costing more these days—gas, food, housing. Inflation is putting the 
squeeze on workers, and the unanimous jury verdict last week is a lifeline for the men 
and women who can go back to work building the corridor. But court was barely 
adjourned before some politicians came up with a last-minute desperate attempt to 
once again yank that lifeline back from Maine workers. 
Sometimes it seems that the sponsors hatred of CMP has blinded them from realizing 
they are pulling the rug out from under the l\/laine workers who have spent over a year 
building the corridor. Even when the Maine Supreme Court and a unanimous jury 
verdict overruled their attempts at killing the corridor jobs, they came up with one more 
way to prevent Mainers the opportunity to go back to work. 
I ask that the committee vote to ought not to pass. 
Dick Rogers 
Scarborough, Maine
