James C. LaBrecque 
323 Stillwater Ave 
Bangor, Maine 04401 
i 
.i,.i§Ef~ ,.* ,.-T9ﬁtlhfiﬁéi{E5352;i;.éi,iF' .l.l§.¢.§.£?EEi 
(207) 262-9682 
L.D. 1658 
An Act to Verify the Reduction of Global Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions for Certain Electric Transmission Line Projects 
Dear Chairs and members of the Committee, 
lvly name is Jim LaBrecque, I am from Bangor lvlaine and here to testify Not in 
Favor of L.D. 1658. l am further requesting a motion to hold L.D. 1658 in abeyance 
until an ethics complaint and a Federal Anti-Trust complaint can be filed and 
investigated. The sponsor of this bill, Senator Rick Bennett will be a subject in 
these complaints. 
L.D. 1658 is another of many unconstitutional tactics attempted by Senator 
Bennett to target one company, one project, for one reason, that is to aid a large 
energy player with anti-competitive blockades just to kill off competition from 
CMP. 2 
Senator Bennett's other unconstitutional tactics which he engaged in include: 
0 The first NECEC referendum which l\/laine Supreme Judicial Court 
found to be unconstitutional; 
0 The second NECEC referendum which Maine Supreme Judicial Court 
found to be unconstitutional; 
0 Senator Bennett promoted a false claim that the land lease granted 
by both the LePage and Mills administration was unconstitutional, 
which the Ivlaine Supreme Judicial Court found against Senator 
T 
Bennett; 
v Subsequent to the finding of the Maine Supreme Judicial Court 
against Senator Bennett, Senator Bennett ﬁled a motion to the court
for reconsideration, claiming the court was wrong in their decision. 
The court rightfully dismissed Senator Bennett's motion; 
0 Senator Bennett was also a party in the latest NECEC Maine Supreme 
Judicial Court decision that was remanded back to the Business Court 
to answer a question, last week a jury verdict of 9-0 voted against 
Senator Bennett; 
Q Senator Bennett made a false claim that Cl\/IP was cutting wider than 
the 54-foot state permit allowed. He ignored the verified inspector 
on the job and called in DEP. Senator Bennett reprimanded the DEP 
in front of this committee for agreeing with the verified field 
inspector; 
0 Senator Bennett continues a pattern of ignoring and or disagreeing 
with many agencies like the DEP, BEP, PUC, Army Core, FERC, EPA, 
superior courts, l\/laine Supreme Judicial Court, etc.; 
0 Senator Bennett engaged in a multi-year disparagement crusade 
against the NECEC with a misinformation campaign; 
0 Senator Bennett is presently campaigning through Our Power to put 
CMP out of business 
0 Senator Bennett was allegedly behind the Tucker Carlson NECEC 
show that was extremely misleading and harmful to the state, New 
England and the owners of the NECEC project. 
0 Senator Bennett engaged in private law suits as an individual but 
used his official title ”Senator Rick Bennett" o try and influence 
judges. 
ln conclusion, Senator Bennett has used his title, and political position to aida 
large energy company with anti-competitive/anti-trust behavior which is seriously 
harmful to the great state of Maine and New England. This committee must not 
allow him to use his political position, title or this committee to continue his 
questionable behavior and must vote no for L.D. 1658. 
Thank you 
James C. LaBrecque
