Linda Woods
Waterville
LD 1658
To: Environment and Natural Resources Committee
From: Linda Woods (Waterville)
Re:  Support LD 1658, “An Act to Verify the Reduction of Global Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions for Certain Electric Transmission Line Projects”
Date: April 26, 2023
Since I have been a volunteer on the Say No to NECEC (aka the Corridor) project 
from the beginning, I have studied the CMP’s claims that their high-speed 
transmission line would “help Northeast states reach their climate and clean energy 
goals” (https://www.necec.org/news-and-events/publications).  Claiming that the 
Corridor will reduce greenhouse gas emissions is an example of greenwashing.  While
its connection might reduce Massachusetts’ fossil-fuel consumption, CMP’s claim 
ignores the fact that Hydro-Quebec will need to build new reservoirs to meet 
increased demand.  All reservoirs emit methane from decomposing organic matter 
contained therein.  In the first 10-20 years, methane emissions have been found to be 
over 80 times more potent than carbon dioxide.  These statistics need to be included 
when determining the global climate impact of this project.  That reason by itself is 
enough to support LD 1658, which would require an analysis of the global 
greenhouse gas emissions impact of the corridor.
If CMP, Avangrid, NECEC, and Hydro-Quebec have been telling the truth about the 
climate impact of the corridor, they should support this legislation to validate their 
claims.  This might improve their reputation with many Maine residents.  If an 
independent analysis finds that the NECEC project does not reduce global greenhouse
gas emissions as claimed, CMP/Avangrid should be fined.  Of course, this monetary 
penalty would be too late to protect the impacted wilderness in Maine and the lands of
the first-nation people in Quebec.  
You have the opportunity to protect these lands by voting in support of LD 1658, “An
Act to Verify the Reduction of Global Greenhouse Gas Emissions for Certain Electric
Transmission Line Projects.” I encourage you to do so. 

