 
 
LISA A. GILBREATH  
Merrill’s Wharf  
254 Commercial Street  
Portland, ME  04101  
 
PH 207.791. 1397 
FX 207.791.1350  
lgilbreath @pierceatwood.com  
pierceatwood.com  
Admitted in:  KS, MA, ME, MO, NY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
April 24, 2023  
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
Chairs Brenner and Gramlich, and members of the ENR Committee,  
My name is Lisa Gilbreath  and I am an attorney at Pierce Atwood LLP speaking  on behalf of Avangrid 
Networks, Inc. and NECEC Transmission LLC.  
My work on the New England Clean Energy Connect  (NECEC) Project extends back almost six years, 
when it was first submitted to the Maine Department of Environmental Protection  (DEP or Department) 
for approval under the Site Law and NRPA.  After multiple years of regulatory review, which included six 
days of evidentiary hearings, sworn testimony from dozens of witnesses, testimony of hundreds o f 
Maine citizens, thousands of pages of written evidence, and confirmation of the permit on appeal at the 
Board of Environmental Protection, Project opponents are now taking a different tack.  But the 
proposed amendment to the Site Law makes no sense and w ould only inject uncertainty into the 
Department’s permitting process  for the following reasons . 
First, LD 1658 would result in arbitrary and capricious review by the DEP because the Site Law has no 
standards governing review of greenhouse gases (GHGs) .  It would amend the Site Law , and require 
imposition of a condition on permitted projects, but is  untethered from any Site Law approval standard .  
This is illogical because a condition is  imposed upon a project to ensure that project meets a specific Site 
Law or NRPA approval standard.  DEP Regs. Ch. 2 § 19(D) (“ The Department may impose any 
requirement as a license condition to provide for and ensure compliance with applicable State law or 
rule. ”).  Neither the Site Law nor LD 1658 provide any standards that  would inform the Department’s 
review, injecting significant regulatory uncertainty into the review process.  Furthermore, the bill 
requires a demonstration “to the department ’s satisfaction,” a subjective review that may change with 
the Department’s leade rship.  
Second, LD 1658 would wrest from the Maine Public Utilities Commission  (PUC)  the authority to review 
the GHG  impacts of a project.   Such review  is solely the purview of the PUC  under Title 35 -A, which is 
statutorily obligated to take into account “state renewable energy generation goals” in determining the 
public need for a project.  35 -A M.R.S. § 3132(6) .  In fact, in forming the PUC the Legislature stated that 
its “basic purpose … is to ensure  safe, reasonable and adequate service, to assist in minimizing the cost 
of energy available to the State’s consumers, to ensure that the rates of public utilities subject to rate 
regulation are just and reasonable to customers and public utilities and to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions to meet the greenhouse gas emissions reduction levels set forth in Title 38, section 576 ‑A.”  
35-A MRS § 101 (emphasis added); see also  35-A MRS § 103 -A. 
ENR Committee  
April 24, 2023  
Page 2 
#15980465
The PUC did in fact consider the GHG impact of the NECEC Project, find ing it would result in a reduction 
in GHGs , as described in the testimony of  Mr. Libonatti .  The Maine Law Court upheld this conclusion , 
and the Maine DEP properly relied on the PUC’s conclusion.  NextEra Energy Res., LLC v. Maine PUC , 
2020 ME 34, ¶¶ 30, 3 6-38, 227 A.3d 1117 (Mar. 17, 2020) (“The Commission’s conclusions regarding the 
NECEC project and Maine’s Renewable Energy Goals were reasonable and consistent with the law”) ; 
Maine DEP Order at 105 (May 11, 2020).  Additional independent review by the DE P as set forth in the 
bill would result in unnecessary and duplicative review with potentially contradictory results.  
Third, the bill would unlawfully require the owner of any transmission lines, including those that have 
already received a permit under th e Site Law, after achieving commercial operation, to submit 
“documentation, analysis or other information, prepared by an independent 3rd party, that 
demonstrates to the department's satisfaction that the transmission line and the electricity it transports  
contributes to the reduction of global greenhouse gas emissions.”  This post hoc condition on permitted 
projects is an unlawful retroactive imposition of a condition.  Furthermore,  because LD 1658 imposes a 
reporting condition that is not otherwise impose d by the  DEP, it represents an uncons titutional intrusion 
by the Legislature into the Executive Branch’s authority in violation of the separation of powers under 
the Maine Constitution.   
Finally, LD 1658 is unconstitutionally limited to "nonessential transmission lines ,” which are defined as 
projects “ constructed primarily to transport electricity generated outside of the State ,” in violation of 
the Commerce Clause  of the U.S. Constitu tion at Article I, Section 8, Clause 3 .  The bill unlawfully  
discriminate s against and unduly burde ns interstate commerce.  
The Department has robust governing statutes and regulations that result in thorough review of projects 
like the NECEC, as evidenced by the multi -year regulatory review of that Project.  The PUC has already 
analyzed the GHG impacts of this Project  and has done and will do the same for all other transmission 
projects.  LD 1658 is simply unnecessary, would result in regulatory uncertainty and duplication, and 
runs afoul of multiple constitutional protections.  
Thank you.  
Lisa A. Gilb reath  
