 
 
131st MAINE LEGISLATURE 
THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL 
RESOURCES 
   
Re: Testimony in Opposition to LD 1658 
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Peter DelGreco, 
President & CEO of Maine & Co.  My organization exists to find growing companies and 
show them how they can be successful in establishing an operation in Maine.  Created 
during the administration of Governor Angus King, we are a privately funded 501(c)6.  
We compete with states from the entire country and countries around the world to 
attract new jobs and investment to Maine.  We also work with existing Maine 
companies, helping them implement their growth plans.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share why I oppose LD 1658.   
 
This bill looks to create additional requirements for permitting after a permit has 
already been issued.  This creates an unpredictable business climate while at the same 
time targeting a specific company.  It is simply unfair.  If we want to continue to attract 
new investment to Maine, we cannot change the rules after a company goes through the 
regulatory process in good faith. 
 
Adding new capacity to our grid is already a monumental process.  Companies must run 
a gauntlet of permitting requirements and manage long timelines to get to a decision.  
We already put companies through an extremely rigorous process that includes 
numerous Federal, State, Local, and Regional agencies.  These are agencies that are 
charged with protecting our environment.  In Maine, our regulations are especially 
stringent.   
 
Companies that seek to invest in Maine typically choose our state because they like the 
high standards we impose.  Companies don’t want to invest hundreds of millions or 
billions of dollars in a location only to de-value their investment.  They want to make 
investments that are in keeping with the standards and guidelines of the state.  We 
should be encouraging these types of investments in Maine, not making retroactive 
punishments to companies who have done all that was asked of them at significant 
expense of both time and resources. 
 
Thank you again and I urge this committee to oppose LD 1658. 

Peter DelGreco
Maine & Co.
LD 1658
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony opposed to LD 1658.
Best,
Peter
