April 24, 2023 
Testimony of Sebastian Libonatti, VP Business Development for Avangrid 
in Opposition to 
LD 1658 An Act to Verify the Reduction of Global Greenhouse Gas Emissions for Certain Electric 
Transmission Line Projects 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, members of the Environment and Natural Resources 
Committee, my name is Sebastian Libonatti. I reside in Falmouth Maine and am here today to 
testify in opposition to LD 1658 An Act to Verify the Reduction of Global Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions for Certain Electric Transmission Line Projects. 
The New England Clean Energy Connect (NECEC) is the largest clean energy project in New 
England. Once the transmission line is in service, it will deliver 1,200 megawatts of clean, 
reliable power from Canada to Maine and the region. 
The project consists of 145 miles of new transmission line that will tie into the existing 
transmission system in Lewiston, Maine. Additional project components include upgrading 50 
miles of existing alternating current transmission lines, construction of a new converter station, 
a new substation and multiple system upgrades. 
NECEC is a subsidiary of Avangrid. Avangrid is the country's third largest renewable power 
generator with wind and solar generation in 24 states, and with utilities in New York, 
Connecticut and Maine. Currently, our generation is 91% emissions~free generation and we have an 
emissions intensity over six times lower than the U.S. utility average. And, we are not stopping there, by 
2030 we plan to be carbon neutral and to have 17GW of emissions-free generation. 
The NECEC project will reduce energy costs, enhance reliability and contribute to greenhouse 
gas reduction requirements. This project represents a fundamental shift away from fossil fuels. 
After more than a year of expert testimony and public participation, the Public Utilities Commission 
found that: 
NECEC will result in incremental hydroelectric generation, it follows that the Project will also 
provide GHG emissions reduction benefits in the region. As noted above, the expert analyses 
provided in the record in this proceeding indicates that the GHG emission reductions in the 
region resulting from the NECEC would be in the range of approximately 3.0 to 3.6 miiiion metric 
tons per year, which as noted above, is equivalent to removing approximately 700,000 passenger 
vehicles from the road. 
Unsatisfied with the public process, our competitor NextEra has challenged every permit and every 
decision, funding any possible attacks. Maine's Law Court has rejected all ofthese, including an attack 
on the PUC's decision, finding:
The (PUC} followed the proper procedure and there is sufficient evidence in the record to support 
the findings it made. In short, the (PUC) reasonably interpreted and applied the relevant 
statutory mandates in arriving at its decision to grant (NE CEC) a certificate of public convenience 
and necessity for the NECEC Project and in its decision to approve the stipulation. 
LD 1658 is another attempt to re-write the rules of the game. l\/laine ’s Law Court has made it clear that 
our Constitution does not allow such fundamental unfairness and just last week a jury delivered a 
unanimous verdict in favor of NECEC, finding that opponents could not rescind or alter its permits and 
approvals. Let me be clear on this point, NECEC applied for its permits under the existing law of the 
State of Maine, project supporters and fully participated in Maine's public process for approval, and, 
then, opponents appealed those permits in Maine courts. They have now lost those appeals and 
challenges and cannot be allowed to change the rules of the game. To allow LD 1658 to change the 
rules of the game would be fundamental unfairness and make a mockery of l\/laine ’s rule of law. 
Thank you for your consideration. l'd be happy to answer any questions you have now, or provide 
information at your work session. 
Attachments submitted electronically: 
v MPUC CPCN (O5-O3-2019 
0 Law Court decision on CPCN (03-17-2020) 
Q Law Court decision on the 2"d Referendum (O8-30-2022) 
0 Business Court entry ofjudgment on 2”“ Referendum (O4-21-2023)
