 
Richard A. Bennett                                                                                                        3 State House Station  
Senator, District 18                                                                                                  Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Fax: (207) 287-1527 *  TTY (207) 287-1583  *  Message Service 1-800-423-6900  *  Web Site: legislature.maine.gov/senate 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
Presenting LD 1658, “An Act to Verify the Reduction of Global Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
for Certain Electric Transmission Line Projects” 
24 April 2023 
 
Good morning, Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and distinguished members of the 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee.  I am Senator Rick Bennett.  I represent the 
towns of Mechanic Falls, Minot, Bridgton, Harrison, Brownfield, Denmark, Fryeburg, Hebron, 
Norway, Otisfield, Oxford, Paris, Sweden and Waterford.   
 
I am pleased to present LD 1658, An Act to Verify the Reduction of Global Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions for Certain Electric Transmission Line Projects.   
 
This is a relatively simple accountability bill, requiring owners of large transmission line 
projects, constructed primarily to transport electricity generated from outside the State of Maine, 
to demonstrate – within a year after reaching commercial operation – that their project 
contributes to the reduction of global greenhouse gas emissions.   
 
The bill applies only to what is defined as “nonessential transmission lines,” meaning electric 
transmission lines carrying 100 kilovolts or more that are constructed primarily to transport 
electricity generated outside the State that become operational after January 1, 2024. 
 
Verification of global greenhouse gas emission reduction is achieved via an independent 3rd 
party analysis submitted to the DEP.  If the analysis shows that the project does in fact contribute 
to the reduction of GHG emissions, then no further action is required.  If, however, the study 
concludes the electric transmission line does not contribute to GHG emissions reduction, the 
DEP shall take appropriate action requiring the project owner to pay penalties calculated in 
proportion to the amount of electricity transported that does not contribute to the reduction of 
GHG emissions.  Those penalty payments would be deposited in the Regional Greenhouse Gas 
Initiative Trust Fund (“RGGI Fund”) overseen by the Efficiency Maine Trust or another fund, as 
determined by the department. 
 
While this bill would apply to the NECEC CMP Corridor a year after it is built – if in fact that 
project does move forward – it would also apply to any future transmission lines going through 
Maine that are built primarily to transport power generated outside the State.  However, this bill 
would not apply to the transmission line proposed as part of the Northern Maine Renewable 
Energy Development Program because that proposed line would transport power generated in 
Maine. 
 
Some of you may find similarities between this bill and a former Resolve – LD 640 To Require a 
Study of Greenhouse Gas Emissions Reductions from the Proposed Central Maine Power 
Transmission Corridor -- presented by the former Chair of this Committee, Senator Brownie 
Carson, before the 129th Legislature.  The similarities are intentional because the issue is still 
pertinent.   
 
In his testimony before this Committee in favor of LD 640 former Senator Carson provided the 
following reasoning for the bill: 
 
“If greenhouse gas emissions decreased in Massachusetts as a result of the CMP corridor, 
but increased in New York or New Brunswick - where Hydro-Quebec also sells 
electricity- then CMP’s claims about climate benefits from the project would turn out to 
have been illusory. We need global reductions in greenhouse gas emissions, not local or 
regional reductions, because climate change is a global problem.”1 
 
This bill, of course, is different from Senator Carson’s resolve in that it is a prospective 
application of the idea of ensuring GHG reductions – and it speaks to accountability based upon 
verifiable data – as opposed to unconfirmed forward projections.  As I said from the outset, this 
is an accountability bill. 
 
I would also observe that this bill is not a bar to project development -- or a delay or an obstacle 
in any way -- to the development of a project.  This bill will not prevent the NECEC CMP 
Corridor from being built, nor would it prevent any other future project from being built.  For 
that reason, I am hopeful opposition to this bill will be limited.  Indeed, if project developer 
claims regarding greenhouse gas emissions for their proposed projects are accurate, then they 
should not be concerned about this bill. 
 
And in fact, because, as I mentioned, this bill does not prevent or impede the development of a 
project, I am hopeful opposition to its enactment will be limited.  Indeed, as some of you may 
recall, the primary reason cited by lobbyists opposed to Senator Carson’s resolve was that it 
would delay construction of the NECEC CMP Corridor.2 
 
This bill removes theoretical assumptions and replaces them with verifiable data.  Importantly, it 
does not delay project development.  In fact, I would argue that had we had this bill in place 
before the NECEC CMP Corridor debate began, it could have served to remove much of the 
 
1 See testimony of Senator Brownie Carson presenting “LD 640, Resolve, To Require a Study of Greenhouse Gas 
Emissions Reductions from the Proposed Central Maine Power Company Transmission Corridor” (March 15, 2019) 
(emphasis in original). https://legislature.maine.gov/legis/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=100501    
2 See e.g. testimony of IECG lobbyist, Tony Buxton, in opposition to LD 640 (“Please do not delay the historic 
reduction in CO2 emissions NECEC would cause.”) (March 15, 2019) 
https://legislature.maine.gov/legis/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=100483 ; testimony of Mainers for Clean Energy 
Jobs lobbyist, Ben Dudley (LD 640 “would needlessly delay a vital clean energy project that . . .  makes a major 
down-payment on moving the entire region toward carbon neutrality by mid-century . . .”) (March 15, 2019) 
https://legislature.maine.gov/legis/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=100492 ; testimony of Maine & Co lobbyist Peter 
DelGreco (LD 640 is “an attempt to influence a process, to sow confusion in the regulatory environment, and to 
delay a capital investment project in Maine.”) (March 15, 2019) 
https://legislature.maine.gov/legis/bills/getTestimonyDoc.asp?id=100487 .  
controversy surrounding the project, namely whether it would contribute to the reduction of 
global greenhouse gas emissions.  Going forward, if proponents of transmission lines built in 
Maine primarily to transport power generated outside the State make carbon emissions claims 
about their projects that turn out “illusory” they would be required to pay a fine commensurate in 
proportion of electricity transported not contributing to the reduction of greenhouse gas 
emissions.   
 
In short, if claims about their project’s GHG reductions prove accurate, they have nothing to 
worry about.  But if they aren’t accurate, this bill ensures that we hold them accountable. 
 
For these reasons, I am hopeful you will join me in support of LD 1658.   
 
I would be happy to answer any of your questions. 
 
  
