Testimony of IBEW Local 104 Assistant Business Manager, Tim Burgess, speaking out against 
LD 1658, "An Act to Verify the Reduction of Global Greenhouse Gas Emissions for Certain 
Electric Transmission Line Projects." 
Good afternoon, Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the 
Environmental and Natural Resources Committee. My name is Tim Burgess, and I am the 
Assistant Business Manager of IBEW Local 104 located in Lewiston. 
Enough is Enough. LD 1658 is another effort to stop or penalize the NECEC Project after 
opponents have lost before every agency and every court. It is time to let us go back to work 
and build a reliable electric grid that delivers more renewable power. 
The lBEW members performed significant construction work on the Corridor in various 
capacities as Linemen, Apprentices, Heavy Equipment Operators, Driver Groundmen, and 
Groundman, including work on transmission line construction, reconstruction, maintenance line 
work, station and cable work. IBEW members are an integral part ofthe workforce that 
maintains Maine's electrical infrastructure. 
As for IBEW Local 104, its members have performed significant work on construction and 
upgrades of other portions of the Corridor project. Over 300 IBEW Local 104's members are 
from Maine and were paid for thousands of hours of work on the Corridor project. Overall, the 
IBEW represents hundreds of employees who perform the work and construction that builds 
and maintains our electric grid. 
The NECEC project was planned over several years and will take several years to build and 
complete. That is the nature of projects of this size and complexity. |BEW's members relied on 
such permits to assist with the work on this complex, technical project. Reliance on the 
effectiveness and stability of these permits as granted under existing law is absolutely essential 
for the completion of the work. It is disruptive and problematic for workers like IBEW members 
and families whose livelihoods depend on projects like the NECEC. 
This case presents fundamental questions about the fairness of retroactive laws depriving a 
party of vested rights no matter how much good faith effort was expended in undertaking the 
project. The question presented becomes all the more imperative when the retroactive law 
targets only one specific project and is openly supported and promoted by that project's 
economic competitors. LD 1658 would send a clear and resounding message that no rights are 
safe from retroactive laws because well-versed lobbyists can engineer a referendum or new 
laws and take those rights away. it would also cement Maine's position as a hostile place to do 
business where permits are legally acquired and then overturned. If they succeed with NECEC, 
who is their next target?
