Larry Dansinger
Bangor
LD 1039
April 11, 2023
To members of the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety of the Maine 
Legislature:
I am writing in opposition to LD 1039, “An Act  to Provide Restitution for Victims of
Shoplifting for Time Spent Dealing with the Offense” and urge committee members 
to vote “ought not to pass” on this bill.
Many years ago, my father owned a small store that sold military surplus. It was just 
my dad, one other part-time employee, and sometimes me. The store was about 1,000 
square feet in size. We barely survived financially (fortunately, my mother also had a 
job). We had some items shoplifted from us. My dad complained, but accepted it as 
part of the “cost of doing business.”
Today, a lot of attempts to shoplift are at much larger big box stores with many times 
the size our little military surplus store. But, these stores have sophisticated security 
systems and security personnel. It is part of the “cost of doing business” for them also.
They accept that and are generally doing very well, with profits in the millions if not 
the billions.
This bill, LD 1061, would pay restitution, in almost every case, to businesses that are 
already paying someone to “deal with the offense.” It is a normal part of their day, 
every day. 
Except in rare instances of mental illness, those who shoplift do so out of financial 
desperation. If they are caught, they receive some sort of sanction for what they have 
done and must pay for what they stole plus the cost, the suffering, and the hassle of 
dealing with the criminal punishment system. Trying to get them to also provide 
restitution is like trying to get “blood out of a turnip.” 
We all want people to stop shoplifting but this kind of restitution, to businesses that 
really don’t need it or expect it just digs a bigger hole for shoplifters to crawl out of. It
makes our communities less safe, not more.
Please stop trying to turn people with inadequate income into full-time criminals and 
vote “ought not not pass” on LD 1039.
Sincerely,
Larry Dansinger
21 Mount Desert Drive
Bangor, ME 04401
(207) 262-3706
larryd@myfairpoint.net

