 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1039  (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1039, An Act to Provide Restitution for Victims of Shoplifting for Time Spent Dealing 
with the Offense  
 
DA: April 1 2, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 1039.   
 
 As defined by the bill, “shoplifting” is a sub -category of the crime of theft.  17 -A M.R.S., 
Ch. 15.    The bill also expands the definition of “work loss” applicable to the restitut ion statutes , 
but only with respect to the newly defined shoplifting .  The combined effect of these definitions 
would be to provide  different treatment for retail stores that are victims of shoplifting, by 
authorizing courts to reimburse retail stores  for time associated with addressing the shoplifting 
incident.  The expanded definition is broadly drafted and would appear to cover salaries of loss 
prevention officers.  The approach makes more restitution potentially available  to certain victims of 
shoplifti ng than to other victims of crime, who may also be “engaging with law enforcement, 
engaging with attorneys and appearing in court,” and who are also, unfortunately, not compensated 
for this time.   CLAC does not support the proposed disparate treatment.    
 
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
