  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. Morgan  
 
Treasurer  
Walt er F. McKee  
 
Secretary 
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Ma ttson 
Joseph Mekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swanson  
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642 
Portland, ME 04112 -8642 
(207) 523-9869      
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
April 12, 202 3 
  
Senator Anne Beebe- Center, Chair  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury, Chair  
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
5 State House Station, Room 436  
Augusta, ME 04333  
   
RE: LD 1039  “An Act to Provide Restitution for Victims of Shoplifting for Time 
Spent Dealing with the Off ense.” 
Dear Senator Carney , Representativ e Moonen , and Members of the Committee on 
Judiciary : 
MACDL opposes  LD 1039 . 
LD 1 039 seeks t o create a special bill for corporate retail stores that is unnecessary  and 
incongruous  with th e existing laws on restitution.  
17-A M.R.S . § 2002 p rovides for “property loss ” restitution that returns the value of a ny 
stolen  property  to retail s tores that are the victims of shoplifting . It is unnecessary  to 
provi de further restitu tion to corp orations for shoplifting . 
LD 1039 dramatically e xpand s the type of expenses considered for restitution by making  
prosecutors and courts respo nsible for recou ping the salaries of loss prevention officers. 
This type of restitution  far exceeds even  the “critical investigation  expenses ” that law 
enfor cement is able to seek under very limited  circumstances (e.g., drug testing). 
Moreover, it requires payment  for the se “servi ces” notwith standing the reality that loss 
prevention officers perform many more tasks than apprehending  shop lifters  (e.g., basic 
security, internal audits  of merchandise, maintenance of se curity s ystem s, etc.) and that 
the cost of the ir salaries is a business  expense  that corporate retailers pass on to custom ers 
the same way th ey take into account  the salaries of store clerks  and managers.  
Finally , shopl ifting is often a crime of desper ation  with many defend ants stealing food, 
clothing, and even d iapers because  they have no money to pay for these it ems. The use of 
limited court and prosecutorial resources to obtain a nd enforce resti tution orders against 
such indigent persons benefits  no one.  
For these reasons, MACDL opposes  LD 1039 . 
 
                 
Sincerely ,     
 
/s/ M atthew Morgan  
 
Matthew D. Morgan , Esq.  
MACDL Vice President  
 
