PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444
www.aclumaine.org
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ. 
Ought Not to Pass – LD 1039  
An Act to Provide Restitution for Victims of Shoplifting for 
Time Spent Dealing with the Offense 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON
CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY 
April 12, 2023 
Senator Beebe-Center , Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, good afternoon . My name is Michael 
Kebede, and I am  Policy Counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization committed to 
advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. 
Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we urge you to reject LD 1039 because it is duplicative 
and ill-considered.  
Shoplifting is illegal in Maine and can result in a one-year prison term.  See 17-A MRS 
§§353 (defining “theft by unauthorized taking or transfer”, and designating the crime as Class E), 
4-A(3)(E) (defining penalty for Class E crimes). Shoplifting can also result in a restitution order 
requiring people convicted of the crime to pay the victim, or even dependents or representatives 
of the victim, for economic loss that resulted from the crime. See 17-A MRS §§ 2004 (list of 
authorized restitution claimants), 2005 (criteria for restitution). Maine’s restitution statute does 
not specify exactly what types of “economic loss” qualify for restitution, instead stating broadly 
that restitution is available “as compensation for economic loss.” Id. § 2005(1). Thus, any other 
retailer can argue that someone found guilty of shoplifting should pay a restitution total of not 
just items not recovered, but also the staff time and other economic losses that the shoplifting 
caused.  
Crucially, current law prevents restitution “to a victim who has otherwise been 
compensated from a collateral source, but economic loss in excess of the collateral compensation 
may be authorized.” 17-A MRS § 2005(2)(C). In other words, under current law, retailers cannot 
“double dip” by receiving an insurance payment that makes them whole and a payment from the 
person found guilty of shoplifting. But retailers can still recover a restitution payment for any 
difference between insurance payouts and the total needed to make the retailer whole.  
This bill would create two unnecessary and misconceived laws. First, it would pile the new 
crime of “shoplifting” upon our already-bloated list of crimes. That crime already exists – it is the 
  
 
2 
 aforementioned Class  E crime of “ theft by unauthorized taking or transfer.” There is no need to 
re-create this crim e under a different name, unless it is the legislature ’s intent  to lengthen the 
criminal records of people found guilty of crime s.  
Second, this bill  would “allow” restitution for “time spent by the victim, an employee of 
the victim or an agent of the victim dealing with the offense, including time investigating the 
offense, pursuing the offender, engaging with law enforcement, engaging with attorneys and 
appearing in court.” This change would allow businesses to “ double dip ,” since it has no limitation  
for compensation that retailers might receive from collateral sources. More troubling, this bill  
would make it lucrative for businesses to spend inordinate amounts of time “investigating the 
offense, pursuing the offender, engaging with attorneys and appe aring in court.” Perverse 
incentives produce perverse behavior: A  failing retailer might see this law and feel emboldened to 
squander days or weeks engaging in these seemingly necessary activities, but for the sole purpose 
of running up the bill and obtain ing a lucrative restitution payment.   
Current law is adequate to accomplish this bill’s goals. We urge you to vote ought  not to 
pass.  
 
