Ezra Showalter 
199 Dunn Rd., 
Dexter,ME 04939 
Ph. (207)924-0988 _, 
March 30, 2023 
Senator Bailey and Representative Perry, and members of the 
committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services 
I am Ezra Showalter, a deacon in the Mennonite Church in the 
Corrina/ Dexter area of Maine. I speak in support of LDIOO4. 
I thank Representative Foster for his efforts. I thank this 
committee for your consideration of this matter. 
Further I am sensitive to the government in the challenges 
they reckon with, of increasing irresponsibility in our time. 
I am thankful for_the general freedom we have in this country. 
The message displayed on US currency is very foundational 
to LDIOO4; namely, “In God We Trust" . We strive to keep this 
practical in our lives. 9 
I am thankful for the influence of my parents, the church 
we attended, and the Christian school in my childhood, that 
helped me to learn many valuable Bible truths, including this 
trust in God. We were not exposed to the television, etc., which 
we avoid yet today. But when I catch glimpses of the flashing 
screen in public places I am often impressed how unreal, or 
not true to real life, many programs are, that entertain many 
people. Is it any wonder that such minds treat the factual Bible 
accounts as unreal also? 
But God has preserved these accounts that might seem unbelievable, 
to impress us, that situations that seem impossible to man are 
possible with God. Those who simply believe and are moved to 
put their trust in God, find that He is still the same today. 
( See note 1 ) ‘ , 
As I look back over my few years of experience, I think of 
numerous examples that give evidence that God overrules and 
provides for those who put their trust in Him. Some are in personal 
experiences, others I am an eyewitness of. ( See note 2) 
Prior to relocating to Dexter,ME., in 2020; Kentucky was home 
for 39 years. I am well acquainted with the self-insurance program 
offered in Kentucky, which was used by the church of which we 
were members. ( See note 3) 
Thankeyou for this opportunity to share, and for considering 
this matter. I will gladly try to answer any questions you may 
have, now or later.
I; I assume all of you have access to a Bible. You may read 
these accounts yourself. A few in focus are: the six day creation 
( Genesis 1 ); the worldwide flood K Genesis 6-8 ); the crossing 
through the Red Sea on dry land ( Exodus 14 ); food.provided 
for the multitude in the wilderness for a period of forty years 
( over 600,000 men, plus women and children; exceeding the total 
population of Maine ) ( Exodus 16 ); etc.. Consider the practical 
lessons from the Exodus 16 account in 2 Corinthians 8 and 9. 
Above all, in the New Testament, read of salvation through our 
Lord Jesus Christ and His solution to the irresponsibility problem 
2; These incidents are not all related to vehicle liability, 
but reflect a trust in God, rather than insurance policies. 
A. I will briefly describe the only significant accident 
I was involved in, in my thirty—two years of driving. Travelling 
out—of—state, on snowy roads, descending a long hill, and seeing 
a string of brake lights ahead, I eased on the brakes. But my 
vehicle went into a slide, so I chose the banks along the road, 
rather than to be liable for a pileup. The van rolled onto its 
side and nine people climbed out unharmed. Tow service and kind 
friends came to our rescue. Within 24 hours our vehicle was 
sufficiently repaired at minimal cost, that we could travel 
on. 
B. A widow, with a number of children, a few months after 
her husband's sudden death also lost her house and personal 
possessions to fire. But the Lord rewarded their trust in Him, 
with donations and volunteer workers coming from various communities, 
and within 2 or 3 weeks, a new house was built and furnished, 
ready to move into! 
C. A young family was left with medical bills with a face 
value exceeding $700,000, after their infant son spent seven 
weeks in the hospital. They declined the option to sign up for 
Medicare. This hospital did extend a significant discount to 
parents that have the Form 4029 Exemption, if the balance was 
promptly paid. As deacon, I assisted in arranging loans, which 
were fully paid off in about three years, primarily by freewill 
offerings, taken locally and abroad. 
Q; For thirteen years, I was personally responsible for the 
correspondence with the KY State officials. Therefore I am well 
acquainted with the documents they regularly required to assure 
that we were meeting the solvency requirements. This included 
various financial reports, accident reports, vehicle lists, 
and maintaining the amount of security required for the number 
of vehicles covered, etc.. They issued an annual letter verifying 
that all requirements were met. I have samples of various of 
these documents in my possession, and I am willing to produce 
copies if anyone desires to see them. 
With God's blessing on careful drivers, accidents were minimal. 
Sometimes a year or two would elapse with no accidents involving 
the ninety to one hundred vehicles covered. We were usually 
able to settle claims in a short time, but some took time to 
resolve yet were settled without going to court. In the thirty- 
five or more years of functioning as a self—insured entity, 
the security provided to the state was never touched.
