James Brubacker 
640 Dover Road 
Dexter ME 04930 
PH (207)924-9779 
March 30,2023 
Greetings Senator Bailey,Representative Perry,and other members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial 
Services. 
First,I am James Brubacker,resident of Dexter.As a people often called 
Mennonites, but most importantly Christians, we are grateful for general 
law and order maintained by +he State, and we esteem automobile financial 
responsibility as a part of that. 
We take this opportunity to appeal or ask for recognition of financial 
responsibility outside of insurance company involvement, such as LDIOO4 
proposes. As a church community of 63 persons, would it be possible somehow 
to self—insure approximately 18 vehicles? 
As a people, we pattern,our mutual sharing after the early Christians 
(see note#l) as we face various calamities: fire, hospitalization, or auto 
liabilities. We interact with other congregations across state lines, 
giving and receiving material help, and God in heaven has always provided 
for us. - 
We are not necessarily looking for a lower cost option than auto insurance. 
Even if the overall cost of self—insurance exceeds what insurance premiums 
would,it is our conviction that insurance companies cannot rightly or 
accurately represent us in settling claims in our name. It is important 
to us that we settle liabilities within Jesus’ teaching to "Agree with 
thine adversary quickly" (see note#2), Qven if that means Settling quite 
a bit higher than apparent damages, or taking responsibility even though 
there is a question of fault, 
I came from Pennsylvania where there has been official reco9ﬂiti°n for 
such mutual sharing plans since 1972, At least 19 states give such recog- 
HibiOn,though varying some in the means and methods- ' ' ‘ S:-2? 
In most of these 18 states, certain securities are held by the state,(ﬂMe3) 
against default. Liabilities are paid without touching those securities. 
LDIOO4 calls for securities held by the state, although not specifying 
whether those assets would be provided by way of a Bank's irrevocable 
letter of credit, or by cash deposit. Either way,if those securities 
were ever drawn against for paying auto liabilities, we understand that 
the self—insurance status would be immediately jeopardized or even 
revoked. 
I want to thank this committee for the opportunity to speak on 
behalf of our cause. If this bill is not considered worthy of consider- 
ation, are there other conditions or adjustments that might make 
it more worthy? 
Thank—you, and I would be glad to try to answer questions. 
#1 Acts 4:34,35 :"Neither was there any among them that lacked; ' 
for as many as were possessors of lands and houses sold 
them, and brought the prices of the things that were sold, 
And laid them down at the apostles ’ feet: and distribution 
was made unto every man according as he had need." 
#2 Matthew 5:25 :"Agree with thine adversary quickly,whiles 
thou art in the way with him ..." 
Matthew5:4O,41 :"And if any man sue thee at the law, and 
take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. And 
whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain? 
#3'A few states such as Tennessee do not require any securities 
to be held that way, but issue selfminsurance status on ¢ 
the basis of past record( reference Tenn 55--12-~1l1)~
