Shepherds River Mennonite Church  
Old County Road  
Brownfield, ME 04010  
 
 
March 28, 2023  
 
Testimony in support of: LD1004.  
 
To the State of Maine Legislative Body,  
 
First, we wish to thank you for your help and interest in this issue. We as a congregation did reach out 
to the Maine Secretary of State in early 2015, asking for consideration with the self-insurance  issue. 
They kindly responded on March 16, 2015, with information regarding the current self -insurance 
provision in Maine law. We responded by stat ing that the current requirements for self -insurance would 
be prohibitive for us, requiring security in excess of three million, just for our congregation. We asked 
if there is anything further that could be offered, and did not receive a reply. We are gra teful the issue is 
again being considered, and especially thank those who are sponsoring this bill.  
 
About the Shepherds River congregation, we are part of a larger Mennonite body, the Eastern 
Pennsylvania Mennonite Church. Our group has had a long standin g practice of mutual aid, where we 
lift voluntary offerings to support one another. It is the conviction of this church body, as well as 
numerous other conservative Mennonite and Amish groups, that the church is Scripturally responsible 
to assist its membe rs in case of losses and that members should not rely on insurance companies to 
provide relief from disaster. We seek to live by the scripture that calls us to “bear ye one another’s 
burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ” (Galatians 6:2).  
 
This Scriptu ral approach to meeting one another’s needs has been recognized by various government 
jurisdictions. The federal government, for example, has allowed members of the Eastern Mennonite 
Church, as well as similar Mennonite and Amish groups, to be exempted fro m Social Security for more 
than forty years. A number of states have recognized the Eastern Pennsylvania Mennonite Church’s 
approach regarding automobile insurance. For example, the states of Maryland, Massachusetts, 
Pennsylvania, and Georgia have recogniz ed our group as being self -insured. In Pennsylvania, liens 
have been placed on property as security for the state to recognize this self -insurance status. Those 
liens have never been exercised in over 40 years, because the needs have been satisfactorily me t 
through free will offerings.  
 
We would be very grateful if there could be legislative accommodatio n for our religious convictions, 
and we thank you for considering this need.  
 
Marvin Zimmerman, Pastor  
Clarence Martin, Jr., Pastor  
Jonathan Siegrist, Deaco n 
