March 30, 2023 
Senator Bailey, and Representative Perry, and members of the Committee 
on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services. 
I am Paul Nolt, a minister in the Mennonite church in the 
Corinna/Dexter area of Maine. I speak in support of LDlOO4. I thank 
Representative Foster for his efforts in drafting this bill. I also 
thank this legislative body for the opportunity of giving a testimony in 
both written and oral form. I believe our written testimony has already 
been made available to all who are here. 
I am 73 years old. My wife and I were married in l973, just short 
of 50 years ago. We have 7 children, who are all married and are raising 
their own families now. We have a goodly number of grandchildren. I 
applied for a 4029 exemption from Social Security tax in 1971, and was 
granted that exemption shortly thereafter. In doing so, I signed away 
all privileges of ever receiving Social Security and Medicare benefits, 
as well as any benefits from any other public or private insurance. 
I still am able to work and have been able, with God's help, to 
provide for most of our needs. I have been self—employed almost all of 
my adult life. Our children have helped supply for some of our needs, 
especially over the past few years. We did receive some help through our 
church affiliation a few times over the years to help with hospital 
bills. Our children and our grandchildren are very ready to help us 
whenever we have needs we cannot meet. Some of them live in distant 
states, but they come to visit fairly often and are always ready to help 
then, or to sent help from a distance at times, also. Several of our 
children and their families live in Maine and make themselves very 
helpful if there is anything we find difficult to do ourselves. My wife 
and I find this all to be a very satisfactory arrangement, and we have 
no fears for future provisions even though we receive no government 
money and would not be able to do so even if we would choose to do so, 
which we do not. Above all, though, our trust is in the promises and 
provisions of Almighty God. We do realize that unforeseen circumstances 
such as national disasters, losses from storms, thefts, or other such 
things could come to be our portion, as it could for anyone else. 
A number of years ago one of our sons was involved in a vehicle 
accident in which he was at fault. In order to be peaceful we agreed to 
pay some over $100,000 to settle the case. With the help of various 
individuals and churches, that was all made up and paid for in a fairly 
timely manner. 
We desire to humbly and faithfully take our places in ongoing life 
as we have sought to do in the past. We would count it a real privilege 
to be granted approval for our church group as LDl004 outlines. Thank 
you again for this opportunity to speak and for considering this matter. 
I would be glad to try to answer any questions you may have. 
Y Respectfully yours, 
WW’ .5’ . /M1“ 
Paul S. Nolt
