g , HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
1; gig; 3 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Maureen Fitzgerald Terry TTY: Maine Relay 711 
9 Lombard Street 
Gorham, ME 04038 
Cell Phone: 712-9735 
Maureen.Ter1y@legislature.maine. gov 
February 13, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Maureen Terry presenting 
LD 265, An Act to Provide Support Services for Military Members Transitioning to 
Civilian Life in Maine 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal A_/fairs 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and esteemed colleagues on the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs, I am Maureen Terry, representing part of Gorham in 
House District 108. I am proud to be here to present LD 265, An Act to Provide Support 
Services for Military Members Transitioning to Civilian Life in Maine. 
In the 130th legislature this committee and the whole legislature approved an appropriation of 
$200,000 to help recruit newly retired military members from all over the country to come live 
and work in the state of Maine. This was a pilot program to see if this kind of work would be 
successful in bringing new families with solid work experience and the desire to lay roots in this 
incredible state to Maine. 
The pilot program was a huge success. With that small appropriation dozens of new families 
have made the move to Maine, helping to add a $45 million return on investment to the state. 
Boots2Roots is one such organization doing this incredible work. They partner with companies 
and community development organizations including Live and Work Maine, Dead River 
Company, Bath Iron Works, Northern Light Health, Unum and many others, to cormect veterans 
and their families to meaningful employment, helping them integrate seamlessly into 
communities across the state. They are now also partnering with a range of educational 
institutions like The Landing School, Maine Upward Bound and the Roux Institute to help even 
more retiring military members and their families ﬁnd opportunities in Maine. 
As of this time last year, Boots2Roots had already supported almost 200 families in relocating to 
Maine, resulting in roughly 500 new Mainers entering the workforce, including transitioning 
service members, their spouses and working-aged children. These families share the unparalleled 
work ethic and sense of grit that Mainers are so well known for, making this a natural ﬁt. 
District I08: Gorham (part)
During a time when so many businesses across the state are struggling to hire and retain quality 
employees, organizations like Boots2Roots don’t just beneﬁt the retiring service members, but 
they also provide a sorely needed beneﬁt to the state by fostering connection between dedicated 
and hardworking individuals and businesses experiencing massive workforce shortages. 
Supporting these efforts is a Win-win for all of us, and I am so proud to continue to advocate for 
this work. 
Thank you and I’m happy to answer any questions you may have.
