STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC  
AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT  
 
JANET T. MILLS                                        HEATHER JOHNSON  
                                GOVERNOR                                                                               COMMISSIONER  
 
59 STATE HOUSE STATION•AUGUSTA•MAINE•04333 -0059  
PHONE : (207)  624-9800•FACSIMILE : (207)  287-2681    
WWW .MAINE .GOV/DECD  
February 13, 202 3 
 
Senator Craig Hickman  
Representative Laura Supica  
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Dear Senator Hickman , Representative Supica , and members of the Committee on Veterans and 
Legal Affairs ,  
 
I am writing regarding LD 265, An Act to Provide Support Services for Military Members 
Transitioning to Civilian Life in Maine . This bill would provide ongoing funding for efforts to 
help veterans transition to civilian life in Maine. Funding for this purpose was provided through 
Public Law 2021, Chapter 483 , An Act To Provide Allocations for the Distribution of State 
Fiscal Recovery Funds , also referred to as the Maine Jobs and Recovery Plan , using federal 
money for a pilot project. Those funds came through our department and were awarded to 
Boots2Roots, a local organization I believe you will hear from today.  We will be subm itting a 
report on the outcomes of those funds to the Legislature in December of this year.  
 
Connecting veterans into the Maine workforce  is vital work both to provide deserved services to 
our veterans and to boost our economy. It is excellent to see organizations bridging the gap 
between veterans and jobs in Maine, providing a key pathway to our workforce at a time when 
employers across the state are trying to hire. Maine can boast one of the lowest veterans’ 
unemployment rates in the nation —something that is aided by proactive efforts to place veterans 
directly into jobs when they transition out of the military.  
 
On a pr actical note, if the committee wishes to move this legislation for ward, you may consider 
amending the language to have the funding continue to flow through our department. The existing 
funding for this purpose flows  through DECD , and we would be able to handle future funding with 
minimal disruption.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Phoenix McLaughlin  
Tax Incentive Policy Manager  

