 
 
 
 
     May 9
th, 2023 
 Re: LD 328, An Act to Improve Mental Health in Maine    Thank you, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, an d distinguished Committee Me mbers for accepting this 
testimony in support of LD 320. My name is Ben Strick.  I am a licensed clinical social worker and the Senior 
Director of Adult Behavioral He alth for Spurwink Services.  
 
Assertive Community Treatment (ACT) is an evidence-b ased practice designed to help individuals with 
serious mental illness, like schizoph renia, live in the community rather than a psychiatric hospital.  It is 
the highest level of community -based care available.   
 
Evidence based practices are scient ifically validated treatment models  that generate superior results 
when followed with fidelity.  For ACT, fidelity is measured using the Dartmouth Assertive Community 
Treatment Scale (DACTS).  The intent  of this bill is to do one thing: improve care for vulnerable Mainers 
by aligning MaineCare regulati ons with the DACTS.      
 
MaineCare recently took hu ge steps towards ACT progra m sustainability by impr oving rates and shifting 
from a daily to weekly rate.  Unfortunately, the Ma ineCare guidance concerning these changes included 
an overly restrictive definition of how face-to-face contacts are counted, and disallowed billing for 
outreach, both in clear co nflict with the DACTS.  
 
Approximately a quarter of Spurwink’s ACT client pa nel is homeless at any give n time. Of those who are 
homeless, over 80% struggle with a co-occurring substance use disorder.  Each of these clients requires 
hours of weekly outreach at differen t campsites around the county.  Even with this outreach, it is hard to 
meet MaineCare’s billing requirements for these client s.  And while we average 3.3 face-to-face contacts 
per week across our client panel, MaineCare requirements make it so we are unable to bill for 25 percent 
of our most vulnerable clients.  We  want to continue serving these cl ients with full fidelity to the ACT 
model but will be unable to without a MaineC are structure that suppo rts the service.   
 
I’ve attached DACTS fidelity standards and MaineCare guidance to my testimony.   I respectfully request 
you support this legislation and help us serve so me of our highest-needs community members.   
 
 Thank you for your time and consideration,   
 
 
 
BENJAMIN STRICK, LCSW  
Senior Director of Adult Behavioral Health  
207.871.1200 x 3160 | 207.615.2146 (c) |207.871.1232 (f) 
62 Elm Street Portland, Maine 04101 
www.spurwink.org  
 
January  1, 2023 Behavioral Health Rate A djustments Frequent ly Asked 
Questions  
 
Updated April 14, 2023  
 
 
I. General  
 
1. How will Program Integrity incorporate the recent changes into their reviews of 
providers?  
Answer : Program Integrity is aware of ongoing communications regarding changes to 
rates and billing guidance and will take those communications into account and exercise 
enforcement discretion as relevant and appropriate for any reviews that include dates of 
service during this period.           
 
2. Will there be an opportunity to comment on the rate models proposed for the final 
rates?   
Answer:  Pursuant to 2021 P.L. ch. 639, the Department accepted and will be responding 
to the public comment on the Burns rate mode l and has taken these comments into 
consideration in determination of the final rates.  The Department will be posting 
responses to public comment on the rate model in early February. In addition, the rate 
changes that were implemented on January 1, 2023, will still go through the 
Administrative Procedures Act (APA) rulemaking process which includes notification of 
proposed rulemaking, a public hearing, and opportunities to submit comments prior to 
rule adoption. For additional information please refer to t he proposed rules page . 
 
 
II. Section 17, Assertive Community Treatment (ACT) Services  
 
1. How will Kepro handle  the transition from authorizations under the old  units to 
authorization under the new units?  
Answer :  Providers should  continue to use their existing authorizations  and should bill 
for services using  the new weekly unit rate. Kepro will end the original authorization on 
February 19, 2023, and will create a new authorization starting on February 20, 2023, that 
will be set up for weekly billing units.  
 
2. Do we need to have collateral contacts on non -face-to-face days to bill the week?  
Answer: Collateral contacts are not required on non -face-to-face days to bill the weekly 
rate. However, provider s must  deliver  services  as needed based  on the individualized 
treatment needs of the member which may include collateral contact on non -face-to-face 
days. As described in Section 17.04 -3, ACT provides individualized intensive integrated 
services that are delivered by a multi -disciplinary team o f practitioners and are available 
twenty -four (24) hours a day, every day, three hundred and sixty -five (365) days a year. 
ACT services are delivered primarily in the community and not in an office - based 
setting. Assertive interventions, including street outreach, are employed by the team as 
2 
 appropriate. ACT teams must provide at least , on average , three (3) face -to-face contacts 
per week with each member.  
 
3. How do we bill week of intake/discharge or weeks with hospitalization or jail?  
Answer:  The expectation is that providers will meet the monthly calendar average of 
three (3) contacts per week, as described in Section 17.04 -3. This flexibility allows for 
occurrences such as those listed in this question that may prevent a provider from having 
three contacts with a member every week. In cases where the provider is unable to meet 
with a member three (3) times in one week, the provider must clearly document in the 
member’s record why the three (3) contacts did not occur. Examples of information 
provid ers may include in documentation to support why three contacts were not possible 
in a week include, but are not limited to:  
• Provider did not have contact with the member but made multiple attempts to reach 
and meet with the member, including instances where the member was unexpectedly 
unavailable or the contact occurred through a closed door.  
• There were contacts with the member  to transition the member to another level of care, 
and the member transitioned prior to having at least 3 contacts with the providers.  
 
4. If we don’t hit the minimum threshold for face -to-face monthly  average of three (3) 
contacts per week, can we bill the full week if we document the reasons why in the 
clinical record?  
Answer:  As stated in the MaineCare Benefits Manual Chapter II, Section 17.04 -3, 
providers must ensure that the delivery of services me ets the minimum standard of a 
calendar monthly average of three (3) face -to-face contacts per week. A provider may not 
bill for a week if they have not met this standard , even if they document the reason for 
not meeting the requirement in the member’s reco rd.  
 
5. Does outreach still count as face to face as indicated in Section 17?  
Answer:  Outreach does not count as a face -to-face contact.   Providers may still bill 
during a week when they have conducted outreach but not met the three contacts with the 
member, as long as they are still meeting the requirement to average three contacts per 
week. The provider should clearly document all outreach  attempts.  
 
6. How do I know if I can bill for a week for a member if I do not yet know whether I 
will meet the requirement to average three (3) contacts a week for the month?  
Answer: You may either hold weekly claims until the end of the month to determine 
billable weeks, or you may determine on a rolling week by week basis whether you have 
met the requirement for the past month.  
 
III. Section 28 , Rehabilitative and Community Support Services for Children with  
Cognitive Impairments and Functional Limitations  
 
1. What is the difference between providers of school health related services that are 
subject to Service Provider Tax (SPT) versus SPT exempt?  
3 
 Answer: Exemptions to the Service Provider tax are detailed in  Maine Revised Statutes, 
Title 36, Chapter 358: Service Provider Tax . Providers may consult with their tax 
attorney and/or accountant to determine the appropriate tax laws applicable to their 
circumstance.  Additional information can be found at the Maine Revenue Services  
webpa ge.  
 
2. What Board Certified Behavior Analyst  (BCBA ) services are required/included in 
the new “bundled rate ?” 
Answer:  Providers of BCBA services  will continue to adhere to the requirements 
outlined in Section 28, to include the delivery of BCBA services in connection with 
Specialized Services for Children with Cognitive Impairments and Functional 
Limitations (Specialized Services). The BCBA is resp onsible for the supervision and 
delivery of the Specialized Services. For specific BCBA service definitions, please refer 
to Section 28.04 -3.  
 
3. Can an approved specialized RCS provider bill for BCBA services for any youth 
who is not receiving specialized s ervices from the agency?    
Answer : BCBA services must be delivered as part of an approved specialized services 
program. Section 28 does not provide for billing of “stand -alone ” BCBA services. As a 
result of the rate study, we now have a code that could be used to bill this service if it is 
added through rulemaking in the future.  
 
4. (New – 2/10/23)  For community -based services that have new modifiers, will 
providers need to request new prior authorizations  for one -to-one codes ? 
Answer: Kepro will automatically end -date authorizations, effective 2/19/23, copy the 
case of the member, and create new authorizations with correct coding and the original 
end date/units.    
. 
5. (New – 2/17/23)  Will providers need to submit new PAs with the new codes? 
Answer: Providers must  end existing authorizations effective February 19, 2023  and 
request new PAs with the new codes. Providers must  update the unit requests to reflect 
current utilization.  
 
6. (New – 2/17/23)  Will providers need to request new authorizations to bill for one -to-
one and group modifiers?  
Answer: Providers do not need to request new authorizations to add group modifiers. 
Providers will continue to bill using the group modifiers at the claims level . When one -
to-one services require a modifier, providers must  submit the modifier with the 
authorization.  
 
IV. Section 65 , Behavioral Health Services  
 
1. Why were there no rate increased for psychiatric medication management services 
despite Burns’ guidance recommending significant increases in rates for medication 
management services provided by physicians?  
4 
 Answer : Burns recommend ed reintroduc ing separate  medication management rates for 
physicians versus non physicians (nurse practitioners, physician assistants). The change 
from the currently “blended” rate model effective October 1, 2021 where there is a single 
rate for both physicians and non -physicians would have been a decrease for non -
physicians and an increase for physicians. Due to maintenance of effort (MoE) 
requirements associated with Section 9817 of the American Rescue Plan, the Department 
may not implement the rate decrease at this time.  It doe s not make sense to have the 
current blended model apply only to non -physicians when it was intended to be a rate that 
would cover physicians as well. As such, for at least as long as the Section 9817 MoE 
requirements are in place through the end of March 2025, the single blended rate 
approach will remain in place.  
 
2. Why are there no longer Bachelor’s and Master’s level rates for Outpatient Services 
provided by Licensed Alcohol and Drug Counselors (LADCs)?   
Answer : The rate model for Outpatient Services pro vided by an LADC was developed 
by determining  a straight  average wage assumption calcula ted from the LADC  
Bachelor’s Degree and LADC  Master’s degree , in alignment with the fact that  LADC 
licensure includes various educational and experience requirements (32 M.R.S.A. 
§§6212, 6214 -D, 6216).  
 
3. Should providers bill Triple P and Incredible Years services under HCT or 
Outpatient?  
Answer:  Providers should continue to bill  Triple P and Incredible Years under Section 
65.05 -17, Behavioral Therapies for Children with Disruptive Behavior Disorders.  
 
4. What is the approved place of service code for Outpatient Services provided in the 
community?  
Answer: Providers should use t he “99” place of service code to designate Outpatient 
Services delivered in the community.  
 
5. Are child -serving agencies now able to bill for Dialectic Behavior Therapy provided 
to children under Specialized Group Services?  
Answer : The eligibility for Specializ ed Group Services has not changed and continues to 
be for members aged eighteen (18) or older or emancipated minors, as described in 
Section 65.05 -16 (A).  
 
6. What is “HCT -OCFS funded” referring to?    
Answer:  This refers to OCFS Child Welfare contracts with HCT providers services 
outside of MaineCare -funded services.  
 
7. For providers who serve high hours of HCT in tough cases can MaineCare  add to 
the rule to allow an hourly billing once a member hits the ten hours in a week that 
the weekly rate  assumes ? 
Answer:   The HCT rate model is based on the weekly average  of members served per 
BHP (5) and per Clinician (6), not on the estimated number of hours each member 
receives services  throughout the week . The weekly case rate was developed using 
5 
 averages and recognizes the variability in treatment needs and time required to provide 
services across the caseload mix at this level of care. If the member requires more 
intensive treatment, it may be that the member requires a higher level of care.  
 
8. (New – 2/10/23) What will happen to current authorizations that have a code or 
modifier  that is no longer used?  
Answer:   For outpatient services, Kepro will end -date all existing authorizations with 
codes and modif iers no longer being used on February 19, 2023.  The provider will need 
to submit a new registration and align existing end -dates with current authorizations.   
 
For comprehensive assessment services, Kepro will end -date all comprehensive 
assessment codes on February 19, 2023 . Providers will exhaust existing comp assessment 
authorizations  then will need to submit a new authorization request.  
 
9. (New – 2/10/23) If a member is receiving co -occurring services for both substance 
use outpatient therapy AND mental health outpatient the rapy, will you deny the 
authorizations?  
Answer:   No. Kepro has a standard practice to  block duplication based on service 
description. For example: If one LCSW/LCPC is providing mental health outpatient 
services  and another LCSW/LCPC is providing substance use outpatient services , the 
second cli nician providing the additional service must contact Kepro so that Kepro can 
create a shell case.  A shell case is when Kepro puts in a request that is duplicative so the 
provider can submit the rationale for why there are two services for the same dates and 
time.    
 
10. (New – 2/10/23)  For children ’s behavioral health day treatment  services , will 
providers need to request new  authorizations from Kepro for one -to-one codes?  
Answer:   Providers are required to exhaust units in the existing authorization then submit 
a new Continued Stay Review ( CSR ) when units are exhausted  or an  end-date is due.   
 
11. (New – 2/10/23)  Will HCT providers be required to follow the same billing guidance 
and service requirements as adult ACT services (Section 17)?  
Answer:  Although  there are similarities between the Section 17, Adult ACT services and 
Section 65, HCT services, the guidance is not exactly the same.  
 
For HCT services,  all expectations included in the  MaineCare Benefits Manual  Chapter 
II, Section 65.09 continue to apply. Additionally, providers should aim for a monthly 
average of three face -to-face or telehealth contacts per week, of which at least one 
contact per  week is a clinical intervention with the clinician. Qualifying contacts are 
interventions provided by a treatment team member (clinician and/or BHP), which 
directly address the youth’s identified treatment goals and may include collateral contacts 
as defi ned in Section 65.05 -10. 
 
12. (New – 2/17/23) How will MaineCare retroactively reimburse providers for HCT 
services provided by an HCT clinician?  
6 
 Answer:  Kepro will end date old codes on February 19, 2023 a nd create new 
authorizations retroactively  to January 1, 2023. Providers will continue to bill under 
existing authorizations until February 19, then must utilize the new authorization for 
services provided on or after February 20, 2023 . Providers must  adjust their claims after 
the new authorization  is granted (after February 20 ) to bill with the new codes  and 
modifiers , as well as the appropriate service model (weekly bundled rate and/or 
outpatient services -community) , with the newly approved authorization.  
 
13. (New – 2/17/23)  Is Sunday through Saturday a n appropriate timeframe for a weekly  
billing cycle and c an providers submit claims with overlapping weeks between 
monthly cycles ?  
Answer: The claims system can accommodate overlapping weeks between months. The 
system does not restrict a week to be Sunday through Saturday as long as  the minimum 
requirements are met to bill for the weekly rate.  
 
14. (New – 2/17/23) Is there a process to transfer children receiving “Clinician -only” 
HCT services to Outpatient Community Services?    
Answer:  Kepro will process services t ransitioning from “Clin ician only” HCT services 
the same as request s for outpatient therapy. No referral is needed for outpatient services . 
The provider enters  the required information into the Atrezzo system for an initial 
registration and continued stay reviews , as well as a community place of service location 
instead  of the office as the place of service .  
 
15. (New – 2/17/23) If the HCT team loses the BHP mid -treatment, but intends to rehire 
for that position, must they close the HCT case and reopen it as Outpatient 
Community Services?    
Answer:  If the HCT team loses their BHP staffing, the provider has two options, based 
on clinical necessity and family choice. The provider can:  
a. End date the HCT case and create a community -based outpatient case, OR  
b. Adjust the number of clinician hours required to meet the service requirements and 
treatment needs of the member until a BHP is hired.  
 
16. (New – 2/17/23)  Are all HCT providers automatically eligible to bill for Outpatient 
Services delivered in the Community?  
Answer : Clinicians who provide HCT services are also allowed to provide outpatient 
services and bill the appropriate code (H0004  or H2000 ) and modifier combinations , 
based on the clinician credential specific to the services delivered.  
 
17. (New – 2/17/2023)  What are the billing requirements a nd reimbursement rates for 
Outpatient Services delivered in the community?  
Answer:  Providers must meet a ll expectations included in the  MaineCare Benefits 
Manual  Chapter II, Section 65.0 5-3, that apply  to outpatient services delivered in the 
community. O utpatient services delivered in the community include the following  
procedure codes and modifiers : 
 
7 
 Procedure 
Code  Modifier(s)  Code Description  Unit of 
Service  Rate  
Outpatient Services - Comprehensive Assessment - Community  
H2000  AH U2  Psychologist  15 min  $38.37  
H2000  HO U2  LCSW/ LCPC/ LMFT  15 min  $31.26  
H2000  U2 Deaf Services  15 min  $40.17  
H2000  HN U2  LADC  15 min  $28.99  
H2000  HM U2  CADC  15 min  $24.20  
Outpatient Services - Individual/Family Therapy - Community  
H0004  AH U2  Psychologist  15 min  $38.37  
H0004  HO U2  LCSW/ LCPC/ LMFT  15 min  $31.26  
H0004  U2 Deaf Services  15 min  $40.17  
H0004  HN U2  LADC  15 min  $28.99  
H0004  HM U2  CADC  15 min  $24.20  
H0004  ST U2  Trauma -Focused Cognitive 
Behavioral Therapy  15 min  $38.55  
 
18. (New – 2/17/2023)  How will changes to Outpatient Services delivered in the 
community impact providers, members, and central enrollment requirements?  
Answer: Providers enrolled as a Mental Health Agency, a Substance Use Agency, or an 
Independent Practitioner can now all deliver outpatient services in the community . These 
changes may improve  members’  access to services as more MaineCare enrolled providers 
can offer servic es, including substance use related services, in the community. 
Additionally,  members are not subject to  central enrollment requirements  for outpatient 
services , which may assist with a reduction in members’ wait times to receive services , 
further improvin g access to services .  
 
19. (New – 2/17/2023)  What are the performance measures  and reporting requirements  
for HCT ? How do providers bill for services before  the Department defines and 
communicates the  performance measures?  
Answer:  The Department will propose  changes  to payment structures through the formal 
rulemaking process, which will include a public comment period  for stakeholders to offer 
feedback.  New performance metrics and performance -based payment provisions will not 
begin until the Department has formally adopted a final rule . 
 
20. (New – 2/17/2023)  How are HCT contacts defined with clinician, BHP, collateral, 
and telehealth contacts? Are there minimum time requirements for each?  
Answer:  HCT services delivered to a member are based on level of care needs, not on a  
minimum amount of time spent with the member per contact.  HCT services are designed 
to meet the member’s individualized treatment needs delivered through a combination of 
medica lly necessary clinical interventions an d may include  the following:  
• individual therapy session(s) for the identified child,  
• family therapy session(s),  
• treatment team /stakeholder meetings , and/or  
• collateral contacts .   
8 
 The HCT treatment team (clinician or BHP)  provides services that include at least one  
face-to-face or telehealth contact with a clinician and a monthly average of three face -to-
face or telehealth contacts per week.  These services are not separately billable, as they are 
incorporated into th e weekly  rate of reimbursement.  
 
21. (New - 3/7/2023)  Does the covering clinician who provides outpatient services to my 
clients when I am out need to submit a new authorization?   
Answer:  If the covering clinician has the same credentials as the primary clinician, then a 
new PA is not required. For example,  if the primary clinician is an LCPC, and the 
covering clinician is also an LCPC, a new authorization is not required and that provider 
may bill under the active PA. If the covering clinician has a different credential (for 
example, psychologist is coverin g for an LCPC), the covering clinician must submit a 
new PA.  
 
22. (New - 3/7/2023)  Can Section 65 providers submit one authorization for all services 
for all outpatient services provided in the office, community and/or group setting, or 
are separate authorizations required for each service location?  
 
Answer:  For initial Prior Authoriza tions (PA), providers may submit one PA to request 
all services whether delivered in the office, community and/or group setting. When 
registering for outpatient services with Kepro, the provider may indicate one or more 
settings in which the service may be  delivered on a single authorization.   
 
23. (New - 3/7/2023)  When will the Kepro Atrezzo system show changes to the new 
service modifiers?  
Answer: Effective February 20, 2023, Kepro updated the Atrezzo system to reflect the 
changes to the service codes and modifiers.  
 
24. (New – 4/04/23) How will Kepro handle existing authorizations for specialized 
groups?  
Answer:  Kepro end -dated existing specialized authorizations as of February 19, 2023. 
Providers must  resubmit a new registration with a start date of February 20, 2023.  
 
25. (New – 4/04/23) How will Kepro handle authorizations for Triple P, PCIT and 
Incredible Years behavioral therapies?  
Answer: Kepro end -dated existing authorizations as of February 19, 2023. Kepro created 
new authorizations by copying  the existing case s and align ed existing end dates with the 
number of units/sessions stated in the MaineCare Benefits Manual.  Providers are required 
to submit  a Continued Stay Review  (CSR ) off the newly created cases and stagger the 
end dates.  What this means is that w hen you submit you r request, please do not have your 
end dates all on the same date , as this would make them due all on the same day for their 
next continued stay. Please evenly distribute (stagger) your end date request s so all 
requests do not expire on the same day.  
26. (New – 4/14/23) How should providers approach HCT billing for services provided 
from January 1, 2 023 until final updates to Section 65 are adopted?  
9 
 Answer : For HCT services,  all requirements set forth in the MaineCare Benefits Manual  
Chapter II, Section 65 continue to apply.  These baseline requirements include that 
providers render services  at a level  of care consistent with the member’s clinical needs, in 
accordance with the provisions of the HCT service model, based on the comprehensive 
assessment and as identified in the individualized treatment plan. Specifically, Section 
65.05 -9 provides that HCT is for members in need of mental health treatment based in the 
home and community who need a higher intensity service than Outpatient  Services  but a 
lower intensity than Children’s ACT  Services, and Section 65.05 -9A provides clinical 
eligibility standards for the service.  
 
The Department has suggested that providers should aim for a monthly average of three 
face-to-face or telehealth contacts per week, of which at least one contact per week is a 
clinical intervention with the clinician. Qualifying contacts are interventions provided by 
a treatment team member (clinician and/or BHP), which directly address the youth’s 
identified treatment goals and may include collateral conta cts as defined in Section 
65.05 -10. 
 
It is the Department’s intention to update Section 65 this year and additional specific 
guidelines may take effect at that time. Until the rule is updated and in effect, providers 
that have delivered services consistent  with Section 65 may bill the weekly rate for 
services even if they have not met the monthly average suggestions.  Providers may not 
bill the weekly rate for any week in which they do not deliver HCT services.  
 
Benjamin Strick
Spurwink
LD 328
May 9th, 2023
Re: LD 328, An Act to Improve Mental Health in Maine  
Thank you, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished Committee 
Members for accepting this testimony in support of LD 320. My name is Ben Strick.  
I am a licensed clinical social worker and the Senior Director of Adult Behavioral 
Health for Spurwink Services. 
Assertive Community Treatment (ACT) is an evidence-based practice designed to 
help individuals with serious mental illness, like schizophrenia, live in the community
rather than a psychiatric hospital.  It is the highest level of community-based care 
available.  
Evidence based practices are scientifically validated treatment models that generate 
superior results when followed with fidelity.  For ACT, fidelity is measured using the 
Dartmouth Assertive Community Treatment Scale (DACTS).  The intent of this bill is
to do one thing: improve care for vulnerable Mainers by aligning MaineCare 
regulations with the DACTS.     
MaineCare recently took huge steps towards ACT program sustainability by 
improving rates and shifting from a daily to weekly rate.  Unfortunately, the 
MaineCare guidance concerning these changes included an overly restrictive 
definition of how face-to-face contacts are counted, and disallowed billing for 
outreach, both in clear conflict with the DACTS. 
Approximately a quarter of Spurwink’s ACT client panel is homeless at any given 
time. Of those who are homeless, over 80% struggle with a co-occurring substance 
use disorder.  Each of these clients requires hours of weekly outreach at different 
campsites around the county.  Even with this outreach, it is hard to meet MaineCare’s 
billing requirements for these clients.  And while we average 3.3 face-to-face contacts
per week across our client panel, MaineCare requirements make it so we are unable to
bill for 25 percent of our most vulnerable clients.  We want to continue serving these 
clients with full fidelity to the ACT model but will be unable to without a MaineCare 
structure that supports the service.  
I’ve attached DACTS fidelity standards and MaineCare guidance to my testimony.  I 
respectfully request you support this legislation and help us serve some of our 
highest-needs community members.  
Thank you for your time and consideration,  
BENJAMIN STRICK, LCSW
Senior Director of Adult Behavioral Health
207.871.1200 x 3160 | 207.615.2146 (c) |207.871.1232 (f)
62 Elm Street
Portland, Maine 04101
www.spurwink.org

