May 10, 2023 
Testimony Submitted by:  
Catherine R. Ryder, MSED, LCPC, ACS 
Chief Executive Officer, Tri-County Mental Health Services (TCMHS) 
 
Testimony in support of; LD 328 "An Act to Improve Mental Health in Maine” 
SUMMARY: 328:  This bill brings MaineCare regulations into alignment with Dartmouth 
Assertive Community Treatment Scale fidelity items, ensuring high-quality, evidence based 
Assertive Community Treatment (ACT) services for Maine residents with psychotic disorders 
and high needs.   
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the committee, 
Good morning, 
My name is Catherine Ryder and I serve as the chief executive officer for Tri-County Mental 
Health Services (TCMHS) which serves Western Maine and Northern Cumberland County.  I 
submit this testimony in support of LD 328, An Act to Improve Mental Health in Maine.  
TCMHS has provided Assertive Community Treatment (ACT) for over 30 years and was an 
early innovator in the state of Maine, deeply dedicated to those living with serious and persistent 
mental illness, who without such supportive services in the community might have lived their 
lives in locked institutions. We are committed to providing the highest quality of care in a 
manner which best meets the needs of those we serve.  
The current MaineCare standards for  ACT  have resulted in a program that is faltering 
financially, is clinically challenging, and which threatens program collapse. It is antithetical to 
what we know works, and so we ask you to carefully consider the language in LD 328 as a viable 
alternative to being fiscally and clinically accountable for the work we do.  
To aid your understanding, I am offering de-identified examples of services we have provided 
that do not meet the current MaineCare service definition, in spite of significant amounts of 
assertive outreach.  
Person 1: Currently off medication and decompensating. This person is refusing to allow staff in 
his apartment “without a warrant” and keeps the door closed at all times.                                                                              
18 attempted contacts, including weekends, with only 7 face-to-face contacts resulting in only 1 
billable week for the month. 
Person 2: Experiencing audio-visual hallucinations, delusions and disorganized thinking at 
baseline. Fears staff may be unsafe at his home due to his roommate and “ghosts”, so he has 
reduced the frequency he allows staff to visit. Does well processing his fears and worries on the 
phone, but is unable to follow through on appointments to meet someplace other than his home.                                                                                       
20 attempted contacts and only 4 face to face contacts resulting in only1 billable week for the 
month.  
Person 3: Engagement is impacted by substance misuse. We expected to meet on the final day of 
the month for the 12th required face to face contact, but were unable to locate him in spite of 
assertive outreach.                                                                                                                                       
Lost 2 weeks of billing for the month due to the loss of the 12th face to face contact.  
Person 4: Experiences baseline paranoia, delusions and auditory hallucinations; when 
unmedicated often loses housing and engages in threatening behavior. Struggles with 
disorganization including taking medication consistently, and although team delivers 5-6 times a 
week, is often difficult to locate.                                                                                                         
In April, of 23 attempts to deliver medication, this individual only received 10 doses and we 
were only able to bill for 2 of 4weeks. 
I share these examples so you can see the thoughtful actions and responses of our staff who 
provide compassionate care metered out with a “client first” approach. I hope you also see that 
for some we serve, imposing face to face contact is clinically contraindicated. We currently have 
over (80) individuals enrolled in our ACT team services, and would be most grateful for your 
support of this bill so that we may remain a viable program which is in question at this time. 
Thank you for hearing my testimony, and I’d be happy to answer any questions you may have.  
Catherine  
Catherine R. Ryder, LCPC, ACS 
Chief Executive Officer 
Tri-County Mental Health Services 
 
 
