 52 WATER STREET 
HALLOWELL, ME 04347 
(800) 464-5767 
 
 LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Sr. Clinical Director 
(207) 622-5767  ￿ HannahL@namimaine.org  POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
www.namimaine.org/advocacy 
POSITION STATEMENT IN SUPPORT  
LD 328: An Act to Improve Mental Health in Maine 
Presented to Maine’s Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
As the state’s largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine strongly supports 
the passage of An Act to Improve Mental Health in Maine.  NAMI Maine speaks to countless family 
members and peers living with Severe and Persistent Mental Illness each year navigating the mental 
health maze seeking treatment and support services to maintain stability in the community.  
While 1 in 40 Americans will experience a severe and persistent mental illness across their lifetime, less 
than half will receive an adequate and effective intervention prior to their illness progressing to the 
point of meeting criteria for a disability. Sadly 20% of young people who develop a severe and persistent 
mental illness receive their first formal intervention during an encounter with law enforcement. People 
who are admitted to the hospital due to severe and persistent mental illness are far more likely to be 
readmitted within a month’s time if they do not receive appropriate community-based services. The 
average cost of readmission due to a mood disorder is $7,100. It is currently estimated that the cost of 
untreated or undertreated mental health disorders costs the nation $300 billion a year. These numbers 
are staggering to think of the impact on the state and national economy.  
Assertive Community Treatment is an effective, evidence-based practice to support individuals with 
significant mental health needs in the community. Unfortunately, over the last 15-20 years, ACT services 
have received funding cuts resulting in an evidence-based treatment being delivered on a sub-standard 
funding scaling. As a result, the services being delivered have been altered in order to accommodate the 
budget available. Although ACT is still recognized as an evidence-based program, the services being 
delivered are not in line with what is best practice. The result has been increased interactions of ACT 
members with crisis services and law enforcement and unnecessary hospitalizations. Prior to the 
services receiving funding cuts, ACT Teams would respond in the community on nights and weekends, 
often eliminating the need for higher level, and more costly services, to become involved. Although the 
ACT teams strive to deliver the best possible services, without adequate funding they are not able to 
deliver to the level that many require.  
NAMI Maine appreciates that the State of Maine is in difficult fiscal position during these times. 
However, as funding has been decreased over the years, members receiving ACT have required higher 
levels of care, resulting in greater accrued costs to the state. We do not question medical best practice 
measures as it relates to physical health conditions such as cancer, heart disease, or diabetes; we should 
not question these interventions as it relates to severe mental illness either. ACT saves money spent on 
more restrictive treatment and supports successful community Integration of people living with a severe 
and persistent mental illness. 
                                                                           
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the National Alliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) is the state’s 
largest grassroots mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the agency is dedicated to 
building better lives for everyone impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine engages with leaders and community 
partners at all levels to improve the state’s mental health system through collaboration and education. 
