Nicole Grohoski P.O. Box 1732 
Senator, District 7 Ellsworth, ME 04605 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Testimony of Senator Nicole Grohoski 
In Support of LD 893, “An Act to Amend the Legislative Membership of the 
Hancock County Budget Advisory Committee ” 
Before the Committee on State and Local Government 
_ 
3 I ,1»4' March 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and esteemed members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on State and Local Government. My name is Nicole Grohoski, and I have 
the honor of serving the 22 coastal towns and island communities that make up Senate District 7, 
21 of which are in Hancock County. Today, I am pleased to introduce LD 893, “An Act to 
Amend the Legislative Membership of the Hancock County Budget Advisory Committee. ” 
This bill aims to clarify the selection process for the legislator who serves on the Hancock 
County Budget Advisory Committee. The Budget Advisory Committee has ten members: nine 
from around Hancock County, who each serve a three-year term, plus one legislator, who serves 
a one-year term. Each October, the Committee reviews the annual budget proposed by the 
County Commissioners and provides recommendations to the Commissioners. 
Currently, the process for selecting the legislative member is somewhat inefﬁcient and vague. 
Statute simply states: 
Legislative member. The Hancock County legislative delegation shall annually select one 
member of the delegation who resides in Hancock County to serve on the budget advisory 
committee. 
If passed, LD 893 would require the Hancock County legislative delegation to select their 
delegate to the Budget Advisory Committee by October 1, 2023, and every two years thereafter. 
This member would be selected by majority vote and serve for a period of two years. 
A two-year Committee term aligns well with a legislative term, and it provides more consistency 
for the whole Committee, whose other members serve for three years. It also speciﬁes how the 
delegation selects their member, which is currently not described in statute. 
3 State House Station, Augusta, Maine 04333 
State House (267) 287-1515 * Fax (ZO7) 287-1585 * Toll Free 1-800-423-6900 * TTY 711 
Nicole.Grohoski@legislature.maine.gov * legislature.rnaine.gov/senate
Additionally, if the selected member resigns from either the budget advisory committee or the 
Legislature before their two-year term is over, a new member will be chosen by the delegation to 
serve out the remaining tenn of ofﬁce. The delegation may also replace its selected member bya 
two-thirds vote from the delegation. 
This bill has the support of the entire Hancock County legislative delegation. As you will see in 
the attached memo, the Hancock County Commissioners defer to the consensus of the delegation 
on this matter. 
This bill provides clarity that will beneﬁt all concerned parties; therefore, I urge this committee 
to vote Ought to Pass. I have included an emergency preamble in the hopes that it might go into 
effect well in advance of the October 1, 2023 deadline as drafted. Thank you for your attention 
and I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
QOCK C0 CQUNTY OF HANCOCK ~==‘“' 
Q» c ' ' 
* 
orr Q; Ol'1'll’1’l1SSlO1’l€I‘S ICE I ' 
50 State Street, Suite7 
Ellsworth, Maine 04605 
/0 ~\ 
,1? ‘)1; flq‘ i‘ ' 
Learn more about HANCOCK COUNTY by visiting 
WWW.hancockcountymainegov 
Memo from the desk of Michael R. Crooker, County Administrator 
To: Senator Grohoski 
From: Michael Crooker, County Administrator 
RE: LD 893 
Date: March 7, 2023 
Thank you again for allowing the Commission the opportunity to provide comments related to LD 
893. As I indicated in December of last year, the general opinion of the Commissioners was that they 
would defer to the consensus of the delegation regarding changes in legislation related to this 
matter. The underlying feeling was that ultimately the member and process that is undertaken to 
designate a member of the legislative delegation to serve on the BAC ultimately should reside with 
the delegation. l hope that helps but please let me know if you need anything else.
