-I 
/52/(M12, A Senator Eloise Vitelli 
s’ 
, I 
Senate A/lo/' ority Leader 
’ 
d II 
3 Stare House Station 
» » r ' ' 
_ » 
Augzls/a, ME 04333-0003 
1 
‘%uke ' 
Q 0_;_7i@@(207)287-1515 
_._ @¢I4éa2't"Z4 t -I 
.r 
_ Testimony of Senator Eloise Vitelli introducing 
V _ 746, An Act to Modernize the State’s Vehicle Inspection System by 
‘Requiring Ir spections Biennially and Allowing for an Electronic Inspectionl 
V IIi 
t * 
A ' 
Program _V 
_- 
- 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
. ' 
March 16, 2023 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Esteemed Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Transportation, my name is Eloise Vitelli, and I proudly represent Senate District 
24, which includes all of Sagadahoc County and Dresden. Today I am pleased to introduce LD 
746, “An Act to Modernize the State’s Vehicle Inspection System by Requiring Inspections 
Biemiially "andIAlIlowing for an Electronic Inspection Program. ” .'
- 
.I 
Last year, a constituent contacted me and shared his idea for this bill.’ As this committee likely' 
knows" , the Legislaature has a long history of looking at the beneﬁts and costs of amiualr 
inspections. LD 746'adds to this history. It asks that we once again look to change the rules and, 
more importantly..update our systems to be more efficient and modern. 
The need to modt-rnize the system has never been more clear and urgent. In New England,Main_e 
is the last state Wl2ihOLlt a digital system to track car safety inspections. Each year, workers carry' 
boxes of stickersisinto their office and sort the serial numbers in Augusta. ’After that,-the State" 
sends vehicle inspection stickers to more than 2,600 cardealerships and repair shops. ‘ Staffuse a 
printout list and highlighters and pens to keep track of which dealership and shop receiveswhich 
stickers. They must mail back receipts, known as stub sheets, with handwritten information about 
which sticker has placed on which car. (Inspection stations are expected to keep photocopies on. 
their stub sheets on hand for two years.) In total, State Police employeescount and ﬁle more than 
amillion sheets of paper_ — allby hand' 
-—- and keep track of four million sheets.u 
A modern state vehicle inspection program would help the State, inspectors and mechanics, . 
police, and drivers. It would prevent abuse of the current system, and it could protect drivers 
from bad or. low-quality inspections. ’ It would ensure that mechanicsvare fairly compensated for 
conducting an inspection, without having taking on the burden of unpaid paperwork. It would 
help the State collect data and maintain records — without relying on a paper system from the 
p1'e-digital era.' 
_'
_ 
4. 
__ _' 
Thank you foryour time, I will do my best to answer any questions you may have.
El0ise’Vitelli A 
Senate Majority Leader,» Senate~Dist1'ict 24 
Sagadahoc County and Dresden .
