Michael  Guay
Biddeford 
LD 746
To Senator Ben Chipman, Senator Tim Nangle, Senator Brad Farrin and Members of 
the Transportation Committee, 
I am writing to you as a third-generation auto shop owner of Jim’s Auto Repair Shop 
in Biddeford, as well as the owner of various Sticker Station locations across southern
Maine which conduct annual Maine state vehicle inspections. The purpose of my 
testimony to the committee is to provide my perspective on LD 746, SP304 and to 
advocate for the continued practice of annual inspections and to support the use of an 
electronic system.
I was a member of a working group asked to research and report back on LD 284 
titled ‘Resolve, to Study Maine’s Motor Vehicle Inspection Program” that was 
completed January 2022. I’d like to highlight the report’s four key points as it 
emphasizes the importance of the annual inspection program, and the benefits 
implementation of an electronic inspection program would bring.  The major 
takeaways from the report are as follows:
-Based on a Carnegie Mellon Study published in December 2020 titled, “The impact 
of periodic passenger vehicle safety inspection programs on roadway fatalities: 
Evidence from U.S. states using panel data”, as a result of the current, annual Maine 
Motor Vehicle Inspection Program, 51 lives were saved, 2,214 fewer people were 
injured and there were 7,277 fewer instances of property damage due to crashes in 
2020. 
- With annual inspections, the vehicle fail rate is 25-30%. My professional opinion on
this matter is that by increasing the length of time between inspections, the number of 
unsafe vehicles on the road will double.
- Preventative maintenance, like an annual inspection, provides Maine drivers with 
the opportunity to utilize recalls and warranties because annual inspections identify 
required repairs in a timely manner, saving Mainers money in the long run. In 
addition, an average person drives 17,000-20,000 miles per year. If Maine moves to a 
bi-annual inspection program, vehicles will not be inspected for upwards of 40,000 
miles. With Maine winters and the wear and tear icy road conditions and snow put on 
a vehicle, safety is a primary concern. 
- All of Maine’s neighboring states, New Hampshire, Vermont and Massachusetts, 
utilize an electronic inspection program/system that works far more efficiently than 
Maine’s current system. The electronic program provides valuable insight into 
tracking completed inspections within their respective states. An electronic system 
allows for consumer protection, inspection data and vehicle history, as well as 
documentation storage. The electronic programs standardize the process and reduces 
human error. Finally, inspectors can check for open recalls and can access sections of 
the Maine State inspection manual if there is a question on a specific part of the 
inspection process. 
I hope this serves you well in making a decision that will best serve and protect Mainers.
Best Regards, 
Michael Guay 
