

Newell Augur
Enterprise
LD 746
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Transportation, my name is Newell Augur. I am a resident of 
Yarmouth and a partner at Pierce Atwood, LLP. I appreciate the opportunity to submit
this testimony on behalf of Enterprise Rent-A-Car, neither for nor against LD 746, An
Act to Modernize the State's Vehicle Inspection System by Requiring Inspections 
Biennially and Allowing for an Electronic Inspection Program.
Our testimony is in strong support of the modernization of Maine’s registration and 
titling system.  As many stakeholders have indicated, it is long overdue.  From a 
national perspective, Maine is a much more difficult state for fleet companies to 
operate given the antiquated nature of our registration and titling system.  We know 
that the Maine DMV and others are working hard to bring the system into the 21st 
century.  We are happy to provide our experience in other states to inform those 
efforts, including creating a separate fleet plate and an electronic vehicle registration 
system for fleet companies and providing remote options for fleet companies to have 
the ability to select towns and cities without the required travel.  
We also support dispensing with the first three vehicle inspections (we take no 
position as to the frequency of inspections thereafter).  Every year, Enterprise 
registers approximately 5,000 cars, nearly all of them brand new, at our 34 different 
locations in Maine.  We pay a registration fee to the State and excise tax to the town 
for every one of those vehicles.  At the end of the first year, on average, 
approximately 75% of them are located in a different state.  
The Enterprise office in that state does not have the wherewithal to return the vehicle 
to Maine for an inspection.  Because an inspection is required on a new car after only 
12 months, the Maine plates on that car are removed and plates from the state where 
the car is newly located are put on.  As a result, Maine loses the registration fee and 
the excise tax for that vehicle.  Multiply that by 3,750 every year and the amount of 
lost revenue to the State of Maine and Maine municipalities adds up quickly. 
For Enterprise, it’s not a question of saving money or avoiding the registration fee.  
We pay that fee regardless of where the car is located.  Rather, it’s an issue of the use 
of our asset.  Pulling plates off a car and reissuing plates in a new state is an 
administrative hassle that most rental companies would just as soon avoid because it 
pulls an asset off the road for a week.  But driving that car from New York, 
Pennsylvania, Virginia or Florida back to Maine for an inspection is not an option.
It’s important to remember that new cars sold today are remarkably different than new
cars manufactured 25 years ago, or even 10 years ago.  Vehicle safety has changed 
dramatically over this time, and today newer cars are safer than ever before. Thanks 
to advanced engineering, in-depth research and analysis of crash data, newer vehicles 
are built better and have more safety features. These advanced technologies make 
vehicle inspections within the first two years after a new car is purchased entirely 
unnecessary.  
The data supports this.  New Hampshire, which is also considering a change to their 
registration and inspection process, recently collected data on the failure rate for 
vehicles in the first two years following purchase.  A chart issued by the New 
Hampshire Division of Motor Vehicles is included along with this testimony.  For 
safety inspections on 2018-2020 model year vehicles, the failure rate for the first 
inspection was between .201% and .18%; the failure rate for the second inspection 
was between 1.19% and 1.04%; the failure rate for the third inspection was between 
2.43% and 2.23%.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.  I’d be happy to answer any questions.

