Testimony in Support of LD 746:
“An Act to Modernize
the State's Vehicle
Inspection System by Requiring Inspections Biennially and Allowing for an Electronic
Inspection Program”
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and the distinguished members of
the Committee on Transportation, my name is Nick Murray and I serve as director of
policy for Maine Policy Institute. We are a free market think tank, a nonpartisan,
non-profit organization that advocates for individual liberty and economic freedom in
Maine. Thank you for the opportunity to testify on LD 746.
Maine’s vehicle inspection program is outdated and unnecessary. Drivers spend
an estimated $16 million—and countless hours—getting their vehicles inspected each
year, despite the absence of evidence that mandated inspections increase safety or
reduce the number of accidents and injuries on our roads and highways.
A majority of states do not require vehicle inspections for safety. Only 15 states
require annual inspections; five others require it only every two years.
1
A 2015 report from the federal Government Accountability Office (GAO) that
reviewed six rigorous studies examining vehicle safety inspection programs found no
statistically significant difference in crash rates, fatalities, or injuries between states
with and without inspection programs.
2
Law enforcement officers at the state and local level can stop a vehicle if they
believe it is unsafe to drive. If the vehicle is an immediate hazard to the public or has
caused an accident, the operator could be charged with a Class E crime.
3
Therefore,
vehicles can already be deemed unsafe by law enforcement, eliminating the need for all
Maine residents to get their vehicles inspected annually.
Lawmakers should repeal Maine’s vehicle inspection mandate entirely, at least
for non commercial vehicles. If the program must exist, requiring inspections every
other year instead of annually is the bare minimum change needed.
Please deem LD 746 “Ought To Pass” and work to save Mainers from being
nickel-and-dimed by their government. Times are hard enough. Thank you for your time
and consideration.
3
Title 29-A, §1768: Unlawful acts
2
https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-15-705.pdf
1
https://mainepolicy.org/project/sticker-shock-maines-burdensome-vehicle-inspection-mandate/
Maine Policy Institute | mainepolicy.org| themainewire.com | Post Office Box 7829 Portland Maine 04112 | 207.321.2550

