Chair, Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry Committee * Health and Human Services Committee  
State House (207) 287 -1515 * Fax (207) 287 -1585 * Toll Free 1 -800-423-6900 * TTY 711  
Henry.Ingwersen@legislature.maine.gov  * legislature.maine.gov/senate   
 
Henry L. Ingwersen  
Senator, District 32  THE MAINE SENATE  
131st Legislature  3 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333
 
Testimony of Senator Henry Ingwersen Presenting  
LD 1 472, Resolve, Directing the Department of Education and the Maine Municipal 
Bond Bank to Amend Their Rules Regarding the Maine School Facilities Finance 
Program and the School Revolving Renovation Fund  
Before the Joint Standing  Committee on Education and Cultu ral Affairs  
 
Monday , May 1 , 2023  
 
Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan  and esteemed m embers of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs  Committee. I’m Senator Henry Ingwersen, and I represent District 32, which includes the 
York County municipalities of Arun del, Biddeford, Dayton, Hollis, and Lyman. I’m before you today 
to introduce and speak in favor of my bill LD 1472 , “Resolve, Directing the Department of Education 
and the Maine Municipal Bond Bank to Amend Their Rules Regarding the Maine School Facilities  
Finance Program and the School Revolving Renovation Fund .” 
 
This resolve  proposes to increase the maximum total loans from the School Revolving Renovation 
Fund for repair, renovation, and improvement projects  for school buildings from $4,000,000 to 
$8,000,000, and increasing the maximum loan amount from the fund to address each priority level 
in a school building from $1,000,000 to $2,000,000 within any 5 -year period.  
 
As the sponsor of this bill, I believe that increasing the maximum total loans fro m the fund for 
repair, renovation, and improvement projects for school buildings is an urgent and necessary 
measure.  Of the 600+ Maine Public School buildings, more than half were built during or before the 
1960s. Many  schools in Maine are in dire need of repairs and renovations, and the demand for funds 
from the School Revolving Renovation Fund far exceeds the available supply. As a result, many 
schools are forced to wait years for funding, and some are simply unable to secure the funds they 
need.  Just las t year, only 34 out of 87 applications for renovations were fulfilled by this fund.  
 
In speaking to several school districts in the municipalities I represent, it is clear that the need for 
the fund for school repairs and renovations is great, and goes unm et. There is an urgent need in the 
district for funds for building upkeep, and due to inflation the cost for these repairs and renovations 
is only increasing.  
 
This will provide much -needed resources to schools across the state, allowing them to address 
critical infrastructure needs and ensure a safe and healthy learning environment for Maine's 
students.  Raising the loan amount does not necessarily equate to larger loans being distributed. At a 
minimum, this bill would increase the options for DOE as they d isperse these funds, as they are 
distributed at their discretion. Increasing the loan amount gives DOE more leeway in deciding how 
much money to give each project.  
 
I believe that investing in our schools is one of the most important things we can do to support our 
children's future. By passing this resolve, we can ensure that our schools have the resources they 
need to provide a quality education to all students. I urge you to support this bill and help make a 
difference in the lives of Maine's children.  

 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I strongly encourage you to support this bill and invest 
in the future of Maine's education system. I am happy to take any questions you might have.  
