Sal Craig
Hodgdon
LD 1164
Testimony of Sal Craig, Hodgdon
LD 1164 An Act to Continue the Department of Education Diploma Program Related 
to the COVID-19 Pandemic
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, my name is Sal Craig, and I 
am a student at Summit Academy in Houlton.
 
The COVID-19 virus left many lasting effects on all students across Maine, myself 
included.  When it first hit, the classes my school pushed over Zoom were irregular, 
and many students were impacted.  Luckily, we managed to get through it.  However, 
when I moved from Houlton to Hodgdon in the summer of 2020, the lack of 
supervision in my home made it impossible for me to focus on schoolwork, and often 
times I just ended up sleeping.  I would have preferred to do in-person classes, but 
that wasn’t an option at the time due to family difficulties.  Being left alone all day 
and being scared that my family could get COVID at any minute left me stressed and 
sent me into a long period of depression, which affected my grades in turn.  I know 
for a fact, from friends telling me of their experiences, that it was this way with many 
other students, even those who weren’t in high school at the time.  It would be 
incredibly unfair to younger high school students whose mental health was affected to
not get this diploma when COVID interrupted their normal lives as well.  Extending it
to current high school students so that they have an easier way to graduate would 
change the course of their lives for the better.  I know for a while I had lost hope in 
graduating, I felt like I was never going to make it no matter how hard I tried.  When I
was presented with the choice to go for this diploma, I was elated knowing that a new 
path to graduation had been laid out for me.  Students that I know are upset that my 
graduating class will be the last to get it if this ends when I graduate, they feel like it's 
not fair considering their lives were disrupted at the same time ours was.  I understand
that a few years seems like enough time to make up for what was missed, but I know 
that by the time I chose to try and pick up what I had missed for school work, it was 
nearly impossible, and it is for them too.  Extending this diploma’s time will be 
amazing for the future graduating classes, and it will allow them to get on their feet 
much easier.
 For these reasons, I strongly encourage you to pass this act to continue the 
Department of Education Diploma Program Related to the COVID-19 Pandemic.
I am happy to further discuss our position or answer any questions.
Thank you for your time today.
 
Sal Craig
