RE: Comments in support of LD 1164: An Act to Continue the Department of Education 
Diploma Program Related to the COVID-19 Pandemic 
 
To Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs: 
 
I am a Maine educator with over 20 years of education experience, who taught high school 
English during the early days of the pandemic. I now serve as an Academic Dean at a Central 
Maine high school, where I work with some of our most at-risk students. I write to you today to 
share my support of LD 1164 – as I am keenly aware that for some of our students who have 
been most impacted by COVID, this legislation will be the difference between them either 
graduating with a high school diploma or dropping out of school completely –resulting in many 
closed doors and a bleaker future for many of them.  
 
Part of my current position is to help students recover credits so that they may graduate on time 
with their peers. And that is what our students so desperately want – to graduate. But the effects 
of COVID still linger. For some of the students I work with, when COVID hit and online school 
began, they disappeared. They never engaged in online and hybrid school, and their parents 
(many of whom had to continue to work their low-paying and frontline jobs during school 
closures) were not around to help them navigate this unprecedented time. In short, they forgot 
how to “do” school. I pull students into my office all the time, and when looking at their 
transcript they say, “that was during Covid, I didn’t do anything during Covid.” For some they 
were watching younger siblings, for others the pandemic caused tremendous depression and 
anxiety, for yet others they lost family members (so many due to the ravages of the Opioid 
epidemic, made worse by the pandemic), the challenges they faced are many.  
 
Let us not forget that when we still get COVID, and when we do, we must stay home for five 
days (at least). And make no mistake – our children are still getting COVID, which so many of 
them with lack of support at home, fall further behind. My students want to earn the traditional 
high school diploma; they are working hard towards it – but for some it is not (and will never be) 
attainable, for so many reasons really, but most stem from the pandemic. 
 
It is for these reasons and so many more that I support this legislation and urge you to vote in 
favor of LD 1164. 
 
Thank you for your time and attention. Please reach out with questions. 
 
Sherry Pineau Brown, PhD 
Benton, Maine 
 
 
 
 
