  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Testimony of Simon West for The Maine State Chamber of Commerce Neither for Nor Against    
L.D. 1164 An Act to Continue the Department of Education Diploma Program Related to the 
COVID-19 Pandemic 
 
Chairs Rafferty and Brennan, and esteemed members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee, my name is Simon West. I reside in Gardiner and I represent the Maine State 
Chamber of Commerce, a statewide business association made up of both large and small 
businesses, here to provide you with my testimony neither for nor against LD 1164. 
 
The legislation before you is well intended and has our student’s best interests at heart. 
Over the pandemic our students have experienced significant disruption. Even students with 
great support systems have been at risk of not adequately demonstrating the acquisition of 
knowledge necessary to obtain a high school diploma. We do not want our students to fall 
behind and we can understand the purpose behind a bill like this. On average high school 
graduates earn $10,000 more annually than their non-graduate counterparts. This is significant 
for the individual’s quality of life as well as the economic impact those earnings would have for 
our state. The diploma also opens doors to further education opportunities. This bill helps 
students close a difficult chapter in their lives and work toward the future. 
Disruption diploma’s are not a new idea in our state. While this bill addresses an 11-
credit diploma, in statute the department of education can already award a 16-credit diploma. 
This 16-credit disruption diploma has served many students, including those in foster care and 
students of migrant families, when disruption has made meeting the 22-credit diploma 
unachievable. The concern with this bill is the loss of 5 additional credits. Other concerns are the 
level of disruption from the pandemic. News outlets reported on research papers around the 
globe that indicate students lost about 35% of their learning each school year from March of 
2020 to August of 2022. With learning loss this significant students are moving into higher 
education or the workforce without the skills and knowledge promised to them. While students 
would be able to walk away with a high school diploma, they will likely find themselves 
underequipped for the world ahead of them. Nationwide test scores plummeted during the 
pandemic and here in Maine we see scores in both reading and math dropping more than the 
national average.   
While giving students an upper hand by making sure they have a high school diploma we 
may be funneling them into a lifetime of future difficulty. Maine has a high-quality adult 
education program that has helped students of all ages attain a high school diploma. Our 
institutions of higher education have strong ties with our adult education providers and can help 
students using the adult education pathway transition to further education. While this may not be 
the traditional path, 4 years of high school and then workforce or secondary education, it would 
provide the foundation of learning our students deserve. Further, another result of the pandemic 
is the challenging the idea of a traditional education path. Advances and innovation by secondary 
schools during the pandemic not only kept traditional students engaged with education, but 
afforded working adults and other nontraditional students the ability to be successful. People 
who had taken decades off from their education found ways to return. I would encourage the 
committee to consider upcoming legislation regarding funding and capacity for our adult 
education system while weighing the pros and cons of the legislation before you today. 
While we agree with the overall intent of the bill and the desire to not create a generation 
with a bloated percentage of non-graduates, there are other paths that can both accommodate 
learning disruption and give students a diploma that can defend itself when students are 
challenged in higher education or the workforce. 
   
Thank you for the opportunity to provide you with our testimony.   
 
    
  
  
