Testimony  of Susan Lieberman  
 
LD 1164  An Act to Continue the Department of Education Diploma Program Related to the 
COVID -19 Pandemic  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultu ral Affairs.   My name is  Susan Lieberman , and I am also a 
member of the State  Advisory  Committee on Truancy, Dropout and Alternative Education .  
 
I appreciate the opportunity to submit te stimony.  I am  in favor of LD 1164, to continue the 
Department of Edu cation Diploma Program  related to the COVID -19 pandemic .   
 
The current legislatio n should not sunset this September . We need to  provide alternative 
pathways to graduation for  students who have experienced educational dis ruption  due to 
COVID.  Students who se education was dis rupted in si xth grade  due to COVID are now in eighth 
grade .  The se students  are still experiencing  the emotional and education al consequences  
experienced during the ongoing pandemic , and they  should  have the opportunity to benefit 
from the Maine DOE Diploma .   
 
Over 200 stude nts received the Maine Department of Education diploma in the past school 
year.  By purs uing  the ME DOE Diplo ma, these students have successfully completed the core  
requirements for their  high school education  as dic tated by the Maine statute .  They weren ’t 
given a free ticket ; these students proved they had the state  credits required  for all Maine  high 
school  students.   
 
I have personally seen how the DOE  diploma has provided an oppor tunity for students who 
might ot herwise have dropped o ut of high school  because they didn ’t fulfill a unique local 
requirement  that is specific to one com munity or district . 
 
I am conce rned that too many students drop  out of school because t hey lack sufficient credits  
to meet specific lo cal requirements . Many of these  stud ents have experienced educati onal 
disruption due to trauma , related to physical or mental health, economic insecurity, and/or  
high m obility.  
 
For these reasons, I strongly en courage you to pass this act to continue the D epartment of 
Education Diploma Program Related to the COVID -19 Pandemic.  
I am happy to further discuss my position or answer any questions.  
Thank you for your time toda y. 
 
Susa n Lieber man  
  
 
