  LD 537 An Act to Remove the Limits on Bass Fishing in Washington County Rivers
Greetings Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
My name is Bailey Bowden and I live in the small coastal town of Penobscot in Hancock 
County. I write today to submit testimony in favor of LD 537 that will help to protect the 
endangered Atlantic Salmon and native Eastern Brook Trout recovery in Downeast Maine.
I have enjoyed open water and ice fishing on Maine’s lakes, rivers, and streams for over fifty 
years. During this time, I have seen the negative effects of illegal introductions of fish into local 
waterbodies. 
The non-native and invasive largemouth bass was bucket stocked into Third Pond in Blue Hill 
and it did not take long for the fish to migrate downstream into Second Pond and eventually into 
First Pond – Western Hancock County’s most valuable Eastern Brook Trout pond. Today it is 
rare to catch a brook trout in Second Pond and only a few are caught in First Pond.  It is very 
easy to land a bass though.
Washington County is the last stronghold of the famous Atlantic Salmon.  Maine has the most 
robust brook trout population in the United States. With little industrial development and low  
housing density, Washington County boasts a tremendous amount of pristine fish habitat. These 
salmon and trout are vulnerable to the competition of the invasive large and small mouth bass.  
Bass compete for habitat, food, and eat smaller salmon and brook trout.
Fishermen react to the signals sent by IFW rule making.  Twenty years ago, Moosehead Lake 
was infested with small togue.  The length limit rule was removed and the bag limit increased, 
allowing fishermen to reduce the togue population to a healthier level. Today the togue are larger 
and brook trout are plentiful.  The Pemadumcook chain of lakes was once infested with small 
land locked salmon. Again the size limit was reduced and the bag limit increased – allowing 
fishermen to cull the school.  Today the land locked salmon are noticeably longer and heavier. 
This management success story can be told about many lakes in Maine.
Fishermen react to signals. Please send a signal to Maine anglers that the Department is focused 
on restoring the endangered Atlantic Salmon and preserving the Eastern Brook Trout population 
by creating a law that will reduce the bass populations in the Washington County salmon rivers 
listed in LD 537.  Perhaps this effort is best served by having all the interested parties sit at the 
table and discuss the best management strategy to accomplish this.
Thank you for taking the time to consider my thoughts.
Respectfully submitted,
Bailey Bowden
Penobscot
