Testimony from Donald Sprangers on 
LD 537: An Act to Remove the Limits on Bass Fishing in Washington County Rivers 
March 8, 2023 
Senator La Fountain, Representative Landry, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee MIFW: 
I am Don Sprangers from East Machias and I am here to testify in favor of LD 537, an act to remove the limits 
on bass ﬁshing in Washington County Salmon Rivers. 
I spent my childhood ﬁshing salmon, steelhead, and trout on Lake Michigan. I also lived in Oregon for a short 
time where I ﬁsh salmon and steelhead. When I move to Maine in i990, I thoughtl would be able to ﬁsh 
Atlantic salmon, but soon learned that the Atlantic salmon was a threatened species. Rather than ﬁsh for salmon, 
I decided to get involved with the Downeast Salmon Federation. I have been a member of DSF for 31 years and 
have dedicated much of my personal and professional life to restoring Atlantic salmon and their habitats. I also 
serve as the president of the Maine Council of the Atlantic Salmon Federation. 
I moved to Washington County, Maine 33 years ago. I am a retired science teacher from Washington Academy 
where I taught chemistry and ecology for 28 years. Atlantic salmon were the focus species of my ecology class 
and the salmon watersheds of Washington County were my classroom. My students and I immersed ourselves in 
the issues affecting Atlantic salmon populations. We literally were learning as we go. We partnered with state 
and federal agencies, raised salmon in our classroom, assisted DSF with hatchery operations prior to the Peter 
Gray Parr Project. We surveyed ﬁsh passage issues with Project SHARE, conducted stream water quality 
analysis, macroinvertebrate surveys and participated in large wood additions. Over the years, my students andI 
have received numerous recognition for our work with Atlantic salmon. 
In 2002, my students an I traveled to Washington DC to represented the State of Maine for the 30"‘ anniversary 
of the Clean Water Act. We highlighted the recent ESA listing of Atlantic salmon and the work the students have 
been doing to steward our rivers and to conserve this iconic species. The students were awarded ls‘ place in the 
Nation for their understanding of the issues, for their commitment stewardship, and for their presentation of 
content. Following this award, the students were invited to be keynote speakers for Project SHARE and the 
Maine Rivers Conference. 
In the later years, prior to my retirement, I had students who focused on water quality and large wood additions 
to our rivers. There ﬁeld work and scientiﬁc analysis was presented as a research project at the Maine State 
Science Fair where students were awarded scholarships and recognitions for their work. 
Lastly, Washington Academy was part of the Atlantic Salmon Conservation Schools Network (ASCSN), 
involving 10 schools from 8 different countries across the Atlantic salmon's geographic range; all focusing on 
Atlantic salmon. In Summer of 2019, Washington Academy hosted schools the ASCSN for the International 
Year of the Salmon. Students went aﬁeld where they were exposed to current conservation practices here in 
Maine and were introduced to the threats salmon face from aquaculture, agriculture, forestry, acid rain, global 
warming, and predation. 
In closing, the Atlantic salmon has been a big part of my life. I will never in my lifetime have an opportunity to 
ﬁsh for Atlantic salmon in Maine. I did however make this promise to my students that they MIGHT someday 
be able to ﬁsh for Atlantic salmon. It would be shameful if I did not testify today in support of LD537. It is 
high time for the State of Maine to get serious about salmon conservation and restoration. You can begin by 
supporting LD 537 to eliminate all limits on bass ﬁshing on salmon rivers. I also encourage you to add Atlantic 
salmon to the state's endangered species list and begin managing our natural resources with respect to those 
species that are threatened and endangered. Thank you for your time and attention today. 
Respectfully submitted on March 8, 2023 by Donald Sprangers, retired teacher, DSF, MCASF
