IC€lt]13r:l:iiOF1 alls ME 04623 
SA (207) 483-4336 ’ 
d f ' 
l'
. 
FEDERATION .;.%%‘;i;?:::.;*;::;:::;:.?;§. 
Testimony of the Downeast Salmon Federation on 
LD 537: An Act to Remove the Limits on Bass Fishing in Washington County 
Rivers 
March 8, 2023 
Honorable Chairs and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife, 
My name is Dwayne Shaw. I am the Executive Director of the Downeast Salmon Federation. 
DSF is a 40-year-old, Washington County based, angler/conservation group focused on recovery 
of Atlantic salmon and other native ﬁsh. Our organization was founded by ﬁve angling clubs in 
the region. The 1,000+ members and volunteers associated with DSF ﬁsh these rivers religiously 
and many are participants in an organized network of local stewards. 
DSF operates two conservation hatcheries. Our ﬁrst hatchery was built in 1990 in Columbia 
Falls on the Pleasant R. by volunteers and has been operating ever since. The other facility is in 
East Machias and has been operating for 14 years. Our work is conducted in close cooperation 
with and we are permitted by the state and federal ﬁsheries agencies. We currently stock salmon 
parr and ﬁy into the Narraguagus, Pleasant and East Machias Rivers. Our stocking and our 
habitat protection and restoration efforts have helped assure that there will be a future for these 
important gameﬁsh. The DSF professional staff includes 9 full time biologists. We are 
continually increasing investments to recover Atlantic salmon in our Home Rivers and we plan to 
increase effort in managing the impacts of competing non-native species. 
The bill before you was initiated by a number of our members. It comes as the result of 
frustration with the inaction and often misaligned “silos” that exist between the competing 
priorities of the ﬁsheries agencies. The bill, as written, has many merits and some limitations. It 
alone will not recover Atlantic salmon, nor will it fully protect our valued brook trout, but it is an 
important step in the right direction. LD 537 is already producing results in terms of getting the 
agencies attention and pushing the parties to ﬁnd a logical path forward together. 
The federally designated sea-run salmon in Maine and the wild brook trout alike, do not limit 
their migrations, spawning activities and other needs to the MIFW North — South management 
plan. These cold-water ﬁsh inhabit many hundreds of miles of Washington County rivers and 
streams entirely within the South Zone. In accordance with the federal Endangered Species Act, 
the home rivers of the salmon must be managed as a very high ﬁsheries priority. The state can no 
longer afford to shy away from the responsibility to address the needs of salmon in these rivers. 
The agencies need to make clear what those management needs should be and enact them. 
These “South Zone” watersheds are not “warm water” river systems and it is completely 
inappropriate to emphasize and prioritize trophy Largemouth and Smallmouth Bass regulations 
and rules in these streams. General Law, if applied, (as MIFW had planned to move toward
before this bill was introduced) would contradict overarching federal and state ﬁsheries 
priorities. It would also send a very dangerous message to anglers and the public. Sending that 
message, by virtue of removing S-13 rules where they now exist and moving fully toward 
General Law, runs opposite to Fisheries Management Best Practices. Doing so would essentially 
indicate: “we throw in the towel, game over for native salmonid recovery, bass are the new 
priority ”. 
As We too often see, these agencies can sometimes become paralyzed in trying to work together - 
even after issuing their stated intentions to do so publicly. A citizen initiative is often what it 
takes to nudge things back on track. 
The Good News: 
Because of LD 537, conversations that were long overdue have occurred. The agencies — 
including MIFW — have indicated their willingness to look at the bass regulations and other 
ﬁsheries interactions and to “make the time” to work through these complex issues. 
For reference, please see the documents provided by Mike Look in his testimony. The federal 
recovery plan and related documents indicate the need for a focused Work Group on the topics. 
The plan identiﬁes MDMR and MIF W as the lead agencies. Those concepts were spelled out 
three years ago and it appears there is now a true commitment to work with the NGOs and 
federal agencies to begin the process. This is very good news. 
What’s next: 
We feel LD 537 should be held over. We feel that a report documenting the progress of the new 
Work Group be delivered to this legislative committee in May or June of this year to provide a 
clear indication that the Work Group is following through. 
MIF W has communicated to DSF that they will suspend their plans to expand General Law regs 
for bass across all of these watersheds. Instead, they will participate in the Work Group, work in 
good faith to produce regulatory, management and public messaging outcomes that will help to 
prioritize native salmonid recovery. 
We encourage the Committee to use your authority to hold the agencies to their commitments 
and to do so by holding the bill over and establishing a plan for reporting progress in this session. 
Sincerely, 
Dwayne Shaw 
Executive Director 
dwayne@mamesaknonrivers.org 
Cell: (207)598-8474
