TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 537 
“An Act to Remove the limits on Bass Fishing in Washington County Rivers" 
SPONSORED BY: Representative Kenneth Jr. Davis of East Machias (by request) 
DATE OF HEARING: March 8, Z023 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. l am Francis Brautigam, Fisheries Director at the Department 
of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in opposition to L.D. 537 
This bill removes size, bag, and possession limits on bass in rivers within Washington County. 
While the bill 's intent is not disclosed, past conversations with the bill's proponent suggests a 
desire to increasejuvenile sea-run Atlantic salmon survival by reducing predation losses caused 
by bass. The bill names just some Maine rivers that are a focus of Atlantic salmon recovery. 
Bass are not native to Maine, are currently the state's second most preferred sportfish, and are 
very well established throughout the South Management Zone in the area that is a focus of this 
bill, where they are generally managed by the Department as a sportfish. Bass do compete with 
native fish and the Department remains concerned regarding the unauthorized expansion into 
other areas of Maine where they currently do not exist, particularly in the North Management 
Zone, where some of the state's most significant native brook trout and charr resources reside. 
Over time, and more recently the Department has established "no size or bag limits for bass" 
(special code S-13 in the lawbook) on waters where new or recent unauthorized introductions of 
bass have established for the explicit purpose of creating public awareness. The establishment 
of liberal bass harvest regulations is a communication strategy to deter and discourage new 
unauthorized introductions and identify those populations that would not be actively conserved 
or enhanced by the Department. 
While this special regulation does allow unlimited han/est of bass of all sizes and has value for 
messaging and creating public awareness; the regulation by itself is not an effective tool to 
reduce bass population size, particularly on the rivers that are requested in this bill. Any 
incidental angler harvest will not achieve a meaningful population reduction. it is recognized 
that some anglers perceive the no size or bag regulation as a feel-good measure that provides a
convenient opportunity for anglers to help solve a problem, falsely empowering anglers to 
believe tossing a few bass on the bank while trout fishing is helping. As l already mentioned the 
special S-13 regulation is more recently being applied by the Department for public messaging 
following a new introduction; not as a meaningful strategy to achieve population 
control/reduction. 
There are several Washington County salmon rivers where the Department has already applied 
no size or bag limits to address past management concerns and create public awareness of 
recent unauthorized introductions. Most of the rivers referenced in this bill receive very low 
fishing pressure from anglers targeting brook trout and bass. The lack of angler use, and the 
prevalence of catch and release fishing practices further reduces opportunity to suppress bass. 
In addition, headwater lakes and ponds in these river systems are teaming with bass which will 
continue to colonize rivers that are a focus of this bill. This bill does not address the host of 
other sources of natural predation that may be collectively more impactful on juvenile salmon 
survival such as native pickerel, otter, mink, king fishers, cormorants, seals, mergansers, etc. 
Also, this bill does not address the key factors limiting Atlantic Salmon recovery, particularly 
marine survival. 
The proposed bill will not achieve salmon recovery objectives, but it will add additional special 
regulations to an already thick fishing law book. There would also be a significant administrative 
task in digitally mapping all the additional rivers to support the Department's Fishing Laws 
Online Angling Tool used by anglers to navigate inland fishing laws. The proposed application of 
the special regulation is also inconsistent with the Department's current use of the regulation. 
Furthermore, directed conversations to state and federal agencies responsible for managing 
sea-run salmon recovery have indicated bass predation is not a significant factor limiting salmon 
recovery. The Department regularly meets with US Fish and Wildlife Service and the 
Department of Marine Resources to coordinate on any issues of shared concern. 
l would also like to offer that water specific changes as outlined in this bill are normally 
managed by the Department through its rule making authority consistent with the 
Administrative Procedures Act (APA). The rule making process allows the Department to 
integrate its publicly derived species goals and objectives with water specific angler and fish 
data to achieve the best outcome for the fisheries resource and the angling public. In the past 
moving regulations for individual waters from rule into statute has proved cumbersome and 
created a fragmented and less effective approach to managing the fisheries resource. 
Any changes advanced through the APA review process does allow the Department to havea 
more fluid response and the timing can also be aligned with printing of new law books. 
While the Department does not support this bill for reasons already outlined, if there is a desire 
by this committee to advance special fishing regulations for all bass rivers in Washington 
County, the Department would prefer to manage this request under its APA rule making 
process. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
