James R. Mabee . 
271 Kenduskeag Ave. 
Bangor, ME 04401 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Senator LaFountain, 
Representative Landry, 
Members of The Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, 
My name is J.R. Mabee, l am a resident of Bangor and the President of the Grand Lake Stream 
Guides Association. The members of the guides association and myself are opposed to LD 537 An Act 
to Remove the Limits on Bass Fishing in Washington County Rivers. lf passed this legislation will havea 
negative impact on historic Bass fisheries that are enjoyed by many and relied on by guides and lodge 
owners. 
Grand Lake Stream which is considered the west branch of the St. Croix watershed has beena 
guided fishing destination since before the civil war, and is still alive and well today. lt is said that Grand 
Lake Stream has the largest pool of working Registered Maine Guides in the state and still has eight 
operational sporting camps in business. Smallmouth Bass were introduced to LaCoute Lake located in 
the upper main stem of the St. Croix in the 1870's. By the 1920’s Smallmouth Bass were being caught 
regularly and had spread throughout the entire St. Croix watershed. Smallmouth Bass were a desirable 
sport fish in the late 1800's and stocked in many places. Bass eventually took over as the more preferred 
target species providing more guide days and filling more beds than Landlocked Salmon or Trout 
fishermen. Third Machias Lake was featured on The American Sportsman television show with Curt 
Gowdy in the 1970's and was said to be one of the best Bass fisheries in the United States at that time. 
Maine River, Pocomoonshine, Crawford, and the Mud Lakes all part of the East Machias River were 
known as Trophy Smallmouth fisheries. Downeast Maine became known as the Smallmouth Bass 
Capital of the World. 
LD 537 not only adds strain to the Washington County Bass fisheries, but also creates 
enforcement issues for Game Wardens, does not take into consideration Boundary Water agreements 
with the province of New Brunswick, and gives no definition or delineation of what is considered river 
versus lake. The Grand Lake Stream Guides Association knows fisheries can be destroyed by 
overfishing. Before Catch and Release became a practice older members of our association witnessed 
this on the Machias Lakes. The daily bag limits on Bass were very liberal and logging roads created easy 
access to waters that used to be hard to reach. Third Machias Lake went from one of the best Bass 
fisheries in the country, to hardly being able to catch a Bass. Our older guides and long-time clients 
remember years you could hardly catch a legal Bass for shore lunch on Big Lake. It was not until more 
conservative bag and slot limits to protect the older, bigger breeding fish did we see the fisheries recover 
and in some cases get better than ever. Smallmouth Bass grow extremely slow in Maine some living for 
over twenty years, being caught many times a summer. Once they get killed it takes years and years to 
grow another equal in size. As written this bill would allow an angler to legally come through a stream or 
river between these interconnected lakes and kill generations of Bass! 
LD 537 will remove all of the protective regulations that have helped sustain and enhance the 
Bass fishing in Washington County that guides and lodge owners rely on to make a living. l urge you, 
please vote “ought not to pass"l Thank you all for your time, and consideration.
