 
Fort Andross, Suite 202 A  14 Maine Street  Brunswick, ME 04011- 2030  
(207) 725- 2833 │ www.asf.ca /maine   
Testimony of the Atlantic Salmon Federation on  
LD 537: An Act to Remove the Limits on Bass Fishing in Washington County Rivers  
March  8, 2023  
 
Senator La Fountain, Representative Landry, and Honorable M embers of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife : 
 My name is John Burrows, and I am the Executive Director of U.S. Operations for the Atlantic Salmon 
Federation (ASF), an international non- profit conservation organization dedicated to the conservation 
and restoration of wild Atlantic salmon and their environment . I represent more than 2,500 members and 
volunteers with ASF, our Maine Council, and a  dozen local affiliates working on river and fisheries 
conservation and restoration across Maine.   
 ASF is providing testimony in support of this legislation, and we offer a few  recommendations  that we  
believe improve the bill  to make it more workable for the  Maine Department  of Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife (MDIFW) . 
 
First, we feel it is  critical to acknowledge that n on-native  fish species are one of the greatest threats  to 
aquatic biodiversity and aquatic ecosystems  across the globe . Here in Maine, the negative impacts of 
invasive, non- native fish – like smallmouth and largemouth bass – on our native fisheries have been 
substantial and widespread . These non -native fish species are both major predators  of native fish  species  
and direct competitors for resources and habitat.   
 
Endangered sea -run Atlantic salmon  (as well as  landlocked Atlantic salmon ) and Eastern brook trout  are 
iconic  Maine cold -water fish species . The  conservation status of sea- run Atlantic salmon and brook trout 
in Maine couldn’t be more  differen t, however . Atlantic salmon are critically endangered , with  Maine 
support ing the last remaining wild populations in the United States . On the other end of the spectrum , 
Maine has the healthiest, most abundant populations of br ook t rout and the most intact habitat for t he 
species of any  state . Both species, however, have been and will continue to be impacted by non- native 
bass species across much of their range in the state  and the threat will only  increase in the futur e. 
 
MDIFW has already established  no length or bag limit for bass in the North Zone, encouraging harvest 
of bass where they are illegally introduced. This approach is also enshrined in the 2021 15- year Inland 
Fisheries and Hatcheries Strategic Management Plan , which has  a goal to “ manage bass population in 
the North Zone as invas ive to protect native fish.”  This plan also includes high priority m anagement 
strategies to “ clearly message the reason that bass are managed as an invasive in the North Zone” and to 
“regulate bass waters in the North Zone to discourage illegal introductions .”  
 
LD 537’s intent seems to be to apply a similar management philosophy in some waters in the South Zone  – specifically in Washington County – where MDIFW and/or the Maine Department of Marine 

 
Fort Andross, Suite 202 A  14 Maine Street  Brunswick, ME 04011- 2030  
(207) 725- 2833 │ www.asf.ca /maine  Resources have management plans that focus on na tive cold -water fish , like Atlantic salmon and brook 
trout. 
 The issue is not unique just to the rivers of Washington County, though, and as  such, we recommend 
that the bill take a broader perspective  and look at where the application of the  S-13 regulation – no bag 
or size limit on bass  – can have the greatest positive impacts  on our  native cold-water fish species  in the 
South Zone . 
 For Atlantic salmon, the appropriate scale would be to look at the rivers and streams that have been  
designated as critical habitat by NOAA Fisheries and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service under the Endangered Species Act. Critical habitat extends from the Dennys River in eastern Maine to the 
tributaries of the lower Androscoggin Rive r. This is a  very large area, and we recognize t hat expansion 
of S-13 across the board  is not  realistic.  As such, we would support taking a more targeted approach.  
Some of the rivers and streams in this  range already have S -13 in place and we support extending it  to 
those places wher e it is most likely to be effective in  decreasing levels of competition and predation by 
bass on native cold- water fish . This is most likely  to be the cas e in small and medium sized  rivers , and 
not in places like the lower  mainstems of our large st rivers  where S -13 would almost certainly  have no 
appreciable impact on  bass populations . Nonetheless, allowing for the  removal of bass in certain places  
will certainly do no harm and it will allow for organized groups of anglers to direct effort towards bass removal in pools or river reaches that are particularly important for salmon and trout ; for example, cold 
water refuge areas where juvenile salmon ids congregate in late summer and may be particularly 
vulnerable to bass predation.    Designation of an S -13 rule also serves as an important communications tool. In fact, this is arguably the 
greatest benefit of expanding S -13 to more rivers and streams in the South Zone that support native 
cold-water fish. By establishing no size or bag limit on bass, MDIFW  makes clear that it has made a 
policy choice not to manage bass as a recreational f ishery in the designated water.  For those waters 
where bass are not yet present, this may serve as a deterrent to illegal introductions , which is the primary 
driver of the spread of non- natives . 
 In conclusion, we support the concept of this legislation a nd believe that  elimination of bag and size 
limits on bass in certain areas can and will have benefits for our native fish species. As such, we recommend focusing on and prioritizing the rivers and streams where the benefits are most likely to have an impa ct. This  may be best done through a working group of state and federal agenc ies and non-
governmental organizations.  Thank you for your time and consideration.  Sincerely , 
  
John R.J. Burrows  
Executive Director, U.S. Operations  
Atlantic Salmon Federation  

