Testimony on LD 537 IVlarch 8, 2023 1:00pm 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Good afternoon, Senate and House Chairs and members of this 
Committee. Ivly name is Matthew Scott aka, “Matt” a citizen of Belgrade 
and former ﬁsheries and aquatic Biologist for some 40 years of 
experience, serving the State of Maine. I appear today to offer comments 
regarding LD 578 and its intention. I am somewhat indifference with this 
proposed legislation as I think the current S-13 regulation could be 
applied without trying to speciﬁcally legislate ﬁshery management. 
Currently ﬁshery managers can apply the S-13 rule to control black bass 
(SMB and LIVIB). Regional management could be recommended. Thus,I 
do support the intentions of this LD and I think that the Committee 
recognizes its purpose and intention. 
We have two ﬁshery management agencies involved with different 
mandates of the one species of major concern. Atlantic salmon due to its 
life history requirements in freshwater and the ocean. 
I wish to relate to you all a speciﬁc experience regarding illegal SIVIB 
introduction. When I served as the Executive Secretary of Project SHARE 
for the ﬁve downeast rivers watersheds for 3 1/2 years. I owned a camp 
and shoreline property on PRL and became familiar with the lake back in 
1958. The lake historically never had SI\/IB and this species was not 
present in the entire watershed based on my survey work with the 
Department and the Atlantic Salmon Commission historical records. In 
1979-80 three PRL camp owners decided to catch SI\/IB from Crawford 
Lake and make an illegal transfer into PRL. This in my opinion wasa 
terrible mistake. The SIVIB population exploded. Department ﬁsheries 
staff established these facts in 1999 when they resurveyed the lake and 
caught several SMB one weighed in at 5 1/2 pounds. Also noted was the
minnow population had been signiﬁcantly reduced due to SIVIB foraging 
and a smaller abundance of White Perch. 
I want to be very clear that SMB never existed in the watershed based on 
all historical surveys and that the species is now in the riverine system all 
the away to Columbia Falls. 
The Pleasant River in one of the ﬁve rivers that hold relict populations of 
native Atlantic salmon. As a former property owner and concerned 
scientist I made several canoe trips over the years before the SI\/IB 
introductions and after to see what and where this species has found 
suitable habitat for survival. These trips (six to be speciﬁc) were from PRL 
to Saco Falls in Columbia just West of the Epping settlement. 
All through the riverine habitat I and my canoe partner caught numerous 
SIVIB and on occasion we caught a brook trout. After and during all these 
trips I made random stomach analysis of SI\/IB and found YOY salmon in 
various size bass plus several Parr. These two life stages of Atlantic salmon 
are critical for recovery of the species. Also, numerous aquatic insects, 
mostly stoneflies plus an occasional crayﬁsh were found. It is my final 
opinion as a former practicing ﬁshery scientist that the recovery program 
for the Pleasant River Atlantic salmon has been severely compromised by 
this illegal introduction that started in PRLlThis is why I support the S-13 
rufe onfcaftawikeepjl and kill all SIVIB life stages in the riverine sections of 
the Pleasant River. This same rule could be applied to all AS rivers listed 
under the ESA. Thej riverine portions of these rivers are where we ﬁn‘ d the 
\/mat»? life stages of AS. It is imperative that the rule be applied if we are 
ever going to observe any chance for AS recovery. Hundreds of millions of 
dollars are being spent for recovery and every effort needs to be made for 
the beneﬁt of future generations. I also realize how valuable the LIVIB and 
B|\/IB ﬁshery is in Maine and especially in Washington and Hancock
Counties. They have been a signiﬁcant sport ﬁshery for over 125 years 
and SlVlB were introduced to l\/laine in 1869 over 150 years ago. One 
might say the species has become naturalized over this period. The stocks 
are self—sustaining, based on regulations and suitable habitat. l live in the 
Belgrade lakes region and the SI\/lB ﬁshery is very signiﬁcant lake resource 
and economic sport ﬁshery. 
Finally, it is most unfortunate that persons uninformed of their stocking 
deeds create an impact when they introduce a non-native species (non- 
indigenous). 
I thank you for your time and listening to my diatribe. 
Respectfully, 
lvlatthew Scott, Biologist, Emeritus
