March 8th, 2023
131st Maine State Legislature 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee
Dear Committee Members 
This letter is in support of LD537, an Act to Remove Bass Fishing Limits in Washington County.
     I am the secretary for Downeast Trout Unlimited (DETU), whose mission is to conserve, protect 
and restore Maine’s cold-water fisheries and their watersheds.  Bass, Smallmouth and Largemouth, 
are non-native fish species that have been introduced to Maine over time, both legally and illegally.  
Our waters are home to two of Maine's most iconic native fish species, the endangered Atlantic 
Salmon and the Brook Trout.  Maine is the last state in the country with remnant populations of 
Atlantic Salmon; most of these are in Washington County.  Maine also has the largest remaining 
intact population of native Brook Trout in the United States and these fish are found throughout 
Hancock and Washington counties. 
     Maine Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MIFW) is responsible for the management of Maine’s 
inland fish species.  DETU recognizes the challenges are enormous and recommends that MIFW 
management practices in waters with endangered Atlantic Salmon and native Brook Trout should be 
directed towards those species and not towards non-native Bass that compete and predate on both 
species. Policies favoring Bass over Atlantic Salmon in particular would be counter-productive to the 
enormous efforts made by the Federal government, USFWS, and others and NGOs to improve 
endangered Atlantic Salmon populations.  DETU supports management efforts to reduce competition 
and predation by non-native fish species on endangered Atlantic Salmon to improve the recovery of 
this species. At the same time this will also have a positive effect on native Brook Trout populations.
     LD 537 is an important step in the right direction by expanding S13 regulations in Washington 
county. S13 regs across all Downeast watersheds would simplify rules for anglers thus making 
enforcement easier, assist interagency efforts with government and NGO’s, and send a message to 
anglers, conservationists and communities that MIFW recognizes the economic importance of 
protecting Maine salmonids. It is already producing results, bringing agencies and interested parties 
together to find a logical path forward. We hope this Committee will support LD 537 and create a 
Work Group of interested parties that will produce a comprehensive management and public 
messaging plan that will promote native salmonids.  Downeast Trout Unlimited is eager to assist with 
implementation of a plan in Hancock and Washington County watersheds.  By partnering with 
MIFW, other agencies and NGO's like Downeast Salmon Federation and Project Healing Waters Fly 
Fishing, we feel we can be a useful participant to help MIFW reach their management goals.
Sincerely,
Tammy Packie, Secretary
Downeast Chapter, Trout Unlimited
tpackie@gmail.com
PO Box 117 Hulls Cove, ME 04644
Commented [MOU1]:  This sounds like you know tha IFW 
“favors bass management” AND what sort of management are you 
referring to – enforcing a rule?
Would you say that LD537 lifts mgmt. of bass from (the mgmt. 
burden on) IFW?

Tammy Packie
Hulls Cove
LD 537
March 8th, 2023
131st Maine State Legislature 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee
Dear Committee Members 
This letter is in support of LD537, an Act to Remove Bass Fishing Limits in Washington 
County.
     I am the secretary for Downeast Trout Unlimited (DETU), whose mission is to conserve, 
protect and restore Maine’s cold-water fisheries and their watersheds.  Bass, Smallmouth and
Largemouth, are non-native fish species that have been introduced to Maine over time, both 
legally and illegally.  Our waters are home to two of Maine's most iconic native fish species, 
the endangered Atlantic Salmon and the Brook Trout.  Maine is the last state in the country 
with remnant populations of Atlantic Salmon; most of these are in Washington County.  Maine
also has the largest remaining intact population of native Brook Trout in the United States and
these fish are found throughout Hancock and Washington counties. 
     Maine Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MIFW) is responsible for the management of Maine’s 
inland fish species.  DETU recognizes the challenges are enormous and recommends that 
MIFW management practices in waters with endangered Atlantic Salmon and native Brook 
Trout should be directed towards those species and not towards non-native Bass that 
compete and predate on both species. Policies favoring Bass over Atlantic Salmon in 
particular would be counter-productive to the enormous efforts made by the Federal 
government, USFWS, and others and NGOs to improve endangered Atlantic Salmon 
populations.  DETU supports management efforts to reduce competition and predation by 
non-native fish species on endangered Atlantic Salmon to improve the recovery of this 
species. At the same time this will also have a positive effect on native Brook Trout 
populations.
     LD 537 is an important step in the right direction by expanding S13 regulations in 
Washington county. S13 regs across all Downeast watersheds would simplify rules 
for anglers thus making enforcement easier, assist interagency efforts with 
government and NGO’s, and send a message to anglers, conservationists and 
communities that MIFW recognizes the economic importance of protecting Maine 
salmonids. It is already producing results, bringing agencies and interested parties 
together to find a logical path forward. We hope this Committee will support LD 537 
and create a Work Group of interested parties that will produce a comprehensive 
management and public messaging plan that will promote native salmonids.  
Downeast Trout Unlimited is eager to assist with implementation of a plan in 
Hancock and Washington County watersheds.  By partnering with MIFW, other 
agencies and NGO's like Downeast Salmon Federation and Project Healing Waters 
Fly Fishing, we feel we can be a useful participant to help MIFW reach their 
management goals.
Sincerely,
Tammy Packie, Secretary
Downeast Chapter, Trout Unlimited
tpackie@gmail.com
PO Box 117 Hulls Cove, ME 04644
 

