 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
neither for nor against  
LD 1700, An Act to Protect Agricultural Lands by Creating a Permitting Process for Solar Development on 
Those Lands  
 
April 26, 2023  
 
Dear Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and Distinguished Members of the Committee:  
 
My name is Amy Winston, and I am Senior Director of State Policy at Coastal Enterprises, Inc. (CEI). I live 
in Edgecomb. I am submitting this testimony on behalf of CEI, to express our organization’s perspective 
on LD 1700.  
 CEI is a private, non- profit Community Development Corporation (CDC) and Community Development 
Financial Institution (CDFI) based in Brunswick. CEI was founded in 1977 to develop job -creating n atural-
resource -based business ventures in Maine’s rural and coastal regions. W e continue to work to build a 
just, vibrant, and climate resilient future for people in communities in Maine and other rural regions. We do this by integrating finance, business  expertise and policy solutions in ways that make the economy 
more equitable.   CEI has a 46 -year history of investment in Maine agriculture. We provide business services including free 
sector -specific business advising and technical assistance, and by mak ing loans and investments in new 
and existing farm and food -related businesses. Our focus on and commitment to Maine’s agricultural 
and natural resource industries has only grown  since our inception. Si nce 2018, CEI has provided $17.5 
million in financing to food and agriculture related enterprises, helping them to create or maintain 1,986 local food economy jobs, and providing technical assistance to 412 farmers and food entrepreneurs.  
 CEI is also investing in the transition to clean energy. CEI’s low-cost solar financing
 has helped over 40 
businesses go green with $ 25 million in loans leveraging $45 million in investments across Maine and 
New England to install solar arrays . Our portfolio  generat es enough energy to power 3,500 homes  
annually . These loans prioritize low -income entrepreneurs and business owners from populations that 
have historically lacked access to credit and capital. In 2018, CEI established a subsidiary, Bright 
Community Capital , to increase access to solar energy and specifically to bring cost -e ffective solar power 
to low -income communities and neighborhoods. For its part, Bright Community Capital has provided 
$2.3 million in financing to developers  for solar projects and owns 1.6 MWs in projects bringing 
affordable solar power to non- profits, municipalities,  and affordable housing.  
 Our missioned approach to photovoltaics understands that without access to credit and capital, low -
income consumers are unable to qualify for a loan or federal tax incentives. Credit risk (real or 
perceived), smaller project sizes, developer balance sheet capacity, and technical assistance needs are 
 
additional hurdles1. For this reason, CEI was named to the Distributed Generation Stakeholder Group 
convened by the Governor’s Energy Office pursuant to LD 936 (P.L. 2021, Ch. 390) to advise and assist in 
making recommendations for a cost -effective successor program for distributed renewable energy 
program that is equitable in benefitting ratepayers and energy burdened households and in guiding the 
responsible siting of solar installations in a way that is compatible with agricultural land use.  
To this end, LD 1700  establish es a permitting process that attempts to balance competing needs  when 
considering installation of solar panels on farms . CEI supports the  intent of the bill to protect agricultural 
lands  and the  need to implement a permitting process  for large -scale  solar panel installations that cover 
many acres of land . However,  it will be challenging  and costly in  certain  instances for a farm to 
demonstrate th at the economic benefit of a solar installation is both  necessary fo r the viability of 
agricultural business operations and ancillary to  the use of the property  for agriculture  - this may be 
especially true for  farms with limited space  suitable for ground -mou nts and those who are only trying to 
meet the on -site energy needs of  their farm .  
 We know that many, if not most, farm  businesses require additional revenue to be profitable . Farm  
businesses need  assurance  that they will be compensated for their stewardship of the land .  As stated in 
the bill, solar energy creates societal value as well as economic benefit to farms . A permitting process 
requiring a landowner to demonstrate th at this benefit is subsidiary to the a gricultural value of the land 
holds farmers to a higher standard because of the critical role that they serve in protecting food 
security . If this is an opportunity to support farmers  in applying best practices , then we have to help 
them  compet e in the marketplace .  
 
This bill attempts to balance the state’s interest in keeping agricultural land available for food 
production  without incentivizing that activity when there are competing alternatives , including non -
solar related options . While an  additional  layer of specialized permitting may rightly deter solar 
developers from converting large swaths of arable farm , this can come at the cost of farmers  who would 
have been  able to lower operating  costs , diversify revenue streams, increase the financial resilience of 
the farm,  and contribute societally through clean energy generation . If the intent of the Department is 
to protect arable  and productive farmland, the Department may consider a minimum kW size for 
projects that are required to go  through this regulatory process. Many farms that are just meeting their 
on-site farm energy  needs may be required to ground mount  these modest arrays. Delaying the benefits 
of clean energy production  under these direct ownership scenarios  due to a permitting process is 
unfairly restricting the farming  sector relative to their peers.  
 
While the Department  of Agriculture, Conservation and F orestry  has ultimate authority to approve 
applications, to prevent time and resources from being wasted on the permitting application process, 
municipal authorities must also have  technical capacity to understand the complicated  nature of 
successful dual -use projects – i.e., projects that produce a societal ben efit in distributed energy 
production as well as th rough th e public  benefits of food production. Additionally, municipalities and 
the Department should be prepared to assure that farm businesses who are unable to prov e that the 
 
1 See Carsey Institute of Public Policy White Paper on Scaling Solar Equitably 2021  
 
economic benefits of solar o utweigh the agricultural potential are referred  to business advisors and 
other farm -related business programming to ensure the long- term financial sustainability of these farms 
is protected.  
 
To ensure their productive coexistence, f urther work may be needed to evaluate the impacts of solar 
energy development on working farmland  and this statute for its ability to direct solar development to 
the least agriculturally productive lands as other states have chosen to do . Adopting a sunset period 
woul d allow for such evaluation, development of a methodology for assigning land value, and analysis of 
the feasibility of f ood system service payments to farmers to compensate them for using energy for 
agricultural production without forfeiting solar panel le ase revenues.  
 Thank you for considering CEI’s  perspective on this important issue . 
