District 44:      Hope, Union, & Warren  
 
 
 
    
William D. Pluecker 
State Representative 
1133 Finntown Road 
Warren, ME 04864 
(207) 273-3044 
Bill.Pluecker@legislature.maine.gov 
 
  
 
STATE OF MAINE 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
SPEAKER'S OFFICE 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1315 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sen. Ingwersen, Rep. Hall and the entire Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry 
Committee, thank  you for the chance to present LD 1700, “An Act to Protect 
Agricultural Lands by Creating a Permitting Process for Solar Development on Those 
Lands.” 
 
The primary thrust of this bill is to create a process by which we, as a State, can 
steer solar development away from our agricultural soils. We have all seen the pressure 
being put on farmers and communities as solar developers have sought sites to build solar 
installations. On this committee, we know that the value of our land is much more than 
just a place to generate solar energy, it is where we grow food for our families and 
communities, build our soil, and live our agricultural heritage. It is where we build an 
agricultural industry to sustain the people and economy of the state. When we contruct 
solar installations that will be in place for the rest of our lifetimes, it takes land out of 
cultivation for the long term. It is important that we conserve these lands for the sake of 
food production, and for the sake of the industry at large. The more land that is taken out 
of production the more the cost will increase for those looking to buy or lease land to put 
into production. If farmers intend to make a profit off of more expensive land, then food 
prices will necessarily increase. That will either increase the cost of local food, or make 
our food unable to compete with the food from away. 
 
This bill creates a permitting process within the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation, and Forestry that would only allow solar development on agricultural soils 
if certain conditions were met. If the soil was contaminated, then it could be developed. If 
the land is owned by an active farming operation and the solar development will aid the  
production of food by creating an additional income source, then that is also acceptable 
for development. If the field is near a substation, or there is another clear reason why this 
land should be used for solar development rather than growing food, or food production 
will continue along with the solar installation, then development may occur. 

 
This bill is still a work in progress. I believe you will hear a few different language 
suggestions from the Department as well as other stakeholders. I look forward to working 
with them on a bill that meets all our needs. There is a chance that this permitting process 
would work best in a supporting way to the existing DEP permitting process, though we 
want to make sure that the bill keeps its teeth in terms of enforcement. I am also 
interested in continuing the conversation about which soils are defined as agricultural 
soils, and making sure that small scale installations for a home or small business don’t 
have to go through needless red tape. In line 22 of page 1, there is a sentence requiring 
that the value of the solar installation must exceed the value of the land. I believe this was 
the result of a miscommunication between myself and the Revisor’s office, and this 
sentence should be struck entirely.  
 
We have many areas of land in our state, developed areas, disturbed lands, or 
contaminated soils that are more suitable for solar development than our precious 
agricultural land. We have seen the loss of the hayfields and crop land in the state to 
development of all sorts. It is important that we control this development and steer it in 
the directions where it will do the least harm to our ability to produce food as a state and 
build a resilient agricultural economy for the future.  
 
Thank you very much, and I’d be happy to answer any questions. 
 
