 
 
 
PO Box 5257 | Augusta, ME | 04332  
 
 
 
February 9, 2023  
 
The Honorable Donna Bailey , Chair  
The Honorable Anne Perry , Chair  
The Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
 
RE: Testimony neither for no r against  LD  252  An Act Relating to Long -term Care Pharmacie s 
 
Dear Senator  Bailey , Representative Perry  and members of the Health Coverage and Financial Services Committee :  
 
My name is Amelia Arnold  and I a m a resident  of Winthrop, Maine, a lic ensed pharmacist  employed b y 
Comm unity Pharmacies and  the Le gislative Liaison  for the  Maine Pharmacy Association.   The MPA  is the state pharmacy 
organization that addresses  the advocacy, continuing education and professional needs of all licensed pharmacists, 
pharmacy technicians and student phar macists in Maine . Our mission  is to promote public health by advocating for the 
profession of pharmacy.   On behalf of  the Maine Pharmacy Assoc iation, I am testifying  today neither for nor against LD 
252    
 
Long term care ph armacies fill an important role i n healthcare by providing med ication s and services for patients 
resid ing in facilities  across Maine .  Currently these ph armacies are most often license d as “Closed -shop  Pharmac ies”.  
Defining long term care pharmacies i n law could help highlight the differences in their type of practi ce compared to 
other pharmacies,  such as retai l pharmacies.  One point of caution would be to allow this to be a licensing option for 
pharmacies  that service long term care facil ities, and not a requirement .  There are many reta il and hospital pharmacies  
that provide services to long term care facilities - and th at right should be maintained . Patients an d/or f acilities should 
have a right to  choose who provides their medication s.  We have co ncerns  that as currently drafted this bill  could be an 
obstacle for these retail or hospital ph armacies to continue to service their established patient s. 
 
In regard to the proposed change by adding a seat to repre sent long term care pharmacies on the board  of pharmacy  
we’d like to offer this information for consideration.   As you know, the current make up is d efined by law with 2 public 
members and 5 pharmacist s. For the pharmac ist seats one must be  a hospital  pharmacist , one must be a chain 
pharmacist and on e must be a n independent  pharmacist  at the time of appointment .  A long t erm care pharmacist 
certainly would be a n appropr iate appointee for one of those two seats , and t here have been long term care pharmacists 
who were appointed to one of those seats in the  past.   Items to consider if choosing to change the make up wo uld be the 
potential implications for having an even number of members on the board, as well as future practice areas of pharmacy 
that may want to submit legislation  to expand the board  to ensure they have a seat as well.  The purpo se of the Board of 
Pharm acy is to protect th e public, so that should guide all de cisions for board representation and appoint ees.  If you 
desire a further discussion about a change  in board representation  you could  consider looking at the number of licens ed 
pharmacists for each p ractice area of pharmacy as well as looking at the number of complaints that the board hears for 
each type of pharmacy  practice .  
 
The M aine Pharmacy Association  is happy to answer any questions and work with the committee on this leg islation . 
Thank you fo r your time and consideration.  
 
 
Most Sincerel y,  
 
Amelia Arnold, PharmD  
Vice Pres ident of Oper ations  | Community Pharmacies, LLC  
Legislative Liaison  | Maine Pharmacy Association  
