Testimony for Public Hearing 
Committee for Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services
State of Maine
LD 252-An Act Related to Long-Term Care Pharmacies
Amy Enos, PharmD, BCGP
Director, Pharmacy Operations | Guardian Pharmacy of Maine
3 Business Parkway, Suite 2 | Brunswick, ME 04011 | 207-844-2240
amy.enos@guardianpharmacy.net  
To the Committee for Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services
State of Maine, thank you for hearing my testimony. 
My name is Amy Enos. I reside in North Yarmouth, Maine and am representing Guardian 
Pharmacy of Maine. 
I am writing today in support of LD 252-An Act Related to Long-Term Care Pharmacies. I have 
served the state of Maine as a long-term care pharmacist for over 15 years. 
Long Term Care definition: Long Term Care pharmacies have been defined as retail 
pharmacies, but they provide so much for then medications to Maine residents. They do not 
have public traffic/access; they do not have cash registers. Long Term Care pharmacies do 
provide:
Daily deliveries of medications & supplies to patients residing in facilities
24/7 access to a pharmacist for emergent needs as well as 24/7 emergency delivery 
services
Specialized prescription packaging for staff to administer patient medications
Interfacing with facility electronic medical records for accuracy
Regulatory and Clinical support on site at nursing homes & assisted living facilities as 
required by facility state regulations (monthly, quarterly)
More in depth medication reconciliation – unlike a retail pharmacy which is working off of 
prescriptions only, Long Term Care pharmacists evaluate hospital records and discharge 
summaries in real time along side prescriptions for patients entering facilities
Vaccination support for flu/covid clinics
Long Term Care pharmacies serve the patient that is too unwell to be at home but not so unwell 
that they need to be hospitalized. When a retail pharmacy isn’t available on a Saturday night or 
in a snow storm or on Christmas, who does that facility nurse turn to? – the Long Term Care 
pharmacy. A retail pharmacy simply packaging a medication in a ‘bingo card’ does not make 
them a long term care provider. Our team of pharmacists logs clinical interventions everytime 
they intervene on a clinical issue for a patient. They logged over 800 hours of clinically 
intervening on patient orders during 2022. Long Term Care Pharmacy is a specialty industry 
serving some of the most vulnerable patients in Maine and it deserves its own definition. There 
should be a standard for long term care pharmacy services & definition standard for what these 
patients require for care. Defining Long Term Care as it’s own type of pharmacy is of the utmost 
importance to me in this bill. 
Long Term Care Pharmacy representation on the board: As outlined above, the specialized 
nature of a long term care pharmacy’s scope of services, truly suggest a need for representation 
of the Maine Board of Pharmacy. This is no different that requiring representation from a 
hospital pharmacist or an independent retail pharmacist.
Long Term Care Pharmacy Returns: When a medication leaves a traditional pharmacy, it 
cannot be returned. I would like to write in support of this being the standard in long term care 
pharmacies as well. When a medication leaves the chain of custody of the pharmacy and 
moves to facility or patient custody, one cannot know the stability of what might be returned to 
the pharmacy. Did that medication experience temperature excursions? Was the medication 
adulterated in any way? Would you want your family member to ingest medication that was 
previously dispensed, returned and then re-dispensed to your loved one? Every time a 
medication is delivered from one location to another there is an opportunity for diversion. By 
eliminating the option to return mediations, there is one less chance of this happening. 
Thank you to the committee for your time & consideration and for hearing my testimony. It is my 
hope that LD-252 will pass on all accounts & can give Long Term Care Pharmacy the voice and 
recognition it needs to optimally serve the long term care residents of Maine. 
Sincerely, 
Amy Enos, PharmD, BCGP
Director, Pharmacy Operations | Guardian Pharmacy of Maine
3 Business Parkway, Suite 2 | Brunswick, ME 04011 | 207-844-2240
amy.enos@guardianpharmacy.net 
