 
 
 
Testimony of Angela Cole Westhoff , President and CEO  
Maine Health Care Association  
 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
 
February 9, 2023 at 1:00 pm  
 
 
Testifying neither for nor against  LD 252, An Act Relating to Long -term Care Pharmacies  
 
Senator Bailey , Representative  Perry , and distinguished members of the  Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services :  
 
My name is Angela Westhoff, and I serve as the  President  & CEO of t he Maine Health Care 
Association . We represent approximately 200 nursing homes , assisted living , and residential 
care facilities (also known as Private Non -Medical Institutions or PNMIs) across the state. Our 
mission is to empower members to ensure the integrity, quality, and sustainability of long term 
care  (LTC) in Maine.   
 I am providing testimony neither for nor against L D 252.  This bill creates a new category of 
pharmacy facility licensure for long -term care pharmacies.  It also adds a new seat for an  LTC 
pharmacist  on the Maine Board of Pharmacy and changes requirements for redistributing 
returned drugs.  
 Long term care pharmacies  provide an invaluable  service to Maine’s aging population.  Our 
pharmacies support residents every day, 365 days a year.  They are dedicated to supporting 
residents of LTC facilities and ensuring they get the best care possible. They make a big impact , 
yet their work often goes unnoticed.  A recent  highlight of LTC pharmacies’ excellent work was 
during the COVID -19 pandemic and the administration of  the vaccine. During a period of 
 
 
2 
 uncertainty and specific eligibility requirements, our pharmacies d istributed and administered 
thousands of doses to those critically vulnerable.  
 
LTC pharmacies provide a service that is distinct from typical retail pharmacies in many ways. For example, they  are not open to the public and do not sell convenience items . They support a  
specific set of patients  with complex  needs  and operate  under a 24/7 schedule . LTC pharmacies 
are prepared to dispense  emergency prescriptions . They conduct patient monitoring, and their 
revenue is based solely on dispensing prescriptions an d consultative services . Additionally, LTC 
pharmacies often have higher operating costs due to  different legal and regulatory mandates.  
MHCA recognizes LTC pharmacies' important and distinct role , and we support their desire for 
increased recognition.  
 Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments.   
