STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL 
L; AND FINANCIAL REGULATION‘ 
» 
~ 35 sr/me; HOUSE srrvrrow 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 
. YE AS 
04333-0035 
'_ _ Anne L. Head 
Jam‘ lr Mme Commissioner 
Governor 
TESTIMONY OF KRISTIN M. RACINE 
ATTORNEY, OFFICE OF PROFESSIONAL AND OCCUPATIONAL REGULATION 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST LD 252 
“An Act Relating to Long-term Care Pharmacies ” 
Sponsored by Senator Eloise Vitelli 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
HEALTH COVERAGE, INSURANCE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Public Hearing: February 9, 2023, 1:00 PM 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and honorable members of the Committee, my name is Kristin 
Racine and I am the attorney for the Office of Professional and Occupational Regulation (OPOR). I am 
here to speak neither for nor against LD 252 on behalf of OPOR. 
Pursuant to 10 M.R.S. § 8008: 
“The sole purpose of an occupational and professional regulatory board is to protect the 
public health and welfare. A board carries out this purpose by ensuring that the public is 
served by competent and honest practitioners and by establishing minimum standards of 
proﬁciency in the regulated professions by examining, licensing, regulating and disciplining 
practitioners of those regulated professions. Other goals or objectives may not supersede this 
purpose. ” I 
This bill creates a new category of pharmacy facility licensure for long-term care pharmacies, deﬁninga 
long-term care pharmacy in the Maine Pharmacy Act to mirror a proposed federal bill (S. 1574, H.R. 
5632), which has not yet been enacted. The proposed federal legislation seeks to codify a deﬁnition 
contained in CMS regulations relating to the Medicare prescription drug beneﬁt. It is important to note 
that boards regulating an occupation or profession do not have jurisdiction over reimbursement matters. 
It is not clear that this proposed federal legislation, even if enacted, would require a new 
statutory license category for pharmacies at the state level. The Board already issues licenses to 
a variety of pharmacy facility categories under its existing statute and rules (sterile and non- 
sterile compounding, nuclear pharmacies, veterinary animal health specialty pharmacies). The 
Maine Board of Pharmacy already has the authority through rulemaking to license a sub- 
<)FFl(f£~IS L()(.‘/WEI) AT: 76 N()R'I‘HI'iRr\i AVIENULL GARDINER, MAINE 
r>H<'>:\1r1; (207)624-8511 (V0105) *;~';~\/US$31 m!§MiimRdm,7H FAX? (2U7}o24~8595
category of retail pharmacy when appropriate. In 2013, the Board adopted a rule permitting 
licensing of closed-shop pharmacies, which may only serve a limited institutional patient 
population, such as residents of a long-term care facility or assisted living program. Currently, 
there are eight licensed closed-shop pharmacies. 
Of note is that Board rule set forth the scope of a closed-shop pharmacy license as pertained to 
the population it may serve, but made no change to the scope of practice of the pharmacists 
staffing such a facility. By contrast, LD 252 appears to direct the Board to expand the 
pharmacists ’ scope of practice when practicing in a long-term care pharmacy. Scope of practice 
can only be amended by statute. 
Regardless of whether a new licensure category is created, the Department does not support 
increasing Board membership from 7 to 8 members. There are only a few pharmacies in Maine 
that would identify as a long-term care pharmacy facility, meaning there would be a small pool 
of potential pharmacists to serve as a board member. In general, it is difﬁcult to ﬁll board 
member seats. Such a statutory change would mandate a board seat to be ﬁlled by a very 
speciﬁc and limited area of pharmacy, while not similarly providing a board seat to those areas 
that are equally important to the regulation of pharmacy in the State (e. g., non-sterile 
compounding pharmacists, sterile compounding pharmacists, nuclear pharmacy, veterinary 
compounding pharmacists, etc.). Finally, an even-number membership presents the possibility of 
tie-votes with no ability to break a deadlock. 
The last section of the bill prohibits a licensed pharmacy from accepting drug or drug preparation 
returns for re-distribution unless it is returned in the manufacturer ’s unbroken, sealed container 
or packaging. Current law allows a pharmacy to accept drugs to be returned to the pharmacy 
stock for future re-distribution if the drug is packaged in an unbroken, sealed container. The bill 
also proposes to remove the provision in current law that provides hospital pharmacists with the 
discretion to dispense the returned drug again if the hospital pharmacist determines that the drug 
has not been impaired. 
Thank you for your time, and I will be happy to answer your questions now or at the work 
session.
