 
P.O. Box 261 Augusta, ME 04332 | 207-204-8800
February 9, 2023
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair
Representative Anne Perry, Chair
Members of the Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services Committee
RE: Testimony, LD 252 An Act Relating to Long-term Care Pharmacies
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Health Coverage and Financial 
Services Committee:
My name is Matthew Marston, I am a resident of Hampden and the Legislative Liaison on the Maine 
Society of Health System Pharmacists Board of Directors. Today I am submitting testimony on 
behalf of the Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists, an organization that has more than 300 
members statewide and primarily represents individual Pharmacists, Technicians and students who 
practice in a health-system setting. I am testifying neither in support nor against LD 252.
Long term care pharmacies play an integral role in supporting patients and facility staff throughout 
our State in effectively managing medication therapy.  Further defining in statute what it means to 
be a long-term care pharmacy helps to highlight the vital work that is done in this sector of 
pharmacy.  What this bill does not do as written, is prevent patients from having the ability to utilize 
any pharmacy of their choosing in order obtain their medications which is a fundamental right of 
our Maine residents that must be preserved.  I want to highlight for the committee that 
independent retail pharmacies and hospital pharmacies also service long term care facility patients 
in varying degrees across the state with longstanding relationships that are not licensed as long-
term care pharmacies.  The ability to do so should be preserved and should not be challenged by 
the final language of this bill.
We are also aware of concern that may exist regarding the number of Board Members changing on 
the Board of Pharmacy and that this may introduce the possibility of a tie vote.  We acknowledge 
this concern and would suggest amending statute to allow the Board of Pharmacy to address the 
composition of the Board membership through rulemaking rather than statute.  The profession of 
pharmacy is made up of a diverse number of care settings including long term care that continue to 
evolve over time, such has hospital pharmacies, specialty pharmacies, physician practices, and 
compounding pharmacies to name a few.  Establishing membership composition through 
rulemaking would allow membership to be more representative of the profession they regulate and 
serve as the profession changes over time.
The Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists would be happy to work with the committee in 
any way we can on LD 252. Please reach out if we can be of service.
Kind Regards,
Matthew Marston, PharmD, MBA, BCPS, BCOP
Legislative Liaison| Maine Society of Health System Pharmacists
