P.O. Box 2490  
Augusta, ME 04338  
 
Telephone: 1-800-965-7476  
Fax: 1-888-214-5233  
Website: www.mainecahc.org  
Email: consumerhealth@mainecahc.org   
 
Advocating the right to quality, affordable 
health care for all Mainers.  
 
Testimony in support of LD 389  
An Act to Improve Rural Transportation and Access to Mental  
Health Care and Physical Health Care  
Ann Woloson, Executive Director, Consumers for Affordable Health Care  
4/5/23  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services.  I am Ann Woloson, Executive Director of Consumers for Affordable Health Care and I am here today to testify in support of  LD 
389, An Act to Improve Rural Transportation and Access to Mental Health Care and 
Physical Health Care.  
 
Consumers for Affordable Health Care (CAHC), is a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization 
that advocates for Maine people to be heard, respected, and well -served i n a health 
system that provides coverage, access and quality, affordable care to all.  
 
CAHC is designated by Maine’s Attorney General as Maine’s Health Insurance 
Consumer Assistance Program (CAP). The CAP program provides toll -free and  
in-person access t o Maine Enrollment Assisters and other trained individuals who help 
Mainers understand their health coverage options,  apply for,  and enroll in private 
health insurance. The program also provides assistance to Mainers in appealing inappropriate health ins urance denials and links people to safety net programs when 
necessary, so they can meet health care and other basic needs. CAHC also serves as 
the Ombudsman program for Maine’s Medicaid program, MaineCare, and helps people with applying for and navigating the enrollment process for MaineCare coverage. It is 
from our experience assisting Mainers in navigating health coverage programs that we 
offer our support of this bill.    
 We often hear about the difficulties people face accessing the services they need in rural areas of the state. Problems are more acute for people who need community 
behavioral health services. Current reimbursement for non- emergency transportation 
services is limited, creating challenges for providers who supply these cost -effectiv e, 
beneficial, and necessary services.  Without access to these services, some people 
may find themselves in need of more expensive services including hospital emergency 
department and ambulance services.  
April 5, 2023, Testimony in support of LD 389  
Ann Woloson, Consumers for Affordable Health Care  
 
 
On a personal note, my daughter, who is now 24 years old, worked as a mental health rehabilitation therapist about two years ago in central Maine.  While she was not paid 
much for her work, she enjoyed it and felt her clients benefited greatly from local access 
to services.  She became very frustrated, ho wever, when she was not reimbursed 
adequately for the transportation required.  Sometimes she was not paid to travel to a client’s home; other times, she was not reimbursed if the client was not at home or 
unable to participate in the scheduled activities.  When she was reimbursed, it was at a 
nominal mileage rate of $0.21 cents per mile.  She ended up leaving the position out of 
that frustration.    
This bill will have three beneficial effects for people in rural areas: 1) it will improve 
access to communit y services; 2) it will help attract and retain dedicated workers; and 3) 
it will reduce the need for more expensive care.   Thank you.       
 
