 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyers and the good members of the HHS Committee; 
 
My name is Betsy Sweet, and I represent the Behavioral Health Community 
Collaborative – eight non-profit community based mental health agencies for children 
and adults.  (Sweetser, Opportunity Alliance, Spurwink, Shalom House, KidsPeace, 
Volunteers of America, Gateway Community Services, Oxford County Mental Health 
Services). 
 
I testify today in support of LD 389 – aimed at increasing access to behavioral health 
services in rural areas.  This committee is well aware of the crisis we have in mental 
health – not enough providers, not enough services, long wait times, programs closing 
down – you have heard it all.  And I want to thank each of you for the incredibly good 
support you have given to help us all address these issues, both last session and this 
session.  There is more to do. 
 
Rural access to and availability of services is extremely limited.  I talked to a mom the 
other day who lives in Piscatiquis County, and she has to drive her teenaged daughter 2.5 
hours each way to see an outpatient therapist.   She reports a friend whose son also is in 
need of services and is on an 11-month waiting list.   If you are in an urban area or along 
the I-95 corridor, the problem of access is terrible.  If you are anywhere else, multiply 
that problem by three or four times.   
 
This bill is so helpful in that it addresses the issue from two vantage points – one from the 
clients’ needs, by requiring DHHS to provide the transportation.  It also addresses a huge 
problem for our rural providers.  As funds have shrunk, and reimbursement to travel has 
not increased, agencies have necessarily limited the areas where they can send staff and 
travel.  If you think of the state as catchment areas defined by circles, think of those 
circles shrinking and shrinking – and all those areas in the “gaps” are not getting service 
or having to travel long distances. 
 
This bill is a partial and necessary step toward restoring critically important behavioral 
health services to rural Maine.   
 
I’m happy to answer any questions.  
 
