 52 WATER STREET 
HALLOWELL, ME 04347 
(800) 464-5767 
 
 LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Director of Community 
Programs 
(207) 622-5767  ￿ HannahL@namimaine.org  POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
www.namimaine.org/advocacy 
POSITION STATEMENT IN SUPPORT 
LD 389: An Act to Improve Rural Transportation and Access to Mental Health Care and Physical Health 
Care 
 
Presented to Maine’s Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 5th, 2023 
 
As the state’s largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine supports the passage 
of LD 389 An Act to Improve Rural Transportation and Access to Mental Health Care and Physical Health 
Care. NAMI Maine works closely with the 1 in 4 Mainers impacted by mental illness state-wide and often 
hears stories from individuals who are seeking help but find themselves coming up against a litany of 
barriers, including the lack of access to transportation   
Maine is the most rural states in the nation, with 61.3% of the state’s population residing in rural areas. 
The rural landscape of Maine can make accessible healthcare treatment complicated. Maine continues 
to experience transportation barriers, with minimal access to public transportation, making it more 
difficult for individuals to access the limited resources within the state’s rural areas. The lack of 
transportation options in the state should not be a barrier to individuals receiving mental health 
treatment and engaging in activities and groups that are proven to improve mental health. By providing 
transportation to programming that is part of an individual’s treatment plan, the state will in fact see a 
positive impact on negating the higher overall costs for healthcare that accompany the lack of access to 
treatment. Missing a routine or preventive care service because of transportation can lead to poorly 
managed care, a need for emergency care, and preventable hospitalizations. 
With the current transportation reimbursement rates for treatment for mental health services, agencies 
are often put in a precarious financial position that limits their ability to serve the full scope of their 
clientele’s needs. Individuals are placed in a situation that requires them to choose between receiving 
care, funding their basic needs, or leaving the communities where their supports exist. By increasing the 
reimbursement rates for transportation and providing individuals with transportation to mental health 
services, the state of Maine will be able to strengthen the ability of providers to better serve 
communities. As the public health emergency ends, Maine is continuing to grapple with the residual 
impacts, particularly on the mental wellness of our residents. It is imperative that we support their 
physical and mental wellbeing by all the means possible. Because of this, NAMI Maine supports the 
passage of LD 389 to ensure that those who require supports and resources can access them, regardless 
of transportation options or the communities where they reside.  
 
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the National Alliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) is the state’s largest grassroots 
mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone 
impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state’s mental 
health system through collaboration and education. 
