'55‘ i "' 
Officers "‘ 
bave McCluskey, President 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1" Vice-President 
Day One 
Bob Descoteaux, 2"“ Vioe~ 
President 
MalipeGeneral Behavioral Health 
‘ 
Kara Hay, Secretary 
Penquis CAP inc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
Arqostook Mental Health Center 
'Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 
" Board Members "' 
Adcare Educational institute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, inc. 
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare 
;‘ 
Assistance Plus 
l Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co~occurrlng Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
i 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties 
Community Caring Collaborative 
Community Health & Counseling 
COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine 
1 ~ 
Genoa Healthcare & ‘ 
Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health 
_i Organization 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
Milestone Recovery 
NFl North, Inc. 
Northern Light/Acadia 
Portland Recovery Community 
l 
Center 
Pathways of Maine 
Rumford Group Homes 
Brighter Heights Maine 
1 ' 
Sunrise Opportunities 
‘ Sweetser 
TriCounty Mental Health Sen/ices 
Wellspring, inc. 
Wings for Children 8t Families 
Woodfords Family Sen/ices Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maineis community behavioral health providers‘ 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
Testimony in Support of LDSEQ 3Q>Ci 
" An Act to improve Rural Transportation and Access to Mental 
Health Care and Physical Heaith Care" r 
Sponsored by Representative Madigan 
April 5, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the 
Health and Human Services Committee. My name is Malory Shaughnessy and lam the 
Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance 
is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine's community based 
mental health and substance use treatment providers, providing services to over 80,000 
Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of 
sound policies and evidence-based practices that serve to enhance the duality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system. 
We support LD 389 and thank Representative Madigan and the cosponsors for bringing 
this legislation forward. This proposal would add two different ways to expand access to 
treatment services. 
First,§laq would expand the nonemergency transportation services to- a member 
receiving mental health community support services to include transportation to the 
activities identified in a member‘s individual treatment plan for community support. 
Currently it is only allowed to and from actual appointments for medical or mental health 
services. However, community support services are designed to assist a member to 
maintain the highest level of independence possible. The services provide. personal 
supervision and therapeutic support to assist members to develop and maintain the skills 
of daily living. Services may be provided to an individual or in a group setting and are 
targeted to enhance access to community resources, with natural" supports, increase 
independence to promote successful community integration. The member needs to be 
able to participate in the targeted activities they are working on in the community. 
Secondly, this proposal would also require the department to reimburse a, community 
support provider or community-based mental health provider for travel? time when the 
provider travels more than 10 miles in a single direction to visit a MaineCare member for 
a MaineCare billable sen/ice in the member's home or community-based setting. 
One of the reasons that home and community services are so hard to access in rural 
areas is that provider travel is not a billable activity. Whether a provider travels 5 miles to 
someone’s home, or 25 miles, the rate is the same. regardless of the extra time and 
mileage needed. ln order to make the reimbursement rate work economically to sustain 
a program, agencies are forced to limit the distance that a clinician or Behavioral Health 
Professional travels to provide services. This has left many of our rural areas without 
access to these home and community-based services. s‘ 
I would be happy to answer any questions you have for me and to bring any other 
information you need for the work session on this bill. 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 “' Phone 207.621.8118 "’ Fax 207.621.8362 "' theAilianceMaine.org
