  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 5, 2023 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Miche le Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 389 – An Act to Improve Rural Transportation and Access to Mental Health Care and 
Physical Health Care  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide the perspective of the Department of Health and 
Human Services. This letter is in opposition to  LD 389, An Act to Improve Rural Transportation 
and Access to Mental Health Care and Physical Health Care . This bill requires the department 
to provide a MaineCare member with mental illness who is receiving adult community support 
services and who resides more than 10 miles away from the member's community support 
provider's office with nonemergency transportation services  to and from medical and mental 
health appointments and to and from activities identified in the member's community support 
individual support plan. It also requires the Department to reimburse a community support 
provider or community -based mental health provider for travel time when the provider travels 
more than 10 miles in a single direction to visit a MaineCare member for a MaineCare billable 
service in the member's home or community -based setting.  
 
The first section of the bill would  use nonemergency transportation (NET) to cover rides that are 
not currently covered . This  would place further strain on an already -strained transportation 
system.  NET brokers are struggling to find drivers who are willing to transport MaineCare 
members who need rides to medical appointments. Adding coverage for transportation to other 
service destinations w ould lead to additional challenges getting members to medical 
appointments.  The legislation assumes that NET could provide transportation to and from all 
activities listed in t he member’s community support plan. We have concerns about this language 
as it does not specify the services to which MaineCare would cover  NET , and the Department 
cannot assume that all listed activities in a member’s community support plan would be 
MaineCare -covered services, as required in order to be  NET -eligible. If this legislation includes 
rides to activities that are not NET -eligible, the Department would need to pay for these rides 
solely with state  general fund  dollars. 
 
The second section will  provide reimbursement to certain providers for transporting members . 
For some service  rates,  transportation services have already been built into the reimbursement . 
As written,  this change lead to duplicative reimbursement for s ervices with bundled rates.   
 
 
 The Department is currently administering a research project  under its CMS -approved Home and 
Community Based Services spending plan for Section 9817 of the American Rescue Plan to 
research how best to cover trips for home and community -based services community supports.  
The department would recommend it finish this report and review options and recommendations 
prior to taking any action to reimburse NET for these services.  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

