 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
Testimony of the  Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
Department of Health and Human Services  
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Se rvices  
 
In Opposition to LD 1598 , An Act to Allow an Exception to Immunization Requirements for 
Health Care Workers for Vaccines Approved Under Emergency Use Authorization  
 
Hearing Date: April 2 4, 2023  
 
Senator  Baldacci , Representative  Meyer , and Members  of the Joint Standing Committee on  
Health and Human Ser vices, my name  is Ann Farmer and I am the Associate Director of the 
Division of Disease Surveillance at the Maine Cente r for Disease Control and Prevention at the 
Department of Health and Human Services . I am here today to provide testimony in opposition 
to LD 1598, An Act to Allow an Exception to Immunization Requirements for Health Care 
Workers for Vaccines Approved Unde r Emergency Use Authorization . 
 
LD 1598 allows an exemption from immunization requirements for health care workers if the 
only available vaccine for a disease is one that is approved by the federal Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) under an emergency use authorization and provides that an employer of 
health care workers may not require a vaccine approved under an emergency use authorization or 
retaliate against an employee for refusing to obtain a vaccine that is approved by the federal 
Food and Drug Administration under an emergency use  authorization. Maine CDC strongly 
opposes this bill.  
 
This bill will restrict health care facilities from requiring health care workers to be immunized 
with a vaccine that has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) under an 
Emergency Use Authorization (EUA). An EUA is permitted during a public health emergency 
and if the FDA determines that it is reasonable to believe the vaccine “may treat or prevent” the 
disease, the known and potential benefits outweigh the known and potential risks. Th e FDA sets 
high standards for determining whether to grant an EUA, including requiring data from clinical 
trials that demonstrate the vaccine’s safety and efficacy and set the minimum efficacy and safety 
requirements.  
 
It is crucial during a public health emergency for health care workers to be vaccinated when they 
are providing care to our most vulnerable populations.  We would like to remind the committee 
that certain presentations of both Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna COVID -19 vaccines have 
already received  full approval  by the FDA . Comirnaty and Spikevax are now fully licensed 
under a Biologics License Application as both products have completed robust, well -controlled 
clinical trials and demonstrated the se vaccines to be “safe, pure, and potent .” Prohibiting  
vaccines approved under EUA  as proposed in LD 1598 will not prohibit COVID -19 vaccine . 
 
 
 In summary, the Maine CDC  opposes LD 1598. Good public health policy is data -driven and  
evidence based . Maine’s immunization requirements are to ensure full  protection of all Mainers  
from vaccine -preventable disease. The evidence is overwhelming, sound, and supported by the  
professional medical community and majority of Maine voters; vaccinations are proven to be  
safe and effective for preventing the spread o f disease   
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter  and for the opportunity to provide testimony 
today. I can address questions from the Committee , and I will be available to participate in the 
work session.  
 
 
 
