Courtney Ampezzan 
North Yarmouth 
April 24, 2023 
Regarding LD 59, LD 172, LD 601, LD 1382, LD 15-47, & LD 1598. 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services: My name is Courtney Ampezzan, and I am a resident of North Yarmouth. l am here as an 
extremely vulnerable and concerned citizen. My time to speak is limited, so I will not address each 
bill, but please note my opposition to all 6 of these bills -LD 59, LD 172, LD 601, LD 1382, LD 1547,& 
LD 1598. 
Some of you might remember me from my previous testimonies before other committees. I have an 
ultra~rare primary immunodeficiency which means I am a very high-risk patient that is incredibly 
vulnerable to severe illness and infections. In fact, after testifying here at the state house on April 
third, I ended up at the doctor's where I had to be put on additional medications and was in bed fora 
week due to the stress on my immune system. Yet I am back here today because it is critical that this 
committee takes into consideration the negative and potentially deadly consequences these bills 
could have on other patients like me. 
LD 172 seeks to reinstate the religious and philosophical exemption for healthcare workers. 
Reinstating these exceptions would have direct and severe consequences for the most vulnerable 
people in our community. Speaking as a patient, when I go to the doctor, the emergency room, or 
when I’m admitted to the hospital, I am already extremely anxious about my health. I don’t need the 
additional stress on my mental and physical well-being by worrying about the vaccination status of my 
care team. My illness is going to kill me, I don’t need an unvaccinated employee doing it for me 
sooner by giving me COVID. If I am being completely honest, I struggle with the thought of whya 
healthcare worker would even want an exemption to a vaccine that could not only protect themselves 
but also their patients and their community. I don’t understand why someone would even be working 
in healthcare if they didn't trust the science behind vaccines. Vaccines are safe, effective, and 
necessary for good public health. Furthermore, the Supreme Court has allowed Maine’s immunization 
requirements for healthcare workers to remain in effect, rejecting claims that workers should be 
allowed religious exemptions. 
Vaccines, and the protection they provide through herd immunity, are significant reasons as to how 
and why I am here today. Tomorrow isn't promised. I am not sure how much longer I have before my 
illness consumes me, but I do know until I take my final breath I will continue to advocate for the 
health and safety of my community. So today, I am here using my voice to respectfully appeal to the 
Committee to vote “ought not to pass" on LD 59, LD 172, LD 601, LD 1382, LD 1547, 8 LD 1598. 
Thank you for your time this morning and for your continued commitment to affording all Mainers 
equitable access to a safe and healthy community.
