Testimony of Lani Graham, MD, MPH 
IN Opposition to LD 1598 and LD 1382 
An Act to Allow an Exception to Immunization Requirements for Health Care 
Workers for Vaccines Approved Under Emergency Use Authorization 
Sponsored by Senator Harold Stewart
& 
An Act to Establish Guiding Public Health Principles of Focused 
Protection for Pandemics of a Highly Infectious Respiratory Disease 
Sponsored by Senator Eric Brakey 
Before the Health and Human Affairs Committee, April 24, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Committee, 
my name is Lani Graham I am a former Chief Public health Officer for 
Maine. I serve on the Public Health Committee of the Maine Medical 
Association. l live in Freeport. I am here in opposition to LD’s 1598& 
1382. Both bills constitute real threats to the health of Maine people. 
Despite the misinformation widely circulating about the Covid-19 
vaccines approved through the Federal Drug Administration (FDA) 
Emergency Authorization plan, the data is indisputable. A careful 
scientific study conducted from December 2020 to November 2022, 
indicated that use of the Covid vaccines saved over 3 million American 
lives, averted about 18 million hospitalizations, and prevented about 
119 million infections.1 It can scarcely be overestimated how much 
those savings meant to American families and our economy. Of course, 
this towering success did not come risk free. But overall, risks were 
very low and were balanced by the benefits attained. 
As we certainly discovered, when a pandemic strikes, time is of the 
essence. The FDA Emergency Authorization was essential to the 
benefits described. In addition, had the people who resisted 
‘ https://www.commonwealthfund.org/biog/2022/two-years-covid-vaccines-prevented-millions-deaths- 
hospitalizations
immunization with the Covid vaccine been vaccinated, it is estimated 
that over 300,000 lives could have been saved? That is a tragic number 
to consider. People died due to misinformation and fear, feelings that 
these two bills feed. At a time when public health should be celebrated, 
it is being attacked. 
With specific reference to LD 1598, the one group that absolutely must 
be as safe as possible is health care workforce who have direct contact 
with sick patients Isn’t it critical to make sure that people who care for 
the sick do not make their patients even more ill by passing on a deadly 
disease? Even during Covid, no health care worker was forced to take 
the vaccine. It was just that there were certain jobs they could not do. 
And Emergency Authorization is not undertaken lightly, only in the face 
of real need for fast action as was the case with the Covid Vaccine. 
With specific reference to LD 1382, the best of it is already in action asa 
natural part of public health, but the bulk of the bill is extremely 
dangerous to public health action. One element (F) is particularly 
egregious. Public health is specifically directed to populations. In fact, 
public health might be called “population health” . This element 
prohibits required actions directed to populations, actions that might be 
needed without delay. Coercion is always the last stop for public 
health, but sometimes is needed. Occasionally we are all required to do 
things we may not wish to do in the interest of others. And a pandemic 
is just the environment where such actions must sometimes be taken 
swiftly to save lives. LD 1382 could prevent that and lives would be 
lost. 
I hope you will vote both these bills ought not to pass. 
Thank you for your attention. I would be pleased to answer any 
questions you might have. 
2 
httpsi./fwww.npr.org/sections/liealth-shots/2022/05/ 13/ 109807 I284/this-is-how-niany-lives-could-have 
been-saved-with-covid-vaccinations-in-each-sta
