Senators and Committee members. I am speaking today in favor of Bills LD 172, 
601, 1598, 1547, 59 and 1382. iT
T 
My name is Lisa Miller. l am a Select Board Member for the Town of Weld, a Fire 
Fighter and a Registered Nurse. Not only has the removal of vaccine exemptions 
affected me personally, its making it very difficult for the Town of Weld to 
maintain its EMS License. 
l want to ask you all a couple of questions. 
You took an oath to uphold the United States Constitution and the Maine 
Constitution. Do you believe in the First Amendment andArticle One? These 
guarantee citizens the inherent and unalienable rights‘ 
among which are to be free 
and independent. Do you believe inithese? *' 
How do you feel about being lied to about vaccines? The words safe and effective 
were beat into our consciences day and night. ln an interview last July, former 
White House Covid-19 Response Coordinator to the Trump administration, 
Deborah Birx stated that they knew the Covid-19 vaccine would neither prevent 
transmission or protect against infection. ln fact, the very definition of the word 
vaccine was changed by the CDC in 2021 from "producing immunity" to 
"producing protection" . The American people were lied to; given false information 
about the efficacy and safety of this and other vaccines. 
Former Vice President at Pﬁzer, Dr. Michael Yeadon, who has over 32 years of_ 
experience in pharmaceutical research, expressed his deep concerns over the 
experimental use of #COVlDl9 vaccines. He testified in Jan 2022 at the 86"‘ 
session of the German Stiftung Corona Ausschus, and stated what he called the8 
Covid Lies. I will sum them up... 
1. The virus is extremely lethal 
2. The PCR test is accurate and reliable 
3. Masks will protect you 
4. Lockdowns will slow the transmission of the virus
5. There is asymptomatic transmission 
6. They lied and told us there were NO TREATMENTS for this respiratory virus 
7. There is no natural immunity 
8. Covid-19 Vaccines are safe and effective 
The vaccine industry has not conducted legitimate placebo-controlled tests on 
their products. 
The Estimated 2022 US Vaccine Damage Report which looks at data from people 
ages 16-64 showed that we had 300,000 excess deaths, 26.6 million vaccine 
injuries and 1.36 million people disabled by vaccines, along with an added 
financial cost to the taxpayers of $147.8 Billion. 
The American public has been lied to, coerced, censored and threatened. 
As a Select Board Member for the Town of Weld, l like to add that the removal of 
vaccine exemptions has also harmed people living in small towns in Maine, like 
Weld. Our Fire Dept. is having a difficult time obtaining medical first responders 
because of the vaccine mandates. We have a paramedic with over 20 yrs. 
experience that isn't allowed to respond to medical calls. We have Fire Dept. 
members willing to serve as medical responders, but our hands are tied until 
exemptions are reinstated. 
Lastly, l will ask, is this what you want for Maine? Communities suffering, 
individuals stripped of their ability to serve in the medical community and thrown 
into financial hardship, medical professionals leaving the state to obtain work 
elsewhere. 
its time to reinstate vaccine exemptions.
t|_ 3e_Y' _=e_@__ 5.3_ _l2..£. l.lT§.l? Why did CDC change definition for ’vaccine'? Agency explains I Miami Herald
' 
§.>1§§vs $he_'lgn§W '_C0\/JQ ¥.§£¢_lFL§§__Yi ’9_"ld mt 1arote<:1_against.i_efe¢t i_<>n'_L.F9>< News 
Dr Mike Yeadon's key testimony — Part l: The Eight Covid Lies (thepeoplesvoice.org_) 
On March 28"‘ , 2023 Edward Dowd (who has previously given US Congressional Testimony on 
Dec.7, 2022, author and Founding Partner of Phinance Technologies) released the Estimated 
2022 US Vaccine Damage Report. He used source data from the Society of Actuaries and the U5 
Bureau of Labor Statistics to identify trending safety signals. 
For Americans age 16 to 64- 
Estimated Human Cost: 
26.6 miilion lniuries 
1.36 million Disabilities 
308K Excess Deaths 
Estimated Economic Cost: 
lnjaries: $89.9 billion 
Disabilities: $52.2 billion 
Excess Deaths: $5.6 billion 
Totai $147.8 billion
04/23/2023 
Dear Honorable Members of the Legislature, 
lthank you for your attention in this matter. l am a small—town ﬁre chief who has ten members 
in my ﬁre department. Currently we have our EMS License with one active EMT and one 
inactive. We also have a registered nurse. Of these three, only one can respond to medical calls. 
Over the past few years with the changes we've had to make due to mandates, the world has 
come to know these changes with views that have separated us. Not only has bipartisanship 
faded politically, our religious and philosophical views should, in my opinion, be respected and 
considered. In a world of so many opinions, it's difﬁcult to agree. 
The act of agreeing to disagree is becoming more past tense. The welfare of ali people of this 
great country is at stake if we can't do this. 
I am an independent and open-minded individual who listens and takes advice and with all due 
respect, i'rn conﬁdent the we all are trying to accomplish these traits, although difﬁcuit it may 
be- 
Maine EMS laws, immunization requirements, mandates and the EMS organization (including 
any norrtransportirig EMS services, such as many of these small—tovm ﬁre departments) require 
medical responders to be vaccinated for Covid-19. This is the same for employees of healthcare 
facilities on a larger scale. 
Religious and philosophical exemptions have been removed for influenza and Covid-19 in the 
state of Maine as of 2021. 
if you have n0n~medi €3l personnel with the minimal requirements needed to administer 
Narcan, who are possibly unvaccinated and can still administer the drug, how is that acceptable 
and different than going to a medical call? 
The complexity oi“ this issue of available medical responders with required immunizations has 
become a~ huge problem. if l could change things, l would try to ﬁnd solutions to allow people to 
serve in public safety medical responding regardless of medical, philosophical, or religious 
beliefs. There are ways around this that will work, and can work safely. 
l urge you to work diligently on this. l am sure many of you are ﬁrst responders, or know people 
who are. 
in our day to day lives, we are asked to risk our lives and safety to ensure the safety of others. 
The risk factors of having non-vaccinated personnel responding to calls are lower than the risk 
factors of living in a small town with the nearest ambulance usually 20 minutes or more away 
with little or no medical responders available.
The average EMR caurse is 56 hours in keagkh» feﬁewed by a natkmal test. The eveeage EMT 
ci:-arse is semesiez" wean the mejeritv ef smeﬁé-tewn depertmenfs persormei 
werking §u§§t§me iebs eisewhere, with families to feed and :s§mu5tane0us§y respnnding to calis 
when iwaiiabie, its mat an easy task ‘£0 recruit mere ta; make ihese sacriﬁces. 
l ask that you else cesssider the facts: of aur aging pepukation in this State. The average age in 
Maine was about 45 years 0? age in 2626). Not oniy are we faceé with previding services to an 
side: poeuiatjea, it's a doubieedged sward in the way that we are ﬁnding it more difﬁcult to 
recruit Younger pecpie that are avaiiabie to provide servﬁces. Se, -ear respunders are getting 
older. 
in dosing, E ask that yea zzensieier enei be creative, As a ﬁre chief, i knew what we are facing.» 
lmmunizetkms, eitiwugh with the intention sf emtedéng aﬂ, they are not for everyone. if we 
can ﬁnd other creaﬁve and sa%e seiuﬁans it wauid be wise. 
E thank yea: for heeréeg this meréee". 
Sincerely, 
Chief Ciarey Hetchiasen 
Weid Fire and Rescue
