i 
‘ H CARROLL HARPER 8: ASSOCIATES, INC. 
Professional Insurance Planning Since I975 
Experience You Can Trusf. . .for the Long Term 
396 Main Sfreef E-Mail: info@hc1rperh ‘c.com. Tel: 207.244.5133 
PO. Box I420 www, hclrperlfc. com Fox: 207-244-5709 
Southwest Harbor, ME 04679 Toll Free: I .800. 539.5 133 
March 9, 2023 
Re: LD308, ”An Act to Require that Insurance Companies Notify Workers Over 65 Years 
of Age of Potential High Costs" 
Good afternoon, Senate Chair Bailey, House Chair Perry, and other distinguished 
members of the Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services Committee of the 
131“ Legislature. My name is Carroll Harper. I am President of Carroll Harper and 
Associates, lnc., an agency specializing in Medicare and Long-Term Care Insurance, with 
experience in Medicare since 1975. 
l appear before you today in support of LD308, "An Act to Require that Insurance 
Companies Notify Workers Over 65 Years of Age of Potential High Costs". 
Many Medicare beneficiaries, upon attaining the Medicare eligible age of 65, continue 
to work, either by need, by choice, or both and many work for small businesses of less 
than 20 employees. These small group companies often provide health insurance 
benefits to their employees and many employers pay for some of the cost of the 
premiums, so when they sign up for Medicare, they have a decision to make as whether 
to enroll in both parts of Medicare, or not. There are two parts of original Medicare, 
“Unequaled commifmenf lo service”
Part A Hospital — which has no premium for most Medicare beneﬁciaries who have 
worked the required quarters and Part B Medical. The Part B Medical part of Medicare 
has a standard monthly premium of $164.90 for 2023, so the Medicare eligible 
employee opts not to enroll in this part of Medicare because the employee is already 
paying a high premium for the Group Health Plan sponsored by their employer. They 
assume that if they need medical care, the employer sponsored plan would pay any 
medical costs incurred based on the plan design of the company. 
it is important to note that currently there are five insurance companies active in the 
Small Group Market here in Maine providing health insurance benefits. How they pay 
Medicare Part B benefits to Medicare beneficiaries, however, differs and herein lies the 
problem. Three of the companies will pay the 80% of medical costs that Medicare would 
have paid, had the working Medicare beneficiary signed up for Medicare Part B, but opt 
not to. Two of the five will not pay the 80%. This position of denying the 80% benefit 
presents potential high out of pocket costs to the Medicare beneficiary. 
To better understand this, let's look at how the two carriers (who do not pay the 80%) 
would affect the Medicare employee who undergoes simple cataract surgery: 
in Hancock County, the provider charges around $17,000 per eye. Medicare only 
approved $6,000 of the $17,000 charge and would pay 80% of the $6,000 approved 
amount (also known as reasonable charge), or $4,800. if the employee is covered under 
one of the two insurance companies that won't pay the 80% (if the Medicare beneficiary 
opts not to enroll when eligible), the Medicare beneficiary is responsible for paying this 
$4,800 expense amount. Now, think if this was hip replacement surgery, knee surgery,
or even worse, heart bypass surgery; the cost to the employee could be staggering, as 
these are all Medicare Part B expenses. 
This bill before you, LD308 will go a long way in preventing medical expense sticker 
shock to affected Medicare employees who continue to work beyond age 65 and are 
unaware of such potential medical liability. lt will require an insurer providing health 
insurance coverage to a group with fewer than 20 employees, to provide written notice 
when the insured first becomes eligible for Medicare due to age, and annually upon 
each group renewal anniversary date. it will also require the insured Medicare 
employee to sign a written acknowledgement that the notice was provided. 
in a perfect world, all ﬁve carries would treat Medicare Part B claims the same, but that 
is not the case, thus the need to have a safety net for Maine's working seniors, which 
LD308 provides. 
To that end, I kindly request your support in passing LD308, which will help protect 
Maine seniors from such unexpected medical expenses in today's work place. 
Thank you and I welcome any questions. 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Carroll E. Harper 
Carroll Harper and Associates, Inc. President
