/E“, 
“gt? Affordable Telephone: 1-800 965-7476 Consumers for P-° BOX 249° 
Augusta, ME 04338 
Hearth cafﬁ Fax: 1-sss-214-5233 
. www.mainecahc org 
Advocating the right to quality, affordable . 
health we for an Mainem consumerhealth@ma|necahc org 
Testimony In Support Of 
LD 308, An Act to Require That insurance Companies Notify 
Workers over 65 Years of Age of Potential High Costs 
Thursday, March 9, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services. Thank you for the opportunity to submit 
these comments in support of LD 308, An Act to Require That Insurance Companies Notify 
Workers over 65 Years of Age of Potential High Costs. 
My name is Kate Ende and l am the Policy Director at Consumers for Affordable Health Care 
(CAHC), a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization that advocates for Maine people to be heard, 
respected, and well-served in a health system that provides coverage, access and quality, 
affordable care to all. CAHC is designated by Maine's Attorney General and Bureau of Insurance 
as Maine's Health Insurance Consumer Assistance Program (CAP). The CAP program provides 
toll-free and in-person access to certified application counselors and trained individuals to 
people across Maine who need help obtaining, keeping, using, or fixing problems with accessing 
or utilizing health coverage or health care services. lt is from our experience assisting Mainers 
in navigating health care and coverage systems that we offer the following comments in 
support of this bill today. 
Through our HelpLine, we often hear from people who are confused about their health 
coverage options. Transitions in health coverage or changes in eligibility can be especially 
confusing and often difficult to navigate, particularly for people who have had employer-based 
coverage for many years, sometimes their entire adult lives, who have never had to shop for 
insurance on their own and may not know where to go to sign up for other insurance or how to 
get help enrolling in coverage. 
It is also one thing to know that you have an alternative option for health insurance available to 
you. However, it is another thing entirely to truly understand those options and fully 
comprehend the repercussions of choosing one option over another. This is especially true 
when one of those options is Medicare, due to how complex the rules are for how Medicare 
interacts with other types of coverage. There are so many different rules regarding 
coordination of benefits between Medicare and other types of coverage, that CMS created a
32-page booklet to educate people about how Medicare interacts with their other health 
insurance, Medicare & Other Health Benefits: Your Guide to Who Pays First? 
While many people who are 65 years and older and working can delay signing up for Medicare 
and instead keep their employer coverage without there being any issues. However, others 
who do this may face serious financial consequences if they work at an employer with fewer 
than 20 employees. When someone has Medicare and employer coverage, one plan is 
considered ”primary payer," which pays first, and the other plan is the "secondary payer,” 
which pays second. When someone has coverage through an employer with 20 or more 
employees, the employer plan is the primary payer. However, if the employer has fewer than 
20 employees, then Medicare becomes the primary payer, which means the employer plan will 
only pay for costs that remain after Medicare has paid its share. This is true even if the 
individual did not sign up for Medicare yet. 
This bill will help Mainers with employer health coverage who are turning 65, or are 65 years or 
older, to make an informed decision about whether they should maintain their employer 
coverage, and how their financial exposure under their employer plan will, or has changed, due 
to failure to enroll in Medicare once they are eligible. As I mentioned before, navigating these 
coverage decisions can be very difficult, which is why we suggest the notices required by this 
bill also provide information about the availability of assistance with understanding Medicare 
benefits and coverage through the Maine State Health Insurance Assistance Program (SHIP). 
Thank you. 
1 
httpsr/jwww.medicare.gov§sites,{'_defayEtffiies; ’2i3§_§~2i. €if€}2},Z§%¢Medicateaitd~0ther-heaithMbez}e €its~§zous" ~-guEde» 
EQ-W?%¢3 “Qa§S—f§fSi.§€if
8 _ STATE OF IvIAINE 
_ DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL ‘F , #1 AND FINANCIAL REGULATION 
ii BUREAU OF INSURANCE 
ﬁt» 
_ 34 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 
04333-0034 - _z\i§: 
Janet T. Mills Eric A. Cioppa 
Governor Superintendent 
Bulletin 440 
Interaction Between Medicare and Small Group Health Plans 
The Superintendent issues this bulletin to explain the interaction between Medicare and group 
health plans, and to remind small group health carriers of the importance of providing employers 
and health plan enrollees with accurate information about how Medicare will affect them, 
especially when the employer has fewer than 20 employees. 
Under federal law, Medicare is secondary to group coverage for active employees and their 
spouses if the employer has 20 or more employees. ‘ This is why employees of those employers 
often delay enrollment in Medicare Part B until they retire. 
However, if the employer has fewer than 20 employees, Medicare is primary and the employer ’s 
group health coverage is secondary. This means that the group health carrier can coordinate 
beneﬁts, so that its responsibility for payment cannot exceed the portion of the bill that Medicare 
does not pay. Furthermore, Maine law also permits carriers to coordinate beneﬁts if the employee 
is eligible for Medicare but did not enroll in Part B. This means that if the employee is eligible for 
Medicare Part B due to age but chooses to delay enrollment, and the group has fewer than 20 
employees, the group plan may decline to cover any portion of a bill that Medicare Part B would 
cover, as long as the insured employee, retiree, or dependent has received prominent notice. The 
carrier must provide notiﬁcation to the insured both in the certiﬁcate of coverage and when an 
insured becomes eligible for Medicare due to age.2 
I 
Social Security Act § 1862(b)(l) (42 U.S.C. § 1395y(b)(l)). 
1 24-A M.R.S. § 2844(1-A)(B)(4). 
PRINTED ON RECYCLED PAPER 
OFFICES LOCATED AT 76 NORTHERN AVENUE, GARDINER, MAINE 04345 
www.mainegov/insurance 
Phone: (207) 624~8475 TTY: Please call Maine Relay 71 l Consumer Assistance: l-800~300-5000 Fax (207) 624-8599
When the Legislature considered L.D. 6l6, An Act To Create Uniform Practices for Medicare 
Beneﬁciaries in Small Group Plans, during the last legislative session, the Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Services Committee expressed concern that carriers were not adequately 
informing employees a11d retirees about the implications of failure to enroll in Part B at the time 
they become eligible for Medicare. Carriers that reduce their beneﬁts when enrollees are 
Medicare-eligible but fail to enroll should review and, if necessary, revise both their certiﬁcates of 
coverage for small group plans and their notiﬁcations to Medicare-eligible individuals. Carriers 
must clearly articulate in plain, unambiguous language whether the carrier is the primary or 
secondary payor for Medicare-eligible individuals and provide examples to explain the difference, 
if any, for actively employed individuals and retirees covered under the small group health plan. 
November 27, 2019 4.
% Eric A. Cioppa 
Superintendent of Insurance 
NOTE: This Bulletin is intended solely for informational purposes. It is not intended to set forth legal 
rights, duties, or privileges, nor is it intended to provide legal advice. Readers should consult applicable 
statutes and rules and contact the Bureau of Insurance if additional information is needed.
Pierce Atwood Draft 
March 9, 2023 
ACLI and Unum: Proposed Amendment to 
Sponsor’s Amendment to 
LD 308, An Act to Require That Insurance Companies Notify Workers over 65 Years of Age of Potential High Costs 
Amend the amendment by striking all of §2844, subsection 4, and by amending §2844, subsection 1-A, paragraph B, subparagraph (4) to to read as follows: 
§2844. Coordination of benefits 
1. Authorization. Provisions contained in group and blanket health insurance contracts 
relating to coordination of beneﬁts payable under the contract and under other plans of insurance 
or of health care coverage under which a certiﬁcate holder or the certiﬁcate holder's dependents 
may be covered must conform to rules adopted by the superintendent. These rules may establish 
unifonnity in the permissive use of coordination of beneﬁts provisions in order to avoid claim 
delays and misunderstandings that otherwise result from the use of inconsistent or incompatible 
provisions among the several insurers and nonproﬁt hospital, medical service and health care 
plans. 
[PL 1995, C. 332, Pt. H, §1 (AMD).] 
1-A. Coordination with Medicare. Coordination of beneﬁts is governed by the following 
provisions. 
A. The contract may not coordinate beneﬁts Witl1 Medicare Part A unless: 
(1) The insured is enrolled in Medicare Part A; 
(2) The insured Was previously enrolled in Medicare Part A and voluntarily disenrolled; 
(3) The insured stated on an application or other document that the insured was enrolled in 
Medicare Part A; or 
(4) The insured is eligible for Medicare Part A Without paying a premium and the certiﬁcate states 
that it Will not pay beneﬁts that would be payable under Medicare even if the insured fails to 
exercise the insureds right to premium- ﬁree Medicare Part A coverage. [PL 1997, c. 604 , Pt. 
c, §2 (NEW) .1 
B. The contract may not coordinate beneﬁts with Medicare Part B unless: 
(1) The insured is enrolled in Medicare PartB;
(2) The insured was previously enrolled in Medicare Part B and voluntarily disenrolled; 
(3) The insured stated on an application or other document that the insured Was enrolled in 
Medicare Part B; or 
(4) The insured is eligible for Medicare Part A Without paying a premium and the insurer provided 
prominent notiﬁcation to the insured both when the certiﬁcate Was issued and, if applicable, When 
the insured becomes eligible for Medicare due to age. The notiﬁcation must state that the contract 
Will not pay beneﬁts that would be payable under Medicare even if the insured fails to enroll in 
Medicare Part B. An insurer that provides health care coverage to a group with fewer 
than 20 employees shall notify an insured under the group contract who is eligible 
for Medicare whether the insurer coordinates beneﬁts with Medicare Part B coverage 
and to what extent the insured rnav be required topav Medicare Part B exoenses ii‘ 
the insured is not enrolled in Medicare,, Part B,,cover_ag_e when the insured first 
hecornes eligible for Medicare due to age, An insurer shall notify an insured in writing 
prior to the insured becoming eligible for Medicare clue to age and annually upon the 
anniversary date of the group plan to all Medicare —eligible insureds under the group 
contract. An insured nrovided the written notice required under this subsection shall 
sign a written acknowledgement tokthe insurer that notiﬁcation wasprovided under 
this subsection and the group, policyholder shall retain a copv of signed, 
acknowledgment. [PL 1997, C. 604, Pt. o, §2 (NEW).] 
C. Coordination is not permitted With Medicare coverage for Which the insured is eligible but not 
enrolledexceptasprovidedinparaeraphsAandg. [PL 1997, c. 604, Pt. o, §2 (NET/il).] 
[PL 1997, <1. 604, Pt. o, §2 (NEW).] 
2. Medicaid and Cub Care programs. Insurers may not consider the availability or 
eligibility for medical assistance under 42 United States Code, Section 13969, referred to as 
"Medicaid," or Title 22 section 3 l74-T, referred to as the "Cub Care program," when considering 
coverage eligibility or beneﬁt calculations for insureds and covered family members. 
A. To the extent that payment for coverage expenses has been made under the Medicaid program 
or the Cub Care program for health care items or services furnished to an individual, the State is 
considered to have acquired the rights of the insured or family member to payment by the insurer 
for those health care items or services. Upon presentation of proof that the Medicaid program or 
the Cub Care program has paid for covered items or services, the insurer shall make payment to 
the Medicaid program or the Cub Care program according to the coverage provided in the contract 
or certiﬁcate. [PL 1997, c. 777, Pt. B, §3 (AMD) .1 
B. An insurer may not impose requirements on a state agency that has been assigned the rights of 
an individual eligible for Medicaid or Cub Care coverage and covered by a subscriber contract that 
are different ﬁom requirements applicable to an agent or assignee of any other covered 
individual. [PL 199?, C. 777, Pt. B, §3 (AMD).] 
[PL 2005, C. 683, Pt. A, s41 (AI:/iD).] 
3. Credit toward deductible. When an insured is covered under more than one expense- 
incurred health plan, payments made by the primary plan, payments made by the insured and 
payments made ﬁom a health savings account or similar fund‘ for beneﬁts covered under the 
secondary plan must be credited toward the deductible of the secondary plan. This subsection does 
not apply if the secondary plan is designed to supplement the primaiy plan. 
*"~>‘~'*‘r'~‘ ""~r'*""'=" 1L is" 
_ Q FE Qvikilil ﬂ &@U&I %% gI 
tim with’ at-€edicare. —*  
Q Q Q QQ A Q Q QQ 7 Q Q QQ 4 QQ Q Q Q Q QQ -Q Q Q —' -— ' I U‘ I_ CU I —_ ' I U — Q U —' _ I Q 
- - Q- .. Q ... -' 
-.Q Q Q nQ,..-Q.. Q- Q Q-.. Q- Q- Q Q Q- '7 I—' _C— "— “ " 1 ' _.' C ' ' C — — —G 
=:': 5.. _ HQ: Q =;Q ; uQ= - Q"QQ QQ QQQ _ Q == Q.. . Q =QQQ' 
\AQQ Q I_Q. Q Q QQ QQ Q .Q Q QQ QQQ QQ QQ QQ -Q QQQ " . C — " __ _ _ ‘ " C — — I' _ “_ ‘‘ . . . . . .. Q \lQQ Q I Q: Q Q.»-Q Q QQ Q QQ QQ QQ Q QQ Q IIQQ Q I Q- .C' ‘ I — — ‘ — ' — t _ I — ' 
Q Q Q-Q ,QQQ QQQ QQ ma QQQQ QQQQ Q \lQQ QQ Q Q Q-Q ‘QQQ —Y U‘ " U — — Q —_ _ Y I UP —U— - I 
. . . .. . . . . . . Q Q- Q Q QQ Q QQQ ... Q Q... Q QQ QQ QQQQQQ QQQ Q nQQQ — ' ' I - ' 7‘ _ — ' * — ' — § _ —- C _C 
Q Q Q QQ QQ QQ QQQ QQ QQ Q Q QQ QQQQ QQ Q Q LIQQ Q C’ _¢_ I . C —_ ' ——_ C 7 C ' —I — _ iU_II -I —U 
. . . . . . . Q Q-.. Q Q.. QQQ QQ Q Q Q QQ AQ Q Q- QQ QQ- QQ . QQ QQQ __ — — — ' - ——— _ Q I U U — '7' — 7' T 
T . 
Summary 
This amendment clarifies that the additional notice requirement proposed by the 
Sponsor's Proposed Amendment does not apply to ACA excepted beneﬁts.i
