Testimony for LD308 
February 27, 2023 
I am writing in support of passing LD 308 “An act to require full disclosure in Small Group Health 
insurance Plans foractive Medicare eligible beneficiaries." 
I turned 65 in August 2022. For my entire adult life have maintained health insurance ,mostly employer 
provided though when not available self-paid health care premiums. 
Until 12/12/2022 my employer was Maine Harvest Federal Credit Union which provided insurance 
through Anthem BCBS and paid 100% of the health care premium. 
Maine Harvest Federal Credit Union had 2 employees, and was in the ﬁnal regulatory stages of a merger 
with a larger credit union (FiveC_ounty Credit Union, 126 employees). As the plan was to continue to 
work after age 65, and upcoming merger, I researched Medicare including discussions with Medicare/SS, 
future employed- ‘C' CU's HR department and attended Medicare seminar hosted by Insurance Trust. 
Although Social Security in Rockland indicated the difference in employee numbers deﬁne small group 
vs large group, it was not made clear that small groups health care providers are allowed torefuse to 
pay claims once employee is 65 unless they are signed up for Medicare Part B. FCCU explained once an 
employee of FCCU they would cover’100% of health care premium though clear-they wouldn't pay 
Medicare Part B premiums. 
l signed up for Medicare Part A effective August 1, 2022. And having had employer sponsored health 
insurance did not sign up for Medicare Part B. 
On September 1, 202-' 2, Wendy Byrd of Allen Insure nce reached out to CEO of Maine Harvest FCU about 
upcoming health care insurance renewal in November. She indicated “l was looking at your renewal and 
you onlyhave 1- person on the plan, and she turned 65 recently. I am going to assume that she has gone 
on to Medicare as that would be more economical for her than your group plan" . Medicare PartB 
wouldn’t be more economical as MHFCU paid 100% of health care premium. MHFCU agreed to 
continue to provide health care coverage through Anthem and not drop the group plan. There was no 
mention or counsel about the importance of signing up for Medicare Part B, or that as a small group that 
turning 65 would change coverage provided. 
On 9/14/2022 I tripped over a cartand hit my head on a cement floor. The impact was hard enough that 
it bounced. Went to the emergency room, had a cat scan, and was released with instructions not to be 
alone for 24 hours. Total charges were $3,000. 
As a‘ 
result of the insurance claim, received a letter from Anthem dated 9/Z9/2022, indicating they had 
"no Medicare eligibility information associated with our coverage." It went on to indicate that "if eligible 
for Medicare coverage [Part B) and chose not to take it "when Medicare would have been the primary 
payer for your Medicare Part B-type beneﬁts you will be ﬁnancially responsible for the majority of your 
Medicare Part B-type claims."
Being informed that your health insurer will no longer cover health claims unless on Medicare Part B- 
(with $174/month premium) is frightening and devastating. How is Anthem allowed to change a health 
ca re beneﬁt and refuse to pay claims,while premiums are being paid. Very good deal for the insurance 
company. 
Evan worse is neither Anthem nor Allen insurance provided clear disclosure or had any discussion about 
changesfor participants at age 65. When Allen insurance finally answered MHFcU's question about 
notice we were told "You may not have receivedya physical copy of the document (group health plan 
certiﬁcate) but were given instruction on how to access it online or order it when you received your ID”. 
Allen insurance went on tosay, "The disclosure is located on page$ 
123 of the certiﬁcate" . A disclosure as 
important as "you will be responsible for claims insurer isn't going to pay once you reach 65" shouldn't ’ 
he buried on page 123 in a document accessed by a link that may or may not have been sent toyou in 
separate mail/email. 
if the fall resulted in a traumatic brain injury it would have been catastrophic to discover aftervvards that 
Anthem'wouldn't-pay a signiﬁcant amount for the health care claims. Am grateful for the referralto 
Carroll Harper & Associates who assisted MHFCU to change health care providers (in record 2-week 
timelinel' to"Har\rard Pilgrim which doesn't require participants to enroll in Medicare B at ag_e.6 _5. The 
uncertainty around coverage forced me to defer 3-4 elective Dr appointments and medical procedures 
until was sure health care claims and costs would be covered. Lastly suffered a signiﬁcant amount of 
stress during the last 3 months of 2022v/orrying about ramiﬁcations of a serious illness or injury. 
T 0 l7 _fO’£ec_ t the health and ﬁnancial well-being of citizens, please pass LD308 and require insurance 
companies to require signed disclosures and acknowledgement of changes in Certiﬁcates of Coverage 
that occur at age 65; Why continue to allow insurance companies to get paid full premiums without 
having to pay claims. Failure to pass the bill is only good for insurance companies and disastrous for the 
people of Maine. 
hank0 
Q V U, 
Patricia J. Duffy\ 
59 Salmond St 
Belfast, ME 04915n
