!§§¢“¢‘ .- " ' 
c, oﬂl 
TO: The Honorable Craig Hickman 
The Honorable Laura Supica, Co-Chairs 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
DATE: Wednesday, l\/larch 8, 2023 
RE: LD 726: An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Political Action Committees Relating to 
Union, Business and Nonproﬁt Organizations 
Good morning Senator Hickman and Representative Supica. 
lVly name is Anna Kellar. I'm a resident of Portland. l am here today as the Executive Director of Maine 
Citizens for Clean Elections. l am testifying in opposition to LD726. 
Maine Citizens for Clean Elections has been the leading campaign ﬁnance organization in Maine for over 
twenty years and one of the nation's most respected state—based organizations advocating for 
democratically funded elections. We are proud of our national reputation. But we are all Mainers, and 
our nonpartisan mission has always been with and for the people of this state. 
Two years ago, the Maine legislature passed LD 1417 and prohibited corporations from making campaign 
contributions to legislators, candidates, and Leadership PACs. This law protects the voices of Maine 
voters in our elections and brought Maine law into synch with 22 other states and the federal 
government. 
As we testiﬁed on LD 1417: 
Corporations are legally required to earn as much money as possible for their owners. This 
means that they are often in tension with certain public goals. And this is where political 
contributions come into play. Corporate contributions can be used to increase a corporation's 
inﬂuence over public policy, and to push back against the public interest in regulating corporate 
activities and behavior. This corporate money, over time, distorts our democracy. Like barnacles 
encrusting the hull of a ship, these pervasive special interest contributions slow our progress and 
send us off course. 
The ban went into effect on January lst of this year. We have not yet seen its impact through an election 
cycle. Yet now there is a bill in front of you that would hollow out the new law and take away much of 
the beneﬁt to voters. 
PO Box 18187, Portland, Maine 04112 | Tel: (207) 831-MCCE (6223) 
www.mainecleanelecti0ns.0rg l iiii‘ ii(r:§m:airieriiaraaieiociioiasmrg
MCCE Action to VLA 2 
LD 1726 March 8, 2023 
LD 726 would allow party committees and PACs to once again donate to candidates and leadership PACs 
using funds that they received from corporations. While corporations would still be banned from direct 
contributions, with minimal effort, they could funnel their contribution through a party committee or 
PAC, opening a major loophole in the law. in fact, if LD 726 went into effect, we would have all the 
potential for corporate inﬂuence, but with even less transparency than before the corporate contribution 
ban was passed! 
As the corporate contribution ban goes into effect, it is possible that we will need to make adjustments 
to improve compliance and enforcement, to better ensure that entities that make campaign 
contributions can effectively and practically manage their responsibilities under the law. We welcome 
good faith efforts to improve the law and its implementation. 
LD 726, however, would make a mockery of a law that this body just passed, and I urge you to reject it. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I would be happy to answer any questions from the Committee.
