Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
In Support  
LD 726: An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Political Action Committees Relating to Union, 
Business and Nonpro fit Organizations   
Ben Grant – General Council , Maine Education Association  
Before the Veterans and Legal  Affairs C ommittee  
March  16, 2023  
 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and other members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee – 
  
My name is Ben Grant and I serve as General Counsel for the Maine Education Association (MEA) and I 
am submitting this testimony in support of LD 726, An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Political 
Action Committees Relating to Union, Business and Nonprofit Organizations.  
  
MEA supports fair and transparent elections, based on sensible reporting requirements for all 
participants. However, recent events have demonstrated that good intentions can yield unintended 
consequences – and LD 726 is needed in order to bring clarity back to our campaign finance regime. 
This bill seeks to modify changes made to Title 21 -A in a bill from the 130th Legislature that has resulted 
in countless hours of unnecessary staff and attorney time to even understand, let alone implement . 
While MEA stands by the underpinnings of transparent elections, the process still must be 
understandable, predictable, and sensible for all parties. No matter what side of the aisle you are on, 
the focus and resources going into elections should be spent  on communicating with the electorate. 
Our concern is that the law has gone too far in creating a byzantine structure that will consume too 
much time and resource for no benefit to the system or the voters.   
  
Moving to the merits of the issue: The new la w created multiple new PAC designations based on the 
type of entity creating the PAC and the source of funds flowing into the PAC. The complexity this 
created caused the Ethics Commission to issue at least four different “guidance” letters to affected 
part ies over the course of a few short weeks since last December. The upshot is that there remains 
significant confusion as to the ever -shifting rules regarding PAC activity, and we fear that the law in 
question is not susceptible to greater clarity. MEA belie ves it is time for the Legislature to step back in 
and re -simplify the PAC laws, so the public can retain access to information, but also so that electoral 
participants are not overburdened with bureaucratic costs.  
  
 
 
Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth French Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Finally, we feel compelled to ask the Committee to consider whether rulemaking from the Ethics 
Commission henceforth should be considered major substantive rules, therefore subject to review by 
this Committee and the full Legislature.   As described above, the Ethics Commission struggled to 
provide clear guidance and direction about their own rules, causing legal whiplash as guidance and 
interpretations were updated and adjusted.   This should cause us all to be concerned.   Declaring future 
rule changes promulgated by the Ethics Commission as ma jor substantive , will provide for more 
opportunity for all parties to best understand the proposed changes and their implementation.   The 
law should balance the need for transparency with the need for campaigns to devote most of their 
attention to electi oneering. We can have a simple, predictable system if we keep both goals in mind.  
 
