. ~‘ 
-a at 
.L “" Jeffrey Timbeﬂake THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District 17.V 
, 131st Legislature A 
Augusta, Maine 04333 
TESTIMONY OF SENATOR JEFF TIMBERLAKE 
Sponsor of LD 726 
“An act to Amend the Laws Governing Political Action Committees Relating to Union, 
Business and Nonprofit Organizations ” 
»' 
- 
Public Hearing: March 7, 2023 . 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs. I am Senator Jeff Timberlake and I represent Senate District l7, 
which includes the Towns of Durham, Greene, Leeds, Lisbon, Litchﬁeld, Sabattus, Turner, 
Wales, and Wayne. I am here to present my bill LD 726 “An act to Amend the Laws Governing 
Political Action Committees Relating to Union, Business and Nonproﬁt Organizations. ” 
This bill removes the provision of law stating that monetary contributions from party 
committees, ballot question committees and political action committees to candidates and 
leadership political action committees may not be derived, in whole or in part, from a business 
entity. Under current law, a business entity includes a ﬁrm, partnership, corporation, 
incorporated association, labor organization or other organization, whether organized as a for- 
proﬁt or a nonproﬁt entity. 
After the new law passed last year that prohibited these type of donations, I have heard froma 
number of businesses who cannot believe they cannot donated to candidates here in Maine. They 
pay taxes, pay fees for licensing and employee individuals in our state but are prohibited to 
giving to individual candidates who are running for ofﬁce and most political PAC’s unless they 
are caucus PAC’s. 
This law applies to all businesses in Maine, not just big corporations; you could be a business 
who employees ’ one person and you cannot donate to a candidate who is rumiing for House, 
Senate or Governor. I ﬁnd it a little offensive that a person may think my vote is for sale for 
$850. 
In closing, I believe we should overturn this law and allow the hardworking businesses in our 
state to participate in the political process. I am happy to answer any questions. 
State House: (207) 287-1505 * Fax." (207) 287-1527 * Toll Free: J-800-423-6900 * TTY: 711 
Jeﬂrey.Timberla/te@legisZature.maine.g0v * Web Sire: legislature.mainegov/senate
