Ethics Commission  Staff 
LD 726 ‐ 3/13/2023  
Primer on Campaign  Finance Restrictions  
and Prohibitions  that took effect January 1,  2023 
(P.L. 2021, Ch. 274 and 607) 
Background  
•Through December 31, 2022, Maine campaign  finance law was relatively simple and flexible for  
organizational contributors and the PACs and party committees receiving contributions:
Corporations,  labor organizations, and non‐profits could contribute  to any candidate,  
PAC, or party committee.
PACs and party committees could  spend all of the contributions they had received in the  
same way,  regardless of the source of the funds.
No contribution limits applied to PACs.
•On January 1,  2023, more complex restrictions and prohibitions took effect (shown on next 
sheet).
•To provide written guidance on the law changes, the Commission has distributed the attached  
January 5,  2023 staff memo and February 21, 2023 Law Changes Guide.
National Context on Corporate  Contribution  Bans 
Corporations  and labor  organizations  cannot contribute  to federal candidates . They cannot
form political committees to  influence  federal candidate  elections,  except for a “separate
segregated  fund ” that solicits contributions  only from certain classes of individuals  (executive
personnel,  members,  etc.).
22 states prohibit  corporations  from contributing  to candidates  for state office, according  to
2019 research by the National Council on State Legislatures .
Ethics Commission  Staff 
LD 726 ‐ 3/13/2023  
 
Breakdown  of Changes 
(P.L. 2021, Chapters 274 and 607) 
 
1 Business entities* (corporations,  labor organizations,  and nonprofits)  may not 
contribute  to candidates  and leadership  PACs. Title 21‐A 
1015(2‐A)&(10) 
1056‐C(3)&(4) 
2  $475 contribution  limit applies to leadership  PACs. 1052(4‐C) 
1056‐C(2) 
3 PACs, party committees,  and ballot question committees  may not use funds 
that derive, in whole in part, from a business entity to donate to a candidate  or 
leadership  PAC. 
        may require advanced  bookkeeping  or separate bank account 1015(2)(A)  
1056‐C(2)(A) 
4 Parent organization  (corporation  or other organization)  may form a separate 
fund to influence  elections,  a “separate  segregated  fund” PAC. 
The SSF PAC can receive contributions  from individuals  (up to $5,000/year)  and 
donate them to candidates.  
The SSF PAC may accept no business entity funds. 1052(5)(A)(1)&(6)  
1056‐D 
 
*Business entity is defined as “a firm, partnership,  corporation,  incorporated  association,  labor organization  or 
other organization,  whether organized  as a for‐profit or a nonprofit  entity.” §§ 1015(10) & 1056‐C(4). 
 
 
Purpose of P.L. 2021, Chapter 274 (question from Rep. Boyer) 
  
Quotes from Sponsor’s  testimony:  “Large corporations  have been able to buy state governments  for far too 
long.” “It’s a proposal that is about making sure we have a government  of, by, and for the people – not a 
government
 [] of, by, and for the highest bidder.” “It makes clear that our democracy  is not for sale.” 
Rephrasing : The law is intended to minimize the appearance  to the public that contributions  can “buy” 
favorable  treatment  by elected officials. Testimony  by the sponsor focuses on legislation,  but concerns in 
other states sometimes  include favors in regulation,  executive  action, contracting,  etc. In addition to public 
perception,  in isolated situations  nationally,  contribution  prohibitions  and limits may prevent actual 
favorable  treatment  by public officials. 
 
   
Ethics Commission  Staff 
LD 726 ‐ 3/13/2023  
 
 
Three Interpretations  of P.L. 2021, Ch. 274 in Written Guidance  by Ethics Commission  Staff 
(background  information  to address points by lobbyist Kate Knox at 3/8/2023  public hearing) 
 
#1 ‐ A corporation  or other organization  (a “parent organization”)  can form a traditional  PAC that is not 
subject to the contribution  restrictions  on SSFs in § 1056‐D.  
 The parent organization  can donate its own funds to the traditional  PAC or solicit donations  from any 
source for the PAC.  
 If its wants, the parent organization  also has the option of forming an SSF committee  to receive money 
from individuals  that would be contributed  to candidates.  
 The Commission  staff declined to take the restrictive  federal approach  that parent organizations  may 
only form SSF committees  whose contributions  are restricted  by § 1056‐D. 
 
#2 ‐ If a parent organization  forms a traditional  PAC, all of the PAC’s funds are considered  part of the business 
entity (for reasons below). Those funds cannot be contributed  to candidates.  
 If a parent organization  sets up a political fund to influence  candidate  elections,  the money in that fund 
would typically be controlled  by the parent organization . Most often, the money is not owned by a 
separate legal entity. 
 Contributions  from a PAC established  by a parent organization  may result in the same appearance  of 
corruption  as a contribution  directly from the organization.  
 For example, a $20,000 contribution  from the “Ford Motor Company  PAC” to a Maine leadership  PAC 
may result in the same appearance  of corruption  as a $20,000 contribution  directly from the Ford 
Motor Company.  From the standpoint  of appearances  to the public, it is hard to see any difference.  
 Before the law took effect 1/1/2023,  a contribution  by a PAC that was “maintained  or controlled  by a 
corporation”  was considered  to have been made by the corporation .  21‐A M.R.S. § 1015‐A. In other 
words, the corporation  and its PAC were considered  the same contributor  for purposes of the limits on 
contributions  to candidates.  In administering  the new law, it is reasonable  to apply this same principle.  
Since corporations  and labor organizations  are prohibited  from contributing  to candidates,  the PACs 
they maintain and control also should be prohibited,  unless the PAC is an SSF.  
 
#3 – Bookkeeping  or Separate Bank Accounts (applicable  to some PACs, party committees,  and ballot question 
committees)  
 PACs, party committees,  and ballot question committees  can contribute  to candidates  and leadership  
PACs, as long as they are not “using funds that derive, in whole or in part, from a business entity.” §§ 
1015(2‐A) & 1056‐C(2)(A). 
 In the view of the Commission  staff, this requires advanced  bookkeeping  to track funds received from 
business entities to make sure those funds are not contributed  to candidates  or leadership  PACs. 
Alternatively,  the committee  could use two bank accounts.  
STATE OF MAINE 
COMMISSION ON GOVERNMENTAL ETHICS 
AND ELECTION PRACTICES 
135 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 
04333-0135  
 
 
OFFICE LOCATED AT: 45 MEMORIAL CIRCLE, AUGUSTA, MAI NE 
WEBSITE: WWW.MAINE.GOV/ETHICS 
PHONE: (207) 287-4179                   FAX: (207) 287-6775   
 
To: PAC Principal Officers and Treasurers, and Othe r Interested Parties 
From: Commission Staff 
Date: January 5, 2023 
Re: Implementation of An Act Regarding Campaign Fin ance Reform (P.L. 2021, Ch. 274) 
 
 
This memo pertains to the implementation of An Act Regarding Campaign Finance Reform (P.L. 
2021, Ch. 274), which took effect January 1, 2023. The purpose of the law is to prohibit the 
contribution of funds derived from business entitie s to candidates and leadership PACs. All 
statutes referenced herein are from Title 21-A of t he Maine Revised Statutes. 
 
Types of PACs .  All PACs must be registered as one of the four f ollowing PAC types:  
 
Leadership:  Any PAC directly or indirectly established, maintai ned, or controlled by a current 
member of the Legislature (other than a Caucus PAC) . § 1052(4-C).  
 
Caucus:  The official PAC of each of the four legislative ca ucuses (House Democrats, House 
Republicans, Senate Democrats, Senate Republicans).  There can be only one PAC per caucus, and 
it must be identified in writing to the Commission.  § 1053-C. 
 
Separate & Segregated Fund (SSF) : Any corporation, membership organization, cooperati ve or 
labor or other organization that establishes a sepa rate or segregated fund that receives contributions  
or makes expenditures for the purpose of influencin g the nomination or election of a candidate to 
political office. § 1052(5)(A)(1). 
 
Traditional:  Any organization or group, including a corporation  or membership organization, other 
than an individual, that raises and/or spends funds  for the purpose of influencing the nomination 
or election of a candidate to political office. § 1 052(5)(A)(5). 
 
Restrictions on Contributions from Business Entitie s. Candidates for state office and 
Leadership PACs may not accept contributions from a  business entity. §§ 1015(2-A) & 1056-C(3). 
2 
 A business entity is defined as “a firm, partnershi p, corporation, incorporated association, labor 
organization or other organization, whether organiz ed as a for-profit or a nonprofit entity.” §§ 
1015(10) & 1056-C(4). SSF PACs are also prohibited from accepting contributions from a 
business entity. § 1056-D(2). 
 
The law is written to prevent candidates and Leader ship PACs from receiving business entity funds 
through intermediaries. If a PAC or party committee  wishes to contribute to a candidate or 
leadership PAC, they cannot use “funds that derive,  in whole or in part, from a business entity.” 
§§ 1015(2)(A) & 1056-C(2)(A). 
 
This means a Caucus or Traditional PAC may accept c ontributions from business entities, but the 
PAC may wish to segregate those funds in a separate  bank account or set up an accounting system 
to mark those funds as derived from business entiti es to ensure those funds are not subsequently 
contributed to a candidate or Leadership PAC. The C ommission anticipates issuing additional 
guidance or regulations on this topic. 
 
PACs Established by Corporations or Organizations.   If a corporation, or a membership, labor 
or other organization, has established a PAC, the p arent organization can choose to designate the 
PAC as an SSF or a Traditional PAC: 
• SSF PACs may not accept contributions from their pa rent organization or from other 
business entities. The SSF PAC may contribute to ca ndidates and Leadership PACs. 
• A Traditional PAC established by a corporation or o rganization is considered a business 
entity, which means no part of the PAC’s funds may be contributed directly or indirectly 
to candidates and Leadership PACs. 
 
Restrictions and Prohibitions for Each PAC Type 
 
Leadership PACs:  May not accept contributions from business entitie s and may not accept any 
contributions aggregating more than $425 in a calen dar year (to be increased soon based on 
inflation). May not accept contributions from party  committees or other PACs made with funds 
derived from business entities, including Tradition al PACs established by a corporation or 
organization. §§ 1056-C(1), (2)(A) & (3). 
 
3 
 Caucus PACs:  May not make donations to candidates or Leadership PACs with funds derived 
from business entity contributions. § 1056-C(2)(A).  
 
SSF PACs:  May not accept contributions from business entities , including Traditional PACs 
established by a corporation or organization. May n ot accept donations from an individual 
aggregating more than $5,000 in a calendar year. Ma y use PAC funds to donate to candidates, 
other PACs, and party committees. §§ 1056-D(1) & (2 ). 
 
Traditional PACs:  May accept donations from business entities. May no t make contributions to 
candidates or Leadership PACs with funds derived fr om business entity contributions. § 1056-
C(2)(A). May use business entity funds to make inde pendent expenditures, donate funds to other 
PACs or party committees to finance independent exp enditures, or pay for staff or administrative 
expenses. If the PAC has been established by a corp oration or organization, the PAC is considered 
part of a business entity. § 1056-C(4). 
 
Noncompliant Contributions . SSF PACs must cease acceptance of contributions f rom business 
entities, including from Traditional PACs establish ed by a corporation or other organization, and 
return any business entity funds received on or aft er January 1, 2023.  
 
Traditional PACs established by a corporation or or ganization must cease donations to Leadership 
PACs, SSF PACs, and candidates. If any such donatio ns have been made on or after January 1, 
2023, those donations must be rescinded.  
 
Leadership PACs must cease acceptance of contributi ons from business entities, including from 
Traditional PACs established by a corporation or or ganization, and return any business entity funds 
received on or after January 1, 2023. 
 
Questions. Please direct all questions and PAC designation pre ferences to Political Committee 
and Lobbyist Registrar Emma Burke at Emma.Burke@maine.gov . 
 
 
Maine Commission on Governmental Ethics and Election Practices  
135 State House Station, Augusta, ME 04333  
(207) 287 -4179 | ethics@maine.gov | www.maine.gov/ethics | www.mainecampaignfinance.com
2023 Political Committee  
 Law Changes 
Impacting PACs & Party Committees  
 2023 General Information  
Introduction  
On January 1, 2023, An Act Regarding Campaign Finance Reform (P.L. 2021, Ch. 274), took effect. 
The purpose of the law is to prohibit the contributio n of funds derived from business entities to 
candidates and Leadership PACs. This guide is an informat ional resource for PACs and party 
committees specifically regarding the law change. It is not , however, a substitute for the 
Commission’s statutes and rules. Please do not hesitate to  email or call the Political Committee & 
Lobbyist Registrar if you have any questions.  
 - Ethics Commission Staff  
(207) 287 -4179 | ethics@maine.gov | www.maine.gov/ethics  
Filing Financial Reports  
As a general reminder, committees must file financial re ports according to the schedule below. Late 
reports will be assessed late -filing penalties automatically. Therefore, it is critica l committees file 
their report by 11:59 p.m. on the deadline. The Com mission staff is available to help until 5:00 p.m. 
on each filing deadline. Reports must be filed on the  Commission’s eFiling website: 
www.mainecampaignfinance.com   
Filing Schedule for PACs and State Party Committees  
Report  Due Date  Period Begin Date  Period End Date  
April Quarterly Report  April 10, 2023  January 1, 2023  March 31, 2023  
July Quarterly Report  July 17, 2023  April 1, 2023  June 30, 2023  
October Quarterly Report  October 5, 2023  July 1, 2023  September 30, 2023  
January Quarterly Report  January 16, 2024  October 1, 2023  December 31, 2023  
24 -Hour Reporting Periods  
In the 13 days prior to a candidate election, 24 -Hour Reports must be filed if the committee accepts a 
single contribution of $5,000 or more, or makes a s ingle expenditure of $1,000 or more . This 
includes loans, debts, and debt payments. Within 24 hours of the transaction that triggers a 24 -Hour 
Report, committees must log in to the eFiling website,  add the transaction, and then file the 
automatically created 24 -Hour Report.  
Independent Expenditure (IE) Reporting Periods  
Prior to a candidate election, Independent Expenditu re Reports must be filed if the committee makes a 
single expenditure of more than $250 on a communicati on to support or oppose a clearly identified 
candidate. Reports must be filed according to the follow ing schedule:  
60 -Day Pre -Election: All IEs taking place up to the 61st day before an electi on must be filed in the IE 
Report due no later than the 60th day before the el ection.  
1-Day Pre -Election: All IEs taking place from the 13th day to the day bef ore an election must be filed 
in the IE Report due no later than one day after th e IE occurred, including Election Day.  2-Day Pre -Election: All IEs taking place from the 60th day to the 14th da y before an election must be 
filed in the IE Report due  no later than two days after the IE occurred.  
 Permitted and Restricted Financial Activity Visual Guide  
Legend  
 This means no. This type of financial activity is not  allowed for the PAC.  
 This means yes. This type of financial activity is allowed for the PAC.  
This means caution. This type of financial activity is allowed, provided the PAC is not 
funding the financial activity with funds derived from business entities.  
Traditional PAC 
w/o Parent Org  SSF PAC  Leadership 
PAC  Caucus 
PAC  
Donate to 
candidates  
Donate to 
Leadership 
PACs 
Donate to 
SSF PACs  
Donate to 
Traditional 
PACs 
Donate to 
Caucus 
PACs 
Make 
independent 
expenditures  
Accept 
business 
entity funds  Traditional PAC 
w/ Parent Org  Party 
Committees  

 2023 Contribution Limits & Expenditure Rules  
Contribution Limits  
Some types of committees have contribution limits, and s ome do not. Please see the pages for 
each specific committee type for more detailed informat ion.  
 
Caucus PACs:  Caucus PACs do not have any contribution limits.  
 
Leadership PACs:  Leadership PACs may not accept funds from business entitie s, and all 
contributions are limited to $475 per calendar year.  
 
Separate & Segregated Fund (SSF) PACs: SSF PACs may not accept funds from business 
entities, and contributions from individuals are limite d to $5,000 per calendar year.  
 
Traditional PACs: Traditional PACs do not have contribution limits.  
 
Political Party Committees: Party committees do not have contribution limits.  
Expenditure Rules  
The contribution limitations on candidates and some PACs affects how other committees may 
expend their funds via donations.  
 
All PACs: All PACs may donate to BQCs - ballot question committees.  
 
Caucus PACs:  Caucus PACs may not donate to candidates or Leadership P ACs with funds 
derived from business entities after December 31, 2022.  
 
Leadership PACs: Leadership PACs are not restricted in how they spend the ir funds.  
 
Separate & Segregated Fund (SSF) PACs: SSF PACs are not restricted in how they spend 
their funds.  
 
Traditional PACs: Traditional PACs that have a parent organization are  considered a 
business entity, and all donations to other entities a re considered a business entity 
contribution. Therefore, Traditional PACs with a pare nt organization may not make donations 
to candidates, SSF PACs, or Leadership PACs. Traditional  PACs that do not have a parent 
organization may donate to candidates and Leadership P ACs, provided they are not doing so 
with funds derived from business entities.  
 
Political Party Committees: Party committees may not donate to candidates or Leade rship 
PACs with funds derived from business entities after De cember 31, 2022.  
 Traditional & SSF PACs  
Definitions & Differences   
When a group raises or spends more than $2,500 in Main e to support or oppose candidates, 
that group has become a PAC and must register with the Ethics Commission.  
 
The first step in designating a PAC type is based on wha t type of group is founding the PAC. If 
the PAC’s founder is a parent organization, such as cor poration, labor union, membership 
organization, business, etc., it can choose between registering as a Traditional PAC  or an SSF 
PAC, with the decision depending on the activities the paren t organization wants to partake in. A 
parent organization may form both a Traditional and  SSF PAC - for more on that, please see 
“Bank Accounts, Recordkeeping & Having Two PACs.”  
SSF PACs  
For organizations that will donate directly to 
candidates. They cannot solicit or accept 
business entity funds but can donate to 
Traditional, Caucus, Leadership, and other 
SSF PACs. SSF PACs cannot accept more 
than $5,000 from any individual in a calendar 
year.  Traditional PACs  
For organizations that will accept business 
entity contributions. They cannot donate to 
candidates, but can make independent 
expenditures supporting and opposing 
candidates, and donate to Caucus PACs and 
other Traditional PACs.  
If a PAC is not associated with a parent organization,  or is the state level PAC of a federal PAC 
not associated with a parent organization, the PAC shou ld register as a Traditional PAC . This 
type of Traditional PAC may accept business entity fund s and  donate to candidates and SSF 
and Leadership PACs, provided the PAC is certain all d onations to candidates and SSF and 
Leadership PACs were made with non -business entity funds.  
Examples   
A labor union funds its PAC from donations from its me mbers, and prefers to donate to 
candidates who align with their views. This PAC should r egister as an SSF PAC.  
 
A national animal rights non -profit forms a Maine PAC to support candidates who are  anti -puppy 
mills. This PAC should register as a Traditional PAC, a nd support and oppose candidates by 
making independent expenditures.  
 
A group of citizens in Castle Rock form a group to suppor t candidates who will care about 
Castle Rock. This group should register as a Traditional P AC and either open two bank 
accounts, or keep very detailed accounting of its contribut ions, to separate business entity funds 
from non -business entity funds. The PAC can donate to candidates and Leadership PACs with 
its non -business entity funds, and make independent expenditu res. With its business entity 
funds, it can make independent expenditures, and dona te to Caucus and other Traditional 
PACs.  
 Leadership & Caucus PACs  
Leadership PACs  
A PAC that is established, controlled, or maintained d irectly or indirectly by a Legislator is a 
Leadership PAC. The following examples of a Legislator ’s involvement with a PAC would make 
the PAC a Leadership PAC:  
 
• The Legislator is the principal officer of the PAC  
• The Legislator is the treasurer of the PAC  
• The Legislator is a major fundraiser for the PAC  
• The Legislator is a major decision maker for the PAC  
 
Other than participating with a Caucus PAC, a Legislat or cannot have any of the roles above in 
a PAC that would not be considered a Leadership PAC.  
 
Leadership PACs have an aggregate contribution limit o f $475 per year from any single source. 
This means no single source can donate more than $475 to  a Leadership PAC in a calendar 
year. Leadership PACs may not accept business entity funds,  including from Traditional PACs 
that have a parent organization. Leadership PACs may not accept contributions made with 
business entity funds from other Traditional PACs, Caucu s PACs, and political party committees 
- though that responsibility lies more with the donatin g PAC than the receiving one.  
Caucus PACs  
Caucus PACs are the official PACs of the party caucuses in t he Maine House of 
Representatives and the Maine Senate. Currently, ther e are four caucuses that are allowed to 
have a Caucus PAC. Legislators may help with fundraisin g and other activities for the Caucus 
PAC.  
 
There are no limitations on what a Caucus PAC may accep t. However, it is very common for 
Caucus PACs to donate to candidates and Leadership PACs, and to do so now requires a 
significant change in their bookkeeping and accounting pr actices. Caucus PACs may not donate 
to candidates or Leadership PACs with funds derived from  business entities. That includes 
Traditional PACs with a parent organization. To be a bsolutely sure a Caucus PAC is donating to 
candidates and Leadership PACs with funds derived from n on -business entities, they should 
keep two separate bank accounts (one for business entity fun ds, one for non -business entity 
funds), or keep rigorous and well organized books.  
 Bank Accounts, Bookkeeping, and Having Two PACs  
Bank Accounts  
With the implementation of the new laws, the Commissio n strongly recommends two separate 
bank accounts for Traditional PACs without a parent orga nization, Caucus PACs, and state -
level political party committees. The bank accounts wou ld be used to keep business entity funds 
and non -business entity funds from being commingled and imprope rly used. If a PAC chooses 
not to have separate bank accounts, their accounting of business entity and non -business entity 
funds must be rigorous and well organized. Additiona lly, these types of committees that raise or 
spend more than $100,000 in an election cycle should con sider hiring an accounting 
professional.  
Bookkeeping  
Regardless of PAC or committee types, all political committees should be increasing the 
attention paid to their bookkeeping going forward. Th is is to make sure no violations occur, 
including, but not limited to:  
 
• Accepting business entity funds if the PAC is an SSF or L eadership PAC  
• Donating business entity funds to candidates, SSF PACs, or  Leadership PACs  
• Accepting more than the $475 contribution limit from a  single source for Leadership PACs  
• Accepting more than the $5,000 individual contribution  limit for SSF PACs  
 
Having Two PACs  
If a parent organization wants to accept business funds and donate to candidates and 
Leadership PACs, the only feasible way to participate in both is to reg ister two PACs - a 
Traditional PAC and an SSF PAC. Registering two PACs is allowed, provided each PAC has 
completely separate bank accounts and recordkeeping.  
 
Allowances: The SSF PAC may donate to the Traditional PAC. The Traditional PAC may 
purchase goods for an auction, and the proceeds from th e auction may go to the SSF PAC.  
 
Restrictions: The Traditional PAC may not donate to the SSF PAC, or provide in -kind goods or 
services to the SSF PAC.  
