Lisa Leaverton
Orland
LD 726
The Honorable Craig Hickman, The Honorable Laura Supica, co-chairs
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs
Good morning Senator Hickman, and Representative Supica,
My name is Lisa Leaverton. I’m from Orland, and I volunteer with the League of Women 
Voters to support democracy and voting rights for all, which are non-partisan issues, as they 
always have been. I’m here today to testify in opposition to LD 726: An Act to Amend the 
Laws Governing Political Action Committees Relating to Union, Business and Nonprofit 
Organizations. Like my fellow citizens, I am fighting hard for the right to have a voice and not 
be crowded out by corporate interests, but corporations just keep chipping away. With great 
citizen effort, LD 2417 passed in the Maine legislature. This prohibited corporations from 
making campaign contributions to legislators, candidates, and Leadership PACs. This law 
protects the voices of Maine voters in our elections as demanded by 22 other states.  
 LD 726  would now enable corporations to funnel their contribution through a party 
committee or PAC opens up a new loophole that results in less transparency. This is a step 
backward in the hard fight by citizens and a big step backward for democracy.  Corporations 
should not be able to use contributions to gain influence, resulting in a needless and continual
struggle for citizens who are out-spent on issues affecting us. This bill LD 726 is coming at a 
moment when we need to focus on enforcing LD 2417, the law we just passed. 
There’s no way for average citizens to keep up with these bills corporations author with 
lawyers that serve no common good and waste our time and resources. The majority of 
spending in the 2020 election cycle came from corporate sources, and we know the problem 
goes beyond just spending in an election cycle.  Mainers deserve the confidence that their 
representatives listen to us, not corporate special interests.  Any piece of legislation like LD 
726 that tips the playing field to corporations must be and will be challenged. 
I urge you to reject LD 726 since we have already indicated through the passage of LD 2417 
the will of voters “to increase government accountability and decrease the potential for or 
appearance of corruption.” We need to work together to get money out of politics altogether. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.

