Testimony of Maine Conservation Voters
“An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Political Action Committees Relating to Union,
Business and Nonprofit Or ganizations”
Before the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee
March 17, 2023
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and the distinguished members of the Veterans and
Legal Affairs Committee.
My name is Will Sedlack, Political Director at Maine Conservation Voters, writing in support of
LD 726, “An Act to Amend the Laws Governing Political Action Committees Relating to Union,
Business and Nonprofit Or ganizations” on behalf of more than 13,000 members and supporters
of Maine Conservation Voters. Maine Conservation Voters works to build an inclusive
democracy and to make conservation and climate action a political priority .
To be clear , Maine Conservation Voters is not here today to testify in support of the proposition
that the United States does not have a campaign finance problem.
We do believe that solutions should be elegantly tailored to the problems they are meant to solve
and in this case, despite the best ef forts of the professional, competent staf f at the Ethics
Commission, the solution approved last session is swimming in extra cloth and well-meaning
organizations are tripping over trouser legs in an ef fort to be compliant. We take our obligations
to comply with campaign finance laws extremely seriously and we are experienced filers.  Yet
today , we find ourselves frustrated and perplexed about how to comply with the new rules.
As a non-profit that represents 13,000 Mainers yearning for climate action, we use every tool at
our disposal to ensure a future for generations to come. We are proud to do that work in Maine
and to do that work in full compliance with Federal and State law . We are committed to a
transparent system. Our patience runs thin, though, when solutions lead to guidance for
interested parties being updated
four separate times
since the passage of the law . I have a law
degree, I do this work full-time, and even I am confused. Is it
just
to design a system that is
incomprehensible to the average Mainer?

In addition to voting “ought to pass” on LD 726,  I would ur ge this committee to amend the bill
by requiring all future Commission guidance to be conducted via the major substantive
rulemaking process.  Requiring major substantive rulemaking will help to ensure maximum
transparency and clarity for all Mainers and will help prevent the dif fering and evolving
guidance which occurred in this case.  It would also allow stakeholders to formally weigh in
during the process and give them the ability to push back against incorrect or overly expansive
interpretations of statutes.
With the recommendation listed above, Maine Conservation Voters ur ges you to vote “ought to
pass” on LD 726 and we thank Senator Timberlake for his work on this issue.
Thank you.
William D. Sedlack, J.D.
Political Director
Maine Conservation Voters
