Testimony of 
DANA A. DORAN 
Executive Director 
Professional Logging Contractors of Maine 
Before the Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry in Support of LD 180 
— An Act to Allow a Person to File a Paper Copy of a Timber Harvest Notiﬁcation Form 
. 
Wednesday, February 8, 2023 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the Committee on Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry, my name is Dana Doran, and I am the Executive Director of the 
Professional Logging Contractors of Maine. The Professional Logging Contractors of Maine (PLC) is 
the voice of Maine’s logging and trucking industry. The PLC was formed in 1995 to represent 
independent contractors in a rapidly changing forest industry. 
As of 2017, logging and trucking contractors in Maine employed over 3,900 people directly and were 
indirectly responsible for the creation of an additional 5,400 jobs. This employment and the 
investments that contractors make contributed $620 million to the state’s economy. Our 
membership, which includes 200 contractor members and an additional 120 associate members, 
employs over half of the individuals who work in this industry and is also responsible for 80% of 
Maine’s annual timber harvest. 
Thank you for providing me the opportunity to testify on behalf of our membership in Support of LD 
180 — An Act to Allow a Person to File a Paper Copy of a Timber Harvest Notiﬁcation Form. We 
would also like to thank Representative Black and the other co-sponsors of this legislation for 
providing an opportunity to bring this issue before this committee. 
The logging industry in Maine was in the midst of a reinvention process until the onset of COVID 19 
and the digestor explosion at the Jay mill in April 2020. However, as a result of other mill closures, 
curtailments and inﬂation created by the response to COVID 19, we are estimating that Maine has lost 
30% of its harvesting capacity and the layoff of nearly 1,000 people in harvesting and hauling since 
2020. Our updated economic impact study with the University of Maine, which will be released at our 
annual legislative breakfast on March 3“ , will substantiate these estimates. For an industry that is 
responsible for over $620 million of direct economic impact each year, it has likely led to a direct loss 
of close to $100 million of economic activity per year since 2020. 
I provide all this context because 100% of our membership are small businesses who are fighting for 
their lives right now. They need state government to help them and not provide obstacles or 
roadblocks that can cost them time, money and inefficiency. 
In January of 2021, the paper Forest Operations Notification application, also known as FONS, which 
is required in advance of any commercial timber harvest by Maine statute, Chapter 12, Subchapter 
805, Section 8883, was eliminated by the Maine Forest Service (MFS) in favor of electronic 
submissions only. The logging community was consulted on the change and even asked for their 
feedback, but in the end, that feedback was set aside in favor of MFS’s point of view that the FONS 
should only be submitted electronically. This change essentially eliminated the logging community ’s 
statutory role in the system. The legislation before you today makes one simple change that the
logging community and a majority of their clients are in favor of, which is to reinstate the paper 
option, in addition to the electronic system. 
Paper forms are available for filing taxes, incorporating a business, ﬁling a permit application and 
numerous other areas of state government, in addition to having an online option. MFS is the only 
agency that we know of that has eliminated a paper form and mandated the use of an electronic form 
as the only alternative. In a state that prides itself on the role of the forest products industry and over 
120 years of paper manufacturing, the one agency that actually regulates forest activity is evidently 
antic-paper. 
While we are discouraged by the Maine Forest Service’s anti-paper stance, we would also like to raise 
concerns with the Committee on the process by which the MFS followed to take away the paper 
system. We question whether the method and the outcome might violate state statute in the end. 
Chapter 12, Subchapter 805, Section 8883-B, states specifically that unless an alternate form or 
method of reporting is provided in rule, notification must be on forms supplied by the bureau. We 
don’t believe any type of rulemaking took place which authorized the elimination of paper forms 
supplied by the bureau. If that is the case, there might be a statutory issue that needs be corrected and 
reinstatement of the paper form will ensure that the law has been followed. 
Secondly, the statue provides landowners with discretion to designate an agent to work on their behalf 
to help fill out the FONS and seek necessary signatures if necessary. This designated agent could bea 
family member, a friend or even a timber harvesting contractor. Unfortunately, with the online 
system, the ability for a landowner to work with a designated agent to assist with processing the FONS 
has essentially been taken away, unless you are a licensed forester. See Chapter 12. Subchapter 805. 
Section 883—B2J. It is not clear to us why this was done and whether this has created a situation 
where one group has more authority than another. 
The PLC and many of our members have tried to work wtih MF S officials on numerous occasions to 
ask that they provide a paper option in addition to online. We are not, nor are our members 
advocating to take the online system away, but we simply want both options available. MFS states 
that the paper version is no longer available. However, we have heard that if you are a landowner, 
they will provide an exception. 
Quite frankly, contractors feel as if they are being discriminated against. A contractor can bea 
designated agent, but they can’t exercise that authority in the online only environment. 
Lastly, not all landowners have access to the internet, they cannot all use a computer nor do they have 
money to transport themselves to a location with public internet that they may or may not be able to 
operate. We have heard horror stories from landowners that might be Amish, they might hold specific 
religious beliefs that preclude them from using electronics, or they may just not trust government. As 
a result, many landowners have chosen not to harvest their property because of their unwillingness to 
navigate an online system that they don’t agree with, makes them uncomfortable or that they don’t 
have familiarity with. 
In our opinion, MF S should not be creating systems that discourage landowners from conducting 
harvests or creating situations that have a negative impact upon logging contractors at such a perilous 
time. If anything, government processes should be made easier and more ﬂexible, rather than the 
opposite. If you can ﬁle other government forms in both paper and online, the FONS should be the 
same. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide the opinion of our membership before you today andI 
would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
