“AIME 
_ Maine Forest Products Council 
\\“//f ~ The voice of Maine’s forest economy DUO 
Testimony Neither for Nor Against LD 180 
“An Act to Allow a Person to File a Paper Copy of a Timber Harvest 
Notiﬁcation Form” 
February 8, 2023 
Krysta West, Deputy Director 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, I am here today to present testimony on behalf 
of the Maine forest Products Council neither for nor against LD 180, “An Act to Allow 
a Person to File a Paper Copy of a Timber Harvest Notiﬁcation Form.” 
VVhile considering our position on this bill, we polled a number of members on our 
Policy Committee regarding the Timber Harvest Notiﬁcation System. Industrial 
landowners (representing about 50% of the wood harvested in Maine) initially 
experienced inefﬁciencies in adding multiple harvest sites, but they now report ongoing 
progress with MFS on adding this information into the system. 
What we found to be universally true is that when the electronic ﬁling system launched, 
it presented signiﬁcant issues for landowners, mill procurement programs, consulting 
foresters and land management companies. Through the startup process, these sectors 
report ongoing success in working with the Depaitment to make improvements in the 
system. Some of our logging companies are discouraged by the process and have little 
faith that it can be 
remedied. 
The Department staff has shown a willingness to Work with user groups during the 
transition period, and many members repoit continued system improvements. The 
Council views the electronic ﬁling system as a move to a more accountable and 
professional method of submitting required permit data, but we view the system asa 
work in progress and would encourage the Department to continue to make 
collaborative improvements with user input to ensure that the system is workable and 
accessible to landowners and loggers of all sizes. The Council would be happy to help 
facilitate discussions between the Department and our members to provide such input. 
We acknowledge that there is room for improvement and that the MFS is moving ina 
responsive manner, so we continue to support the move to an efﬁcient electronic 
platform. 
Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions the committee may have. 
535 Civic Center Drive, Augusta ME 04330 207-622-9288 www.maineforest.org
