, STATE OF MAINE 
3% E’ DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, CoNsERvATIoN & FORESTRY 
--A OFFICE OF THE CoMMIssIONER 
22 STATE HOUSE STATION 
GOVERNOR AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 
JANET T. MILLS AMANDA E BEAL 
COMMISSIONER 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST LD 180 
An Act to Allow a Person to File a Paper Copy of a Timber Harvest Notiﬁcation Form 
February 8th, 2023 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Patty Cormier, and I am the Director of the 
Maine Forest Service (MFS). I am speaking on behalf of the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry (DACF) as Neither for nor Against LD l80, An Act to Allow a Person 
to File a Paper Copy of a Timber Harvest Notification Form. 
Since 2021, over 5,000 landowners have ﬁled online notiﬁcations. The annual landowner 
reports are linked to this online system as well. MFS staff, both in the ofﬁce and in the ﬁeld, 
continue to provide one-on-one assistance by phone to anyone who asks for it. Our new online 
harvest notiﬁcation system provides ease of access, efﬁciency, cost savings, ready mapping, and 
resource information for forest practitioners. 
MF S staff have worked with over 212 landowners, loggers, and foresters, who for various 
reasons, such as not having computer access, to assist them in ﬁling harvest notiﬁcations by 
using an alternative method, and we will continue to do so. This alternative method includes 
sending an initial paper copy to the requestor, and once that information is received, we work 
with them to set up an online account. MFS staff take the time necessary to help people comply 
with the law, and they do it with professionalism and courtesy. 
HARVEST NOTIFICATION HISTORY 
Since 1990 landowners or their designated agents have been required by law to ﬁle harvest 
notiﬁcations of their intent to harvest timber on their land. The notiﬁcation requirement was 
instituted as part of the original Forest Practices Act enacted by the Legislature in response to 
widespread public concerns about timber harvesting practices. Part of that effort is maintaining a 
notiﬁcation database for harvest activity in Maine. This database helps the Maine Forest Service 
develop and promote activities that encourage the sound, long-term management of Maine’s 
HARLOW Bmrnme ;""‘.'“"i;°’ PHONE: (201)287-3200 
18 ELKINS LANE cgﬁggrvgzfon FAX: (207) 287-2400 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 3, |=m~es¢|-y WEB: WWW.MAINE.GOV/DACF
M”
forests and helps to provide reliable, timely, and accurate information about the forest resource to 
the landowner and the public. 
For over 30 years, up until 2020, the Forest Operations Notiﬁcation (FONS) system was paper- 
based. Landowners and managers were required to submit paper copies to the Maine Forest 
Service (MFS), including a paper map of the area to be harvested; data was entered by hand; 
acknowledgment letters were then printed and mailed. At times there were over 5000 
notiﬁcations ﬁled this way, and with that came many data inconsistencies and reporting errors. 
We estimate that 20-25% of all notiﬁcations submitted were incomplete. 
The paper form also hindered the enforcement of the notiﬁcation requirement. Historically, 
landowners and their agents could ﬁle a notiﬁcation on the day the harvest began, provided the 
notiﬁcation was complete. However, frequently, Forest Rangers would ﬁnd non-noti ﬁed 
harvests wherein the Ranger would be told the notiﬁcation was in the mail or that they had 
forgotten to ﬁle it. The Ranger would issue a 10-day grace period to ﬁle the notiﬁcation, but 
after several days, no notiﬁcation would arrive. In other cases, a notiﬁcation would be ﬁled only 
if a Ranger visited. Incomplete and “over grace period” notiﬁcations in our database 
ultimately amounted to 20% of all notiﬁcations ﬁled, totaling over 26,000 harvests over 30 
years. Tracking incomplete and “over grace period” notiﬁcations took signiﬁcant staff time. 
With ongoing staff reductions, the number of notiﬁcations not entered into the system on time 
was growing exponentially. 
Additionally, the original database platform designed for harvest notiﬁcation information 
became obsolete and no longer supported by the state’s IT ofﬁce. Maintaining the database 
required expensive contracts with outside vendors. 
ONLINE SYSTEM TRANSITION 
The system of 30 years needed to be ﬁxed. At that time, the MFS consulted with states such as 
Oregon and Virginia, which have had online harvest notiﬁcations in place for several years, 
about setting up an online system. Securing the necessary state funding to transition took several 
years, but we ﬁnally obtained sufﬁcient funding in 2019 to engage a contractor to build the 
system. 
The rollout of the new online system included providing nearly a year’s notice to the forestry 
community. We offered a grace period of over another year for ﬁling the original paper 
notiﬁcations and delivered several workshops on setting up an account. The workshops were 
recorded and posted on the MF S website, along with an instructional video on completing each 
section of the online system. 
CURRENT SYSTEM IN PLACE 
The MFS no longer maintains the original paper-based database as this legislation suggests. 
However, as mentioned above, we do offer an alternative method for landowners or their 
designees and are committed to working with those who need assistance. 
Throughout the rollout, MFS staff have continued to listen to our customers, some of whom have 
offered constructive suggestions to improve the system, and we worked with the contractor to 
make any needed improvements. For example, we have made the system workable for smart 
devices so that a computer is no longer required. We will continue responding to feedback on
2
how to improve the system and making any adjustments as resources permit. Overall, feedback 
on the shiﬂ; to the online system has predominantly been very positive. 
We understand that this change has been difﬁcult for some, whether for lack of access to the 
intemet, access to an online device, or the knowledge of how to use an online platform. We 
recognize this concern, especially for those who work in the woods of Maine, and we are 
committed to working through these challenges. However, we’d ask you to consider the many 
government functions that have transitioned to online platforms. To require the Department to 
return to the old form would require a new database and a different system of notiﬁcation, as the 
two systems wouldn’t marry. 
Thank you for your time. I wouldhappily answer any questions now or at the work session.
3
