207 Forestry Consulting Services, LLC  
P.O. Box 181  
New Gloucester, Maine 04260  
207-431-6153
Paul L Larrive e, Jr. LF 3306
ACF Committee, 
I am writing in support of the FORest Online Resource Tool and the ability to file Forest 
Operation N otification’s  online and complete year-e nd landowner reports. In this era when you can 
register your motor vehicle,  buy hunting/fishing licenses or file permits with municipalities online,  it only 
makes sense you should be able to notify the Maine F orest S ervice of a timber harvest online. The 
following are my opinions on why this system is beneficial  as a small business owner and consulting 
forester. 
•U
nder the old paper system, confirmation of receipt  by the department could tak e
w
eeks to receive in the mail. In man y cases the logging operation could be over
before you received confirmation.
•I have found that filing online results in the municipalities  receiving notification from
the Maine Forest Service of the logging operation mu ch fa ster, resulting in less
downtime answering municipal questions.
•Under the paper system getting out -of-state clients signatures involved  mailing the
form back and forth, which often  resulted in delays .
•The Maine Forest Service has been very responsive to suggestions for improvements
and fixing bugs. For example , a suggestion I had during the trai nings was to allow
licensed foresters who have a fiduciary responsibility to their  client landowners the
ability to file a forest operation notification for their  clients ( already in law). The
system was modified allowing a client’s  forester the ability to file for them.
•The ability to  file legally required year- end landowner reports online.  In the past
when they  were mailed,  I would keep paper copies  out of concern they would get
lost in the  mail, which had happened to me.
• In instances when I am not acting as a fiduci ary to a client , MFS Staff has been very
responsive to hel ping guide a landowner through the process.
I
 understand change can be difficult and take time , however m oving this system online was 
long overdue . The Maine Forest Service is co ntinually striving to make the system more user friendly, it 
would be a shame to give up and go back to paper at this time.  
T
hank you for  your time and your service to the State of Maine.  
P
aul L Larrivee, Jr. LF 3306  
Re LD 180, An Act to Allow a Person to File a Paper Copy of a Timber Harvest Notification Form
