Hello, 
My Name is Thomas Douglass I own and operate Thomas Logging and Forestry in 
Guilford, Maine. I am not sure that you are accepting written testimony on this bill butI 
am going to submit it any ways in hopes it will be read because I do not have the 
availability to be in person or in service during that time. 
I am in Favor LD 180, An Act to Allow a Person to File a Paper Cogy of a Timber 
Harvest Notiﬁcation. 
Along with being a business owner/operator in the Logging industry I also ama 
Licensed Forester in the state, Licensed Professional Forester #3859. 
I help people manage their woodlots all around the Guilford/Greenville/Dover-Foxcroft 
area. Depending on what people need for help with managing their land depends on how 
many “hats” I get to wear on that job. Sometimes I am just a Contractor, and sometimes 
I am a Contractor and a Forester. 
Because I am usually the designated agent for my Notiﬁcations and I happen to bea 
Forester with a Fiduciary responsibility to the landowner I can technically make the 
online program work. Although many of my contractor counter parts can not the way the 
new online system is designed. 
Even with a Licensed Forester involved I personally feel it is important for the 
landowner to have to sign the notiﬁcation. When possible with the new system if the 
landowner has the availability to get online and create an account I have them verify the 
FON as well because I feel as though that is important. 
In the last year I have had 2 landowners who did not have he availability to use this new 
online system. I had no service to help him complete via phone, they did not have the 
ability to drive the 1 hour trip to my office so that I could help them complete it there. 
One landowner was from out of state elderly with no one there to help her complete the 
online processs. She most deﬁnitely didn’t have the ability to drive up from Conneticut 
for me to help her in person. In those cases because I am a Licensed Forester with 
Fiduciary responsibility to the landonwer I could complete the FON. From what I can 
see in this case the only way my Contractor Counterparts could have made this work is 
in situation 1 to drive an hour to the landowners house, drive an hour back sit down at 
the office with them help the landowner through the online process and then drive them 
an hour back to their place. By my estimation a complete waste of the contractors and 
landowners time. In situation 2 The only option I could see to make that work if I wasa 
contractor without a forestry license would have been to drive all the way to Connecticut
to meet with the landowner and sit down to help them do it. Yet again a waste of both 
peoples times. 
Of course there are 2 other ways around these situations.. the landowner could request a 
paper version of the FON. If those landowners don’t have intemet or the ability to drive 
in the ﬁrst place what makes someone think that they are going to be able to navigate the 
paper F ON ﬂawlessly by themselves. 
The other option around these situations is the landowner is essentially forced into 
hiring a Forester to look after the harvest for them just so that the F ON can be 
completed. Which is not right or fair to the contractor or landowner if they are all in 
agreement and comfortable with the situation in the ﬁrst place. 
I did have a third landowner this year who was unable to do his own FON because he is 
91 years old. He does not have Intemet or a computer once again no service at his home 
so that I could help walk him through it. Luckily his daughter was able to help him get it 
completed. But if his daughter had not been able to help most of my contractor counter 
parts wouldn't have been able to make it work with him either. In my opinion this gives 
an unfair advantage to companies with Licensed Foresters. Of course I am a Forester my 
self but most companies my size do not have a Forester on staff and I would hate to see 
some one have to miss out on harvesting a wood lot because of an unfair advantage to 
others with the new system. 
The new system deﬁnitely has its advantages as well, for example last month I started 
paperwork on a wood lot for a retired gentleman. We had been talking about the harvest 
for months and it was time to put the paperwork together. He is retired and he decided to 
head to Jamaica for a 3 week vacation, but no problem because he is a computer literate 
person we got everything done with the new system online in a couple hours one 
afternoon and it worked great. 
In conclusion I think the new system is great for the right applications and it should be 
kept. But I think a paper version needs to be available again for the situations where the 
new online system is not practical or even possible. In my opinion I think those paper 
versions should be readily available as well, if not available at town halls again than at 
least only a phone call away from being able to throw one in the mail that same day. 
Thank you for your time and please consider my testimony carefully when deciding on 
this bill. 
Thomas Douglass 
LPF#3 859
