Board of Directors 
Doug Baston 
President 
Tom Alien 
2nd Vice-President 
Jeff Williams 
Secretary 
Seth Sprague 
Treasurer 
Hannah Carter 
Jim Clair 
Terri Cooiong 
Jennifer Dann 
Mark Doty 
Chris Jackson 
John Meirose 
Richard Nass 
Paui Sampson 
Chagter Leaders 
Si Balch 
Larry Beauregard 
Joe Dembeck 
Jim Ferrante 
Randy Lagasse 
Lauren Oueiiette 
Merle Ring 
Andrew Smart 
Jeff Williams 
8Muiiiken Court $2 PO Box B36 e Augusta, ME 04332-0836 Telephone: 207-626-0005 e Emaii: info@mainewoodiandowners.org e Website: wwwmainewoodiandowners org Dias/’>.L\.l.12 
COMMUNITY ADVOCACY KNOWLEDGE LEGACY 
Testimony of Tom Doak 
Executive Director 
Maine Woodland Owners 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 180 
"An Act to Allow a Person to File a Paper Copy of a Timber Harvest Notiﬁcation 
Form" 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Tom 
Doak, I am the Executive Director of Maine Woodland Owners speaking today neither 
for nor against LD 180, "An Act to Allow a Person to File a Paper Copy of a Timber 
Harvest Notiﬁcation Form." 
This bill provides that a landowner or designated agent may submit a harvest 
notiﬁcation form to the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, Bureau 
of Forestry in an electronic or paper format. 
For over 30 years, the Forest Operations Notiﬁcation (FONS) system has been paper- 
based. Landowners and managers submitted paper copies to the Maine Forest Service 
and the data was entered by hand. In January 2021, the Maine Forest Service began to 
phase out paper ﬁlings and brought online a new web-based tool for landowners and 
designated agents to submit Forest Operations Notiﬁcations electronically. The 
system was not required to be used by ﬁlers until October l, 2021. Aﬁer October 1, 
2021, the ﬁling system was required to be used by all ﬁlers unless a ﬁler is without a 
computer in which case an alternative method is accommodated. 
As we advance further into the electronic age, the move by the Maine Forest Service 
toward electronic ﬁling is a natural progression. Not having to enter data by hand isa 
signiﬁcant time and cost saver for the Maine Forest Service. 
The Maine Forest Service has appropriately recognized that not all ﬁlers will have the 
same capacity to ﬁle electronically due to lack of a computer or other extenuating 
circumstances. We understand change is hard for the ﬁlers who are used to a paper- 
based system, and that there has been some natural resistance to making a complete 
shiﬂ to electronic ﬁling. I am sure there are small Woodland owners who have found 
the electronic ﬁling system a challenge, though not one has brought that concern to us. 
A Nonproﬁt Corporation - IRC 501(c)(3)
We have heard that even for some sophisticated ﬁlers the system itself can be challenging to use. 
Rather than return to paper ﬁlings, we have two suggestions: 
First, while direct assistance is available from the Maine Forest Service in person, via phone, or 
online, more could be done to make it clear that help is available in many ways and locations. It 
is not always obvious that help is available 
Second, the Maine Forest Service should convene stakeholders to determine any shortcomings of 
the electronic ﬁling system and agree on ways to address the issues. The Maine Forest Service 
has made some changes since they rolled out the system, but it seems clear that more could be 
done. 
The solution to this problem is to make the system work for everyone, not to move backward or 
require the Maine Forest Service to maintain two systems. Electronic ﬁlings are a reasonable 
step in the right direction for the efﬁciency of the Maine Forest Service and ultimately for the 
users of the system. Publicizing the help available, changes to the existing electronic system 
including using the latest tools, and a bit of patience among all those involved, will likely address 
most of the growing pains of this new approach. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today regarding this bill. I’d be happy to answer any 
questions now or at the work session._
