HQSWTALITY C 
MAENE 
Testimony of Nate Cloutier 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation Development Economic Advancement and Business 
March 21, 2023 
In Opposition to LD 440, “An Act to Protect Customers from Financial Scams by Requiring 
Retailers to Provide Information on Potential Signs of Financial Scams” 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and distinguished members of the Innovation Development 
Economic Advancement and Business Committee: My name is Nate Cloutier, and I am here today on behalf 
of HospitalityMaine representing more than 1,200 restaurant and lodging operators of all sizes across the 
state. HospitalityMaine opposes LD 440, “An Act to Protect Customers from Financial Scams by Requiring 
Retailers to Provide Information on Potential Signs of Financial Scams.” 
LD 440 was originally a concept draft and is replaced by an amendment from the bill Sponsor. It would 
require a retail establishment to train its employees on how to identify and respond to gift card fraud and 
provide notice to customers about gift card scams. It also creates a ﬁnancial penalty of $500 for 
establishments that violate these requirements. 
The premise of LD 440 is worthy of conversation; our restaurants and hotels take consumer protection and 
privacy very seriously. This bill, however, adds nothing to further protect consumers and only creates 
pathways for more penalties for our small businesses. All of the HospitalityMaine members I have spoken 
with have told me they train employees on handling gift card transactions as part of training and 
onboarding. Employees know the direction to take if a complaint of potential fraud is made, or ifa 
transaction is suspicious. Some have already received supplemental guidance from the Attorney General’s 
consumer protection division when it was necessary. 
We urge the Committee instead to work with the Attorney General’s’ Ofﬁce to ensure the Consumer 
Protection guidance already in place accurately reﬂects today's concerns and how to mitigate them, and 
that the AG’s ofﬁce include this in any regular dissemination to employers that may happen through a 
different department. This bill seems to make the assumption that businesses are not doing their due 
diligence to protect their customers from ﬁnancial scams at their establishment, but the opposite is true. 
Employers I have spoken to take their customers ’ privacy and rights seriously and are proactive to avoid 
any potential issues for themselves or the customer. 
We urge you to please vote LD 440 ought not to pass. Thank you for your attention. Iwould be happy to 
answer any questions.
