 
 
TESTIMONY FROM THE MAINE CREDIT UNION LEAGUE  
In Support of  LD 440 , An Act to Protect Customers from Financial Scams by 
Requiring Retailers to Provide Information on Potential Signs of Financial Scams  
March  21, 2023  
Senator Curry , Representative Roberts , and Distinguished Members of the Joint  
Committee  on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business , 
The Maine Credit Union League proudly  represen ts Maine’s 50 credit unions and 
more than 72 5,000 members  statewide. Please accept our testimony of initial support  
of LD 440; An Act to Protect Customers from Financial Scams by Requiring Retailers 
to Provide Information on Potential Signs of Financial Scams . As a concept draft, it is 
difficult to offer the League’s full endorsed support to LD 440 without a full review of 
drafted language. However, we support the sponsor’s amendment that was 
distributed yesterday to interested parties.  
How man y of you have had an unknown text message come through wanting you to 
verify some information? Fraud has become so ubiquitous that constant innovation in 
techniques mean s that  even savvy consumers can be caught in scams.  
Gift card scams are one of the mos t common types of scams we see. Consumers are 
contacted  by someone who appears to be legitimate and asked to purchase gift 
cards.  They are told the gift cards will help a loved one, support a church member, be 
payment for a new job, pay off debts they supp osedly owe the government, or 
support a romantic interest.  We hear stories from our credit unions  all the time,  
members buying  thousands of dollars in gift cards to give to scammers . Once these 
cards have been purchased, there’s no recourse for people who may have lost their 
entire savings.  
We’ve seen  consistent increases in these types of scams  year after year. Credit unions 
and the League regularly educate consumers about these scenarios . We conduct a 
monthly  fraud call for credit unions to share their experiences with new scams and 
fraud. The League also regularly appears on local media outlets  to teach consumers 
how to look out for these new scams. Still , often we are playing catch up a nd the best 
time  to stop these scams is before they happen.   
Credit union employees are trained to look for nervousness or atypical requests by 
members , ask about their intentions , and warn them when the signature signs of 
 
cc: Clerk Benjamin Berry, State House Room 127  scams exist. We believe that more consumer touchpoints likely decrease the amount 
of unrecoverable fraud losses. This bill will likely  require credit unions to give the 
same disclosures as retailers. D espite the potential burden of  additional regulation, 
we believe so strongly in the need to protect consumers, that we are in support of this 
amendment . 
The extent and prevalence  of modern fraud requires that everyone work together , we 
would be happy to collaborate with stakeholders on this important issue . The League 
is strongly in favor of this type of collaborative effort in fighting fraud and we thank 
the sponsor for highlighting this issue .  
Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony  on this important topic. If the League 
can be of any assistance during the deliberations of this bill or others similar, please 
do not hesitate to contact us.  
