P
resident:  Catherine Moore 
Vice President:  Sharon W. Peavey  
Secretary:  Heidi Jordan  
Treasurer:  Carol J. Lovejoy 
Director:  Victoria M. Hatch  
131st Maine State Legislature   January 31, 2023 
Judiciary Committee  
Hon. Senator An ne Ca rney, Chair 
Hon. Representative Matt Moonen, Chair 
Room 438 
State House Station 100  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
I
n RE: LD 196 Probate and Trust Law Advisory Commission recommendations  
D
ear Sen ator Carney and Representative Moonen,  
M
y name  is Kathleen A yers , I live in West Gardiner and am  the Regi ster of Probate from Kennebec, and Chair 
of the Legislative Committee  for Maine Association of Registers of P robate   
T
oday I have a conflicting meeting regarding a recent secu rity assessm ent.  There are  couple of issues  with the 
confidentiality piece we wish to have considered.  
C
onfidential items are hidden  automatically if filers use the correct docket entr y or they can ask the Court to 
hide them.  Also, we do h ave Maine Probate Rules including  electronic  filing rules , which allow for deemed 
private records . The Court can hide one piece of paper or the entire file  from our end.  
W
e are ask ing that there not be another drop dead date in this legislation.   If it ’s rolled back again our 
vendor has twice hidden records .  This hiding and unhiding records has caused disru ption s for attorney ’s, 
hospitals and the Courts . Putting our needs for the vendor on the back burner.  
I
 am not confident that the State is going to be able to meld the ir rules and our s into one cohe sive set of rules  
within a time certain  considering the progress of their electronic filing s ystem and t he lack of knowledge about 
ours  and the fact the rules committees are volunteers .  
P
reference of language would be until  such  time as the Supreme Court amends the Rules  are amended . 
Th
ese records are our history so I would ask that records more th an 100 years old be exempt to pr otect val uable 
genealogical records , similar to vital statistics .  
I
f there are any questions , I would be glad to address  them. 
Yo
urs Very T ruly , 
L
egislative Chair  MAR P 
Kathleen G. Ayers
        
        
 
   
