	
	
								Maine	Mayors	Coalition		Testimony	in	Support	of	LD 1721 An Act to Create Transitional Housing Communities for Homeless Populations in the State		Senator	Pierce,	Representative	Gere	and	distinguished	members	of	the	Joint	Select	Committee	on	Housing,	the	Maine	Mayors	Coalition	submits	testimony	in	support	of	LD	1721,	An	Act	to	Create	Transitional	Housing	Communities	for	Homeless	Populations	in	the	State.			The	Maine	Mayors	Coalition	is	a	nonpartisan	group	representing	the	mayors	of	ten	Maine	communities	–	Auburn,	Augusta,	Biddeford,	Lewiston,	Portland,	Rockland,	Saco,	Sanford,	South	Portland	and	Westbrook	–	and	more	than	260,000	residents.	The	Coalition	advocates	on	behalf	of	our	citizens	and	municipalities	for	policies	that	recognize	the	vital	services	Maine	cities	provide	and	the	positive	impact	Maine	cities	have	on	our	state.	The	Coalition	seeks	to	work	in	partnership	with	state	and	federal	elected	officials	to	meet	the	needs	of	Maine	people.			Maine’s	housing	crisis	directly	impacts	each	of	our	cities,	and	housing	is	top	of	mind	for	all	of	us.	Every	day	we	see	the	human	and	economic	consequences	that	come	from	the	lack	of	housing	supply	and	the	rising	costs	of	homes	and	rents.				As	you’re	well	aware,	an	unfortunate	consequence	of	our	housing	crisis	is	an	increase	in	homelessness.	Cities	of	all	sizes	are	seeing	their	homeless	populations	increase.	Many	are	at	or	near	capacity.	Though	unhoused	populations	may	be	larger	in	our	cities,	homelessness	is	not	specific	to	us.	Sadly,	communities	all	across	the	state	are	experiencing	it	as	well.			As	mayors,	our	most	immediate	concerns	are	providing	housing	and	essential	support	to	people	who	need	it.	Creating	a	program	to	develop	housing	and	offer	services	for	individuals	and	families	experiencing	homelessness	and	to	assist	them	in	their	transition	to	permanent	housing,	as	proposed	in	this	bill,	will	help	us	address	both	these	concerns.	It	also	will	alleviate	some	of	the	pressures	now	placed	on	our	staffs	as	well	as	on	our	budgets	for	general	assistance,	first	responders,	school	systems	and	other	critical	services.			We’re	in	the	process	now	of	finalizing	our	budgets.	To	that	end,	we	have	been	scrutinizing	every	program	and	expenditure	in	an	effort	to	keep	our	cities’	property	taxes	as	low	as	possible	while	continuing	to	meet	the	needs	of	our	citizens.	As	always,	state	funds	and	programs	to	assist	our	cities	in	supporting	our	unhoused	citizens	would	be	greatly	appreciated,	especially	at	this	time.		Thank	you,	again,	for	all	your	work	on	this	issue.		
