      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
May 12, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1721, An Act to Create Transitional Housing Communities for Homeless Populations in 
the State  
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing,  my 
name is Cullen Ryan , my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community 
Housing of Maine (CHOM ).  CHOM  houses Maine’s most vulnerable people and advocates on 
their behalf to see that everyone is included as part of the community.   
 
I am testifying in  support of LD 1721, An Act to Create Transitional Housing Communities for 
Homeless Populations in the State .   
 
This bill creates the Transitional Housing Community Construction Program Fund under the  Maine State 
Housing Authority to create transitional housing communities, which are clusters of transitional housing 
dwelling units for homeless individuals and families to provide stability and to allow the individuals and 
families to transition to perma nent housing. The bill directs that transitional housing communities be created 
throughout the State designed to cover all 16 counties. The bill directs the Department of Health and Human 
Services, through independent housing services under its administration of assisted housing programs, to coordinate, arrange or provide services including job training and health care services for residents of 
transitional housing communities. The bill also provides one -time funding to the Maine State Housing 
Authority to create transitional housing communities and funding to the department to provide independent 
housing services to residents of transitional housing.  
 
The Maine State Housing Authority shall create 400 dwelling units of transitional housing for families, with 
at least one transitional housing community within each of the 9 homeless response service hubs. And 500 
dwelling units of transitional housing for single individuals, with at least one transitional housing community 
within each of the 9 hom eless response service hubs.  
 
This bill provides $12 million each year for ongoing funds for support services associated with transitional 
housing, and one -time funding in the amount of $45 million in each year of the biennium for transitional 
housing comm unity construction.  
 
LD 1721 would create a fund to help support  the creation of transitional housing communities 
throughout the state, as well as critical support services for these communities.  This addresses one 
of the largest gaps in Maine’s ongoing r esponse to the increased  population of people experiencing 
homelessness  in our communities: transitional housing.  Transitional housing allows people to  be 
able to resolve their homelessness and attain permanent housing with some short- term assistance.    
 
The transitional housing communities this bill would create are ideal for non -citizens seeking 
asylum.  
 
This population is  among those most likely to begin working as soon as they are legally able.  
However, the mandatory federal waiting period to obtain a work permit for people seeking asylum 
is lengthy and is a large barrier to attaining self -sufficiency.   Until asylum seekers are able to work, 
they have no means to support themselves but for  vital safety net programs.  Demonstrated patterns 
suggest that this population is likely to need very little assistance after obtaining work status.  As 
such, this population is perfectly poised to enrich our state and nation.   
 
To ensure Maine’s vitalit y, and to solve Maine’s current workforce crisis, we must create a path for 
asylum seekers to achieve gainful employment, and that will take some kind of temporary housing .   
 
The large influx in Asylum seekers looking to start a safe, new life has caused displacement of 
traditionally homeless populations from homeless shelters.  Asylum seekers now account for 8 0% 
of the people utilizing the City of Portland’s new Homeless Services Center  – the largest shelter in 
the state which has traditionally served mor e than a quarter  of the entire homeless population of 
Maine.  Because asylum seekers are stuck there, this shelter is unable to have some 166 of its beds 
serve people who would most likely stay for a night or two.  And it is similarly unable to serve chron ically homeless populations – the very group most affected by the displacement because they 
are landing outside.   
  
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro  
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell  
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick  
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins  
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 
John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan  
Co-President , Evernorth 
 Kimberly Twitchell  
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba  
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon  
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
    
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
The resulting displacement is directly responsible for a sudden rise in unsheltered homelessness  in Portland and surrounding 
communities .  There are unintended consequences of having this population land in Maine’s homeless shelters.  Please see 
the attached op ed.   
 
Maine needs a two -track system for adequately addressing both populations.  LD 1721 would solve  this, as Asylum seekers 
arriving in our communities are prime candidates for t he type of housing this bill would create.  If targeted towards this 
population, these communities would remove Asylum Seekers from the misnomer of homelessness , significantly free up 
capacity at Maine’s largest emergency shelter s, and immediately  minimize the number of  people sleeping outside.    
 
Please support LD 1721.  Asylum seekers are our workforce crisis solution and need a safe place to live u ntil their status can 
allow that.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment.   
1 / 3By Cullen Ryan February 19, 2023Commentary: End homelessness and welcome asylum
seekers – Maine can do both
pressherald.com /2023/02/18/commentary-end-homelessness-and-welcome-asylum-seekers-maine-can-do-both-2/
Portland is about to open its new homeless service center . It promises to have everything
needed to end homelessness quickly and ef ficiently for single adults. It should be a
remarkably collaborative and ef fective shelter , something poised to help solve one quarter of
all homelessness in Maine.  
Except now , it might not.   
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Cullen Ryan  is executive director of the Portland-based nonprofit Community Housing of
Maine.
This service center was designed to serve mostly circumstantially homeless single adults. It
will also serve a smaller group with serious and persistent mental illness and/or other
complexities that make their homelessness more challenging to solve. All the right
ingredients are there to meet the full spectrum of need and provide quick exits to housing.   
2 / 3But Portland’ s Oxford Street Shelter has recently morphed to address a new need; the
current shelter is serving as the de facto asylum seeker resettlement program for the state of
Maine. The shelter has become a holding tank.  
Although Maine desperately needs af fordable housing, asylum seekers are not homeless
because of that. They are blocked from employment and housing due to federal laws. They
have already proven their resiliency and overcome tremendous adversity . Serving them as
homeless misses the mark.
At the root, these are people migrating to Maine in search of peace and work. There is plenty
of both. 
Maine has an enormous workforce shortage. There are 44,000 unfilled jobs and 24,000
people unemployed . That means Maine needs 20,000 new workers. And here they are –
newly arrived, talented, willing and motivated. They would enter our workforce except for one
thing. Our federal law requires complex paperwork followed by a six-month waiting period
before employment. And during what becomes eight to 12 months, this population is not
eligible for any federal assistance. People arrive and patiently wait.
Our federal delegation has been working in the House and the Senate to fix this, but
Congress has yet to pass one of the many bills our delegation has sponsored. That leaves
Portland in a conundrum.   
This can be solved. 
The state and federal government could collaborate to create an asylum seeker resettlement
program including temporary living space, connections to work sectors and support from
immigrant service programs like the Immigrant Legal Advocacy Program. That way , our state
could welcome this willing workforce and fast-track it into the many employment sectors
desperate for workers. Gainful employment would position asylum seekers to pay for
housing and make a peaceful living in Maine. But Maine does not have any such program.   
Portland is, without question, doing the right thing to meet the temporary needs of the asylum
seeker population. But we must also recognize these are skilled survivors who follow all the
rules and dutifully line up to secure a bed, inadvertently displacing populations we had
intended to serve in the new Homeless Service Center . Some 60% of Oxford Street Shelter ’s
current population are asylum seekers. The city expects that will approach 100% very
quickly; there is a long line at the border of people practiced at enduring hardships – and
ready and willing to work.   
The unintended consequence is that Maine’ s most challenged homeless populations are
now landing outside, unsheltered and at tremendous risk because Portland can’t meet the
needs of both populations simultaneously , at least not without more help.   
3 / 3The new , well-designed center for serving people experiencing homelessness might not do
what we hoped it would; we may see displacement overwhelm other parts of Maine, more
people outside, more encampments and people very visible on the streets, right as it opens.
And people will look at this and say: W ell, that new service center didn’t work, did it? That,
sadly , might thwart other wise investments in ending homelessness.   
We should welcome arriving asylum seekers as a wonderful opportunity , and we should help
this population establish itself quickly and successfully . And we should end homelessness.
We need a two-track system to do both. By throwing asylum seekers into the overwhelmed
homeless arena, we fail both populations.   
« Previous
Commentary: I was shot in the Southern California desert. Why? That’ s the wrong question.
Next »
Susana Hancock: As Maine’ s winters retreat, we risk much more than skiing
© 2023
