 
 
May 10, 2023  
Sen. Tim Nangle and Rep. Holly Stover  
Chairs, Joint Committee on State and Local Government  
 
Sen. Nangle, Rep. Stover and Members of the Joint Committee on State and Local Government:  
 
On behalf of the Goldwater Institute, I am writing to submit testimony on LD 1840. LD 1840 
states that hearing officers and judges may not defer to agencies’ interpretation of statutes or 
regulations. Further, in such cases, the legislation also establishe s a presumption favoring 
reasonable interpretations which limit agency power if ambiguity still exists after exhausting the 
customary tools of statutory interpretation.  
 
Across the nation, government agencies often apply overzealous interpretations of stat utes and 
regulations that expand their own power. These generous interpretations are then upheld by 
deferential administrative law judges and courts. This dynamic effectively turns administrative 
agencies into law -making entities that step into the constitutional domain of the legislature.  
 
Unfortu nately, many Americans do not have the resources or legal knowledge to adequately 
defend themselves in administrative hearings. Administrative law hearings can be intimidating 
venues, and negative outcomes in agency hearings often have a permanent impact w hen a 
deferential decision is predictably upheld on appeal. This regressive status quo is woefully biased 
in favor of the government, and it is harming Americans from all walks of life.  
 
LD 1840 levels the playing field by requiring hearing officers and c ourts to review agency 
actions without deference and interpret the relevant legal texts de novo . This provision will 
ensure that judicial officers are neutral arbiters of justice rather than parties biased in favor of 
administrative power.  
 
In 2018, based  on legislation developed by the Goldwater Institute, Arizona became the first 
state in the country to adopt this reform. Eleven other states have since followed suit.   
 
Adopting LD 1840 will protect your constituents’ constitutional rights before deferen tial judges 
and reclaim the legislative branch’s sole authority to create law. The Goldwater Institute works 
nationwide to protect individual liberty and applauds the Maine legislature for considering this 
necessary reform.  
 
Sincerely,  
Heather Curry, Dire ctor of Strategic Engagement  
500 E. Coronado Road  
Phoenix, AZ 85004  
 
