AMANDA E. BEAL 
COMMISSIONER  JANET T. MILLS 
GOVERNOR  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF AGRIC ULTURE , CONSERVATION & FORESTRY  
OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER  
22 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA , MAINE 04333  
 
HARLOW  BUILDING  
18 ELKINS LANE 
AUGUSTA , MAINE  
 PHONE : (207)  287-3200  
FAX: (207)  287-2400  
WEB: WWW .MAINE .GOV/DACF TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON STATE AND LOCAL 
GOVERNMENT  
 
IN OPPOS ITION  TO LD 1840  
 
An Act to Reform the State's Administrative and Rule -making Procedures  
 
May 12 , 2023  
 
Senator Nangle , Representative Stover , and members of the Joint Standing C ommittee  on State 
and Local Governm ent, my name is Nancy McBrady, Deputy Commissioner  in the Department 
of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  (DACF) . I am submitting testimony  on behalf of 
DACF  in opposition to  LD 1840, An Act to Reform the State's Administrative and Rule -making 
Procedures . 
 
This bill makes substantial changes to the laws governing administrative procedures by requiring 
courts and hearing officers to review an agency's interpretation of a statute, rule , or subregulatory 
document without deference to the agency's interpretation. If the legal text is unclear after this 
review , the court or hearing officer must default to "a reasonable interpretation that limits agency 
power and maximizes individual liberty ."  
 
It further requires that administrative rules expire on June 30th of the 5th year following the year 
of their filing unless extended by the Legislature and requires Governor approval of rules before 
final adoption. Finally, it  changes the definitions of routine technical rules and major substantive 
rules  and eliminates the provision allowing an agency to finally a dopt major substantive rules 
that the Legislature failed to act on.  
 
This bill could significantly increase the staff resources needed for rulemaking initiatives. 
Additional staff would be needed to initiate rulemaking to replace agency rules that expire every 
five years. The bill would also increase the time required for rulemaking initiatives. In addition 
to more rulemaking to replace expiring rules, the agency would have to wait for the Governor 's 
office 's approval of all rulemaking initiatives. Given the number of rulemaking initiatives state -
wide, that could cause significant delays. Also, after substantial agency investment in a 
rulemaking process, if the Legislature fails to act on a major substantive rule, the agency would 
either need to aban don the rulemaking or start over.   
 
The bill revises the definitions of major substantive and routine technical rules. It is unclear how 
the Legislature will determine the impact of major substantive rules as proposed (annual effect 
on the economy of $50,0 00,000 or more, significant adverse effects on competition, 
 
employment, investment , etc., significant changes in social and cultural relations among 
citizens); as forecasts on the measures proposed may be unavailable or so subjective , they are not 
measurab le. Furthermore, the bill removes the requirement to define rules as major substantive if 
they impose state mandates on units of local government that are the entities most affected by 
such rules .  
 
For these  reasons, we recommend that LD 1840 ought not  to pass.  I would be happy to answer 
any questions at the work session.  
 
 
