_ Department of the Secretary of State 
Shenna Bellows 
. 
R1} Secretary of State 
7?»<\;-1~-rm .
l\
. 
Amlllla Kate McBr1en 
Maine State Archivist 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
TESTIMONY OF SHENNA BELLOWS, MAINE SECRETARY OF STATE 
and KATE MCBRIEN, MAINE STATE ARCHIVIST 
Testifying in Favor 
L.D. l029, “Resolve, to Establish a Commission to Commemorate the 250th Anniversary of the 
Founding of the United States” 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on State and Local Government; we are Shenna Bellows, Maine’s Secretary of State, and Kate 
McBrien, Maine’s State Archivist. The Department of Secretary of State and the Maine State 
Archives, which falls under the Department ’s jurisdiction, support L.D. 1029. 
This resolve establishes a commission to help Maine residents commemorate the 250* anniversary 
of the founding of our nation. This will bring us in line with the other states who already have 
Commissions in place and are actively planning statewide programs and events. One goal of the 
federal-level America250 commission is to inspire and encourage Americans to connect to the past 
to inspire the future. That would be a goal for the State of Maine as well. 
Our state recently tried to commemorate our own bicentennial but was disrupted by the global 
pandemic. As a result, Maine residents were not able to fully participate in programs exploring our 
state history. Through the America250 program, we have a chance to commemorate the events 
which led to the creation of our nation in connection with the role residents of the then Province of 
Maine and the Wabanaki tribes played in our nation’s founding. 
This Resolve works to improve on the model set by the Maine Bicentemqial Commission, by 
building a Commission consisting of members with speciﬁc expertise and placing that Commission 
within the Department of the Secretary of State. Speciﬁcally, the Commission would be housed 
within the Maine State Archives, rooting it in history. The Maine State Archives has requested a 
limited-period position to administratively support this Commission and Work to coordinate 
meaningful programs throughout the state. That position is part of our biemiial budget request 
currently under consideration and would truly work together with this bill. 
Maine history is deeply entwined with the founding of our nation. Many Americans know that the 
American Revolution began with the ﬁrst shots ﬁred in Lexington and Concord in April of 1775. 
But how many are aware that the ﬁrst naval battle of the war took place in Maine, when in June 
1775 the citizens of Machias captured the British ship, Margaretta? That same year, Benedict 
Arnold led an expedition up the Kennebec River to defeat the British at Quebec.
When Thomas Jefferson Wrote the Declaration of Independence in 1776, he listed the reasons that 
the thirteen colonies should separate from the British Empire. One of those reasons was “He has 
plundered our seas, ravaged our Coasts, burnt our towns, and destroyed the lives of our 
people.” “Burnt our towns” refers to the burning of Portland (then called Falmouth) by the British 
Navy in 1775. When the Declaration of Independence was completed, printed broadsides of it were 
sent to towns throughout the colonies, including Maine towns, to spread the Word. Two of those 
broadsides are stored at the Maine State Archives. 
In 1779, the largest naval battle of the American Revolutionary War took place in mid-coast Maine, 
when the Americans sent nineteen Warships and twenty-ﬁve support vessels to Penobscot Bay to 
reclaim Maine from the British, who had captured it a month earlier and renamed the area “New Ireland. ” 
Most signiﬁcantly, America won our Revolutionary War with great support and assistance of the 
Passamaquoddy and Penobscot Nations, each of Whom sent brave and determined heroes to ﬁght in 
the War. 
We are happy to answer any questions you may have.
