I HOUSE oE REPRESENTATIVES 
W 2 STATE HOUSE STATIoN 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Sean Paunms TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
677 Middle Street 
Bath, ME 04530 
Phone: (207) 751-7760 
Sean.Panlhus@legislature.maine,go§{ 
April 18, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Sean Paulhus presenting 
LD 1029, Resolve, to Establish a Commission to Commemorate the 250th 
Anniversary of the Founding of the United States 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and distinguished members of the State and Local Government 
Committee, I am Sean Paulhus, Representative for House District 50, the city of Bath. I am glad to be 
here to present LD 1029, Resolve, to Establish a Commission to Commemorate the 250th 
Anniversary of the Founding of the United States. 
2026 marks the 250“ anniversary of the United States’ founding. To observe this momentous occasion, 
states across the nation are forming commissions to plan and execute a celebration that will include 
historical and educational events, activities and programs highlighting Maine’s role in the founding of our 
nation. This resolve would establish Maine’s own commission to develop and coordinate the 
commemoration of the 250"‘ anniversary of the founding of the United States. 
America250 is the U.S. Semiquincentennial Commission that was established by Congress in 2016 to 
help jumpstart a nation-wide anniversary observance that helps to honor, celebrate and accurately portray 
our nation’s history in a way that is as inclusive and forthright as possible. Maine contributed signiﬁcantly 
to the creation of the Union in a number of ways, and I view this event as an opportunity to showcase 
some of those important contributions. 
Through this resolve establishing the Maine Semiquincentennial Commission, it is my hope that we can 
reground ourselves in a richer understanding of where we came from, who we are and where We’d like to 
go — as a state and a nation. By bringing some of this history to the foreground in an engaging and 
entertaining manner with support from local businesses, non-proﬁts and especially the State Archivist, I 
believe that we will successfully elevate the complex and diverse stories that make up our state and 
demonstrate the value and durability of the American project, particularly as it relates to our investment in 
and service to our communities here in Maine. 
An amendment has been introduced by the State Archivist that I support. The amendment would add two 
members to the commission: a representative from the Permanent Commission on the Status of Racial, 
Indigenous and Maine Tribal Populations and the Executive Director of the Maine Arts Commission or 
their designee. 
I appreciate the opportunity to present this resolve, and I would be happy to answer any questions. Thank 
you. 
District 50 ~ Bath
