Janet Lynch
Pownal
LD 1011
From: Janet Lynch, Pownal, representing myself
Date of hearing: 8 May 2023
Re: LD 1011, “An Act Requiring the Reporting of Stolen Firearms”
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety Committee, 
I strongly support LD 1011, “An Act Requiring the Reporting of Stolen Firearms.” 
This common-sense gun safety bill does not restrict gun ownership in any way, but 
aims to ensure that firearms which are lost or stolen do not fall into the wrong hands. 
Gun theft is a major problem which threatens public safety. It is estimated that an 
average of 500 firearms are stolen in Maine annually, and these stolen weapons 
represent a grave threat to public safety. All Maine citizens should welcome this bill 
which will improve public safety and help gun owners recover their stolen guns.
Responsible gun owners who use guns for legitimate purposes know that in the wrong
hands, guns are both deadly and dangerous - that is why they keep them secured. 
Should a gun nonetheless be lost or stolen, the loss should be reported to police so 
that the guns can be retrieved before being used in a crime. When reported in timely 
fashion, this decreases the likelihood of crimes committed with lost or stolen weapons
and gives police a better chance of retrieving stolen guns.
Responsible gun owners buy them; people who steal guns have already committed the
crime of theft, and are likely go on to commit worse crimes with the stolen firearm. 
Why else would they steal guns in the first place?  If police are notified of a stolen or 
missing weapon, they can act preemptively to stop those crimes before they happen. 
There are many incidences of stolen firearms which were later used in crimes, 
including a recent tragedy in which a four year old girl was shot by a family member 
who had stolen his father’s gun. Unfortunately, the theft was not reported before the 
tragedy occurred.
So-called “straw purchasing” of firearms is also a serious problem which leads 
directly to illegal trafficking in firearms. Straw purchasers buy guns with the intention
of selling them to others for profit, usually in jurisdictions where it is more difficult to
buy firearms. Straw purchasing and gun trafficking have led to incidents of horrific 
violence, often committed with weapons not legal in the jurisdiction where the crimes
occurred. But without a duty to report theft, straw purchasers have a ready defense. 
While arms trafficking, like drugs trafficking, is illegal, it is very difficult for law 
enforcement to make charges stick when there is no requirement to report lost or 
stolen firearms. Absent such a requirement, straw purchasers can buy and sell guns 
across state lines, and then can claim the guns that they actually sold for profit were 
stolen but not reported. When there is a duty to report theft, this defense is doesn’t 
work, and law enforcement can better do their job to stop illegal gun trafficking.
Those who keep hazardous materials are required to report their theft, and guns are 
certainly hazardous if they fall into the wrong hands. LD 1011is a common-sense gun 
safety bill which will help law-abiding gun owners, their families and communities, 
and police, and it will improve public safety. LD 1011 OUGHT TO PASS.
