 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1011  (Opposed)   
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1011, An Act Requiring the Reporting of Stolen Firearms  
 
DA: May 8 , 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 1011.    
 
 Maine law rarely criminalizes the failure to report an event.  The following are examples of 
failure to report that the L egislature has elected to criminalize: 17-A M.R.S. § 512 (treatment of 
gunshot wound) and 17 -A M.R.S. § 804 (dangerous fire).   It is a civil violation for a mandated 
report er to fail  to make a report of suspected abuse or neglect .   22 M .R.S. §§ 3475, 3477, 4009, 
4011 -A.    
 
 If the Legislature chooses to create this affi rmative obligation, it is not apparent  why some 
firearms should be excluded.   The reference to the definition of “antique firearms” as defined under 
the federal law would exclude firearms that are within the definition of firearm in the Maine 
Criminal Code that applies  to Maine laws governing  the use or posse ssion of firearms.   17 -A 
M.R.S. § 2 (12 -A).  See also 12 M.R.S. § 10001(21), defining “firearm” for purposes of Title 12.    
 
 If the L egislature chooses to criminalize subsequent  failures to report, i n proposed 455 -
B(2)(B), the language elevating the violation to a Class E crime based on prior violations should be 
revised to be consistent with Criminal Code draftin g conventions.    O ne option is as follows :   “A 
person is guilty of failure to report a stolen firearm if the person violates subsection 1 and at the 
time of the offense, the person has two or more adjudications or convictions for violating this 
section or has two or more adjudications or convic tions for engaging in substantially similar 
conduct to that contained in this section  in another jurisdiction within the previous ten years.”  
 
 *CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    
It consists of 9 membe rs appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the C o-Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crim es in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
