 
 
 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.    
LD 1011, An Act Requiring the Reporting of Stolen Firearms   
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON    
CRIMINAL JUSTICE & PUBLIC SAFETY   
May 8, 2023   
     Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety, good morning. My name is 
Michael Kebede, and I am Policy Counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organ ization 
committed to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine 
and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, we object  to portion 2(B) of this bill, that 
would create a new crime.  
The right to own and use guns is not absolute nor free from government regulation. 
Firearms are inherently dangerous instruments and their use, unlike other activities protected by 
the Bill of Rights, can inflict serious bodily injury or death. Therefore, firearms are subject to 
reasonable regulation in the interests of public safety, crime prevention, maintaining the peace, 
environmental protection, and public health. We recognize that gun violence is increasing, 
reaching levels not seen in the past twenty years.1 Black people an d young people age 18 to 24 
are the most frequent victims of gun violence.2  With this in mind, we do not object to Section 1 
or 2(a) of this bill, but only to the portion that would create a new crime.  
We recognize that this committee is tasked with crea ting public policy that promotes 
public safety in our state, and may feel moved to enact gun control measures as part of its work. 
We ask that as you deliberate over this bill and other bills like them, that you look for solutions 
 
1 See Ed Pilkington, Gun deaths in US rise to highest level in 20 years, data shows , THE 
GUARDIAN, Dec. 13, 2018, available at https://www.theguardian.com/us -news/2018/dec/13/us -
gun-deaths -levels -cdc2017.   
2 Firearm Violence, 1993 -2011 , Bureau of Justice Statistics, available at  
https://bjs.ojp.gov/press -release/firearm -violence -1993 -2011.  
  
 
 2 that do the most good whi le preventing the most harm, and consider in your weighing process 
whether creating new crimes is the best way to change behavior.     
We can shrink our outsized and misused criminal justice system and commit our 
resources to things that make communities he althier and safer: education, housing, and health 
care. We lock up more people in this country than any country in the history of the world and our 
incarceration rate in Maine is higher than most NATO member states. A better world begins with 
making the co mmitment to stop turning to the criminal justice system to solve society’s 
problems. We urge you to remove the criminal penalty in LD 1011 .   
Thank you for your time and attention.    
  
  
  
 
