Peggy McGehee 
Falmouth, Maine 
Good aﬁemoon, Chairs Beebe-Center and Salisbury and Members of the Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety Committee: 
l am Peggy McGehee, a resident of the Town of Falmouth. I speak in support of L.D. l0l l, that 
requires the reporting of stolen or lost frrearrns within 72 hours. Gun theft is a problem in Maine. 
It is estimated that between 2012-2017, 3033 ﬁrearms were stolen in Maine, averaging over 500 
stolen guns in Maine every year. 
A signiﬁcant number of crimes are committed with stolen guns. A recent study of crime scenes 
in Pennsylvania found that 30% of the guns that ended up at crime scenes had been stolen. From 
2012 to 2018 nearly 14,800 guns that were recovered by police in connection with a criminal 
investigation had been reported stolen or lost. 
Mandatory and timely reporting of a lost or stolen gun can give police a chance to track the gun 
and retrieve it before it is used in a crime. Last year, a Maine father did not report the theft of his 
gun to local police. Later, his l9 year old son used the gun he had stolen in a ﬁght with his 
brother, and accidentally shot and killed his 4 year old niece. Had there been a mandatory 
reporting law, the father might have felt impelled to report the theft to the police, who could have 
investigated and retrieved it ir1 time to prevent this tragedy. 
Mandatory reporting of gun thefts and loss will reduce straw purchases in Maine,‘ reduce crime, 
and help police solve crimes. The mandatory reporting laws in other states are associated witha 
30% lower risk that guns would be purchased in those states and recovered after a crime in 
another state. 
The bill will deter Maine’s straw purchasers of guns. This is because, when a straw purchaser 
buys and resells a gun to a felon that is later used in a crime, she cannot avoid accountability by 
asserting only after the gun is discovered at the crime scene that it had been “stolen” from 
her——because she will have had a legal duty to have reported the gun as stolen earlier. This bill 
will therefore help police by giving them a legal basis to investigate, and potentially charge, the 
straw purchaser for having failed to report the asserted theft or loss before it showed up at the 
crime scene. 
Thank you for your consideration of these comments. 
Peggy McGehee 
Pmegehee4@gmail.com 
‘ In April 2023, a Maine woman was arrested and charged with illegally selling more than 55 guns that 
she bought from Maine gun dealers in 2022 and selling them to gang members in Califomia. Portland 
Press Herald, April ll, 2023 “Maine woman accused of buying dozens of guns for California gang.”
