J‘ ,. 
an2 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
VickiD0ude1_a 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
18 Tm Sweet AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
Camden, ME 04843 (207) 287-1400 
(207) 542-1990 TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 Victoria.Doudera@legislaturemaine.gov 
May s, 2023 
Yéstimony 0fRej21*esentat2' ve Vicki Doudera presenting 
LD 1011, An Act Regarding the Reporting of Stolen Firearms 
Before the Yoimf Standing Committee on C7'iﬂZi72dl Yustice and Public Safety 
Good day, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and honorable members of the 
Criminal Justice and Public SafetyCommittee. My name is_Vicl<i Doudera and I represent House 
District 41, which includes Camden and Rockport. I am here today to introduce LD 1011, An Act 
Regarding the Reporting of Stolen Firearms. 
In April of zozo a Canadian man shot his partner, set ﬁre to their house and in the span ofa 
half—hour gunned down 13 people in his small village, including two neighbors whose children 
were hiding behind a bed. Over the next several hours, the killer ended the lives of nine more 
people, including a pregnant woman and a constable from the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. 
He was shot and killed by police outside a gas station the day after his rampage began. Officers 
searching the Mazda 3 he stole from one of his victims found ﬁve ﬁrearms and dozens of 
rounds of ammunition. 
Three of those ﬁrearms — a Glock 23, a Ruger P89 and a Colt Carbine semi-automatic riﬂe— 
came from Houlton, Maine. One was traced to a private sale at a Houlton gun show, one toa 
friend and the third — the Glock 23 — was taken from the Houlton friend’s home “without his 
permission. ” In other words, this gun was stolen, never reported to Maine authorities and used 
in the worst mass shooting in Canadian history. ‘ 
The Houlton man has expressed remorse for the loss of twenty-two lives. But remorse does 
not bring any of them back. What might have helped keep those 22 people alive? The reporting 
to local police of a stolen ﬁrearm. 
When a gun is stolen from a law abiding citizen, it is not used for a good cause. Guns are stolen 
when a perpetrator who cannot legally buy them wants to commit a crime, such as the mass 
‘ A Canadian Man Shot and Killed 22 People. Three of his Guns Came from Maine. Portland Press Herald. 
https://wwwpressherald.com/2022/05/0 8/a-canadian-mamshot-and-killed-22-people-three-of~l1is-gu11s-came-from- 
maine/ 
District 41: Camden and Rockpoit
shooting i11 Canada. They are stolen to sell privately, often to those who cannot legally 
purchase them; and they are stolen to trade for drugs. As Public Safety Commissioner l\/Iichael 
Sauschuck said a few years back when he was Portland Police Chief, “there is no question ” 
that the Maine guns—for-drugs trade is happening. 2 
Guns stolen from Maine are frequently 
traiﬁcked south — part of what law enforcement calls the “iron pipeline. ” 
Jim Ferguson, Special Agent in Charge of the ATF’s New England regional office in Boston, and 
Paul McNeil, the ATF’s lead agent in the Portland ﬁeld ofﬁce, gave an intervie\-v in February of 
2023 to discuss the most recently released Maine crime gun data, covering the ﬁve year period 
from 2017 through 2021." 
The data shows 4,594. guns used in crimes were bought in Maine between 2017 and 2021, and 
1,612 of those guns, or 35%, were recovered in Maine, with 65% recovered in other states. 
Ferguson said, "For the majority of the ﬁrearms that are recovered here, they originate here. 
but it is also a signiﬁcant source for those outside of the state of Maine as well." 
The next four top recovery states for Maine crime guns were Massachusetts, 723, or 15.7%; New 
York, 354, or 7.7%; Florida, 112., or 2.4%; and Connecticut 101, or 2.1%. The most frequently traced 
Maine crime gun is a 9 millimeter pistol? 
Maine is below the national average when it comes to gun violence, a result of the state’s low 
homicide rate. Thank goodness. Maine ranks 25th in the country for gun safety, with about 10.5 
gun deaths per 100,000 residents, compared to the national average of 12.2 deaths, according 
to Everytown for Gun Safety. But this problem of Maine serving as a “source state” for guns is 
really frightening, something every Mainer finds troubling. We can do something to help stop 
the flow of stolen Maine guns and help law enforcement in the process. 
As of January 1, 2021, 13 states and the District of Columbia require firearm owners to report to 
law enforcement when their weapons are lost or stolen. Giffords Law Center reports that most 
jurisdictions with these laws require individuals to report the loss or theft of all ﬁrearms, 
although laws vary in the length of time allowed to elapse between the discovery and the 
report. Maryland requires the reporting of loss or theft of handguns and assault weapons only, 
while i\=iichigan requires the reporting of thefts, but not loss, of all firearms. 
The bill before you requires the owner of a firearm, except an antique ﬁrearm, to report the 
loss or theft to a local law enforcement agency within 72 hours of the time the owner knew or 
reasonably should have known that the ﬁrearm had been lost or stolen. It imposes civil 
penalties for violations. 
Some will say that to place an additional burden and the threat of prosecution on crime 
victims is ruthless and uncaring. No one wants to cause anyone unnecessary trauma to a crime 
victim but we are not talking about a stolen television or pearl necklace. We are talking about 
2 “How Maine became a source of ‘crime guns’ in other states.” Portland Press Herald. 
https://www.presshe1"ald.com/201 6/1 0/3 0/maine~a~source-state-fo1" —c1ime—guns/ 
3 “How Guns from Maine are Connected to Crimes Across the Country, ” WMTW. 
https://WWW.Wmtw.c0m/artic1e/h0W-guns-from-maine-are-connected-to-crimes-across-the-country/43085538 
District 41: Camden and Rockport
weapons. Those opposing this bill will also point out that criminals prohibited u11der state or 
federal law from possessing ﬁrearms cannot constitutionally be subject to lost or stolen 
reporting requirements, but that’s not who this bill is addressing. 
You will also hear that it is not necessary to place penalties on the failure to report lost or 
stolen ﬁrearms, as victims are already incentivized to report thefts in order to facilitate the 
return of their ﬁrearms. If that were the case, why were 4,594 guns used in crimes between 
2017 and 2021 originally from Maine? it wasn’t Mainers committing these crimes. It wasn’t the 
people who bought them. They were acquired illegally — stolen or through a straw purchase. 
What about Federal law? Federal law does not require individual gun owners to report the loss 
or theft of a ﬁrearm to law enforcement. Federal law does, however, require licensed ﬁrearms 
dealers to report the loss or theft of any ﬁrearm from the dealer’s inventory to the US Attorney 
General or local law enforcement within 48 hours of discovering the loss or theft. 
Finally, you will hear today about a 2018 survey of ﬁrearms studies conducted by the Rand 
Corporation. The National Riﬂe Association cites this report saying it “Found no research 
demonstrating lost or stolen reporting laws produce desirable outcomes? ‘ I read the Rand 
Report, and this conclusion is true. They couldn’t say deﬁnitively whether these laws have an’. 
effect because researchers are legally unable to access detailed ﬁrearm trace data. Despite 
this, the experts who wrote the Rand Corporations report concluded: 
“There are several plausible mechanisms through which policies requiring the reporting of lost 
or stolen ﬁrearms might reduce criminal use or traﬁicking of ﬁrearms. First, reporting 
requirements might encourage private gun owners to take steps that decrease the ease with 
which their ﬁrearms might be lost or stolen (e.g., by storing their ﬁrearms in a locked 
container). Second, reporting requirements could deter some straw purchasers who fear that 
failure to report their ﬁrearms as stolen could leave them accountable if their guns later 
turned up at a crime scene. Third, timelier reporting of gun losses or thefts may aid law 
enforcement ‘s gun~tracing efforts and increase criminal prosecutions of illegal users or 
trafﬁckers of stolen ﬁrearms, potentially reducing the stock of ﬁrearms available to prohibited 
possessors or t.o individuals seeking to obtain ﬁrearms for criminal purposes) ’; 
A new Fox News Poll, released last month, ﬁnds most voters would prefer focusing on speciﬁc 
gun control measures rather than arming citizens to reduce gun violence. “ LD 1011 is a speciﬁc 
policy proposal, rooted in common sense and public safety. Let’s pass it and help prevent more 
Maine guns from getting into the wrong hands and causing deadly harm. 
Represemative Vicki Doudem 
4 “Oppose Lost or Stolen Reporting Requirements, ” National Riﬂe Association 
https://wwwnraila.org/campaigns/20l9/virginia/lost —or-stolen- ﬁrearms/ 
5 “Gun Policy in America, ” by the Rand Corporation 
httpsI//wwwrand.org/research/gun~policy/analysis/1ost —or-stolen- ﬁrearms.html 
6 Fox News Poll, April 27, 2023. 
https1//WWW.foxnews.com/0f ﬁcial-polls/fox-news-poll~voters-favor-gun-limits-arming-citizens-reduce-gun-violence 
District 41: Camden and Rockpoit
