   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
Testimony in support of LD 741, “An Act to Prohibit Training Repayment Agreements 
by Employer s.” 
 
Arthur Phillips, Maine Center for Economic Policy  
March 21, 2023  
 
Good afternoon,  Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is Arthur Phillips  and I am an analyst 
at the Maine Center for Economic Policy. I am here to testify  in support of  LD 741, “An Act 
to Prohibi t Training Repayment Agreements by Employers.”  
 
In 2019, Maine passed a law to limit the use of noncompete agreements, acknowledging 
the unjustifiable  burden they place on low -income workers. Similarly, Maine  has taken  
significant strides to limit the debilitating impact of student debt on working -class peop le, 
by expanding access to student loan forgiveness and ensuring transcripts and diplomas 
aren’t wielded as debt collection tools . This bill can be viewed as  an extension of those 
laudable efforts.  
 
Training repayment agreement provisions , sometimes referred to as  TRAPs, require 
workers to pay back the cost of  on-the-job training  if they leave their job  before a period  
set by the employer, which can range from months to years . The details of the se provisions 
are often found in complicated employment contracts that may not be perfectly 
understoo d when deciding whether to accept a job, particularly  in entry level positions . 
Unlike noncompete agreements and the highly regulated student debt sector, training 
repayment  agreements  are largely overlooked, even  though  they cover nearly 10 percent 
of US workers, and their use has grown significantly in rec ent years .i  
 
Training repayment agreements are especially onerous for  low-wage workers  in industries 
with high turnover, where the average worker may not stay in their job for the duration of 
the repayment period . Some workers have reported not knowing whether the agreement 
would be enforced; others have challenged employers’ asserted cost of training, finding the 
true cost far lower than what they were being c alled to repay. These agreements can also 
be wielded as  leverage against employees who speak up about mistreatment or seek to 
organize their workplace, as the fear of  retaliatory termination is compound ed by the fear 
of debt.  
 
Last year, National Nurses United, of which Maine State Nurses Association is an affiliate, 
conducted a survey of its membership and found that around half of respondents were or 
had been in a training program that was required as a condition of employment . Among 
registered nurses who reported having to enter a training program as a condition of 
 
   
 employment, more than half reported that their employer expected them to pay back the 
cost of training .ii Beyond health care, training repayment agreements are also widely used 
in transportation , retail, hospitality,  and financial services.  
 
Maine places significant value o n workforce training and provides substantial public 
resources for these efforts. Fundamentally, these  training  repayment agreements shift the 
cost of job training away from employers and onto individua ls. Workers, especially lower -
wage workers, should not be forced to bear this burden.  
 
Employers may  argue th ese agreements are simply a way to recoup the costs of t raining 
workers who pursue other opportunities. In practice, however, they incentivize  workers to 
stay in jobs  with otherwise unsatisfactory  working conditions  and penalize workers who  
switch jobs. This is the opposite of what we should want for our labor market . 
 
The ability of workers to seek out better opportunities that more closely fit their  skill sets 
and future goals is a critical component of a vibrant economy. We should be encouraging, 
not d iscouraging, the ability of workers to switch jobs when better opportunities arise. 
Doing so would not only optimize workers’ productivity, but it would incentivize employers 
to compete for workers by improving job quality and working conditions.  
 
For thes e reasons, we urge you to support LD 741. I am happy to take any questions you 
may have.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes  
 
i https://www.reuters.com/world/us/more -us-companies -charging -employees -job-training -if-they -quit-2022 -10-
17/ 
ii Comment from National Nurses United to CFPB, September 23,  2022 , available at   
https://www.regulations.gov/comment/CFPB -2022 -0038 -0048  
