TESTIMONY OF "MN! um“i 
Brian Parke “M59931 1 
5% 
|_.o. 741, “An Act to Prohibit Training Assomma 
Repayment Agreements by Employers ” ,,,w'_,, ﬂ“,n 
(aomza-412: P ~’ 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Committee on 
Labor and Housing. My name is Brian Parke and I am the President and CEO of the Maine 
Motor Transport Association and a resident of Brunswick. The Association is comprised of 
more than 1,700 member companies, whose employees make up a large portion of the 
34,000 people who make their living in the trucking industry in Maine. 
I am here today to testify in opposition to LD 741. 
While well intentioned, the training repayment prohibition proposed by LD 741 will havea 
tremendously negative impact on workers. whose employers pay to have them upgrade 
existing or gain new skills through workforce training and education. If passed, the result will 
be that employers will stop paying for such training because there will be no way to determine 
their return on investment without the assuranceof increased future production. 
Like most blue-collar industries in Maine, trucking is experiencing unprecedented workforce 
challenges and MMTA’s membership has identifiedthis as our most important priority. To 
address it, our members have dedicated considerable resources to develop a multi-pronged 
and multi-year strategy that includes significant investments in a social media workforce 
development campaign to get younger people interested in trucking careers, as well asa 
zero percent interest loan program to offer financial assistance for those getting training to' 
get their Commercial Drivers License (CDL). 100% of the financial investment that has gone 
into these programs comes directly from the trucking industry - there have been no grants, 
no government assistance and no pandemic relief funds. Just private industry identifying our 
own problem and then putting our own money where our mouths are to address the problem.
Telling you this isn’t to highlight the important things our members are doing to develop 
tomorrow's workforce, it’s to convince you not to diminish the effectiveness of their 
investment by passing LD 741, especially in the context of our zero percent education loan 
program. 
Right now, MMTA members can (and do) use our loan program as a financing tool when they 
have identified an individual who wants to get their CDL and work for them — sometimes it’s 
an existing employee who wants to improve their marketability and value and sometimes it’s 
someone from the community who wants to be a trucker. Either way, these are Maine 
citizens gaining a valuable credential that can lead to quality careers in our state. 
Due to overwhelming workforce needs, our members oftentimes agree to fund this CDL 
training, but it only makes sense for them to make this investment if the individual agrees to 
work for the employer for a period of time after they successfully get their CDL. Otherwise, 
the individual could haveathe company pay for their CDL training and then go work for 
someone else shortly thereafter, leaving the employer who paid for the training with a big 
expense and no benefit to show for it. 
I have to believe that this is not a unique situation only impacting the trucking industry. 
Training to get a CDL can run between $5,000 and $8,000 and if this legislature wants 
employers to consider making training reimbursements now and in thefuture, we ask that 
you not disincentivize it and request that you oppose LD 741. 
Thank you for your consideration and for allowing me to testify. I would be happy to answer 
any questions the committee has now or at the Work Session.
