HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002
(207) 287-1440
TTY: (207) 287-4469
         Chad R. Perkins
                         POB 251
            Dover-Foxcroft, ME 04426
   Residence: (207) 279-0927
         Fax: (207) 305-4907
        Chad.Perkins@legislature.maine.gov
                                                                                                                                  
21 Mar 23
MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT: LD 741, An Act to Prohibit Training Repayment Agreements by Employers
Committee Chair Senator Tipping, Committee Chair Representative Roeder and distinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing ,
  Thank you for allowing me to present testimony in opposition of LD 741, An Act to Prohibit Training
Repayment Agreements by Employers .
   
   Last year, the State commissioned the “ Blue Ribbon Commission to Study Emergency Medical 
Services in the State”.   The primary takeaway of the report is that the state of Emergency Medical 
Services in the State of Maine is in crisis. One of the primary causes of this crisis is the lack of 
qualified personnel in the field. On Monday, March 20th, my committee, the Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety Committee, was repeatedly told that two of the primary roadblocks in recruiting and 
retaining qualified personnel was the cost of training for requisite skills and the fact that paramedics 
were now able to take their skill sets to higher paying, lower stress non-EMS employment 
opportunities, such as working as Operating Room Technicians.
   When I served as the Chairman of the Board of Directors for a non-profit EMS Service, we would 
often use the cost of paramedic training to recruit new personnel or to promote and retain lower level 
EMS providers. In return for the service paying the bill to educate the employee (currently at $12,000 
to get the training), and allowing them to further their professional development, the service would 
enter into a contractual agreement with the employee obligating them to continue employment with the 
service for a set period of time. If the employee left the service voluntarily, they would be required to 
repay the service a pro-rated portion of the $12,000 that the service invested into them and their 
training.
House District 31
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville Township, &
Southeast Piscataquis
LD   741
Page 2
   
   If LD 741 were to pass, it would further endanger our already precarious EMS system. 
One of two things would happen. Services would be forced to stop offering this option - 
most students wanting to further their professional development would not be able to 
afford the $12,000 required to obtain the level of paramedic and EMS services would be 
without even more paramedics. Alternatively, services could choose to continue to offer 
this option and newly trained paramedics would “jump ship” shortly after being trained, 
leaving the service with the $12,000 bill and having nothing to show for it. EMS services 
cannot afford this at all. Our services are in such dire straits that Speaker Ross has 
recently proposed a $25 million dollar one time injection just to keep EMS functioning 
state wide.  Services that can barely stay open cannot afford a “$12K drive off”.
   I strongly encourage the committee to consider this legislation and vote of ‘Ought Not 
To Pass’. I thank you for your time.
Respectfully,
Rep. Chad R. Perkins
District 31
ATT:
CF:
Committee Chair Senator Tipping
Committee Chair Representative Roeder
Labor and Housing  Committee Members
House District 31
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis

