MAINE 5% T A TE 
CHAMBER —~ of ————~—~—~ W~ 
{Q1 QB/IMERCE 
T/ie voice of‘/l/1'c'1iiic /21/xiiiesx 
Testimony of 
Peter M. Gore 
Government Affairs Consultant 
Maine Street Solutions 
On behalf of the 
Maine State Chamber of Commerce 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
in opposition to 
L.D. 741, An Act to Prohibit Training Repayment Agreements by Employers 
March 21, 2023 
Sen. Tipping, Rep. Roeder and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing, my name is Peter Gore, and I am a Government Affairs Consultant with Maine Street 
Solutions, and l am here on behalf of my client, the Maine State Chamber of Commerce, a 
statewide business association representing both large and small businesses speaking to you 
today in opposition to L.D. 741, An Act to Prohibit Training Repayment Agreements by 
Employers. 
As drafted, L.D. 741 would prohibit an employer from requiring an employee to agree to 
repay the employer for training costs related to their job, should the employee leave that 
employers business.’ 
The current labor market is such that employers are hiring individuals who havea 
willingness to learn and/or obtain the appropriate certifications to complete the job duties with 
skills they may need but do not have in order to perform the position. This includes jobs that 
require certificates or other trainings, or even advanced education at the collegiate level. 
Accordingly, many employers agree to pay the costs associated with these trainings and 
certificates (such as OSHA 10-Hour Training), provide employees with work time to study, and 
pay for the time associated with the course if the employee agrees to continue to work with the 
organization for a period oftime after receipt of any training or educational advancement. 
ln some cases, If the individual does not work for that time period, they can be required 
to re-pay the costs paid for the training proportionally to the time in which they remained 
employed. in most situations this training or certificate is one which will be beneficial to the 
employee in future employment and be of value to competitors who may wish to employ the 
individual. In addition, the employer may have agreed to pay for courses or training 
opportunities with the expectation of long-term employment of the worker. 
The language of L.D. 741 would limit an employer from requiring an employee to enter 
into these types of agreements. This would prove detrimental to both the worker and the 
28 State Street, Suite 101 P! Augusta, Maine 04330-5630 E tel (207) 623-4568 H fax (207) 622-7723 H website: Wu“.mainechamber.org 1-1 e-mail: info@1nainecl1'nnber org
MAINE r" '\ *\ 
CHAMBER WW of ~~~—~~~— »»»~—»— 
5 1,) M l\/lERCl1§. 
busmess owner. If employers cannot be certain they will see a return p,n(tl1(e;rU Q/,~Mm- /W, 
educational investment, why should they be forced to take the risk of training, then losing an 
employee they may be counting on, to a competitor? The effect on the benefits employers 
currently provide to employees will be to cease to offer certificate opportunities as well as 
reimbursement for courses/classes/degree programs as the benefit will no longer provide any 
benefit to the employer as the employee can immediately leave employment without penalty. 
In discussing this bill with Chamber members, not all employers require any type of 
reimbursement or repayment for training opportunities presented to employees. But some 
certification, or higher education courses are expensive, and employers want to be sure they 
are investing in their people wisely. They know offering these types of incentives serve both 
the worker and business. That is why this type of training and educational opportunities are 
often part of a larger benefit package. However, the net effect of prohibiting any employer 
from ensuring some mutual rate of return on the money they willingly spent to improve a 
worker's skills, will be to simply stop offering these incentives. 
The Maine Chamber believes this is a lose-lose outcome for workers and the businesses 
that employ them. Innovation, training, flexibility, and nimbleness are the hallmarks of our 
future workforce. lf Maine is to compete in the global marketplace, we must have workers that 
are trained in the latest technologies and have the educational tools to advance our economy. 
We are opposed to passage of legislation like LD 741 that, in the long run will inhibit these 
goals. We therefor urge this committee to give LD 741 an ought not to pass report. Thank you 
for the opportunity to present you with our thoughts. />1/xi/1<. ’.\'.\' 
28 btiie \t1eet Suite [01 E Augusta. Maine 04330-5630 Q tel (207) 623-4568 B fax (207) 622-7723 ii website: w\vw.inainechainbeuorg B e-mail: inf0@n1ainechalnbemlg
