33 McAlister Farm Rd. 
Suite 102
Portland, ME  04103
info@mainemfg.com
P: 207-747-4406
www.mainemfg.com 
Manufacturers Association of Maine
21 March 2023
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Labor and Housing, we offer this testimony in 
opposition to LD 741, An Act to Prohibit Training Repayment Agreements by 
Employers.
The Manufacturers Association of Maine (MAME) is a non-partisan 501(c)6 
non-profit grounded in service to its membership, providing a network of 
resources designed to support the strategic business growth needs of Maine 
manufacturing entrepreneurs.  Maine’s manufacturing businesses are diverse, 
employing almost 60,000 individuals in military and defense, aerospace, metal 
fabrication, paper, boat building, semi-conductor, wood products, 
aquaculture and biotech, medical device, composites, and bioplastics, as well 
as the food and beverage industries. These businesses represent almost 10% 
of Maine’s annual GDP and 14.5% of all the wages paid in the state on a 
weekly basis. MAME’s mission is to help manufacturing grow and succeed and 
supports Maine’s development of future manufacturing through a variety of 
programs.
As we have testified before, MAME’s advocacy efforts focus on four (4) key 
areas: workforce development, taxation, human resources/wage and hour 
and energy.  This bill directly impacts workforce development and 
employment law by prohibiting an employer from requiring an employee to 
enter into an agreement that would require the employee to reimburse the 
employer for training costs if the employe were to leave that job. 
Manufacturing has a long history in Maine. From our ship building and shoe 
making heritage to the bio-manufacturing and composites of today, all of it 
requires skilled workers. In order to stay relevant and competitive in the 
global market, businesses must invest in their workers by providing training 
that directly impacts the job duties of the workforce. Some companies also 
offer training or tuition reimbursement for employees seeking to improve 
their skills or attain new skills that are beneficial to the employer and the 
employee alike. It not only increases the value of the employee to the current 
employer but also makes the employee more marketable to future 
employers. Because this practice or investment is seen as a valuable benefit, 
employers typically tie the cost of the training or reimbursement to continued 
employment or the requirement of payback, to make sure they, at least for a 
period of time, benefit from that investment.  2023 Executive BOARD
Chair of the Board 
Judith Borelli
Texas Instruments
Vice Chair of the Board, &
Legislative Chair
Dave Fortin 
Kennebec Technologies
Treasurer & Investment Chair
Samantha Pedersen
Albin, Randall & Bennett
Secretary & Business Svcs. Chair
Neal Prescott
Prescott Associates
Past-Chair & Energy Program Chair
Alan LaPoint
The Strainrite Companies
Executive Director
Mike Roughton
Document1
Page 2As proposed, this bill would prohibit the practice outlined above and have an 
adverse effect on employers who would no longer have any incentive to offer 
additional training or educational opportunities to their employees because 
the employee could leave as soon as the training was finished, or the 
reimbursement received. At a crucial time when Maine businesses are 
struggling to get the skilled workers they need, this bill has the potential to 
exacerbate the issue. It would also have a detrimental effect on employees 
who take advantage of the benefit and seek to better or advance their skills. 
Given the state’s already significant workforce challenges, this bill would only 
worsen the situation. As such, we ask that the committee vote this bill Ought 
Not To Pass. 
