 
Testimony  in Favor of  L.D. 1591  
Dirigo Solar LLC  
April  20, 202 3 
 
Senator Lawrence, Represe ntative Zeigler , and distinguished  members of the Energy, 
Utilities, and Technology  Committee.  My name is Robert Cleaves  and I am a Cofounder  of Maine -
based  Dirigo Solar. We strongly support  L.D. 1591.  
Dirigo, and our partners at BNRG Renewables, have developed and financed  energy 
projects worth  over $1 50 million in our State. Seven  projects (in Milo, Oxford, Fairfield , Augusta , 
Hancock, Palmyra, and Winslow ) are operationa l and delivering power to CMP and Versant at 3.4 
cents per kWh . In 2021 alone, these projects  saved Maine ratepayer s more than $3.5M, according 
to utility filings with the Maine Public Utilities Commission . These savings  will no doub t be 
greater in 2022  and 2023  due to higher power prices and additional projects coming online .  
Additionally, Dirigo has  a large pipeline of projects under development , including projects 
on contaminated sites that would be eligible for this procurement.  As solar proliferate s across 
Maine, the need for legislative action on project siting has become increasingly clear. This 
legislation is part of the solution because it sends a signal to the m arket that projects on 
contaminated land are prioritized  compared to greenfield projects  that may impact viable farmland 
or timber reserves . 
PFAS  contamination represents an existential threat to Maine.  Farmers in PFAS -
contaminated areas urgently need relief.  Solving this crisis requires innovative strategies, including 
redeveloping PFAS -contaminated land for energy  generation , such as solar, so that farmers can 
realize value from land that is now restricted from farming for years to come . Renewable energy 
projects are currently the best  way to re -use PFAS -contaminated land . There are c urrently no other  
economically  viable re -use options for PFAS -contaminated farmland .  
While it is important that we prioritize energy projects on contaminated land, we should 
not enact any policy at the expense of ratepayers. Importantly , this p roposal guarantees ratepayer 
savings  because t he PUC must make a finding of ratepayer benefits before awarding any contract . 
All power generated under this procurement will be cheaper than the standard offer.  
Finally, t he p roposal leverages federal opportunities , as projects competing in this 
solicitation will benefit from the current Federal  Investment Tax Credit ( ITC) of up to 30% and 
the 10% adder  for brownfield sites  that was enacted in the Infla tion Reduction Act . Leveraging 
federal opportunities allows projects o n contaminated land to be more cost competitive  for 
Mainers.  
It's not often that a policy solution brought forward  in the Legislatur e helps meet so many 
goals, with so little downside. By p assing this legislation, you will be saving ratepayers money, 

giving a much -needed lifeline to landowners grappling with the devastating impacts of land 
contamination, and helping the State meet our clean energy goals. It’s a win -win-win, and for that 
reason we urge you to pass LD 1591.  
 Thank you.  
 
