STATE or MAINE 
QFFICE OF THE G()VERNOR 
_ 2 1S'l‘A'1‘E Housaz STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINPI 
04333-0001 
JANET MILLS DAN BURGESS 
GOVERNOR DIRECTOR or GOVER:\‘OR’S 
ENERGY QFFICE 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE 
An Act to Promote Economic Reuse of Contaminated Land Through Clean Energy 
Development 
L.D. 1591 
GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFICE 
April 20, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology (EUT): My name is Caroline Colan, and I am the Legislative Liaison for the 
Governor's Energy Office (GEO). 
The GEO testifies in support of L.D. 1591. 
Maine's renewable portfolio standard (RPS) establishes the portion of electricity delivered in the state 
that must be supplied by renewable energy resources. In June 2019, Governor Mills signed legislation 
that increased Maine's RPS to 80% by 2030 and set a goal of 100% by 2050. In addition, the bill required 
the Maine Public Utilities Commission (PUC) to procure long-term contracts for new clean energy 
generation equal to 14 percent of the state's retail electricity sales. The procurement was conducted in 
two tranches, with a total of 24 renewable energy projects awarded contracts at competitive prices in 
2020 and 2021. 
L.D. 1591 proposes adding an additional solicitation for energy from qualified Class IA resources equal to 
5 percent of retail electricity sales specifically to be developed on previously developed or impacted land 
(such as parking lots and brownfields) or agricultural lands contaminated by PFAS. 
The GEO is generally supportive of this concept. As we all know, the impact of contamination of Maine 
agricultural lands with PFAS has been a matter of considerable attention and study in recent years. The 
Maine Department of Environmental Protection is currently undertaking testing of all identified sites to 
be completed by 2025, and the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry is taking several 
actions to support farmers whose land and water have been contaminated with an emphasis on changes 
to operations that allow farmers to pivot to new modes or types of production despite the presence of 
PFAS. Where a return to viability is not practical, using contaminated lands or a portion of contaminated 
lands for renewable energy development may be one plausible alternative use that could provide 
continued revenues for the landowner as it is likely that PFAS contamination would not posea 
significant hazard or barrier to this type of development. 
Regarding eligibility of agricultural lands contaminated by PFAS for participation in this program, there 
are a few things worth noting. First, the bill language indicated eligible agricultural sites are those ”that 
may no longer be used for agricultural purposes as determined by the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry. ” The GEO is not aware of any comprehensive analysis of PFAS contaminated 
sites that has conclusively deemed any land unsuitable for agricultural purposes at this time, so it may
1
be difficult without further clarity to determine the eligibility of agricultural land for participation in this 
solicitation. Additionally, recent analysis of brownfield sites and other contaminated sites has indicated 
most are less than twenty acres in size, and therefore more likely to be candidates for development 
under a distributed generation program. 
ln addition, while land use considerations are an important factor in the siting, and ultimately the cost, 
of new renewable energy facilities, other factors including proximity to electrical infrastructure for 
interconnection are also significant. Carefully crafted competitive solicitations with appropriately 
specified eligibility criteria provide a mechanism for projects to incorporate these and many other 
factors into the prices they bid, ensuring cost-effective renewable energy that supports achievement of 
multiple policy goals. 
The GEO suggests that if this Committee is to move forward with this bill, this category of renewable 
development might be considered as part of a broader procurement package to ensure robust 
competition needed to produce cost-effective results. Due to challenges including supply chain 
disruptions and inflation, roughly 40 percent of the capacity of new RPS projects contracted during the 
two procurement tranches in 2020 and 2021 have since dropped out. Due to this attrition, additional 
procurements should be considered to meet the initial intent of the law. 
The GEO looks forward to working with the sponsor, state agencies currently involved in evaluating 
viable opportunities for PFAS contaminated lands, and other interested parties on this legislation. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
CMai~_Cae.»_ Caroline Colan, Legislative Liaison 
Governor's Energy Office 
Page 2 of2
