ﬁr ' 
STATE OF MAINE , ,,, 
PUBLIC UTIUTIES COMMISSION 
Philip L. Bartlett, 1| Harry Lanphear 
CHAIRMAN , ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTOR 
Patrick J. Scully 
COMMISSIONERS - 
Testimony of the Maine Public Utilities Commission 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1591, An Act to Promote Economic Reuse of Contaminated Land 
Through Clean Energy Development
¢ 
April 20, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities, and Technology (Committee), my name is Deirdre Schneider, testifying neither for 
nor against LD 1591, An Act to Promote Economic Reuse of Contaminated Land Through Clean 
Energy Development, on behalf of the Public Utilities Commission (Commission).* 
LD 1591 amends 35-A M.R.S. § 3210-G, which is the statute through which the Commission has 
conducted two competitive solicitations to procure Class IA renewable resources. These previous 
procurements concluded in 2021, with the Commission directing Central Maine Power Company and 
Versant Power to enter into long-term contracts with solar and wind facilities to be built, as well as an 
existing hydropower facility, an existing wind facility and an existing biomass facility. The statute 
required the Commission to procure resources in an amount that would equal 14% of the retail 
electricity sales in Maine for the period of January 1 to December 31, 2018, which was determined by 
the Commission to be 1.715 million MWh. - 
This amendment would require the Commission to initiate another procurement for Class IA resources, 
in an amount that would be equal to 5% of the retail electricity sales in Maine from January 1 through" 
December 31, 2021. This would amount to an additional 579,000 MWh of resources to be under long- 
tenn contracts with Maine’s two investor-owned facilities. 
LD 1591 sets forth speciﬁc criteria that a Class IA generation project would have to meet to qualify for 
an award under this new solicitation. It would have to be a facility that would not begin commercial 
operation before September 19, 2023, the facility would have to demonstrate that it has initiated 
“system impact studies” for interconnection of the project to the utility’s system, and it has to be 
located on “contaminated land” as that term is deﬁned by LD 1591, with reference to 35-A M.R.S.§ 
3484(6) and 38 M.R.S. § 1614. » 
LD 1591 requires the Commission, in consultation with the Department of Agriculture, Conservation 
and Forestry as Well as the Department of Environmental Protection to score bids using a weighted 
scoring mechanism. Speciﬁcally, a weight of 70% must be given to the beneﬁts to ratepayers. This is 
the same as the scoring weight assigned to price in the current version of section 3210-G. . 
LD 1591 provides that for this new procurement, a weight of 30% must be given “to the economic 
benefits resulting from the use of contaminated land.” In its current form, section 3210-G requires a 
weight of 30% to be given on the basis of additional “economic beneﬁts” in the form of capital 
LOCATION: 26 Katherine Drive, Hallowcll, ME 04347 MAIL: 18 Starr: House Station, Augusta, ME 04333-0018 
PHONE: (207)287-3831 (VOICE) ' 
TTY users call Maine Relay 711 FAX: (207) 287-1039
PUC Testimony —LD 1591 April 20, 2023 
investments, wages paid to 'Maine workers, and various taxes, among other things. It appears that LD 
15 91 replaces this general economic beneﬁt analysis and weighting mechanism with the beneﬁt that 
would be afforded through the use of contaminated land.' 
LD l59l further provides that the Commission may only approve a long-term contract if it determines 
that the contract “will provide ﬁnancial beneﬁts to ratepayers and the contract price must be less than 
the standard-offer service rate” in effect at the time the Commission would be considering approval of 
the contracts selected through the procurement process. 
As the Committee knows, the Commission has been involved in several ambitious legislatively 
mandated procurements over the past few years. As set forth above, the Commission completed its 
3210-G procurements in 2021, and continues to monitor those projects, which are in varying stages of 
development. In fact, due to unforeseen circumstances, some of those projects have had to terminate 
their contracts and the Commission continues to monitor the portfolio as a whole to determine whether 
there will be a need to procure additional projects to meet the initial 14% statutory requirement. LD 
15 91 does not make clear whether this new procurement would supersede the original 321 0—G' 
procurement process such that backﬁlling pursuant to the original qualiﬁcation and selection criteria is 
not required.L
q 
As a general matter, the Commission raises concern regarding the timing of the new procurement 
envisioned in LD 1591. With several projects still in development from the section 3210-G' 
procurement, as well as the transmission project and 1,000 MW wind farm selected in the Northern 
Maine program pursuant to 35-A M.R.S. § 3210-I, the Pine Tree Offshore Wind development project 
under review pursuant to 35-A M.R.S. § 3210-H, as well as the numerous distributed generation 
projects slated to come on line in the next year to participate in net energy billing, the Commission 
questions whether there is a need to procure additional renewable resources at present. The energy 
procured does not serve Maine load, nor is there a requirement that any Renewable Energy Credits - 
resulting from these contracts be marketed to Maine suppliers, which would make these contracts 
available to serve Maine’s RPS requirementsf' 
In addition, with a deadline to approve contracts by December 2024, the Commission would have to 
commence procurement almost immediately, which is not optimal timing considering currentA 
economic conditions. Inﬂationary and supply chain pressures have pushed the cost of renewable 
energy projects upward and it is not clear when, or if, these cost issues will resolve in time to allow for 
completion of a procurement and approval of contracts at beneﬁcial pricing levels. Having said that, 
the Commission is pleased to see the requirement that any contract approved must be at a price that is a‘ 
beneﬁt to ratepayers. This requirement is similar to the language contained in 35-A M.R.S. § 3210-C. 
Requiring bids to come in at prices that will beneﬁt ratepayers will ensure that above-market priced 
projects do not receive an award, which is an improvement from the original criteria set forth in section 
3210-G. Nevertheless, the Commission questions the usefulness of the provision set forth in LD 1591 
that requires the contract price to be less than the standard‘ 
offer price in effect at the time of the 
contract approval. Thislanguage is not necessary because the procurement of renewable energy at a‘ 
wholesale rate through a long—term contract is always going to be much lower than the standard offer 
rate, which is a retail price. 
I would be happy to answer any questions or provide additional information for the Work session.
2
