 
 
May 2, 2023  
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology   
 
BlueWave  Testimony in Support of LD 1591 – An Act to Promote Economic Reuse of 
Contaminated Land Through Clean Energy Development  
Dear Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, and members of the Committee:  
BlueWave Solar respectfully submits the following comment s in support of LD 1591, which 
would promote the development of renewable energy projects on contaminated land, including 
farmland impacted by PFAS contamination. Thank you for your consideration of this important 
piece of legislation.  
BlueWave is a solar and energy storage developer and a leading innovator of dual -use solar 
projects in the Northeast. BlueWave developed the first dual -use project in Maine on a wild 
blueberry farm in Rockport, which was completed in 2021. We are currently partnering with the  
University of Maine to study the impact of differing construction techniques on the blueberry 
crop and are committed to finding innovative ways to bring the benefits of solar to farmers and 
landowners.  
Responsible solar development is an important farmla nd preservation tool, as it provides a 
reliable source of revenue that can help maintain a farm’s economic viability. In addition to 
ongoing economic pressures, farmers across Maine are now finding that their land can no longer 
be used for agriculture due to PFAS contamination. LD 1591 would provide a financial lifeline 
for these farmers while also helping Maine reach its renewable energy goals by encouraging 
solar development on PFAS contaminated farmland. Because solar is a temporary form of 
development, a solar project can provide immediate economic relief to farmers who are no 
longer able to cultivate their land while preserving the land for future agricultural use if the 
contaminated soils are able to be remediated.  
We look forward to a continued conve rsation about the important role solar development can 
play in preserving farmland and providing financial stability to farmers whose land has been 
impacted by PFAS contamination. Thank you for your work and consideration of this important 
issue.  
Sincerely , 
Elizabeth Curran  
Senior Director of Policy and Regulatory Affairs  
BlueWave Solar  
ecurran@bluewave.energy  
 
