Greg C. Robie95 Mineral Springs RdHighland Mills, NY  10930April 20, 2023Utilities, Energy, and Technology CommitteeState House Station Augusta, Maine 04333 Maine State Legislature, Joint Committee on Utilities, Energy, and Technology LD 1591: a 131st Legislature’s BELTWAY OF BILLS snookering Maine* billRe: LD 1591; ONTPChairpersons Lawrence and Zeigler , and Honorable Members of the Joint Committee on Utilities, Energy, and Technology: Thank you for considering my remarks and perspective, particularly from this BELTWAY OF BILLS* perspective. I am Greg Robie and a fourth generation decanted of our 39th Governor, Fredrick Robie (the first GOP Governor of Maine – a Whig Party offshoot born of differences of opinion regarding slavery [& power stuff]. The term “beltway” – in its constricting sense – captures an observable and constraining ’beltway’ of bills that are before our 131st Legislature for its consideration.This is a more systemic view of LD 1591, and renders it premature, particularly when the best interests of Maine and our hammered farmers. What is follows is the current version the #BeltwayOfBills included at the end of this testimony. LD 1591 creates a/[an exceptional?] subsection-specific regulation within MPUC law (Title 35-A) for the stacked LLC solar business model to twice snooker snookered Maine farmers. First by the application of perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl, and now, with the DEP permitting stacks of LLCs as a single person, and this in direct contradiction to the definition of a person in both rule and law, sets up good-hearted Maine farmers who find themselves in the desperate situation that they are in, to enter into snookering of the stacked LLC business model’s contractual and memorandum morass. 
Please consider:1.Through an option and lease framework, their snookering starts with agreeing to an option that commits them to a lease, and2.That lease of their recorded titled land will strip the leased (or sold) part of the farm of its solar rights (and in violation of Maine law regarding the leasing of solar rights on recorded title in real property), and3.The, also stripped, such solar rights, and treated as an uncommon appurtenant to the solar equipment, and4.This as a recorded, but uncommonly so due to at the lease effecting of subclasses what is in law, appurtenant to the titled real property (extralegal-at-best), and5.These subclasses-in-leases being transferred via the duplicitous mechanism of stacked LLC business (i.e., is its nature – think Title 38 MRS §481 and the duplicity of the stacked LLC business model) to entities other than the LLC that will hold the DEP’s permits, and6.This will apply regarding any municipal permit as well(!), and 7.Due to securitization allowed, both in the stack LLC business model leases, AND exempted in the Solar Energy Development Decommissioning, upon the implementation of the structured abandonment which the decommission law enables significantly colors of the recoded title and effects the second snookering, and8.This is, at least what is currently the case since the BEP/DEP did not do its requisite rulemaking, AND 9.In lieu of the DEP rectifying its misapplying its “Wind Energy Act Standards” rule chapter’s decommission triggers (06-096 CRM c. 382), and 10.Doing this misapplying contrary to the judgment of the Department’s rulemaking liaison, and 11.With LD 496 both exacerbating this snookering by lumping in batteries – separately defined in MPUC law as an “energy storage system” – with solar (defined in MPUC law as a “distributed energy resource”), and12.With both of these having distinct regulator and decommission trigger issues, reason demands separate rulmaking processes, and
13.Until rulemaking is done, render LD 1591 twice ‘exceptional’:A.the proposed placement of the LD 1591 in Maine Statues, and B. an exacerbation of the structural flaw of the DEP permitting regime (if it not malfeasance) and our/the MPUC’s Solar Energy Development Decommissioning law.Thank you for your time and consideration. If helpful, I am a happy to answer any questions this written testimony may engender.(845) 534-7291robie@hvc.rr.comor at the above address.=)Greg*   …this is the second draft of the initial 4/19/23 version of this evolving document, “The 131st Legislature’s #BeltwayOfBills snookering Maine” – Ver. 2.1:LD 9: For this bill to apply to the Commissioner it applies to the pre-application meeting/hearing where a permit for a permit by rule may be qualified for, and this is as LD 9 (and as amended) states. The amendment helpfully appears to give our Commissioner more time, but in the Permit by Rule process that has been a Board function since 1983 (new), through 1991 (amended),  through 2011 (amended), and now, today. The Board in 1983 is not what our restored to authority version of it is today (& since 2019). The continued reference to section 7 is specious; problematic regarding MAPA rights stuff … but essential to the in lieu fee program (ILF) that gets underway/permitted in an unrecorded application (and when permited, has a two year lifetime). A pre-application meeting where this all occurs is effected under the auspices of our Commissioner.Why this qualifies as a #BeltwayOfBills snookering Maine bill is that integral to a functionally confidential hearing, a project will be adjudged to qualify for the ILF Program, file a pre-permit-by-rule application, and have a timeframe established by which the DEP wraps up its review processes for reviewed applications. Originally, and still, the Rule by Permit was a 
Board action, and still, under section 7, is a final action that only requires our Board to notify our Commissioner. Because, in practice this Pre-Rule by Permit permit and the Rule by Permit is happening differently than is otherwise in law, balancing citizen involvement is structured out of the process … and consequences happen.That this practice seems to have became a common, and is, at best, an extralegal process, this could be how stacked LLCs became, and remain a practice which, if stopped, cuts the State coffers off from the in lieu fees it generates. About 10% of Sate revenues are identified in the Legislators Handbook as “other”. Or, a ‘perfect”NOT! storm of traditionally accepted practice that is not justified in law; that has embolden the solar industry that relies on stacked LLCs to snooker Maine to:1. effect the 2019 solar gold rush,” and2. lay the regulatory ground work for the next phase of the snookering.LD 43: Removes the 100 MW cap on distributed generation projects and includes solar. This primarily accommodates an increase the size and scope of solar projects/increasingly required by economics and grid capacity to be solar/battery projects, and this without first redressing the lack of rulemaking by the Board of Environmental Protection that are specific to solar, and with LD 496 solar/batteries.The content of the ongoing MPUC workshopping on the grid already outlines that local and/or regional distributed generation is where the changes will likely be require. Any significant benefit from removing the 100 MW cap accrues to grid operators and the transmission of electricity out of state via the equipment gateways that currently have the capacity to do so. As interstate power generation, the profitably of this accrues primarily to the distributed generation entities and the grid owners.  LD 399: This seems to relate to what might be best thought of in terms of RECs. Particularly as it can and has been applied to defense contractors and gaining points in the bidding process for military contracts the place value of such a database, base certification. LD 496: Lumps batteries (defined as an “energy storage system”), with solar panels (defined as a“distributed energy resource), and there by makes different things with different regulatory concerns and decommissioning issues treated as though they are wind turbines, another “distributed energy resource” as meriting a common triggering mechanism. Solar/battery 
projects are integral to the next phase of the stacked LLC business models expansion. And treated as the single “person” in law that they are not, exploit the exempt member transfer language in this bill and the law (FWIW, this exemption arrived by amendment in 2021), which thereby allow snookering that facilitates abandonment under the guise of ’successful’ decommission plans.LD 1134: Amends subdivision statue under the DEP to both conflict with subdivision law under land use law (Title 30-A, Chapter 187), and regardless of that regulatory nightmare, does all for the phase leasing of land for solar projects on large tracts of land without this also triggering a subdivision review [by the DEP].LD 1135: Sets the stage for tree growth classified land in the large tracts the solar industry will be able to exploit under LD 1134, to be similarly exploited to be incorporated into the unfolding and maturing global carbon offset credit markets. LD 1648 Sets the stage for open space and farmland classified land, and whether in large tracts of not in the large tracts, to be similarly be exploited to be incorporated into the unfolding and maturing global carbon offset credit markets. LD 1232: Indirectly regulates land use law (Title 30-A, Chapter 187), but this through Title 25, to build a growing inventory commercial roof area for the stacked LLC solar business model to exploit.LD  1591: Creates a/[an exceptional?] subsection-specific regulation within MPUC law (Title 35-A) for the stacked LLC solar business model to twice snooker snookered Maine farmers. First by the application of perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl, and now, with the DEP permitting stacks of LLCs as a single person, and this in direct contradiction to the definition of a person in both rule and law, sets up good-hearted Maine farmers who find themselves in desperate situation that they are in, to enter into the snookering of the stacked LLC business model’s contractual and memorandum morass. Consider:1.Through an option and lease framework, their snookering starts with agreeing to an option that commits them to a lease, and2.That lease of their recorded titled land will strip the leased (or sold) part of the farm of its solar rights (and in violation of Maine law regarding the leasing of solar rights on recorded title in real 
property), and3.The, also stripped, such solar rights, and treated as an uncommon appurtenant to the solar equipment, and4.This as a recorded, but uncommonly so due to at the lease effecting of subclasses what is in law, appurtenant to the titled real property (extralegal-at-best), and5.These subclasses-in-leases being transferred via the duplicitous mechanism of stacked LLC business (i.e., is nature – think Title 38, MRS §481 and the duplicity of the stacked LLC business model) to entities other than the LLC that will hold the DEP’s permits, and6.This will apply regarding any municipal permit as well(!), and 7.Due to securitization allowed, both in the stack LLC business model leases, AND exempted in the Solar Energy Development Decommissioning, upon the implementation of the structured abandonment which the decommission law enables significantly colors of the recoded title and effects the second snookering, and8.This is, at least what is currently the case since the BEP/DEP did not do its requisite rulemaking, AND 9.In lieu of the DEP rectifying its misapplying its “Wind Energy Act Standards” rule chapter’s decommission triggers (06-096 CRM c. 382), and 10.Doing this misapplying contrary to the judgment of the Department’s rulemaking liaison, and 11.With LD 496 both exacerbating this snookering by lumping in batteries – separately defined in MPUC law as an “energy storage system” – with solar (defined in MPUC law as a “distributed energy resource”), and12.With both of these having distinct regulator and decommission trigger issues that reason demands require separate rulmaking processes, and13.Until rulemaking is done, render LD 1591 twice ‘exceptional’:A.the proposed placement of the LD 1591 in Maine Statues, and B. an exacerbation of the structural flaw of the DEP permitting regime (if it not malfeasance) and our/the MPUC’s Solar Energy Development Decommissioning law.
