Q Natural Resources Council of Maine 
3 Wade Street r Augusta, Maine 04330 ~ (207) 6223101 ~ Fax: (207) 6224343 ~ ww\.vnrem.org 
Testimony in Support of LD 1591, An Act to Promote Economic Reuse of Contaminated 
Land Through Clean Energy Development 
To the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology 
by Jack Shapiro, Climate and Clean Energy Program Director 
April 20, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology 
Committee, my name is Jack Shapiro, and I am the Climate and Clean Energy Director at the 
Natural Resources Council of Maine (N RCM). NRCM has been working for more than 60 years 
to protect, restore, and conserve Maine’s environment, on behalf of our 25,000 members and 
supporters. I’m here today to testify in support of LD 1591, An Act to Promote Economic Reuse 
of Contaminated Land Through Clean Energy Development. 
It’s relatively rare to be able to testify in support of legislation that is so clearly a Win-win. 
It is well established that we must transition away from fossil fuel use to reduce the carbon 
emissions that cause climate change. This will require significant new renewable energy sources, 
both to displace existing fossil fuel power generation, but also to meet the new electricity loads 
from electric cars and tnrcks and electrified heating technologies. 
Solar energy, especially competitively procured solar, is not only the cheapest new renewable 
energy source available to us, it’s the cheapest new energy source available to us period. While 
solar creates no direct pollution, it does take up a lot of space compared to other sources of 
power generation, which can lead to development pressure on working and natural lands. 
At the same time, Maine is grappling with the issue of PFAS-contaminated land. Hundreds of 
farmers across the state are learning that their land cannot be used for agriculture, and that there 
is no way to remediate this contamination - an unspeakable loss for anyone connected with their 
land, but with enormous economic implications as well. 
The procurement in LD 1591 would be open to all previously developed or impacted land, such 
as brownfields or industrial sites, and importantly would also be open to PFAS -contaminated 
land, providing an economic lifeline to landowners contending with contamination, while 
bringing new low-cost renewable energy onto Maine’s grid.
Our energy transition challenges us in many ways, but not every decision needs to be 
challenging. This bill, by promoting the re-use of contaminated land through renewable energy 
projects that guarantee ratepayer savings will help us achieve multiple goals at the same time, 
and it deserves your support. 
We urge you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 15 91, and I would be happy to answer any questions 
that you have.
