April 20, 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology  
 
RE: LD 1591 – An Act to Promote Economic Reuse of Contaminated Land 
Through Clean Energy Developmen t 
 
Senator Lawrence , Representative Zeigler , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on  Energy, Utilities and Technology , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I 
am the Government Relations Director  for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I 
appreciate this opportunity to submit written comments in support of  LD 
1591 – An Act to Promote Economic Reuse of Contaminated Land Through 
Clean Energy Development . 
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization 
dedicated to conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided 
by science, we create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s 
toughest challenges so that nature and people can thrive together. We use a 
collaborative approach that engages local communities, governments, the 
private sector, and other partners.  The Nature Conservancy has  been leading 
conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 12th largest landowner 
in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres.  We also work across 
Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the Gulf of Maine 
to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to address 
our changing climate.  
 
In 2022, TNC participated in the public comment process around the 
Distributed Generation Working Group, offering recommen dations multiple 
times. We are broadly supportive of the report’s recommendations and pleased 
to see many of those concepts incorporated into this legislation. We hope to 
see a Distributed Generation successor program in the future that will continue 
to fa cilitate thoughtful policy discussion and the implementation of prudent 
siting standards.   
 
As a global conservation organization, we fully support the rapid deployment of 
renewable energy sources in Maine. This legislation recognizes the urgent need 
to transition to clean energy sources in order to mitigate the devastating effects 
of climate change and protect our planet's precious natural resources. The  
legislation not only demonstrates a commitment to accelerating the 
deployment of renewable energy techn ologies in Maine, it also protects 
ratepayers by requiring the resources to be qualified Class IA resources, which 
are renewable resources that are both efficient and cost -effective.  
 
But moreover, the definition of "qualified Class IA resource" includes the 
requirement that the resource be located on land that was previously developed 
or impacted land or agricultural land contaminated by perfluoroalkyl and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). As we transition towards a clean energy 
future, it is essential t o consider the environmental impact of all energy 
generation sources. This  prioritization of brownfields and other underutilized 
sites for renewable energy development helps avoid and minimize 
environmental impacts while promoting the rapid deployment of cl ean energy, 
a parallel approach we strongly believe in.   
 
These lands are often unsuitable for other uses due to contamination, 
degradation, and the high cost of remediation. Siting renewable energy projects 
on these lands can provide a valuable opportuni ty to repurpose them for a 
productive and sustainable use that helps Maine meet its climate goals. By 
incentivizing the use of these lands for renewable energy projects, we avoid the 
development of key tracts like farmland, wildlife habitat, and core fores t blocks 
that give Maine its defining character.  
 
We are also glad to see energy storage systems are eligible for a contract award 
if they are co -located with a qualified Class IA resource on previously developed 
or impacted land or agricultural land cont aminated by perfluoroalkyl and 
polyfluoroalkyl substances. The application of the aforementioned siting 
concepts to energy storage projects is an equally prudent tool. Energy storage 
systems are a vital component of a comprehensive, modernized grid system.  
Helping to address intermittency and allowing for more consistent and reliable 
delivery of electricity  
 
In short, siting distributed generation renewable energy and energy storage 
projects on degraded or disturbed lands like brownfields or those contamin ated 
by PFAS provides an opportunity to repurpose these lands for a productive and 
sustainable purpose, promote economic development, and reduce a project’s 
siting impact. As we work towards a clean energy future, we must prioritize the 
responsible siting of renewable energy projects, and repurposing degraded or 
disturbed lands is an excellent way to do so.  
 
Overall, this legislation demonstrates a strong commitment to promoting 
renewable energy, remediating contaminated lands, and encouraging energy 
stora ge systems, all of which are critical to addressing the global challenge of 
climate change. As a global conservation organization, we look forward to 
supporting efforts to advance renewable energy technologies and promote a 
sustainable future for generatio ns to come.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 1591. I would be happy 
to answer questions the Committee may have in time for the work session. 
Thank you.   
