April 20, 2023 
Good Afternoon, 
My name is Kevin Violette and I have lived in Fairﬁeld my entire life. I have been drinking PFA's 
contaminated water at 10 times the allowable limit for over 45 years. DEP installed water 
treatment systems in my home and my three children's next door, as well. So, I guess I can speak 
today with experience about forever chemicals. But today I am here to talk about Forever 
Chemicals soil contamination which is what contaminated our wells. The closest authorized 
sludge spreading was 1 1/Zmiles from our wells. 
I have worked with central Maine dairy farmers now for over 40 years. In the early years, our 
work was out-parceling and land management for debt-relief reﬁnance programs. The new 
battleground is extensive Forever Chemical contamination from sledge spread on our farm 
ﬁelds. 
Edgit Dostie's farm is next to mine, and this May 25 his diary cows go to auction out of state. 
The last dairy farmer in Fairﬁeld will load his animals into tractor trailers and say goodbye to 
four generations of milking cows. The three generations milking today on the Middle Road in 
Fairﬁeld Center will have very little to do on their farm this June. 
That sludge has slashed income that used to pay property taxes and supported landowners ’ 
families. 
LD 1591 will convert contaminated farmland to solar farms, that when fenced-in, will keep all 
animals off contaminated ﬁelds, as well. 
By turning to ”farming the sun" the farmers’ new crop yield is clean, green energy that will 
lower the power bills of many Maine people struggling with rising power costs. With income 
from long term solar leases, the landowner stays on the farm and pays his tax bill. The town 
sends a tax bill to the solar farm for the value of the panels and switch gear. On a 1000-acre 
solar farm the taxable value is over $1 million. This is a win for the town that is concerned about 
plummeting values of farmland that can't be used for agriculture anymore. This income to the 
town has no expenses like added roads to plow or more children in the schools. 
The analogy I want to leave you with today is this: forever chemicals have turned our farm ﬁelds 
into lemons. LD 1591 allows our farmers and towns to go into the lemonade business by 
farming the sun. This is the best and only ﬁnancial solution for my 200-acre contaminated farm 
ﬁeld. 
Sincerely, 
Kevin Violette
