LD 1591 An Act to Promote Economic Reuse of Contaminated Land Through Clean Energy 
Development 
Testimony in Support 
April 20, 2023 
Dear esteemed members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology Committee, 
My name is Max Kenney, I am here today to provide testimony in support of LD 1591. My fondest 
memories of growing up on my family's farm in Fairﬁeld include learning how to plant corn in straight 
rows from my grandfather, milking cows with my cousins on Friday nights and harvesting a turkey with 
my dad on opening day of the annual spring hunting season. I didn't know it at the time, but without a 
doubt, my experiences on the farm have shaped me into the person l am today. 
In the 1970s my grandfather agreed to accept municipal sludge for beneﬁcial reuse as fertilizer on select 
crop ﬁelds around the farm. This practice was approved, licensed and encouraged by the state of Maine 
as an environmentally responsible way to handle community waste. At the time, nobody on the farm 
knew that me and my four cousins would be the last generation of kids to grow up raising animals and 
learning life skills on Tozier’s Dairy Farm. In July of 2019 my family received notice that milk from our 
farm had been detected with high levels of P.F.A.S. and could no longer be sold. We had never heard of 
PFAS and had no idea how it could have gotten into our milk supply. 
Over the next several months we continued to milk our cows twice a day, each day dumping the milk 
collected down the drain, a sight that would make any dairy farmer cringe. We hoped that testing would 
show our milk was safe. Eventually, with support from the Maine DEP, we were able to determine the 
municipal sludge spread on the crop ﬁelds nearly 50 years prior contained super elevated levels of a tiny 
forever chemical that would change the agricultural and economic viability of our 10"‘ generation family 
farm forever. 
Today, several years later, our family farm sits dormant. Overgrown corn ﬁelds, barns falling into 
disrepair, and hundreds of healthy animals dispatched for no fault of their own. 
My family continues to hold out hope for a way to permanently remediate the PFAS contamination that 
plagues our farm and so many other communities across Maine. However, with hundreds of acres of 
contaminated land and no livestock producing income, we are faced with few options. The passage of 
LD 1591 to promote development of renewable energy on undesirable farmland may be a path forward. 
Land that once produced crops and cows now has the opportunity to beneﬁt our community in a new 
way; clean low cost energy. 
Even with thousands of acres of farmland across Maine deemed unsafe for the production of crops due 
to PFAS contamination, solar development continues to be focused on previously undeveloped and 
forested sites. lust one Town over from Fairﬁeld, the Three Corners solar project in Benton is clearing 
nearly 1000 acres of forested and farmable land when an equal number of acres of non-forested and 
unfarmable land sits just across the Kennebec River. LD 1591 will ensure the focus of future solar 
developments will shift to previously industrial sites and contaminated lands. This is where responsible 
solar development makes sense for our state and local communities. We need to preserve our large 
tracks of forested lands and prime farmland for economic growth and future generations of Mainers to 
enjoy.
Sadly, Tozier’s Dairy Farm is no longer producing crops, we are no longer raising animals, we are no 
longer giving high school students their ﬁrst job, our land is no longer providing hunting opportunities 
for local kids and is bogging down the municipal tax rolls with low land values. Solar development on my 
family's farm and other farms devastated by PFAS makes economic sense for the farmers, the 
municipality, electric rate payers and has wide public support. 
Time is of the essence. I compel you to vote "ought to pass" on LD 1591 which will beneﬁt all lviainers as 
we continue to seek environmentally sound ways to manage contaminated lands and push forward 
towards energy independence. 
Thank You
