 
Comments in support of LD 1591 
 
My name is Michelle Wood.  I own a farm jointly with my sister Ann Wood in 
Fairfield, Maine.  
This farm has been in the Wood family since approximately1914. 
My great grandfather George Prescott Wood purchased the farm and raised 13 
children on the farm through WWI and the difficult times that followed until his 
death at the beginning of the Great Depression. He never asked for a government 
handout and the farm and family survived. 
When his father died, my grandfather Prescott George Wood gave up his career in 
construction in New York to return to the farm to take over.  My grandfather ran 
the farm and raised his younger siblings, supported his mother, and raised six 
children of his own on the farm from 1932-1972. He got the family farm through 
the Great Depression, WWII and the many difficulties that followed.  He never 
asked for a government handout, and he mustered through   
My father ran the farm and raised my seven siblings and I on the farm from 1972 
until 2011.  When the ice storms in the late 1990s destroyed our barn and killed all 
of our dairy cattle, my father adapted.  He raised beef cattle and stock for other 
dairy farms.  He rented fields.  He cut and sold hay to other farmers.  He muddled 
through great economic difficulty until his suffering health required someone else 
to assume control.  He never asked for a government handout to get him through.   
My sister and I purchased the farm in 2011.  We have debt.  The debt we are now 
responsible to pay.   
What we didn’t know when we bought the farm is that in 1989, my parents’ 
participation in the State sponsored biosolid experiment would poison our land 
making it impossible to raise any crop or animal to be used for human 
consumption.   
We didn’t know that the PFAS poisoning of the land in Fairfield would taint use of 
the land that hasn’t been poisoned.  No one wants to buy the hay from the fields 
that are not poisoned with PFAS because they hear that we live in Fairfield, the 
location of the highest PFAS levels in the Country.  They don’t want to risk 
poisoning their own stock.  So, what to do?   
Currently, there is no way to remediate the land that has been poisoned by the State 
biosolid program. 
We don’t want a handout.  But, we do want to be treated fairly and we want our 
family farm to survive.   
We think part of the solution is a solar installation.  We think the solar installation 
will allow us to use what is otherwise unusable land.  And, we will be able to pay 
our debts, by ourselves.   
The problem is access to the grid.  LD 1591 is the solution.  The bill allows us to 
competitively participate in a procurement to gain access to the grid.  It will allow 
us to survive and that is all we are asking.  Give us a chance to overcome the 
damage done by the State biosolid program and continue to own the farm that has 
been in our family for over 110 years.   
Thank you for your consideration of LD1591.  Thank you also to Senator Brenner 
and all of the co-sponsors for recognizing the injustice that we and other Maine 
farmers have suffered due to the biosolid program and for submitting this bill.  
Thank you also to the many bipartisan co-sponsors and supporters.  We are very 
grateful.  With that, we ask you all to vote in support of LD 1591.   
