 
Richard A. Bennett                                                                                                        3 State House Station  
Senator, District 18                                                                                                  Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Fax: (207) 287-1527 *  TTY (207) 287-1583  *  Message Service 1-800-423-6900  *  Web Site: legislature.maine.gov/senate 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Rick Bennett in Support of LD 1591 “An Act to Promote Economic 
Reuse of Contaminated Land Through Clean Energy Development” 
April 20, 2023 
Chair Lawrence, Chair Zeigler, and honorable members of the Energy, Utilities and Technology 
Committee, I am Senator Rick Bennett, and I represent District 18 in the Maine Senate. I am hear 
to give enthusiastic support for LD 1591 An Act to Promote Economic Reuse of Contaminated 
Land Through Clean Energy Development and I thank Senator Brenner for bringing this bill 
forward. 
As we are all very well aware by this time, the problem of PFAS contamination is widespread 
across Maine and presents many challenges that the Legislature and state agencies are trying to 
tackle. Also known as “forever chemicals,” this class of persistent cancer-causing chemicals is a 
threat to public health, and we now know that our state has extensive contamination of 
agricultural soils, drinking water, crops, livestock and game animals. 
In my previous service on the Environment and Natural Resources Committee, I had the 
opportunity to work extensively on this issue and begin to understand the implications for our 
state. It seems that the more we learn about PFAS contamination, the larger the scope of this 
problem becomes. 
Maine will spend significant time and resources in the coming years focused on testing for 
contamination, researching and developing remediation strategies, and dealing with the health 
impact of contamination. All of this work is critically important, but the work can’t stop there.  
Not only is this a real public health crisis, it is also a financial crisis for farmers and other 
landowners across the state. We must find ways to ensure that people whose land is 
contaminated are able to remain financially solvent, and not let them slip into debt and despair 
due to the fact that, for the time being, their land can no longer be used for agriculture.  
There seems to be agreement that eventually, once remediation strategies are developed, it would 
be ideal to return as much land as possible to agricultural use. That makes sense, but in the 
meantime, we must throw an economic lifeline to these families. Asking the State to buy all the 
land would not be feasible, but we can find creative ways to reuse it while long-term solutions 
are developed. 
A renewable energy project could be the lifeline that a landowner needs in order to weather the 
storm of PFAS contamination. I commend Senator Brenner for the way she has crafted the 
solution put forth in LD 1591, because she has ensured that any project that moves forward as a 
result of this legislation will also guarantee savings to rate-payers. Given rising energy costs and 
the effect that is having on everyone in our state, I appreciate the effort to ensure savings through 
this legislation.   
 
The state-sanctioned sludge spreading program that caused PFAS contamination has inflicted 
untold cost and pain on farmers and landowners across Maine. It is our moral responsibility, as 
state legislators, along with those in state agencies and the Administration, to find as many 
solutions as possible to every facet of this problem. Economic reuse of impacted land through 
responsible, cost-saving energy projects should be one of those solutions.  
 
 
 
 
  
