 
Testimony before the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
By Robin Kerber , American Farmland Trust, New England Policy Associate  
May 1 , 2023  
 
Dear Senator Lawrence , Representative Zeigler, and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Energy, Utilities and Technology :  
I appreciate this opportunity to testify in support  of LD 1591, An Act to Promote Economic 
Reuse of Contaminated Land Through Clean Energy Development.  
My name is Robin Kerbe r, and I am American Farmland Trust's New England Policy 
Associate. American Farmland Trust (AFT) is the only national conservation organization 
dedicated to protecting farmland, promoting sound farming practices, and keeping farmers on the 
land. AFT is a national leader in promoting Smart Solar Siting on farmland to support clean 
energy capacity while protecting our most viable agricultural lands from development pressures. 
AFT has a long history of working in Maine, stemming back to our role in supporting  the first 
farmland protection projects undertaken through the Land for Maine's Future program. Building 
off our New England Smart Solar initiative, AFT participated in the Agricultural Solar 
Stakeholder Group convened in 2021 by the Governor's Energy Offi ce (GEO) and the 
Department of Agricultural, Conservation, and Forestry (DACF).  
In the summer of 2022, AFT released "Farms Under Threat 2040," which estimates that 
between 2016 -2040, 6.2 million acres in the U.S. will be converted to urban and highly 
deve loped land uses such as commercial buildings, industrial sites, and moderate -to-high-density 
residential development. The remaining 12.2 million acres will be converted to low -density 
residential areas, which range from large -lot subdivisions to rural area s with a proliferation of 
scattered houses. Furthermore, according to AFT's "Farms Under Threat 2020" report, it is 
estimated that from 2001 -2016, Maine lost roughly 17,700 acres of land to urban development or 
highly developed land use and low -density res idential land use. According to "AFT's Farms 
Under Threat 2040" report, if recent trends continue, 53,4000 acres of Maine's farmland will be 
paved over, fragmented, or converted to uses that jeopardize agriculture. This is equivalent to 5% 
of the state's f armland, which is enough to generate $32 million in annual revenue. In short, 
Maine cannot afford to lose any more farmland for development.    
AFT recognizes that the use of solar energy is essential to meeting Maine's renewable 
energy requirements (100% renewable energy grid by 2050) and to national and global goals for 
mitigating climate change. To meet targets set under Maine’s Renewable Portfolio Standard, 
rapid  expansion of solar in all its forms and scales is needed – solar installed for on -farm energy, 
on most residential and commercial rooftops, parking lot canopies, and on landfills, brownfields, 
and highway corridors. In addition, a substantial area of land  will still be needed for utility -scale 

solar and community solar in Maine. Solar development in Maine is accelerating, and the Solar 
Energy Industries Association projects that Maine will double its installed solar capacity (1,196 
MW) over the next five y ears. 
As Maine continues to test additional farmland  parcels  for PFAS contamination, 
considering alternative uses for PFAS contaminated farmland until additional research is 
conducted  to configure re mediation strategies will be critical. As Maine looks towards expanding 
smart solar siting , the installation of solar panels on PFAS contaminated farmland should be  
considered as a viable option. To determin e future uses of contaminated farmland , the first step 
is to rigorously assess the extent and location of potential contamination utilizing protocols set 
by DACF and Maine Dept of Environmental Protection.  As testing moves forward, it is clear that  
there are varying levels of contamination across the state and even amongst a single property. If 
sludge was spread under one farm's license, it might not have been spread over all the fields.  It 
might have been spread once  or a hundred times. There are som e strong example s of the varying 
histories impacting the future uses of the farms that have chosen to share their PFAS challenges 
publicly. One example is  Misty Brook Farm  in Albion , where  some PFAS contaminated areas 
were dete cted to be  low enough to grow corn and rye, two crops that absorb non -detect amounts 
of the chemicals  in their edible portions . On the same farm, there are fields with zero 
contamination  and still others with levels too high to use , now sitting vacant with no plan 
determined for the land's subsequent use.  In this case, there is an opportunity  for the farm to 
pivot and grow more resilient crops, while also consider ing the opportunity of generating income 
from installing a solar array.  
If the Maine D ACF  deems  land no longer suitable for agricultural purposes due to PFAS 
contamination, the re should also be consideration of  remediation with practices known at the 
time of the proposed solar installation. While research and technologies on decontamination 
practice s are still in the early stages, there is heightened attention and interest in working on this 
issue. Therefore, AFT recommends adding the consideration of remediation before installing 
solar panels on contaminated farmland. Once alternative crops and reme diation are considered 
and ruled out as an option, AFT would support the language in this bill.  
AFT has developed Smart Solar Principles to help shape solar development across 
America. These principles can be applied broadly, recognizing that Smart Solar will look 
different across the country due to differences in landscapes, agricultural production systems, 
and other characteristics. Two of our principles directly align with the proposed language in this 
bill. They are the following:   
1. Prioritize Solar Si ting on Buildings and Land Not Well Suited for Farming   
2. Promote Equity and Farm Viability  
The first priority  emphasizes solar energy development on brownfields or other lands not 
well suited for agriculture, such as that contaminated by PFAS. This helps minimize the impacts 
of solar energy on our nation's best agricultural land and farm businesses. The second pr iority 
acknowledges that farmers and underserved communities should benefit from solar energy 
development. In the best -case scenario, solar development on farmland is done in a way that both 
creates new opportunities for sources of income and protects farm land that can still be used for 
agricultural purposes. Using farmland to generate energy must be done with careful planning. 
Farmland is needed for food security, sequestering carbon, filtering air and water, and wildlife 
habitat. As we work to decarbonize  our energy grid, AFT believes we can and must accelerate 
deployment of clean energy while ensur ing resilient  and viable  farms . AFT's Smart Solar 
Principles are framed around appropriate national, state, and municipal planning. Without careful 
planning, solar development could convert millions of acres of  highly productive  farmland out of 
agricultural production. On the other hand, AFT views the siting  of solar  on contaminated and 
agriculturally unusable land as an opportunity for farmers to gain financia l stability and viability. 
Since 2013, Maine  farmers have been facing nearly a 50% drop in net farm income and continue 
to struggle to meet increases in farm production expenses. This economic crisis has seriously 
impacted farm viability and farmers' well -being, thus threatening farmland security. As climate 
impacts ravage growing seasons, and with the recent devastating discovery of PFAS 
contaminating our regions' soils, the livelihood of Maine's farmers has never been at greater risk.  
Maine's producers n eed robust investments in research and remediation so that the state 
will retain more farmland than is necessary for a viable agriculture sector. As Maine moves to 
capture the environmental, economic, and energy benefits of clean and renewable energy, we 
must also minimize impacts on Maine's agriculture by protecting production on the state's best 
farmland. AFT's Smart Solar Principles align with the intent of LD 1591 by prioritizing a future 
of clean energy while simultaneously protecting the future of far ming.  
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony. Please feel free to contact me a t 
rkerber@farmland.org  or my colleagues at American Farmland Trust if you have any questions 
about this testimony on LD 1591.  
With gratitude ,  
Robin Kerber  
New England Policy Associate  
American Farmland Trust  
 
 
 
 
 
 
American Farmland Trust is an agricultural non -profit organization with a mission to save the land that sustains us 
by protecting farmland, promoting sound farming practices, and keeping farmers on the land. AFT is the only 
national agricultural organization that approaches its work  in this comprehensive, holistic manner. We recognize 
the connection between the land, forward -looking farming practices, and the farmers who do the work.  
