13181‘ Legislature Senator Benjamin M. Ckzpman 
3 State House Statzon 
S€1’l6lt€ Of Maine Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
. . Oﬂice: (207) 287-I515 
Senate District Be11ja1m' n. ChyJman@legislamre. mczine gov 
T1"cmsp0rrati0n Committee, Chan 
T axaiion Committee, Men?/Be; 
Testimony of Senator Ben Chipman introducing LD 1689, “An Act to Exempt Prescription 
Pet Medications from Sales Tax” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
i 
May 9, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation, my name is Senator Ben Chipman. I represent Senate District 28, which 
includes a part of Portland. I am here to present LD l689, “An Act to Exempt Prescription Pet 
Medications from Sales Tax”. 
This legislation would establish a sales tax exemption for prescribed pet medications. The bill 
would only apply to sales on medications that are prescribed by a medical professional. 
For many people who own pets, their pets are integral members of their family. Taking care of 
their health issues is just as important the medical needs of the family. Unfortunately, ensuring 
the health of a pet is expensive. Medications for domestic pets are currently subject to Maine’s 
sales tax, making it more expensive for families to take care of their animals. 
In the pandemic, it became even more clear how critical a cat or a dog is to the family. Pets have 
been shown to be helpful for many people who struggle with mental health challenges. Playing 
with a cat, dog or other pet has been shown to increase levels of serotonin and dopamine, which 
are kev chemicals in the brain that stave off depression and anxiety. When pets are so crucial to 
the fabric of someone’s life, the exorbitant costs of health care for pets is a challenge. With the 
exemption, we would be increasing accessibility for all Mainers to keep pets, regardless of 
socioeconomic circumstances. 
I see how necessary this legislation is for many Maine residents. I want to ensure that we are 
removing barriers for pet owners and pet lovers to be able to provide quality care for their pets. 
Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer questions. 
Fax: (207)287-1585 * TTY 711 * ]t4’essage‘Ser\>ice1-80()-423~69()() * legislature.mainagov ﬁsenale
