 
May 9, 2023 
 
 
My name is John Hennessy and I live in Portland. I want to thank my Senator, Ben Chipman, for 
introducing LD 1689 – An Act to Exempt Prescription Pet Medications from Sales Tax.  
The love we feel for our pets is priceless. Unfortunately, that’s not the case when it comes to 
their health. It can be very rough for pet owners when it comes to pet expenses, including 
prescription medications. In 2020, around $99 billion —was spent on pets in the U.S. While that 
includes all types of expenses, drug treatments for animals can really rack up the bill.  
This issue came to my attention when I noticed that several of the medications prescribed to 
one of my dogs for mitral valve disease are the same as those prescribed to humans. Yes, the 
dosages are different, but the medication is essentially the same. So, if I needed the same 
medication the prescription would not be subject to Maine sales tax, but it is for the dog. We 
are spending about $200/month to help keep Finnegan healthy so a sales tax exemption would 
add up quickly.  
 
Both medications for humans and pets must go through a rigorous testing and reviewal process 
in order to earn approval from the FDA. However, there are significantly fewer medications 
made specifically for pets in mind, whereas there are countless medications designed for 
humans.  
In 1944, Congress made it legal for veterinarians to prescribe FDA-approved human drugs for 
animals even though that drug is not specifically designed for them. This is called the “off-label” 
use of the medication. For example, levetiracetam (Keppra) is a common prescription 
medication used to treat epilepsy in adults and children. However, it can be used for the same 
purpose in dogs. 
Human medications can be used to treat a long list of conditions in pets, including infections, 
stomach upset, mitral valve disease, allergies, inflammation, pain, and hypertension. According 
to Amber LaRock, a licensed vet tech and veterinary consultant , some of the most common pet 
meds are compiled in the chart below:  
 
The above are all safe and trusted by vets for use in pets, says LaRock. As you can see, many of these drugs are used to treat the same medical 
problems in both humans and pets. 
Prescription drugs intended for animal use are not subject to Vermont sales tax. This applies 
whether sold by a veterinarian or a pharmacist. No exemption certificate is required. For this 
exemption, the term “prescription” has a limited, specific meaning. It means that a drug may 
only be dispensed through the written order of a licensed veterinarian. Even if a veterinarian 
writes a prescription, any product that may be legally sold without a prescription is subject to 
tax (unless some other exemption applies). 
In NY state, any medicines sold by veterinarians are not taxable because they are designed to 
be used in the care of the animals.  
It's no secret that many people spend thousands of dollars  trying to keep their pets healthy and 
alive. Legislation like LD 1689 was introduced in Trenton and would give pet lovers a bit of a 
break by excluding pet medications from New Jersey's 7 percent sales tax. 
The love and passion for pets crosses all socioeconomic groups and there are people who are 
really faced with a challenge when it comes to making sure that their pets get the care they 
need. In this case, I hope you will support LD 1689 and help Mainers keep their beloved pets 
healthy and safe.  

