Testimony regarding LD 1006 An Act to Ensure Access to Healthy 
Drinking Water from Household Wells in Rural Maine 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health 
and Human Services Committee. My Name is Christina Heiniger and l ama 
Trenton Maine resident and member of PFAS Free Trenton. Please accept this 
testimony in support of LD 1006. 
A significant number of wells in Trenton have been contaminated with pfas. in 
2017, our Trenton Elementary School’s water measured at 33.9 ppt for 6 types of 
pfas. This wasn’t remediated until 2021, when new legislation here in Maine was 
passed creating interim standards for pfas in drinking water of 20 ppt for 6 types 
of PFAS. 
Pfas Free Trenton worked with the Town of Trenton to offer residents free well 
water testing for pfas using ARPA funds. We feel strongly that community-wide 
free testing is important because our school well is contaminated. We want to 
determine the causes and extent of pfas contamination in our community and 
reduce exposure to these chemicals in our town. 
Water testing for pfas is expensive- costing $250 to $300 or more per test. This 
puts testing out of financial reach for many low income households and the cost 
is a major disincentive even for households who might afford it. 
We were only able to get funding from the Town for 100 free tests- 9% of Trenton 
households. It took us at Pfas Free Trenton over a year to find a way to offer 
these 100 free tests. We could not get free testing for our whole community 
through the Maine DEP. The State does offer some free testing in other 
communities where there was large scale use of sludge in agriculture, prioritizing 
free testing in those cities , and towns. However, the Maine DEP is behind their 
own schedule with that testing. 
Despite the fact that there has been no large scale agricultural spreading of 
sludge in Trenton, we have found pfas are an issue in our town. 
We found: of 96 tests we have results for, 16 wells (16.7%) were contaminated 
with pfas. 2 wells tested over the State of Maine interim “safe leve|s” of 20 ppt for 
a combined 6 types of PFAS. (ln addition, the school tested at 33.9ppt in 2017 as 
previously mentioned). Another 14 wells tested with some detectable levels of 
PFAS- from 2.06 ppt to 16.2 ppt. While these 14 wells tested below the interim 
State of Maine standards for pfas in drinking water, many of them were ABOVE 
the new federal guidelines for pfas in drinking water. The Federal guidelines are 
much lower than Maine standards.
There are still about 1000 untested households in Trenton. Based on our testing 
results we can estimate at least 10% of these are contaminated as well. That 
means about 100 families in Trenton alone are possibly drinking contaminated 
water without knowing it. 
In our area, Mt. Desert Island High School, Brooklin Elementary School and Deer 
lsle-Stonington High School also had water test results showing PFAS chemicals 
much higher than the State of Maine drinking water standard. The source of pfas 
in all these cases is as yet undetermined. (Source: Mt Desert Islander, July 20, 
2022). Indeed, pfas contaminated school wells are rarely located anywhere near 
documented sludge spreading sites. 
As our experience in Trenton shows, Pfas can get into drinking water from many 
sources. Contaminated sludge has been sold to landscapers and home 
gardeners as sludge-based compost. Until a year ago, you could buy this at any 
gardening center in bags. These bags might be labeled “bio solids" , but many 
people did not know what this labeling meant. This material needed no DEP 
application license. The State has no record of locations where drinking water 
wells might be at risk of contamination from sludge-based compost. 
Pfas can also enter the water supply through firefighting foam, pump out 
facilities in campgrounds, damaged septic tanks, illegal dumping in backyards, 
leach from landfills and contaminated fill for new construction. The Maine DEP is 
only scratching the surface by prioritizing communities with widespread 
agricultural sludge spreading. 
Thus l urge you to vote “Ought to Pass" on LD 1006 to make widescale free 
water testing for pfas available to all Mainers who are at risk of drinking well 
water contaminated with pfas from many possible causes.
