April 28, 2023      Dianne Wilkins   
Lakeside Drive  
Falmouth , Maine  
dnwilkins@aol.com  
Maine Health & Human Services  Committee  
210 State  Street  (Cross Building)  
 Augu sta, Maine  04330  
 
Re: Testimony in favor of LD 1006  (HP0642)  An Act Concerning Testing for and Disclosure of 
PFAS Contamination of Residential  Drinking Water Wells”  Sponsored by Laurie Osher  
 
Dear HHS Committee,  
 
Plea se vote to pass LD 1006.  
 
The reason my family has  stayed in Maine is not only because its home , but also bec ause of our 
deep belief that unlike other states, our state government ’s highest priorit y was to make  sure 
we have a clean, healthy environment  and that we would be in safe hands if there was ever a n 
environmental or economic disaster .   Unfortu nately , a horrific  environmental and economic 
disaste r has occurred  due to toxic P FAS contamination of land and drinking water by the state ’s 
licensing  of toxic sludge  and the retail sales of toxic sludge  compost  to landscap ers, home 
gardeners  and farms .    
 
The source of s ome  water supply contamination found b y the state ’s investigations ( 25 schools  
with 99 still to go ) can’t be t raced to any known sources  which indicates that there may be 
many more contaminated water wells  located anywhere  in the state .  There is simply no way to 
track down all the possible location s of the contamination  because much is from retail sales  
products .   What  the s tate has been able to trace , contaminated  wells in 22 M aine towns so far, 
does not predict f avorable ou tcomes for other towns  in th e state.   This inability to track down 
sources  and contaminated locations  places the burden o n every homeowner with a well to pay 
$300 + for contamination  testing or else have  to live in  constant stre ss & fear every day of harm 
to their health from drinking & bath ing with water that may be contaminated  by them or their 
neighbor s use of this toxin in thei r home  garden /land/farm .  
 
It is good that the state is providing free water filtration systems to  those  who have found water 
contamination but  this in not en ough. I f the  state truly  wants to prote ct us from this toxin and 
unhealthy chronic stress that leads to many  dis-eases, the state  should pay the cost of testing 
for any and every resident  with a well  who wants it.   Prevention  is always cheaper tha n the 
economic cost  of an unhe althy population  dealing with stress dis-eases and illness linked to 
PFAS poisoning . 
 
Sincerely,  
Dianne Wilkins  
 
