 
 
 
Testimony of Jackie Holmes, Albion, ME 
In SUPPORT of LD 1488,  ‘An Act to Expand Testing for Perfluoroalkyl & Polyfluoroalkyl Substances to 
Private Drinking Water Wells’ 
Before the Health and Human Services Committee 
April 28th, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee.  My name is Jackie Homes.  I am the mother of a PFAS impacted farm owner.   Please accept 
this testimony in support of LD 1006, which would protect low income Mainers from PFAS exposure and 
LD 1214, which would similarly help protect renters and home buyers. 
 
For decades now, we have been utilizing the abundant resources of the earth to our benefit in 
the name of progress, financial gain and useful products.  The list of our needs is endless.  We have done 
this in many cases at the expense of the earth and her inhabitants, both human and animal and the 
earth herself.  Everything has a price, an exchange if you will. 
 
We have utilized and dumped at will, often it seems without regard for what the future will be 
for our children and our neighbors.  PFAS contamination is one of those consequences.  It is a 
contaminant that does not break down in our lifetime.  And maybe never.  This affects us ALL, no matter 
who we are or where we come from, our race, color, religion, sexual orientation, age and financial 
status. We are I think all 75% water, just like the entire earth.  We all need clean water to sustain life in a 
healthy way. 
 
LD 1488 proposed by Laurie Osher and LD 1006 proposed by Bill Pluecker go a long way to 
protect us and our water.  These bills give us information about the safety of our drinking water and the 
chance to pursue remediation and ensure the health of ourselves & our neighbors and the health of all 
Mainers. 
 
I urge you to vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 1006 and LD 1488. 
 
Thank you for your time, 
 
Jackie Holmes, Albion, ME 
Jackie Holmes
Albion
LD 1006
*File attached.  Submitted on behalf of Jackie Holmes by Adam Nordell.  Jackie 
Holmes does not have an email address.
