1 
  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT  
LD 1006 – An Act to  Ensure Access to Safe Drinking Water from Household Wells in  
Rural Areas by Expanding Testing  
& 
LD 1488 – An Act to Expand  Testing for Perfluoroalkyl and P olyfl uoroalkyl Substances to  
Private Drinking Water Wells  
Jacquelyn Elliott ǀ April 28, 202 3 
 
Senator Baldacci, Chair; Representative Meyer, Chair; Honorable Committee Members : 
Thank you for the oppo rtunity  to offer testimony IN SUPPORT OF LD 1006 AND LD 1488. I would 
like to address both bills at  this time as they are related in over all intent. My  name is Jacquelyn 
Elliott and I live in Wa terboro and I will be testi fying as a Board Member on behal f of Slingshot. 
For three decades  I have been and env ironmental health and justice advocate. That journey began 
when my community was assaulted by pollution from a waste -to-energy incinerator and a leaking 
ash landfill threatened a  source of our drinking water.  
Slingshot is an environmental  justice organization who works together with people most 
impacted by pollution and public health threats to  take aim at polluters and build community 
power. Slingshot believes  whatever toxic hazard  your community is facing ; you have the right to 
make your voice hea rd and to create the changes you want to see. Slingshot is a team of seasoned 
organizers, who bring decades of experience in the region to orga nize alongside communities for 
a healthier , more just world.  
Slingshot also co -facilitates the National PFAS Contamination co alitions, which is composed of 30 
community grou ps from across the nation, including Maine , that are directly  impacted by PFAS 
(Perfluoroalkyl and P olyfluoroalkyl Substances). The coalition  is fighting  for a world where people  
are not exposed to any PFAS, where there is justice  for the vic tims of PFAS exposure, and where 
laws and  regulations prevent contamination disasters like this from happening again. We have 
been at the side of Maine communities facing the harmful impacts of drinking water 

2 
 contaminated by PFAS. Fr om this work, we have witnessed the harm PFAS have on our bodies, 
families , and environment.  
Maine has been thrust int o the forefront of leadership of how to respond to this crisis. Our lands, 
waters, crops, wildlife, and human bodies have been contaminated with this class of thousands  
of synthetic, t oxic, forever  chemicals  mostly it appe ars, the result of misguided policy that spread 
sewage sludge on our farmlands and forests, and  allowed sludge -amended com post to be used 
for landscaping and home gardens. Last year, the Legislature wisely passed legislation to cease 
those activities.  
Many Mainers are showing exceedingly elevated blood serum levels of these PFAS chemical and 
are facing un certain futures regarding health outcomes. Children are recognized as s uffering 
impacts of toxic exp osures at levels much greater than adults due to their body size. Maine ’s 
schools are struggling to cope with PFAS -polluted water systems. Scientists are saying that no 
body  system1 is free from adverse impacts from PFAS exposure. PFAS have been linked to ki dney 
and other cancers as well as reproductive  and imm une system disruption. At this time , medical 
treatment consists of identifying the source and ceasing exposure to PFAS.  
In Maine a significant pathway2 of PFAS contaminati on is from private drinking wa ter sources. 
Drinking water is a specific condu it for human bodies to become over burdened with health -
thre atening  levels of PFAS which are ubiquitous3 in our environment and our bodies. The St ate 
has so far identified almost  400 residential drinking wells in nearly two dozen Main e towns with  
levels of PFAS above the State ’s drinking water standar d. EPA4 (Environmental Protection Agency) 
is currently promulgating new rules for drin king water lowering the level for exposure.  
We can assume there are still unidentified sources of drinking well contamination. People ca nnot 
protect themselves from PFAS exp osures if they do  not know it is in  their water. LD 1006  will 
require the DHHS (D epartment of Health and Human S ervices) add PFAS to the existing program 
that subsidizes testing avai lable for house hold well water supplies of low -income residents . PFAS 
testing will be conducted through contracts with qualified laboratories. DHHS will be required to 
provide outreach and education to these residents to apprise them of the availability of th is 
 
1 Emanuel, Gabrielle, February 13, 2023, Tracing the path of toxic ‘forever chemicals’ inside the body, “Not only do 
we all have PFAS in our bodies, but we also know that PFAS affects almost every organ system. I’m not sure I know 
a tissue or organ system where effects haven’t been reported.” Dr.  Linda Birnbaum, former director of the National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences and the National Toxicology Program: 
https://www.wbur.org/news/2023/02/16/pfa s-biology -blood -new -hampshire   
2 March 2023, EPA Fact Sheet, EPA’s Proposal to Limit PFAS in Drinking Water:  
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023 -04/Fact%20Sheet_PFAS_NPWDR_Final_4.4.23.pdf  
3 Environmental Working Group, PFAS Chemicals the ‘forever chemicals’ in 99% of Americans, 
https://www.ewg.org/what -are-pfas-chemicals  
4 March 14, 2023, Per - and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) Proposed PFAS National Primary Drinking Water 
Regulation: https://www.ep a.gov/sdwa/and -polyfluoroalkyl -substances -pfas  
3 
 testing and the eligibility for grants to cover costs of water treatment systems for drinking water 
that exceeds standards for PFAS and other contaminants . These grants will be obtainable from 
the Maine State Housing Authority. Impo rtantly, testing will be based on the  most recently 
available analytical method approved by the EPA that quantifies the maximum levels of PFAS. This 
bill does not re quire landlords treat the water.  
Some may raise the argument of costs, but thos e contentions need to be framed in the long view. 
Preven ting toxic exp osures  and disease will cost less to society and the economy. Additionall y, 
ther e is knowledge that the State of Maine is rightly seeking financial accountability from the 
producers of PFAS through the courts. Producers of pollution are the appropriate goal for 
culpability .  
Maine has many rental properties that supply dr inking  water from wells. LD 1488  requires that 
landlords of residential buildings with private dr inking water supplies add testing  for PFAS to the 
contaminants  already tested. The results of those tests must be shared with tena nts within ten 
days of receipt of this information , as well a s with pro spective renters. The property s ellers would 
be required to disclose a water test that indicates the presence of PFAS to a poten tial buyer.  
LD 1006 and LD  1488  provide needed justice, e quity, and safety measures for Maine citizens who 
have a right to know what is in  their drinking water. These bills provide some agency for people 
to protect themselves and their families from contaminants in the in the water they drink. Maine 
residnets  should not be put at risk or shut off from effective  measures t o limit exposur es to PFAS 
and other toxics in their drin king water  because  they are renters o r lack financial resources for 
testing and remediation .  
LD 1006 and LD 1488  provide important  steps to move in the direction  of safe dri nking water for 
all M aine’s residents. That requires the obligations outlined in th ese bills be vigo rously 
implemented. Sling shot  supports such efforts and wo uld ask the Committee VOTE OUGHT TO 
PASS . Thank you.  
Jacqu elyn Ell iott, Board Member  
Slingshot  
Waterboro, ME  
 
 
  
  
