 
Testimony of Johanna Davis, farmer, Freedom Maine 
In SUPPORT of LD 1006,  
"An Act to Ensure Access to Healthy Drinking Water from Household Wells in Rural Maine 
Before the Health and Human Services Committee 
April 28th, 2023 
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee.  My name is Johanna Davis. I live and work at Villageside Farm in Freedom.  Please accept 
this testimony in support of LD 1006, which would help expand access to clean drinking water to low 
income Mainers. 
 
Toxic per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) or “forever chemicals” are used in thousands 
of everyday products and manufacturing processes. PFAS accumulate in our wastewater and 
can contaminate the land and groundwater from a variety of sources. PFAS pose significant 
health risks, including kidney cancer, reduced vaccine response, elevated cholesterol, reduced 
infant birth weight, and more. Low income communities, communities of color, tribal, and rural 
communities are disproportionately impacted and more susceptible to health and financial 
impacts of PFAS contamination. Children are disproportionately exposed. 
 
In 2021 my family's well was tested for pfas and came back over 8000 ppb. Now my partner and 
I as well as our five year old child have industrial levels of these chemicals in our bodies. Our 
property happened to be on a DEP licensed sludge spreading site however, significant 
quantities of contaminated sludge have been sold to landscapers, home gardeners and farms 
across the state as sludge-based compost.  This material needed no DEP application license.  
The State has no record of locations where drinking water wells might be at risk of 
contamination from sludge-based compost. Additionally, at least 25 Maine schools and 
daycare facilities have water supplies above Maine’s interim drinking water standard of 20 
parts per trillion, suggesting that 6,650 children and young adults currently enrolled at those 
schools have been exposed to high levels of PFAS while at school.  Contaminated school wells 
are rarely located anywhere near documented sludge spreading sites. The source of that 
contamination remains unknown.     
 
Clean water is a basic human right.  
 
The medium and long-term economic benefits to investing in public health are enormous. 
Preventing toxic exposure is always cheaper than cost of medical care for patients dealing 
with PFAS linking illnesses. Our communities have a higher economic productivity when they 
Mainers are healthy. 
 
We can assume there are additional, impacted drinking water wells that remain to be 
identified.  We need to ensure that everyone has access to clean drinking water – including low 
income Mainers.  The state can add the PFAS test to its existing list of subsidized water tests, 
like radon and arsenic. 
 
All people in Maine deserve to drink clean water. Please help make this possible. 
 
I urge you to vote “Ought to Pass’ on LD 1006. 
 
Thank you for your time, 
 
Johanna Davis, farmer, Freedom Maine. 
