Kate Manahan
Kennebunk
LD 1006
Defend Testimony
LD 1006
Sponsored by Rep Pluecker
LD 1006 “An Act to Ensure Access to Healthy Drinking Water from Household 
Wells in Rural Maine”
Hello, thanks for having me, my name is Kate Manahan and I am the producer and 
host of a radio show and podcast about toxics.  My most recent guest, Nik Charov of 
Wells Reserve, said that he thinks Mother Earth is as much an accountant as a 
nurturer.  We cannot spend more than we have.  And what we do has to add up!  
I agree.  
PFAS/forever chemicals have an accounting of their own, as well.  They add up and 
add up, linger in our organs for decades, and there is no way yet to remove them from
our bodies where there is often a sickening and cumulative effect for us all.  
I am here to support LD 1006 because of its action for both health and social justice.  
We have all consumed and been exposed to PFAS, unwittingly, because of 
manufacturers who knew exactly what they were doing, but hid that from consumers 
so they could continue to rake in profits.  But now the balance sheets need reckoning. 
The medium and long-term economic benefits to investing in public health are 
profound and quantifiable.  Preventing toxic exposure is always cheaper than the cost 
of medical care and lost productivity.  And socially, we have an opportunity here to 
protect low-income communities, tribal communities, communities of color and rural 
communities who are more susceptible to health and financial impacts of PFAS 
contamination.
A note here, too, about children.  Due to ratios and more rapid circulatory systems, 
they are always disproportionately exposed to toxics, which have a more substantial 
impact on developing bodies and brains than adults.  
Right now, we know there are PFAS impacted drinking water wells that have not yet 
been identified.  We need to ensure that everyone has access to clean drinking water, 
including children, low-income rural Mainers.  The state can simply add the PFAS 
test to its existing list of subsidized water tests, like radon and arsenic.  We have a 
pathway and can plug PFAS, these emerging contaminants, into our existing process 
for water testing in our state. 
Please vote to support LD 1006 to ensure healthy drinking water.  Let’s skip the 
kidney cancer, low birthweight, immune suppression and all the other hazards that 
come from drinking PFAS contaminated water.  In this case, a liquid ounce of 
prevention can protect rural Mainers drinking from household wells.  The savings will
contribute significantly to Maine’s bottom line in terms of savings from health 
catastrophes avoided for years to come.  
Thank you.
