Testimony of Lani Graham, MD, MPH 
Former Chief Public Health Officer for Maine 
Freeport, I\/Iaine 
IN SUPPORT OF LD 1006 
An Act to Ensure Access to Safe Drinking Water from Household Wells in Rural 
Areas by Expanding Testing 
Presented by Representative Pluecker of Warren 
Before Health and Human Services Committee: 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of 
the Committee. My name is Lani Graham. I am a family practice 
physician. I served on the Governor ’s task force to consider Maine's 
approach to dealing with the chemical family known as PFAS 
(perﬂuoroalkyl substances) which completed its work in 2019. 
Currently, I serve on the Public Health Committee for the Maine Medical 
Association (MMA) and I am here in support of this bill on behalf of the 
Maine Medical Association. 
Over the last few years, I have been very involved in helping to address 
the contamination of Maine by PFAS. And indeed, this is a very serious 
problem that we are learning more about every day. I can tell you from 
extensive experience, that once a chemical is found to be dangerous to 
human health, the news never gets better as more research is done. At 
present we are aware of quite an array of adverse human health effects. 
This is likely the “tip of the iceberg” . I expect more adverse human 
health effects will be revealed as scientific research study continues. 
As you have heard, people on public water supplies do not need to 
worry as public water supplies must conform to strict safety standards. 
But the rural nature of this state has led to the fact that more than 50% 
of Maine people are not on public water and instead get their water 
from residential wells. That is the highest in the country. For these 
people, including myself, unless a decision is made to test your well 
water, you may not know of the contamination.
I will add here that the definition of rural is variable. In Freeportl live 
within 5 miles of two public water supplies, and within 20 miles of 
Portland, but have my own well. 
In my case I have had my well water tested for many different 
contaminants, and found some that have required mitigation. 
Fortunately, I had the resources to make this testing and remediation 
possible. My one family effort cost well over $5000, including 
mitigation. Many cannot afford such expenditures and would instead 
be relegated to turning a blind eye to the possible contamination of their 
drinking water. Access to safe drinking water should not depend on 
your income. Safe drinking water is the very essence of public health. 
But in Maine safe drinking water does depend on income and as a result 
low-income communities, rural Mainers, communities of color are 
disproportionately affected. 
I urge this committee to support funding for safe drinking water for 
Maine families. Thank you for your attention. l would be pleased to 
answer any questions you might have.
