 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 28, 2023  
 
Senator  Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative  Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services   
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1006 - An Act to Ensure Access to Safe Drinking Water from Household Wells in Rural 
Areas by Expanding Testing  
 
Dear Senator  Baldacci , Representative  Meyer , and Members of the  Joint Standing  Committee  on 
Health and Human Services : 
 
This letter is to provide information about  LD 1006, An Act to Ensure Access to Safe Drinking 
Water from Household Wells in Rural Areas by Expanding Testing , and the potential impact of 
the proposed legislation , if enacted.  
 
The Maine Center of Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC)  is neither for nor against this 
bill and offers the following information for your consideration . 
 
LD 1006  adds contaminants to the Department of Health and Human Services' uniform testing 
recommen dation for private wells. The bill requires a program to provide free testing for 
perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) in household well water of low -income 
residents through contracts with qualified laboratories. The department is required  to conduct 
educational outreach to make low -income residents aware of the availability of free testing of 
well water and eligibility for grants from the Maine State Housing Authority to pay for water 
treatment systems. The bill clarifies that low-income  homeowners served by well water that 
exceeds State standards for PFAS  and other contaminants are eligible for the grants.  
 
The Department supports the concept of providing  free well testing for low -income residents as a 
means toward identifying  and reducing  exposure to  potential  drinking water contaminants  that 
could impact public health . The bill identifies 15 contaminants listed in 22 MRS  § 2660 -T that 
are included in the Health and Environmental Testing Laboratory’s (HETL) Uniform 
Recommendations for Residential Pri vate Well Testing . These include arsenic, uranium, radon, 
nitrate , and other contaminants with public health implications . The bill also provides for 
contracted services  of free PFAS analysis for low-income residents  with residential wells.  
Exposure to c ertain PFAS  above  specific levels may lead to adverse health effects.  
 
Private wells in Maine are not regulated and there is no required testing of residential wells  on a 
statewide basis, although some communi ties may have local ordinances to this effect. An 
estimated 560,000  residents receive their drinking  water from private wells , approximately half 
 
 of Maine’s population.  Therefore, providing private well owners with outreach and education  on 
this topic, as well as free testing and information about reducing exposure to contaminants, could 
have a significant impact on public health.  
 
The Maine Legislature has previously enacted a mandate for the Department to provide free 
arsenic testing fo r low -income families ( PL 2021 Chapter 483 Sec. BB -1). $52,840 was allocated 
for each of the 2021/22 and 2022/23 budget  years with the allocation from the Maine Jobs and 
Recovery Program. The Department has been using th ese funds to initiate a pilot progra m to 
provide free comprehensive well water test  kits (including arsenic ) to families enrolled in 
Maine’s Women, Infant, Child (WIC) Nutrition Program  and who are also enrolled in 
MaineCare . WIC counselors identify clients relying on private well water and inform them of the 
opportunity to obtain a free water test. Since November of 2022 , 899 test kits have been 
requested through this pilot program, o f which 550 have been shipped out. The return rate for 
shipped kits being  returned to HETL for analys is is currently running 5  and 8% . The Department 
anticipates it will expend all the allocated funds supporting this initiative.  
 
Attempting to implement th e provisions of this bill without the additional human resources 
necessary to reach o ut to private well owners and educate them on the importance of testing their 
drinking water  and provid ing assistance once  laboratory results are available would fall short  of 
the bill’s intent.  Please note that previous legislation that established  free testing of arsenic in 
well water for low -income Mainers did not provide for  staffing resources  to establish  the 
program and provide follow -up to encourage the return of shipped testing kits and thus far  has 
resulted in  only limited completion of free water testing . To improve and maintain this current 
testing initiative of low -income families, two full-time position s would be needed within the 
Maine CDC ‘s Division of Environmental Health : a Public Health Educator III (PHE -III) to 
provide outreach and education  and manage the targeted low -income testing initiatives , and an 
Environmental Specialist III (ES-III) to establish and maintai n a contractual program for free 
testing of PFAS in well water of low -income families . In addition , in order to process the 
expected increase in samples per year  at the HETL , a lab position (Chemist I) would be needed.   
 
Funding needs for the  increased analys es at the HETL for the 15 recommended parameters, as 
well as for the contracting of the PFAS analyses , would be  significant.  This cost is dependent on 
the definition of low income and how many will avail themselves of this testing, as well  as 
whether multiple samples are allowed per household.   In order to provide a cost estimate, it was 
assumed that the program w ould be limited to families with a household income of less than 
$15,000 per year and who own a home with a well (estimated to be  about 22,000 households) .  
An assumption was then made that 50 percent of these households would avail themselves of this 
testing opportunity over the next 10 years, or approximately 1 ,100 test s per year . 
 
Based upon information provided by the HETL, analysis of the 15 parameters found in 22 
MRSA Section 2660 -T as referenced in this bill  would currently cost $145 per sample . 
Accounting for  minor periodic  increase s in the testing fees  and some equipment replacement , 
this would cost approximately  $2 million in the next 10 years , or $200,000 per year.  
 
The Department  anticipates that there would be significant interest in PFAS testing at residential 
wells in Maine.  Based on information from the only laboratory in Maine currently accredited to 
 
 test PFAS in drinking water, a contract for PFAS testing would cost approxim ately $400 per 
sample . Therefore, the cost of offering free PFAS analysis for low-income residents would cost 
approximately $4.5 million over the next 10 years, or $450,000 per year  for the projected 1100 
tests. 
 
Thank you for your consideration of this ma tter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 

