e, 
ine bliHeth iati 
Testimony of Maine Public Health Association In Support of: 
LD 1006: An Act to Ensure Access to Safe Drinking Water from Household Wells in Rural Areas by 
Expanding Testing 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Room 220, Cross State Office Building 
Friday, April 28, 2023 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services. My name is Rebecca Boulos. I am a resident of South Portland and 
executive director of the Maine Public Health Association. MPHA is in support of LD 1006: “An Act to Ensure 
Access to Safe Drinking Water from Household Wells in Rural Areas by Expanding Testing. ” 
MPHA is the state’s oldest, largest, and most diverse association for public health professionals. We represent 
more than 700 individual members and 60 organizations across the state. The mission of MPHA is to improve 
and sustain the health and well-being of all people in Maine through health promotion, disease prevention, and 
the advancement of health equity. As a statewide nonprofit association, we advocate, act, and advise on critical 
public health challenges, aiming to improve the policies, systems, and environments that underlie health 
inequities — but which also have potential to improve health outcomes for all people in Maine. We are not tied 
to a national agenda, which means we are responsive to the needs of Maine’s communities, and we take that 
responsibility seriously. 
LD 1006 has several components. First, it would require extension of the state’s Health and Environmental 
Testing Laboratory program’s coverage of arsenic and other contaminants in private residential water supplies 
to include perﬂuoroalkyl and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances (PFAS). Secondly, it would require that no fee be 
assessed to low-income individuals who have their private residential water supply tested. Finally, it would 
require educational outreach programs to be formulated for both the existence of this free testing program as 
well as water contamination mitigation system grants available from the Maine State Housing Authority 
(MSHA) for private water systems that are found to have contamination levels exceeding state standards. 
MPHA supports both the intentions and potential outcomes of this bill. Clean drinking water is fundamental for 
good health, and access to contaminant-free water should not depend on income. 
PF AS exposure from drinking contaminated water may reduce antibody responses to vaccines "2 and infectious 
disease resistance.3 PFAS exposure can also alter metabolism4 and ferti1ity,5 reduce fetal growth, and increase 
the risk of being overweight or obese.6 PFAS exposure has also been associated with several chronic health 
problems, including increased cholesterol levels, liver dysfunction, and increased risk of testicular and kidney 
cancers.7 
LD 1006 provides strategies to ﬁnancially cover both well water testing and water treatment systems for low- 
income Maine residents whose drinking water is PFAS-contaminated. The inclusion of both testing and 
mitigation ensures that low-income residents can identify health-harming contamination in their drinking water, 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 - 207-808-0487 - mainepublichealth.org
and access resources to mitigate that exposure, reducing likelihood of disease onset. Oftentimes, there are 
resources for testing, but not for mitigation, which can be costly depending on the water contaminant. With only 
cost-prohibitive mitigation available, it may sometimes be difficult to justify testing. However, with the addition 
of the educational outreach about grants available through the MSHA, this bill outlines strategies that provide 
both free testing and grant-funded mitigation systems to low-income households, eliminating this concern and 
affording beneﬁciaries tangible and health-promoting outcomes from test results. 
This bill is especially pertinent to our state as over 50% of Maine homes utilize a private well water sources 
Private well users are more likely to live in rural areas and to have lower household incomes comparative to the 
general population.9 It has been demonstrated that disparities in exposure to contaminated well Water in Maine 
primarily stem from differences in socioeconomic statuses and a lack of ﬁnancial resources to conduct tests or 
purchase water treatment systems. 1° 
The enactment of the programs described within this bill would aid in the 
removal of this ﬁnancial barrier, greatly contributing to a reduction in disparities seen in contaminant exposure 
from private well water. 
Given the greater risk and burden of disease among vulnerable Mainers — including persons of low-income, 
those living in rural areas, and those with less access to health care — this bill is important for ensuring the 
financial resources necessary to test for PF AS contamination are available, accessible, and affordable to those 
who need it most. Furthermore, this legislation will increase awareness of the availability of grants for water 
treatment systems through the MSHA Well Water Abatement Program, ultimately increasing the access to safe 
drinking water for people in Maine, regardless of their income. 
MPHA supports legislation that improves health equity and reduces health disparities among underserved 
populations. We believe this bill has potential to improve public health, and we are in support. We respectfully 
request you to vote LD 1006 “Ought to Pass.” Thank you for your consideration. 
‘Grandjean P, Heilmann C, Weihe P, et al. 2017. Estimated exposures to perﬂuorinated compounds in infancy predict attenuated 
vaccine antibody concentrations at age 5-years. J Immunotoxicol, 14(1): 188-195. 
2L0oker C, Luster MI, Calafat AM, et al. 2014. Inﬂuenza vaccine response in adults exposed to perfluorooctanoate and 
perﬂuorooctanesulfonate. T oxicol Sci.,138(l):76-88. 
3National Toxicology Program. 2016. Monograph on immunotoxicitv associated with exposure to nerfiuorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and 
perﬂuorooctane sulfonate (PFOS). Research Triangle Park, NC: National Toxicology Program. 
4Liu G, Dhana K, Furtado JD, Rood J, Zong G, Liang L, Qi L, Bray GA, DeJonge L, Coull B, Grandjean P, Sun Q. 2018. 
Perﬂuoroalkyl substances and changes in body weight and resting metabolic rate in response to weight-loss diets: A prospective study. 
PLoS Med, 15(2):e1002502. 
5Bach CC, Vested A, Jorgensen K, Bonde JP, Henriksen TB, Toft G. 2016. Perﬂuoroalkyl and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances and 
measures of human fertility: A systematic review. Crit Rev T0xicoI,46(9):735-55. 
‘Braun J . 2017 . Early-life exposure to EDCs: Role in childhood obesity and neurodevelopment. Nat Rev Enclocrin01,13(3):161-173. 
7Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. 2022. What are the health effects 0fPFAS? 
sMaine Center for Disease Control and Prevention. 2021. Tracking Private Well Water. Maine Environmental Public Health Tracking 
(EPHY) Network. 
9Malecki KMC, Schultz AA, Severtson DJ, Anderson HA, & VanDers1ice JA. 2017. Private-well stewardship among a general 
population based sample of private well-owners. Science of the Total Environment, 601, 1533-1543. 
‘°Flanagan SV, Spayd SE, Procopio NA, Marvinney RG, Smith AE, Chillrud SN, Braman S & Zheng Y. 2016. Arsenic in private well 
water part 3 of 3: Socioeconomic vulnerability to exposure in Maine and New Jersey. Science of the Total Environment, 562, 1019- 
1030. 
122 State Street, Augusta, ME 04330 - 207-808-0487 - mainepublichealth.org
