ai .. »~»: » .,/. . 
-itr 
solutions foro 
Toxic-Free Tomorrow 
Testimony of Sarah Woodbury, Director of Advocacy, Defend Our Health 
ln SUPPORT of LD 1006, “An Act to Ensure Access to Safe Drinking Water from Household 
Wells in Rural Areas by Expanding Testing” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
April 28, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee. My name is Sarah Woodbury. I am the director of advocacy for Defend Our Health. 
Defend Our Health's mission is to make sure that everyone has equal access to safe food and 
drinking water, healthy homes and products that are toxic-free and climate friendly. l am here to 
testify in support of 1006, "An Act to Ensure Access to Safe Drinking Water from Household 
Wells in Rural Areas by Expanding Testing”. 
We have all heard the stories about wells contaminated by PFAS across the state. The state is 
continuing to test for PFAS across the state and, to date, has found over 380 contaminated 
residential wells. This committee has heard several pieces of legislation over the past few years 
that have dealt with the issue of PFAS contamination of drinking water. Over the past several 
years we have learned a lot about the PFAS contamination across Maine and the signiﬁcant 
health risks associated with exposure to these “forever chemicals" including increased rates of 
certain types of cancer, fertility issues, and neurodevelopmental issues in children. These toxic 
chemicals have polluted our farmland and drinking water throughout the state. 
Much of the contamination across the state is due to the state~sponsored spreading of PFAS- 
contaminated sludge on farmland. The good news is that the state is helping cover the cost for 
some PFAS contaminated residential wells. lf the contamination can be tied back to the sludge 
spreading on nearby farmland, the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) is helping 
with the cost of testing and remediation. However, sludge spreading is not the only source of 
contamination. Other sources of contamination could include AFF F ﬁreﬁghting foam, which can 
end up in our aquifers during firefighter training or other firefighter maneuvers. Leachate from 
landﬁlls can pollute groundwater as can effluent being discharged from municipalities and 
industries across the state. PFAS is ubiquitous and highly mobile, making it easy to 
contaminate drinking water. 
Public water supplies in Maine and those community water sources that sen/ice schools and 
daycares will test and treat for PFAS. But most Maine households do not get their drinking water 
from public water supplies, but rather from residential wells. Over half of Maine residents get 
their drinking water from a residential well, the highest percentage in the nation. Residential 
wells are not regulated under the Safe Drinking Water Act, so residents are responsible for the 
cost of testing and remediation. PFAS testing can be cost prohibitive for many families. The 
cost ranges from $250-300 for a DEP certified approved test. This is important because of the 
565 Congress Street. Suite 204, Portland, ME 04101 l (207) 6995795 l info@defenclourhealth.org | defendourhealthorg
~ 
geography of those who are more likely to be impacted. Those who rely on residential wells are 
more likely to live in rural communities, which have higher poverty rates and lower median 
incomes than their urban and suburban counterparts. Those who need this testing are the least 
able to afford it. We need to make sure that everybody relying on residential wells can get their 
wells tested, regardless of income. 
Currently, the state has a program that helps low-income Mainers pay for water testing for 
arsenic and other contaminants. PFAS is not included on that list of contaminants. LD 1006 will 
require the Department to add PFAS to the list of contaminants it covers the cost of testing for 
when helping low-income Mainers test their wells. Information from the Department shows that 
42 families took advantage of the free testing for arsenic and other contaminants over the past 
two years. Adding PFAS to that list would have cost the Department an additional $12,600 at 
$300 a test. We anticipate similar numbers moving fonlvard. $12,600 is much more affordable 
than the healthcare costs associated with PFAS. lt is money well-spent- lf a well tests high for 
PFAS or any other contaminants, there is a program under the Maine Housing Authority that 
helps low-income individuals pay for the cost of remediation for contaminated wells. So, if 
contamination is found, there are resources available to help cover the cost of treatment. 
Even/one deserves access to safe drinking water, regardless of income. LD 1006 would provide 
necessary resources to Mainers who may othen/vise not be able to afford to test their drinking 
water. We urge the committee to unanimously “ought to pass" LD 1006. 
Thank you. 
565 Congress Street, Suite 204, Portland, ME 04101 l (207) 6<J9—5795 I info@defenrlourhealthorg I defendourhealthorg
