Maine Chapter
I l{cd}RPotLAIED I i{ &{Alr.{E
r\rncrican Acadcmy of Pcdiatrics
1lt:rr( 1ti:r'rr) tlii iiit.ili{rt,\ti iiji l)ti\
Since
svd R. Sewall, MD IVIPH
Hallowell, ME
lnstructor in Pediatrics, M aine-Dartmouth Family lVl edicine Residency,ffit
Executive Committee
President
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP
Vice President
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP
Treasu rer
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP
Secretary
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP
lmmediate Past President
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP
Board of Directors
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP
Melissa Burch, lvlD, FAAP
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP
Riley Heroux*x
JenniferJewell, MD, MS, FAAP
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP
Emily l(eller, MD, FAAP
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP
Maria Libertin, MD*
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP
Valerie O'Hara, DO, FAAP
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP
Austin Wheeler Steward**
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP
Mary Tedesco-Schneck, PhD, NP
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP
Aaron Wallace, IVD*
*Resident Board Representatlves
**Medical Student Representatives
Staff
Dee Kerry, BS Ed
Executive Director
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN
Admin & Project Coordinator
30 Association Drive, Box 190
Manchester, ME 04351
office: 207 -480-4185Testimony in favor of LD 1006 - expanding access to well water testing
Sydney R. Sewall MD MPH - Hallowell
Sen. Baldacci, Rep. Meyer, and members of the HHS committee
I am writing as a representative of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy
of Pediatrics, an organization of over 300 health care practitioners distributed
throughout the state who focus on the care of infants, children, teens and young
adults. We are concerned about the theoretical link detween intrauterine and
early life exposure to PFAS compounds and increased disease risk for
developmental delays in childhood. ln addition, their physiologic effects are
associated with later-onset hormone imbalance, chronic kidney disease, obesity,
and some cancers. (Toxicoloov. 2020 Oct: 443: 152565 ). Adding to our concern is the
fact that, by weight, bottle fed infants using PFAS-contaminated water have the
highest exposures levels.
High occupational exposures were noted by DuPont many decades ago to have
Iikely caused birth defects in the offspring of workers. These concerns led to
further research that promoted a switch away from PFOS and PFOA to shorter
chain and more complex replacements, though safety data was limited. (sciAm
May 2020). The thought at the time was that these compounds would have
shorter half lives in humans and have less potential for harm, but unfortunately
they and their metabolites can become incorporated into organs and persist.
Dr. Grandjean from Harvard was contracted by the EU to investigate PFAS
effects on children in the Faroe lsles decades ago. He was surprised to find that
the kids' responses to vaccines were dampened. Other European studies
demonstrated an increased risk of miscarriage, along with adverse effects on
pubertal development and on thyroid functions. (Grandjean leuerto Michigan tegistators,
2018)
It is unfortunate that these very useful compounds have had unintended
consequences due to their chemical properties. While we search for alternatives
and discontinue their non-essential use, it seem prudent to minimize the
exposure of Maine citizents. Public water supplies are monitored. lt would
seem only fair to offer financial support to low income residents to monitor their
wells. lf PFAS levels are high, the family can prevent harm by using an
alternative water source for drinking - and especially for mixing formula.
www.maineaap.orA
