  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
May 3 , 2023 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Miche le Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 361 – An Act to Increase the Reimbursement for Electronic Consultations Through 
Medicaid  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide i nformation and share our opposition to  LD 361, An 
Act to Increase the Reimbursement for Electronic Consultations Through Medicaid .  
 
Payments for e lectronic consultations  (e-consults)  are presently covered  by MaineCare  under 
Section 4, Telehealth Services , and reimbursed at 72.4% of current year Medicare rates, 
consistent with MaineCare methodology used for payment for services across numerous sections 
of the MaineCare Benefits Manual.  
 
The Department supports the concept and expansion of eConsults but  opposes this bill as it 
appears to introduce changes to current MaineCare rate reimbursement methodology at a time 
when rate reform is underway, undermining the rate reform process and principles established 
last year in P.L. 2021, ch 639, which was passed in the last legislature as LD 1867, An Act to 
Codify MaineCare Rate Syste m Reform . The intent behind that bill was to establish “… a rate -
setting system for the development and maintenance of MaineCare payment models … to be 
consistent with efficiency, economy, and quality of care; that are adequate to support MaineCare 
member access to services; and that are equitable and data -driven.”  
 
We would also note that providers participating in e -consult programs have often cited that while 
Medicare and MaineCare provide payment for e -consults, commercial health plans have not 
consiste ntly participated in paying for e -consults.  
 
Additionally, we wanted to note related Department efforts to promote e -consults. In June 2021, 
the Department was awarded a $32 million grant to be used toward addressing disparities in the 
prevention and treat ment of COVID -19 and advancing health equity. A portion of those funds 
was used to establish a one -year pilot program to implement the “ Maine eConsult Network ,”1 a 
system to support e -consults between primary care providers and specialists using an establ ished 
specialty network and a web -based system that allows secure sharing of health information 
 
1 https://www.econsultmaine.org/   
 
 between the parties. With Department funding, the Maine eConsult Network is currently working 
with nine primary care provider organizations to set up systems fo r specialty consultation using 
e-consults in an effort to promote and ultimately extend this network to other primary care 
practices across the state.  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

