" 
STATE or MAINE 
A, ,_ DEPARTMENT or AGRICULTURE, CoNsERvATIoN & FoREsTRY 
BUREAU or AGRICULTURE, FOOD & RURAL RESOURCES 
28 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 
JANET T. MILLS AMANDA E. BEAL 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY 
IN OPPOSITION TO LD 1216 
An Act to Establish an Animal Cruelty Task Force 
April 3, 2023 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Craig Lapine. I am the Director of the 
Bureau of Agriculture, Food and Rural Resources. I am speaking on behalf of the Department of 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry (DACF) in opposition to LD 1216, An Act to Establish 
an Animal Cruelty Task Force. 
The Animal Welfare Program (AWP) ensures the humane treatment of animals through 
communication, education, and enforcement of animal welfare laws. AWP develops and 
implements policies and programs to effectively address animal cruelty complaints; inspects and 
licenses animal shelters, pet stores, kennels, and animal research facilities; and enforces the 
licensing of dogs. We do all of this in close collaboration with stakeholders. 
The Department believes that establishing a separate Animal Cruelty Task Force as laid out in 
LD 1216 is duplicative of the Animal Welfare Advisory Council (AWAC). By law, AWAC is 
charged with assisting the AWP in implementing and evaluating the animal welfare laws and 
rules, reviewing and making recommendations regarding training programs for animal control 
officers and humane agents, and advising the Department on other matters related to animal 
Welfare laws and rules. The Council is a public group that meets at least monthly and which 
stakeholders can engage with. Over the past six months, the Council and AWP have worked 
hand in hand on various matters, and together, we believe we are making progress in many areas. 
For example, we have been collaborating with the Maine Federation of Humane Societies and 
the Maine Veterinary Medical Association to enhance access to rabies vaccines in northem 
Maine. AWP and AWAC also have an active subcommittee working to deﬁne ongoing 
educational requirements for animal control officers. 
The Department understands the intent of the bill; however, we believe there is a more efficient 
and practical approach to achieving the bill’s stated purpose of “[p]roviding a coalition of trained 
professionals to assist with and enhance the enforcement of animal cruelty laws, including the 
18 ELKINS LANE conservation FAX. (207)287-2400 I. 
_ DEPARTMENT or 
HARLOW BUILDING if; , ; Agricuiture PHONE: (207) 287-3200 
AUGUSTA,MAINE I 
I 
8‘ Forestry WWW.MAINE.GOV/DACF
investigation of animal cruelty. ” That would be by adding the desired expertise to AWAC, either 
directly to the make-up of the Council or through a task force. Valuable additions might include 
representation from a District Attorney ’s ofﬁce, a law enforcement agent, a humane agent, anda 
mental health professional. AWAC is well poised to take these steps. Changing the composition 
of AWAC would require legislation, but forming a subcommittee or working group with the 
desired expertise could happen at any time. 
The Department also has concerns regarding the ﬁnancial implications of the proposed 
legislation. This Committee is aware that AWP receives no ongoing funding from the general 
fund. All income is received from designated funding sources that are unpredictable in amount 
and timing. Giving an individual or entity the authority to spend funds on the Program’s behalf 
could ultimately undercut other services and is not advisable. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. l’m happy to answer questions now or at a future work 
session.
