Testimony: LD 1562 
Public Hearing, April 20, 2023, 1 pm 
Benjamin Conniff, Co-Founder & Chief Innovation Officer, Luke’s Lobster 
Portland, Maine 
Good afternoon, members of the Labor and Housing Committee. Thank you for the opportunity 
to address you today at a critical juncture for the business community in Maine and beyond, as 
well as all the citizens who interact with it. l am here today to voice my strong opposition to LD 
1562. 
I'm a co-founder of Luke's Lobster. We're a vertically integrated seafood company that buys 
directly from ﬁshermen, runs our own production facility, and operates a group of restaurants in 
Maine and a branded grocery business around the country. We process about 5 million pounds 
of lobster per year, and we employ 250 Mainers and over 400 people nationwide. 
Luke’s is the highest scoring Certiﬁed B Corp seafood company in the world. That means that 
we’ve proven with hard evidence that we’ve created a positive impact on our workers, 
community, environment, and customers. Institutional investors have chosen to consider these 
positive impacts when determining what our business is worth. They know that history has 
shown that companies who perform well in these impact areas also typically outperform their 
competitors ﬁnancially in the medium and long term and are therefore better investments. This 
has propelled our growth and profit while allowing us to double down on the positive impact we 
have on our community. lt’s a virtuous cycle that has allowed us to make Maine stronger. 
LD 1562 would ban that virtuous cycle. Here are a few examples of what our business looks like 
now, with the free market controlling investing decisions, versus what it would look like if ESG 
considerations were banned under LD 1562: 
0 Today, Luke’s Lobster pays ﬁshermen the highest price we can afford for their catch and 
creates predictable volume-based bonus programs for ﬁshermen to reward them for our 
mutually beneﬁcial relationship. This creates a long term dependable supply for us to 
operate our business. LD 1562 would incentivize us to pay fishermen as little as possible 
and to buy only enough lobster that we can avoid paying those bonuses because we'd 
pocket more proﬁt this year, and that’s all investors would be allowed to consider. 
0 Today, Luke’s Lobster pays its employees industry-leading wages and provides great 
benefits so that our teammates get what they desen/e, live healthy and comfortable 
lives, and continue to work with us so we aren’t constantly needing to hire and train new 
people. It also minimizes their need for taxpayer funded resources. LD 1562 would 
require us to pay our team as little as possible and minimize beneﬁts because we’d proﬁt 
more this year, and that's all investors would be allowed to consider. 
0 Today, Luke’s Lobster analyzes our energy efﬁciency and emissions we create, and ﬁnds 
innovative new tools and technologies to run more efﬁciently and reduce emissions 
throughout for ourselves and our suppliers, because we know that climate change is 
warming the Gulf of Maine rapidly, and if we don’t all reduce emissions there will be no 
more lobster for us to buy here in Maine. Not to mention our energy efﬁciency will save
us money in the long term. LD 1562 would incentivize us to avoid any up front 
expenditures to create long term sustainability of the natural resources we rely on, 
because using the cheapest energy and reducing cash spend would mean we'd pocket 
more proﬁt this year, and that's all investors would be allowed to consider. 
0 Today, Luke’s Lobster is paying more for disposable goods than it paid a few years ago, 
because we discovered the cheaper disposable goods contained PFAS which is 
poisoning Maine farms as it sits in landfills and leaches chemicals into our water, which 
is costing taxpayers untold sums to mitigate. LD 1562 would incentivize us to continue to 
use the cheapest disposable goods and allow them to pile up in landfills because that 
would mean more proﬁt this year, and that's all investors would be allowed to consider. 
0 Today, Luke's Lobster donates money and helps fundraise for the Maine Lobstermen's 
Association and Maine Coast Fishermen ’s Association to make sure our ﬁshing 
communities are strong and resilient. LD 1562 would incentivize us to keep that money 
and fundraising effort for ourselves because that would mean more profit this year, and 
that's all investors would be allowed to consider. 
All of the above decisions make us more proﬁtable in the long term, because they createa 
stable business environment in which we can rely on our suppliers and our team to be with us 
for the long haul; because they make our customers want to support us; because they presen/e 
a natural resource that needs to be healthy for us to continue to source the food we sen/e. 
Without this type of decision making over the last 13 years, my business would have failed. 
But if along the way investors were pushing us to operate solely to maximize that year’s proﬁt, 
with no consideration for environmental, social or governance risks, we may very well have had 
to take that path and follow it to ruin. Considering environmental, social, and governance factors 
in your business is synonymous with smart long term ﬁnancial strategy. Folks who ignore these 
considerations do so at their own peril, and the peril of their investors. 
The free market has acknowledged this fact, and investors have embraced this type of analysis 
to bolster returns for their clients. And now that big multinational corporations that harm our 
community and environment are losing dollars to businesses that want to help the communities 
and environments where they live and work, they're asking our government to manipulate the 
free market and tilt the scales in their favor. 
lt makes no sense to be stridently against regulating business when those proposed regulations 
ban something that harms our society or economy, like predatory lending or poisoning drinking 
water, and then line up in favor of regulating business when the regulations ban investing in 
things that strengthen our society and economy, like fair pay to employees and suppliers, or 
reducing the strain on Maine's electrical grid. 
LD 1562 is that rare bill that offends both consen/ative and liberal values equally. It's 
undermining the free market, hurting taxpayers, and doing so to advantage harmful businesses 
over helpful ones. 
We cannot fall for this cynical lobbyist ploy. If you vote for LD 1562 you will be voting to prop up 
businesses that harm our state rather than help it, even if the long term ﬁnancial returns for 
investors are worse. Please vote this bill down and protect Maine's community business values, 
and the health of our communities, natural resources, and retirement accounts.
