TESTIMONY OF JEFF MCCABE 
 MAINE SERVICE EMPLOYEES ASSOCIATION, SEIU LOCAL 1989 , 
 BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON LABOR AND HOUSING  
 
APRIL 20, 202 3  
 
IN OPPOSITION TO LD 15 62, AN ACT TO PROTECT THE RETIREMENT OF STATE EMPLOYEES AND 
TEACHERS BY ESTABLISHING STANDARDS FOR FIDUCIARY RESPONSIBILITY  
 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder , and members of the Committee on Labor and Housing, my 
name is Jeff McCabe, Director of Politics and Legislation for the Maine Service Employees Association, Servic e Employees International Union Local 1989 (MSEA -SEIU Local 1989). We are a labor union 
representing over  13,000 workers and retirees, mainly in the public sector, statewide. We respectfully 
ask you to oppose LD  1562. 
 
I have watched this committee in recent months and over the last few sessions recognize the great responsibility  around  the Maine Public Employees Retirement System ( Maine PERS ) and its fiduciary 
responsibility . That fiduciary responsibility  is something you have heard about and talked about w ith 
Maine PERS Trustees  during the appointment process.   
 At first,  we seemed unsure what had generated LD  1562 but in talking with partners and pension 
research folks at our international union, SEIU , it appears LD 15 62 is a cookie -cutter bill that has been 
introduced in other states  and is projected to increase costs . We are here today to enter these points 
into the record in opposition : 
 
• This bill will reduce investment choices, resulting in raised costs. Will the L egislature increase 
funding to our state pensions to make up for these costs? Increased funding to the pension system may be needed ; this bill will hurt e very public employee in Maine by reducing their 
retirement savings.  
 
• This bill is supposed to protect the retirement of state employees and teachers, but  by limiting 
their investment choices, it will harm their investment s. A similar bill in North Dakota t his year 
was projected to cost their retirement system over $10 million biennially.  
 
• Fiduciaries already work for the  pecuniary interest of plan participants. This b ill would only 
create confusion by placing unnecessary, subjective and ambiguous restrictio ns on 
plan  fiduciaries. Who will determine whether or not an investment decision was actually ESG 
(environmental, social or governance)  or whether the investor was carrying out their fiduciary 
responsibility by making decisions that maximize returns?  
 
• Politics has no place in our pensions. We can disagree about the role of fossil fuels or other 
companies in our society, but LD 15 62 needlessly puts the pensions of working people in the 
middle of this political debate, and that is dangerous and risk y.  
 Thank you and I would be glad to answer any questions.  
