Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
Testimony 
In Opposition 
LD 1562: An Act to Protect the Retirement of State Employees and Teachers by Establishing 
Standards for Fiduciary Responsibility 
John Kosinski, Government Relations Director, Maine Education Association 
Before the Labor and Housing Committee 
April 20, 2023 
Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder and esteemed members of the Labor and Housing Committee, 
My name is John Kosinski (he/him) and I am proud to serve as the Director of Government Relations for 
the Maine Education Association (MEA). The MEA represents 24,000 educators in the state of Maine, 
including teachers and other professionals in nearly every public school in the state and faculty and other 
professional staff in the University of Maine and Community College Systems. 
I am here to testify on behalf of the MEA in opposition to LD 1562, An Act to Protect the Retirement of 
State Employees and Teachers by Establishing Standards for Fiduciary Responsibility. 
We appreciate the desire to make sure we are maximizing the investments in the MainePERS system. 
As you have already heard, public employee pension beneﬁts have fallen behind due to previous pension 
cuts, inﬂation and other factors, and efforts to improve beneﬁts are costly due to Maine’s unique 
constitutional constraints. We rely on MainePERS investments to pay beneﬁts and to minimize 
ﬂuctuations in the payment obligations for the state and school districts for current employees. 
But LD 1562 appears to be a template bill designed to interfere with current MainePERS polices. This 
bill is similar to ALEC’s “State Government Employee Retirement Protection Act.” If you are not 
aware, ALEC is the American Legislative Exchange Council and is known as a national organization 
with a conservative outlook and provides template legislation for state legislators and pushes these bills 
in several states. 
We are concemed this proposal may run contrary to the protections on MainePERS funding in the Maine 
State Constitution: 
Section 18. Limitation on use of funds of Maine State Retirement. System. All ofthe assets, 
and proceeds or income t.herefrom, of the Maine State Retirement System or any successor 
system and all contributions and payments made to the system to provide for retirement and 
related beneﬁts shall be held, invested or disbursed as in trust for the exclusive purpose of 
providing for such beneﬁts and shall not be encumbered for, or diverted to, other 
purposes. Funds appropriatcli by the Legisla.t.ure for the Maine State Retirement System are 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 06330 I I369 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer 
’ ' 
Rebecca Cole NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director 
assets ofthe system and may not he diverted or deappropriated by any subsequent action. 
(emphasis added) 
LD 1562 proposes to limit the ability of MainePERS to consider certain factors when evaluating 
investments and one can argue this is attempting to encumber and divert their investment decisions. 
Climate risks, labor strife and political turmoil all can have an impact on investment performance, but 
LD 1562 attempts to limit the ability for MainePERS to consider these factors when investing. This bill 
takes aim at so-called “ESG polices” — a new buzzword. 
We have a concern about restricting the investment protocols currently being used by MainePERS. If it 
ain’t broke, don’t ﬁx it. MainePERS has consistently demonstrated ﬁnancial acumen in their 
investments and we defer to their expertise on investment issues. Given their commitment to 
maximizing risk-adjusted investment returns, we caution against any effort to tie their hands as they try 
to keep rates stable and keep the plan healthy and sound. 
Furthennore, David Webber at Boston University School of Law has a paper on how the ALEC template 
legislation creates a legal quagmire for trustees by, among other things, creating an unworkable 
distinction between ‘pecuniary ’ and ’non-pecuniary ’ factors: 
https://corggox .law.harvard.edu/2023/02/27/the-liability-trap-why-the-alec-anti-esg-bills-create-a-legal- 
guagmire-for- ﬁduciaries-connected-with-public-pensions/ 
For these reasons, we oppose LD 1562. Thank you for your time and your service to the people of 
Maine. I will do my best to answer any questions you may have. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 I I369 Broadway, Bangor, ME 0liZi0l 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 04736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME OM06 
207-622-5866 I 207-888-2070 fax I www.maineea.org
