' CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
a ' n e Dr. R»'Ji’)O1iC93illl W‘;/ke Brian H. Noyes. Cm./r 
Richard ‘;' 
elrletivier, ‘/we Chem‘ 
pw; .,_; F W--I (WV.-i <3 F y,;;.; H, N I» 
got; V‘ M I-Ienry Beck. Stare Treasurer. Ex Off:-6:0 
John Beiiveau 
Shitrin L. Blaisdeii 
Mark A. Brimton 
.Jo%m H. Kirxinali 
Kesinoth i_.‘J\)iiii;1ms 
DATE: April 20, 2023 
TO: Senator Michael Tipping, Chair 
Representative Amy Roeder, Chair 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
FROM: Michael]. Colleran, Chief Operating Officer and General Counsel 
SUBIECT: Testimony on L.D. 1562 - An Act to Protect the Retirement of State Employees 
and Teachers by Establishing Standards for Fiduciary Responsibility 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Ioint Standing 
Committee on Labor and Housing. My name is Michael Colleran, and I am the Chief 
Operating Officer and General Counsel for the Maine Public Employees Retirement System. 
MainePERS is testifying in opposition to L.D. 1562 because the bill is unnecessary to the extent 
that it aligns with the Maine Constitution and would be unenforceable to the extent it is 
inconsistent with the Constitution. 
The Maine Constitution and federal and state laws and regulations already clearly outline the 
fiduciary responsibilities of the MainePERS Board of Trustees. 
The Maine Constitution protects the retirement benefit of MainePERS members by 
establishing a fiduciary duty to hold, invest, and disburse pension trust funds solely in the best 
financial interest of members as pension recipients. Article IX, Section 18, of the Constitution 
states: 
All of the assets, and proceeds or income therefrom, of the Maine State Retirement 
System or any successor system and all contributions and payments made to the 
system to provide for retirement and related benefits shall be held, invested or 
disbursed as in trust for the exclusive purpose of providing for such benefits and 
shall not be encumbered for, or diverted to, other purposes. 
This "exclusive benefit rule” is also reflected in the Maine Uniform Trust Code, which applies 
to the MainePERS Board of Trustees and states, "A trustee shall administer the trust solely in 
the interests of the beneficiaries. ” 18-B M.R.S. § 802(1); see also 5 M.R.S. §17153(3). The 
exclusive benefit rule is further reﬂected in the federal statutes and regulations that qualify 
MainePERS retirement plans for federal tax deferment. Under federal law, qualified 
retirement fund assets must not be" used for, or diverted to purposes other than the exclusive 
benefit of [the] employees or their beneficiaries. ” 26 ll.S.C. §401(a)(2). The “phrase ‘purposes 
www.mainepers.org LOCATION LOCAL FAX 
139' 
.7' —1;..»Ff"-1 -'\¢<y.1st;§ F‘ -/1?: ‘T/’» Z517-5l.Z-f:$ ‘.‘.1() f,Z‘§‘:'/' vr:$":Q -I3‘J 
MAILING ADDRESS TOLL-FREE MAINE RELAY~ 
. . - 
\ . .~ ' 
_-: .';:/ ._-Y";-‘i ~1-
LD 1562 Testimony 
22 
\\ Ma,i,"<?,P,E R3 
other than for the exclusive benefit of [the] employees or their beneficiaries ’ includes all objects 
or aims not solely designed for the proper satisfaction of all liabilities to employees or their 
beneficiaries covered by the trust." 26 C.F.R. § 1.401-2(a)(3). Additionally, the 
MainePERS Board of Trustees must comply with the Maine Uniform Prudent Investor Act, 
which requires the Board to ”invest and manage trust assets, as a prudent investor would, by 
considering the purposes, terms, distribution requirements and other circumstances of the 
trust.” 18-B M.R.S. §902(1). 
These existing legal requirements provide clear and sufficient guidance to the MainePERS 
Board, and further requirements are unnecessary. 
Following the existing requirements, the Board has adopted policies that require Trustees to 
act solely in the interest of members as beneficiaries of pension and related benefits, including 
a policy that requires MainePERS to vote its proxies solely for that purpose. MainePERS 
publishes all of its proxy votes on its web site, something L.D. 1562 would unnecessarily 
require. 
L.D. 1562 has language that appears to conflict with the Board' s fiduciary duty under the 
Maine Constitution. For example, the bill would define environmental, social, and 
governance factors as "nonpecuniary" and restrict or prohibit consideration of these factors in 
investment decisions. However, these factors can affect the long-term value of investments, 
and to the extent they do, the constitutional fiduciary duty requires that they be considered. 
The bill also appears to restrict or prohibit consideration of risks that are general, systemic or 
highly uncertain. However, the Constitution and the Maine Uniform Prudent Investor Act 
require the Board to consider all relevant risks. 
L.D. 1562 is unnecessary and potentially conﬂicts with the Maine Constitution. 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony. I would be happy to answer your 
questions and will be available for the work session.
