 
Comcast Testimony on LD 1379  
 
An Act to Combat Unwanted Telephone Solicitations  
 
Chair  Lawrence,  Chai r Ziegler,  and members  of the Energy,  Utilities  and Technology  Committee,  thank  
you for the opportunity  to offer  the following  testimony  opposed  to LD 1379 .  My name  is Chris  Hodgdon  
I am Comcast’s  Vice  President  of Government  Affairs  here in Maine .  Comcas t serves  16 Maine  
communities , in the Mid Coast  region  from  Freeport  to Woolwich  and along  the New  Hampshire  border  
from  Kittery  to Sanford.    We currently  offer  our broadband,  video,  voice  and mobile  services  to more  
than 69,000 Maine  homes,  businesses  and institutions .   
 
Unwelcome  or unwanted  commercial  solicitations  whether  they be via a consumer’s  cell phone,  home  
phone  or mail can be disruptive  and distracting.    Comcast  recognizes  this and has developed  multiple  
tools  to allow  customers  to rid themselves  of these  unwanted  communications.   Going  beyond  that 
required  by federal  law, Comcast  has created  a one stop shop  which  allows  customers  to register  for the 
National  Do Not Call Registry  as well as opting  out of sales  calls,  promotional  mailings,  and door to 
door solicitations  from  Comcast.    Our customers  preferences  as it relates  to solicitations  and sales  
communications  are important  to us and we strive  to offer  the best possible  service.     We appreciate  and 
respect  the sponsor’s desire  to make inclusion  on the National  Do Not Call Registry  easy and simple  for 
wireless  customers.    Unfortunately,  in addition  to privacy  concerns , there  are technica l, operational  and 
policy  inconsistencies  with the current  registry  which  make  the approach  described  in LD 1379  
impractica l. 
 
Maine  currently  does not have  its own state level  do not call registry,  like most states  it directs  citizens  
to enroll  in the federal  registry  operated  by the Federal  Trade  Commission.    The registration  process  
requires  multiple  steps  including  submission  of an e-mail address  to authenticate  requests .   E-mails  are 
first required  when  confirming  that a telephone  number  is not already  registered  and second,  for 
purposes  of registration  of a new number.    The e-mail address  is required  because  in both cases  
consumers  must  click  on a link sent to their email  which  is active  for a limited  period  of time to 
complete  the required  step.   The registry  used by Maine  currently  is not designed  to support  or 
accommodate  registration  by a third  party  like Comcast  or employees  within  the Attorney  General’s  
Office.  
 
LD 1379  also raises  consumer  privacy  as well as data retention  and security  concern s.  To comply  with 
the provisions  of the Bill Comcast  must  collect  and retain  forms  which  will necessarily  include  customer  
data, including  Personally  Identifiable  Information , heightening  privacy  risk for consumers  and 
Comcast.    Further,  Comcast  will be required  to share  substantial  amounts  of information  with the 
Attorney  General’s  office  for purposes  of inclusion  in the registry  raising  further  data security  and 
privacy  concerns.    Lastly,  Comcast  will be required  to maintain  copies  of customers  Opt-Out forms 

which  will necessarily  include  Personally  Identifiable  Information  forever as proof  of compliance  with 
the substantial  financial  penalties  for violation  found  in the Bill. 
 
Lastly,  LD 1379  is not only incongruent  with the National  Do Not Call Registery  which  Maine  utilizes , 
but it envisions  processes  which  are out of step with way consumers  shop  for and purchase  wireless  
communications.   Today  most  consumers  shop  online , comparing  features,  pricing  and styles  online  
without  every  going  into a physical  retail  location .   For customers  who do wish  to go into one of our 
retail  locations  the retail  experience  has completely  changed.   Many  customers  schedule  an appointment  
in advance  to pick up and activate  their phone  having  compared  handsets  and phones  in advance  online .   
Today’s  retail  environment  is not conducive  to educating  customers  about  the Do Not Call Registry  or 
completing  and collecting  opt out forms . 
 
Comcast  has been  an industry  leader  in developing  technologies  to reduce  unwanted  calls.   From our 
pioneering  use of the STIR/SHAKEN  protocol  which  has dramatically  reduced  the prevalence  of 
robocalling  to our introduction  of “verified”  technology  which  confirms  that the calling  telephone  
number  is from  a legitimate  and verified  source  by display ing a “V” next to the telephone  number  in the 
caller ID.  Comcast  has blocked  billions  of unwanted  calls on behalf  of our customers.    Still, we 
respectfully  oppose  LD 1379  as the benefits  of this proposal  do not outweigh  its downsides.  
 
Thank  you for your consideration  of our comments  regarding  LD 1379 .  I would  be happy  to answer  any 
questions  that you may have.  
 
 
 
 
