 
 
Senator Mark Lawrence  
Chair, Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology  
3 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333- 0003 
 Representative S. Paige Zeigler  
Chair, Committee on Energy, Utilities and 
Technology  
2 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333- 0002 
RE: ME LD 1379 – Do Not Call List  - OPPOSE  
 
Dear Chair Lawrence, Chair Ziegler, and Members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities, 
and Technology,  
 
On behalf of the  Association of National Advertisers (ANA) , I write to express our opposition  
to LD 1379  which would create a Maine “do not call” registry. If passed , the bill wo uld 
damage Maine’s small business community, harm Maine’s consumers, and conflict with 
already existing approaches to protecting consumers.   
 
ANA is the nation’s oldest and largest advertising trade association. Our members 
represent every aspect of the adver tising industry, including  more than 20,000 brands that 
collectively invest  over $400 billion in marketing and advertising every year. ANA supports 
the ability for consumers to opt -out of receiving unwanted marketing messages , as 
evidenced by the ANA Center for Ethical Marketing’s DMAchoice1 program  which  allows 
consumers both to manage the amount of marketing messages they receive though several 
different channels and also to op  -out of unwanted communications.  ANA currently works 
with two states, Wyoming  and Pennsylvania, to offer specific state consumer opt -out lists 
to guarantee consumer choice  and self -regulation.  
 
Advertising , including telemarketing, is a significant driver of economic growth and job 
creation . Advertising  supports nearly 20 percent of the U.S. GDP in 2020 , according to a 
recent IHS Markit study2. In Maine  alone, advertising is responsible for nearly $ 21.9 
billion  in economic activity and 123,000 jobs, according to the same study.   
 
This proposed approach would negatively imp act Maine’s small businesses.  Many small 
businesses lack sufficient funding for substantial marketing efforts , and telemarketing 
provides an affordable opportunity to reach new customers. Telemarketing also provides 
small businesses with  the ability to  provide useful information about products and services 
to individuals that have already expressed interest in a product. Additionally, t elemarketing 
can provide businesses with  the ability to gain  valuable insight into  how customers utilize 
their products or services, allowing for companies to improve.  Furthermore, the bill would 
disadvantage small, local businesses  due to national companies’  greater financial 
 
1 https://www.dmachoice.org/  
2 The Economic Impact of Advertising on the US Economy, 2018 -2026, IHS Markit, November 2021  
(https://www.ana.net/content/show/id/a dtax)  
resources and ability to reach consumer s through various other channels.  
 
LD 1379’s opt -in standard  will harm Maine consumers . The bill ’s requirement that wireless 
telephone providers advise customers that their telephone number will be submitted 
automatically to a “do -not-call” registry will effectively create an opt -in standard for 
telemarketing in the state of Maine. This will burden many Maine  consumers who may be 
unaware they have been added to the registry and rely on telephone calls for significant  
updates regarding such important matters as health care offerings. Consumers also benefit 
from receiving additional information about product s or services . In addition, the bill would 
require some consumer s to complete an additional form as they are trying to purchase 
wireless service , many of whom may no t want their telephone number included on a state-
managed list due to privacy concerns.   
 
There are other alternatives  to achieving LD 1379’s intent. Telemarketing is already highly 
regulated by the Federal Trade Commission through the n ational Do Not Call list3 and the 
Federal Communications Commission ’s efforts to combat robocalls4. These efforts ensure 
nationwide adherence to responsible telemarketing practices . Adding a new Maine -specific 
set of requirements raises many questions about Maine ’s process would interact with the 
Federal process. Moreover, there are other possibilities for ensuring that a st ate is 
protecting its residents from unwanted communications. For example, as mentioned,  ANA 
has partnered with A ttorneys G eneral offices to provide a state do- not-call list, and we work 
with many  consumers to address their  concerns about illegitimate call s. 
 
For these important reasons we respectfully urge you to reconsider LD 1379 and develop  
a different approach to protecting Mainers from unwanted telemarketing messages .  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Christopher Oswald  
EVP and Head of Law, Ethics, and Government Relations  
Association of National Advertisers  
 
3 https://www.donotcall.gov/  
4 https://www.fcc.gov/spoofed- robocalls  

