MAINE TOURISM 
ASSOCIATION 
Alison Sucy, Chief Operating Ofﬁce & Director of Government Affairs 
On Behalf of the Maine Tourism Association 
In OPPOSITION to 
LD 621, An Act to Ensure That Businesses D0 Not Refuse Payment in Person with Cash 
March 7, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business: 
My name is Alison Sucy, and I am the Chief Operating Officer and Director of Government Affairs for 
the Maine Tourism Association. I am testifying in opposition to LD 621. The Maine Tourism 
Association is the state’s largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, 
MTA members includes lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, 
tour operators, amusements, and cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf of the 
state seven State Visitor Information Centers from Kittery to Calais, and produces the state’s official 
travel planner, Maine Invites You. 
Many businesses certainly accept cash as Well as credit. However, there are types of tourism business 
that choose to not accept cash and would ﬁnd it difficult to do so~—businesses such as food carts or 
trucks, retail kiosks, fairs, festivals, boat and other sporting equipment rentals, and guide and tour 
services. These businesses are often sen/ing customers from locations that are not ﬁxed or permanent 
but temporary or mobile, or with no ofﬁce building. They would ﬁnd it impractical, and potentially 
unsafe, for their employees to carry large sums of cash. This would be an unnecessary burden anda 
safety concern. 
The sp0nsor’s amendment may remove from the list above retail kiosks and fairs and festivals (“as 
temporary businesses that are not located in a structure that cannot be secured”) but other businesses 
where the cash requirement is impractical or unsafe are not excluded. 
There also is an exclusion for those businesses requiring a security deposit but I’m unclear if that 
language means that a business that requires a security deposit for some of its transactions would 
excluded entirely from the cash acceptance requirement or if it only applies to the security deposit 
itself. 
The Maine Tourism Association is the state's largest advocate for all tourism-related businesses. Incorporated in 1922, 
MTA members include lodging, restaurants, camps, campgrounds, retail, outdoor recreation, guides, tour operators, 
transportation, amusements, and cultural and historical attractions. MTA also operates on behalf ofthe state seven State 
Visitor information Centers from Kittery to Calais, and annually produces the state's official travel planner, 
Maine invites You (since 1933).
