i A HoUsE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
~\¢,' ,- (207) .287-1440 
TTY: (207) 287-4469 
Chad R. Perkins 
POB 251 
Dover-Foxcroft, MB 04426 
Residence: (207) 279-0927 
Fax: (207) 305-4907 
Chad Perkins@legislature.maine. gov 
6 Mar 23 
MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD 
SUBJECT: LD 621, An Act to Ensure That Businesses Do Not Refuse Payment in Person with Cash 
Committee Chair Senator Curry, Committee Chair Representative Roberts and distinguished members 
of the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, 
Thank you for allowing me to bring forth my bill, An Act to Ensure That Businesses Do Not Refuse 
Payment in Person with Cash. 
In, “A Conﬂict of Visions” , Thomas Sowell famously Wrote, “There are no solutions. There are only 
trade-offs. ” I do not think there can be a clearer example of this than my bill. While I believe in the 
founding principle of the free market and the basic concept of limited government intervention, there 
are times when some, limited government intervention must be enacted to ensure access to the free 
market by all Americans. When enacting such legislation, one must not stand on a soap box of a certain 
platitude, clinging to an ideal like a life vest, but rather We must compare and weigh that ideal against 
the founding principle from which it was derived. In this case, that principle is the free market. 
According to Pew Research, 7.1 million households in the United States currently do not have bank 
accounts. When polled, people Without bank accounts state that the main reason for their state of affairs 
is their inability to maintain a minimum balance. This number of ‘bankless ’ households is highest 
among low-income, Black, Hispanic and Native American households, as well as households headed 
by a person with disabilities. In the State of Maine, currently, there are 2.3% of households that cannot 
afford a bank account — approximately 13,134 households. And While the average number of 
households without access to a bank account measured in at 5.4% in 2018, it is traditionally higher. 
during times of national fnancial distress, such as during a recession. After the 2011 ‘Great Recession ’ 
ﬁnancial crisis, the number of households across the country that had no access to banking rose to 8.2% 
(in Maine that would have been around 47,969 homes). 
House District 31 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Miio, Orneville Township, & 
Southeast Piscataquis'
LD 621 
Page2 
Recognizing this fact, many states and jurisdictions have passed legislation or local 
laws to require that businesses accept cash as a form of payment to ensure that Americans 
who cannot afford to maintain a bank account can access the free market and ensure that 
they have access to the basic necessities. New Jersey, Rhode Island and Connecticut and 
the cities of New York, Philadelphia and San Francisco have adopted such laws in recent 
years. The Commonwealth of Massachusetts has had such a law since 1978. Idaho, 
Mississippi and North Dakota, Tennessee and Washington DC are currently seeking such 
laws. 
Even many retailers have changed policies to ensure that ‘bankless ’ consumers have 
access to their goods. AmazonGo stores and Sweetgreen bistros had both switched to 
cashless brick and mortar enterprises but have recently returned to accepting cash aftera 
large outcry from the public. In some parts of our nation, Subway and Domino’s Pizza 
have been cashless for years but have switched back to accepting cash due to a change in 
corporate policy.i 
There are other beneﬁts beside discriminating against lower income consumers to 
ensuring that businesses take cash as a payment option. Using cash lowers identity theft, 
saves the merchant processing fees, is available even when technology fails (electrical, 
communications, equipment failure) and ensures consumer privacy. 
However, there is one advantage that I have not yet discussed — consumer protection 
from discrimination based on ESG Standards. Currently, 68% of banks are collecting 
information about and reporting on consumer ESG metrics. At least one of the largest is 
even denying businesses the ability to conduct business in accordance with free market 
principles based on the company’s ESG score. Currently, eighteen states (Arizona, 
Florida, Idaho, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mirmesota, Missouri, North Dakota, Ohio 
Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, West Virginia and 
Wyoming) have already passed legislation to ban or limit the ability of fmancial 
institutions to implement ESG standards on their customers, including product bans. 
As I previously alluded, the balance of the rights and welfare of the citizens is a fme 
balancing act, as would be any policy decision we made weighed against the rights and 
best interests of the businesses that would be affected this legislation. 
After I submitted this bill, I have heard from several groups and individuals that have 
raised concerns about speciﬁc business activities that might receive a disproportionate 
number of disparate effects from this legislation. As such, I am submitting amended 
language to exempt a certain few types of business activities to include businesses with 
machines that convert cash to tokens or cards that can be used for goods or services, 
businesses that require a security deposit, businesses that require recurring payments for 
contractual obligations, businesses that are located in a kiosk, temporary businesses that 
are not located in a structure that cannot be secured, vending machines and businesses 
that offer curbside point of sale as long as the business offers another point of sale Within 
the business that the consumer can use for cash payments. 
House District 31 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Ornevilie 
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis
LD 621 
Page3 
I thank the IDEA committee in advance for your thoughtful deliberation in this matter 
as you consider LD 621 and trust you Will see the positive beneﬁt to Maine consumers. I 
encourage the committee to consider supporting our ‘bankless ’ Mainers with a vote of 
‘Ought To Pass’ with my attached amendment. I thank you for your time and will gladly 
answer any questions to my ability. 
Respectfully, 
%/444% Rep. Chad R. Perkins 
District 31 
ATT: 
LD 621 Amendment 
CF: 
Committee Chair Senator Curry 
Committee Chair Representative Roberts 
IDEA Committee Members 
House District 31 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcrofl, Lake View Plantation, Medford, ltlilo, Ornevilie 
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis
LD 621 
Page4 
LD 621 Amendment 
§1500-Q. Payment by cash 
1. A person offering goods or services for sale at retail may not refuse payment 
in the form of cash for the goods or services or require payment by only an 
electronic method; unless 
A. The form of cash is in foreign currency; or 
B. That person believes the cash to be counterfeit. 
C. For purposes of this section, "sale at retail" means any retail transaction 
conducted in person and does not include a transaction conducted remotely by 
telephone ‘ ,-mail or the Internet. This paragraph does not apply to: 
(1) Businesses with machines that convert cash to tokens or cards that can be 
used for goods or services; or 
(2) Businesses that require a security deposit; or 
(3) Businesses that require recurring payments for contractual obligations; or 
(4) Businesses that are located in a kiosk; or 
(5) Temporary businesses that are not located in a structure that cannot be 
secured; or 
(6) Vending machines; or 
(7) Businesses that offer curbside point of sale so long as the business offers 
another point of sale within the business that offers an option to pay in cash. 
House District 31 
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Meaford, Milo, Orneville 
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis
