re W __\ MaineGrocers& 
Food Producers 
ERDEERS A A - 
gag?“ P;SgZ'::g';4 Tuesday, March 7, 2023 
Augusta, ME 04332 
PR"""EE“5 207.522.4461 
ASSDCIATIUN infO@mgfpa_0rg 
IN OPPOSiTlON - LD 621 ‘An Act to Ensure That Businesses Do Not Refuse Payment in Person with Cash’ 
Dear Senator Curry - Chair, Representative Roberts - Chair, and Members of the Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business, 
My name is Christine Cummings and I‘ 
am the Executive Director ofthe Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association 
(MGFPA). The Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association is a business trade association representing Maine's food 
community; Main Street businesses, including independently owned and operated grocery stores and supermarkets, 
food and beverage producers and processors, manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors, and supportive service 
companies. 
We are opposed to mandating that every business must accept cash—payments. In the same essence, we would be 
opposed to a mandate that would require a business to accept credit and debit cards. The payment method(s) should be 
determined by the businessles). The business is best suited to decide the feasibility, risks, costs, and other factors which 
determine how they prefer their customers pay for the goods sold. 
Retailers may prefer to not accept cash for a variety of reasons including the ease of managing electronic payments, lack 
of proper protected storage, chance of accepting counterfeit bills, and less opportunity for theft. it should remain the 
retailer's discretion to determine how accepting or refusing a payment type effects their business model and customer 
experience. 
Many mobile payment services, like Square or Swipe, are designed to be cashless. This is a common payment method 
for small businesses and independent contractors. One may be most familiar with this payment method at their local 
farmers’ market, hair dresser or local cafe. 
We question what the demonstrated need for this legislation is? Will all payment types be mandated? Cash, checks, 
credit, debit, contactless, etc? 
MGFPA believes businesses who choose to not accept cash should have clear signage to ensure there is no confusion 
before the transaction. In addition to posting that they do not accept cash, it should be clear what other types of 
payments are accepted. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony. 
Qlvilawut (luvmllwg 
Christine Cummings 
Executive Director 
Maine Grocers & Food Producers Association I PO Box 5234, Augusta, ME 04332 l 207.622.4461 I info@mgfpa.org
