45 Melville Street, Suite1 
Q Esgclﬁg h Augusta, ME 04330 
if 
M N E Phone: 207.622.1149 
Voice of Maine Retail www.retailmaine.0rg
7 
March 7, 2023 
Senator Glenn "Chip" Curry, Chair 
Representative Tiffany Roberts, Chair 
Members of the Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Commerce Committee 
RE: Testimony in OPPOSITION to LD 621, An Act to Ensure That Businesses Do Not Refuse 
Payment in Person with Cash 
Dear Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the IDEA Committee: 
My name is Curtis Picard and I am the President and CEO of the Retail Association of Maine.I 
am a resident of Topsham. We have more than 350 members statewide and represent retailers 
of all sizes. Maine's retailers employ more than 85,000 Mainers. I am here today to testify in 
opposition to LD 621. This committee had a very similar bill, LD 1217, in 2021 and ultimately 
voted the bill Ought Not to Pass. 
In my experience, I've seen retail businesses that are cash-only and businesses that are 
credit/debit card only. Most businesses freely accept both cash and credit, but some choose 
not to and it should be their decision. Ultimately, it is up to the consumer whether or not they 
want to patronize those businesses, and the business will succeed or fail accordingly. 
When this bill first surfaced in 2021, we did ask our members their thoughts on it, and we 
recently asked the same question again. While most accept both cash and credit, a number 
highlighted some important considerations for you to consider. Those retail locations that had 
free-standing kiosks, like in a mall courtyard, felt strongly about their decision to not accept 
cash. These kiosks generally have only one staffer, and the threat of theft of the available cash 
is a major concern. There is a similar concern from retailers that operate at outdoor venues like 
food trucks, fairs or concerts. 
However, the other comments we received were straightforward. They said the government 
should not be making this decision for businesses. They also warned that if the legislature 
decides to require acceptance of cash payment, what's to stop the credit card companies from
