March 7, 2023
To: Sen. Chip Curry and Rep. Tiffany Roberts, co-chairs
Members, Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement & Business
From: David R. Clough – Maine State Director
Re: LD 261, An Act to Ensure That Businesses Do Not Refuse Payment in Person with Cash
This statement is made on behalf NFIB members in Maine that may be affected directly or indirectly by 
this legislation.  NFIB (National Federation of Independent Business) has thousands of small business 
owners throughout Maine who are members.  They collectively provide jobs and paychecks to about 
30,000 people and help form the economic backbone of their communities and the state.  
We would like to add NFIB to the groups that express concern about LD 621.  The legislation would 
require “a person offering goods or services for sale at retail in person to accept cash” and would 
prohibit the person from “accepting payment by only an electronic method” (except for remote 
transactions conducted by telephone, mail or the internet).
“Retail sale” and “sale at retail” are well-defined terms in Maine sales tax law (Title 36, Section 
1752) and include situations where cash payments may be a customary business practice, based 
on the nature of the transaction or the location or size of the business.  
Owners of very small businesses in particular could be affected by LD 261 because businesses 
with fewer than 10 employees, for example, comprise 67% of all retail businesses in Maine 
(according to the U.S. Census publication, “County Business Patterns” for 2020).
Small business owners with retail sales are making a decision of what they think works best 
when decided to accept or not accept in-person cash payment.  That decision may include 
competitive considerations and the added costs to the business of credit/debit and other non-
cash payment arrangements.
Thank you for being mindful of how LD 261 might adversely impact small retail businesses in Maine, and 
how enactment of LD 261 could open the door to unforeseen and unintended negative consequences.
