4r 
1 A
U HOS i“li‘%i_lTY 
.. MAINE 
Testimony of Nate Cloutier 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business 
March 7, 2023 
In Opposition to LD 621, ‘§4n Act to Ensure That Businesses Da Nat Refuse Payment in 
Person with Cash” 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and distinguished members of the Committee on the Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business: My name is Nate Cloutier, and I am here today on 
behalf of HospitalityMaine representing more than 1,200 restaurant and lodging operators of all sizes across 
the state. 
LD 621 would require anyone offering good or services for sale at retail in person to accept cash and 
prohibits accepting payment by only an electronic method. The bill's intent to be more inclusive of all 
persons’ ability to patronize a business is laudable, however it comes at the cost of some unintended 
consequences- —one being the ﬁnancial security of innkeepers. Lodging establishments have the long- 
standing precedent of requiring an electronic form of payment namely for two reasons; it allows the 
innkeeper to charge a guest who refuses to leave, and it is also a safeguard for incidentals and damages 
that may go otherwise unpaid. As a destination state, it is not uncommon to see visitors show up at our 
businesses in-person and make a same day booking. This bill would leave too large of a ﬁnancial risk on 
the innkeeper (especially smaller operators) once it's known that cash must be accepted and leaves ample 
room for exploitation. It’s expected that when you book a hotel room, it's going to be with some form of 
electronic payment, and we see no reason to change that. 
It is our understanding that Representative Perkins is asking for his bill to be amended to exempt lodging 
places from this requirement, which we appreciate. We would urge the Committee, however, to consider 
if it is the role of the Legislature to tell a business what form of payment it must (and potentially must not?) 
accept. We believe this decision should ultimately be left with the business owner. We are also not hearing 
that customers who must pay with an electronic method are upset that they cannot pay with cash, so we 
question the necessity of the bill. 
Thank you for your attention. Iwould be happy to answer any questions.
