Testimony of Newell A. Augur, On behalf of Enterprise Rent-A-Car 
Presented to the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement and Business 
In Opposition to LD 621, An Act to Ensure That Businesses Do Not Refuse Payment in Person 
with Cash 
Sponsored by Representative Chad Perkins 
March 7, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business, my name is 
Newell Augur. I am a resident of Yarmouth and a partner at Pierce Atwood, LLP. I appreciate 
the opportunity to submit this testimony on behalf of Enterprise Rent-A-Car, in opposition to LD 
621, An Act to Ensure That Businesses Do Not Refuse Payment in Person with Cash. 
Enterprise Rent-A-Car offices in New Hampshire and Maine no longer accept cash as payment 
and haven't for nearly the past decade. Most of our offices across the country have done the 
same. And with good reason. A typical car rental transaction is always well into the hundreds, 
if not thousands, of dollars. On top of that, in certain circumstances we need to ask our 
customers to supply a security deposit as a form of insurance for one of our assets, all of which 
run into the tens of thousands of dollars. 
We have thirty-four offices and one hundred eighty employees in Maine. Other than the Bangor 
and Portland Jetports, most of our locations are in industrial, not residential, areas. Our 
employees are working in these locations at all hours of the day, including evenings when there 
is not a great deal of activity in the surrounding area. In some of our smaller locations that 
service more remote areas of Maine, they are often there alone. 
Under these circumstances, we do not want large sums of cash sitting in these offices. This 
directly jeopardizes the safety of our employees. That threat has been significantly decreased 
as we have transitioned to credit and debit card transactions exclusively. But most Enterprise 
employees over a certain age probably know a co-worker who was working the evening shift at 
a remote location and was a witness to an attempted theft of cash collected and kept at the 
facility. We'd rather not go back to that. 
We consider the safety of our employees to be paramount. For that reason, we must oppose 
LD 621. We would welcome the opportunity to work with the sponsor to discuss our business 
and the associated risk in greater detail. The sponsor was considerate enough to provide us 
with a proposed amendment that would exempt certain market participants, and we are 
currently reviewing that language. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. l’d be pleased to answer any questions and will be here 
for the work session.
