Testimony of Alison Britton,
Before the Veterans and Legal Affairs Committee, in favor of
LD 569: An Act To Allow the Adjutant General to Sell the Houlton Armory
February 27, 2023
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs: my name is Alison Britton. I am the Student 
Services Coordinator at Region Two School of Applied Technology and reside in 
Houlton.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of L.D. 569, An Act to Allow the 
Adjutant General to Sell the Houlton Armory.
Working at Region Two School of Applied Technology has been an incredibly rewarding 
career opportunity.  I began this endeavor as an Instructor for nine years, in the Early 
Childhood Education Program, and transitioned into the Student Services Coordinator 
position in the fall of 2021.  During my time at Region Two I have witnessed the 
programming at this CTE (Career and Technical Education) school literally change the 
trajectory of students’ lives in countless ways.  Students learn that they possess skills, 
abilities and aptitudes they’ve never had the opportunity to explore in other aspects of 
their educational career.  Students become passionate about trades and industries that 
make them an invaluable asset to our community.  We are well aware of the workforce 
shortage in our communities, and Region Two is working to remedy that on a daily 
basis.  While participating in our programs students earn a variety of industry 
recognized and stackable credentials that prepare them for productive integration into 
the workforce.  They learn leadership and employability skills that help them not only get 
the job, but keep the job, advancing in their career fields at accelerated rates.  During 
my time here I have watched student enrollment steadily climb in our programs, and 
have seen our program offerings expanded considerably.  For us to continue on that 
trajectory we need to expand our physical space as well.
I am writing to you today to urge you to consider the sale of the Houlton Armory to 
Region Two School of Applied Technology.  Given its proximity to our current campus it 
is an absolutely ideal location when considering things like student access, 
transportation, and maintaining safety protocols.  The current facility even has features 
that would benefit our programming, such as a gymnasium, locker rooms, and 
classroom spaces.  Gaining ownership of the Houlton Armory location would allow 
Region Two to expand its program offerings; this building has the capacity to house 
three additional programs which would provide access to the skilled training earned at 
Region Two for 60 additional students each year.  The addition of sixty skilled-trades 
people per year to our workforce would be an outstanding contribution to our 
community’s economic development.
Additionally, the Houlton Armory has always been a great location to host community 
events, an endeavor Region Two would continue to pursue.  In fact, Region Two has 
partnered with the Houlton Armory to host events including an annual College and 
Career Fair where area students can explore the job opportunities in our area, learn 
how those opportunities align with the Region Two program offerings, and can develop 
their own educational learning pathway to gain the skills and credentials to best prepare 
them to enter their preferred field of work; these career exploration opportunities include 
those available to the students through the military as well.  Gaining ownership of that 
space would allow for productive events such as this to continue in our area, benefiting 
both our future workforce and our current community employers. 
It is our vision, and would be an honor, for Region Two to have the opportunity to create 
a space within the facility that would pay tribute to the history of the building and 
dedication of the military personnel  who have worked there.  We will continue to 
maintain, and strengthen our relationship with the various branches of military service, 
including the Army National Guard, by hosting recruitment events and activities within 
that space, an endeavor Region Two has always been proud to participate in. 
As a proud supporter of Region Two and all of it’s endeavors, I appreciate your 
consideration of this sale to enhance our school community and program offerings.  As 
a community member, taxpayer, and parent of children in the Greater Houlton Area I 
thank you for considering this sale as it would have immeasurable benefits on our local 
community’s economic and workforce development opportunities.
Yours in Education,
Alison Britton, MS
Alison Britton
Student Services Coordinator
Region Two School of Applied Technology
Alison Britton
Houlton
LD 569
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs: my name is Alison Britton. I am the 
Student Services Coordinator at Region Two School of Applied Technology and 
reside in Houlton.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of L.D. 569, An Act to Allow the 
Adjutant General to Sell the Houlton Armory.
Working at Region Two School of Applied Technology has been an incredibly rewarding 
career opportunity.  I began this endeavor as an Instructor for nine years, in the Early 
Childhood Education Program, and transitioned into the Student Services Coordinator 
position in the fall of 2021.  During my time at Region Two I have witnessed the programming 
at this CTE (Career and Technical Education) school literally change the trajectory of 
students’ lives in countless ways.  Students learn that they possess skills, abilities and 
aptitudes they’ve never had the opportunity to explore in other aspects of their educational 
career.  Students become passionate about trades and industries that make them an 
invaluable asset to our community.  We are well aware of the workforce shortage in our 
communities, and Region Two is working to remedy that on a daily basis.  While participating 
in our programs students earn a variety of industry recognized and stackable credentials that 
prepare them for productive integration into the workforce.  They learn leadership and 
employability skills that help them not only get the job, but keep the job, advancing in their 
career fields at accelerated rates.  During my time here I have watched student enrollment 
steadily climb in our programs, and have seen our program offerings expanded considerably. 
For us to continue on that trajectory we need to expand our physical space as well.
I am writing to you today to urge you to consider the sale of the Houlton Armory to 
Region Two School of Applied Technology.  Given its proximity to our current 
campus it is an absolutely ideal location when considering things like student access, 
transportation, and maintaining safety protocols.  The current facility even has 
features that would benefit our programming, such as a gymnasium, locker rooms, 
and classroom spaces.  Gaining ownership of the Houlton Armory location would 
allow Region Two to expand its program offerings; this building has the capacity to 
house three additional programs which would provide access to the skilled training 
earned at Region Two for 60 additional students each year.  The addition of sixty 
skilled-trades people per year to our workforce would be an outstanding contribution 
to our community’s economic development.
Additionally, the Houlton Armory has always been a great location to host 
community events, an endeavor Region Two would continue to pursue.  In fact, 
Region Two has partnered with the Houlton Armory to host events including an 
annual College and Career Fair where area students can explore the job opportunities 
in our area, learn how those opportunities align with the Region Two program 
offerings, and can develop their own educational learning pathway to gain the skills 
and credentials to best prepare them to enter their preferred field of work; these career
exploration opportunities include those available to the students through the military 
as well.  Gaining ownership of that space would allow for productive events such as 
this to continue in our area, benefiting both our future workforce and our current 
community employers. 
It is our vision, and would be an honor, for Region Two to have the opportunity to 
create a space within the facility that would pay tribute to the history of the building 
and dedication of the military personnel  who have worked there.  We will continue to
maintain, and strengthen our relationship with the various branches of military 
service, including the Army National Guard, by hosting recruitment events and 
activities within that space, an endeavor Region Two has always been proud to 
participate in. 
As a proud supporter of Region Two and all of its endeavors, I appreciate your consideration 
of this sale to enhance our school community and program offerings.  As a community 
member, taxpayer, and parent of children in the Greater Houlton Area I thank you for 
considering this sale as it would have immeasurable benefits on our local community’s 
economic and workforce development opportunities.

