Ammie London
Houlton
LD 569
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs: my name is Ammie London. I am the 
Director of Region Two School of Applied Technology and reside in Hodgdon.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of L.D. 569, An Act to Allow the 
Adjutant General to Sell the Houlton Armory.
The Houlton Armory Building has long been a staple of the Greater Houlton 
Community for providing both economic development to our rural area as well as 
providing a location for community events and outreach.  Allowing the sale of this 
property would provide for those opportunities to continue.  If I’m being completely 
transparent Region Two would be interested in purchasing this property and there is a 
whole host of reasons why this would be a mutually beneficial opportunity.
The Sale of the Houlton Armory to Region Two School of Applied Technology 
would benefit the community in the following ways:
•            Increase space for high demand careers such as Plumbing and Heating, and 
Building Trades, for the Region Two catchment area, which includes 32 townships.  
The addition of the Houlton Armory would allow Region Two to add three additional 
training programs, providing 60 additional students training in the trades each year.  
These students earn a variety of industry-recognized and stackable credentials that 
prepare them to successfully enter the workforce; training additional students in this 
capacity will contribute to the economic development of the Greater Houlton area.
•            The facilities current accommodations including a full-size gymnasium, 
showers and classroom spaces would provide increased capacity and access for the 
current Region Two programs that have a physical education component, such as our 
Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice program.  
•            The relationship with the communities is very important.  This would enable 
space to accommodate community activities, including those done in partnership with
the Maine Army National Guard.
            The proximity of the property is alongside the current Region Two property, giving the
development of a “Region Two Campus”.
 
            We have programs that are not on site currently.  This “Region Two Campus” would 
give room for all the programs to be closely located, which provides additional opportunities 
for student collaboration and engagement with Career and Technical Education Student 
Organizations.
•            The consolidation to a “Region Two Campus” would reduce unnecessary 
transportation costs and shorten the time students are on the bus. For some students, 
this would shorten the time they are in transit by as much as 1 hr. 
            There is currently a statewide shortage of school bus drivers. Region Two is a 
member of the Southern Aroostook Regional Service Center. As such, Region Two is partially
responsible for training School Bus Drivers to meet the demands of transporting students to 
and all area townships. There is currently no dedicated interior or exterior space to 
accommodate required training spaces that are mandated by the MDOT for the training and 
licensing of School Bus Drivers. The addition of the armory to the Region Two campus could 
provide space for a dedicated exterior cone course as well as needed classroom space. 
•            There is currently only one access road into the Region Two campus which is
an identified security risk for active shooter events as well as other mass casualty 
events. Incorporating the armory into the Region Two campus would provide for 
multiple entrance and egress points for emergency vehicles, students and staff. 
•            There is currently a significant traffic-flow bottleneck during peak pick-up 
and drop-off times at Houlton Junior Senior High School. Adding the armory to the 
Region Two campus would allow Houlton JSHS and Region Two to implement a 
traffic plan to provide multiple entrance/access points. In turn, improving the safety of
walkers and automobiles during peak periods. 
In conclusion, the sale of the Houlton Armory to Region Two School of Applied Technology 
would benefit the Greater Houlton Community in a variety ways including increased economic
development and strong workforce development opportunities, increased community relations
through the ability to host community events, as well as heightened security and safety of the 
200+ students who access programming through Region Two School of Applied Technology. 
I thank you for your consideration of this very important matter.

