     Harold “Trey” Stewart III 131st MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station
     Senator, District 2 Augusta, ME 04333
Testimony of Senator Harold “Trey” Stewart
Presenting L.D. 569, An Act to Allow the Adjutant General to Sell the Houlton Armory
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs
February 27, 2023
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs: I am Trey Stewart and I have the honor of representing the people of 
Senate District 2, which includes communities in Aroostook and Penobscot counties. I am before 
you today to present L.D. 569, An Act to Allow the Adjutant General to Sell the Houlton Armory.
Last March, I heard from Ammie London who serves as the Director of Region Two School of 
Applied Technology in Houlton. The school offers 13 different Career and Technical Education 
programs to students from five schools, residing in 32 different municipalities and townships. 
When Ms. London contacted me a year ago, she mentioned that they had outgrown their current 
facility and would be interested in a large property. She had heard that the Maine Army National 
Guard was moving out of their building, which is located adjacent to the school. The school was 
and continues to be interested in expanding into the Houlton Armory property.  
While this may seem like a relatively easy thing to address, acquisition of the property cannot 
take place without this legislation passing. Under Title 37-B, you will notice that it is not 
uncommon to have statute permitting the Adjutant General to sell an armory. In mid-December, 
Ms. London was contact by an individual within the Army National Guard informing her that 
they were winterizing the building and walking away. Just between the cost of heat ($75,000) 
and utilities ($5,000), the building costs the state $80,000 per year. 
With this information, I was happy to submit legislation that would allow for the Adjutant 
General to sell the Houlton Armory. By allowing the Adjutant General to do so, I think this 
could be a win for the state and also the Region Two School of Applied Technology should they 
choose to move forward with purchasing the building. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
