 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, 
FAAP  
 Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, 
FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward**  
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, 
NP 
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Rep s 
**Medical Student 
Representatives  
 
Staff  
 Dee Kerry, BS Ed  
Executive Director 
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinat or 
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190 
Manchester, ME  04351 
office: 207- 480- 4185 
 
www.maineaap.org   
Testimony for :  LD 52: AN ACT TO ALLOW CERTAIN SCHOOL EMPLOYEES TO CARRY  FIREARMS ON 
SCHOOL PROPERTY    and    LD 518: AN ACT TO ALLOW ARMED SECURITY IN SCHOOLS   and  LD 
1557: AN ACT TO INCREASE AND ENHANCE SCHOOL SAFETY BY ALLOWING  INDIVIDUALS WITH 
CONCEALED CARRY PERMITS TO POSSE SS HANDGUNS ON SCHOOL PROPERTY  
 
Thank you to Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and the members of the Education and  
Cultural Affairs Committee for the opportunity to share my written testimony. My name is Dr. Amy  
Buczkowski, and I am a hospital -based pediatrician that lives in Freeport, Maine. I represent the Maine  
Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics, and thus, represent a large network of pediatricians  across 
the state of Maine. We stand in opposition to  LD 52, LD 518, and LD 1557, as these bills threaten  the safety of 
children in Maine schools.  
 
Educators and pediatricians share a sacred duty to promote the safety and well -being of Maine  
children and to create environments that help them grow and develop to reach their full potential. When  
children feel safe in school, they learn more successfully, and young families are attracted to live and stay  in 
Maine. I know with the current state of gun violence in the United States many of us are grappling with  the 
correct course of action to increase safety in our schools. However, legislation, like LD 52, LD 518,  and LD 
1557, has no data to support its success in improving children’s safety. Instead, increasing the  presence of 
firearms on school property in any ca pacity poses a significant threat to the safety and mental  well-being of 
children and educators.  
 As a pediatrician, I perform procedures regularly – spinal taps, blood draws, and more. In order to  
be able to perform these procedures successfully, I must do  enough of them to remain competent and calm  
when these skills are called to action in serious or emergent situations. Alternatively, it would be unfair to  ask 
me to perform brain surgery or mix medications in the pharmacy or provide security services in t he hospital. 
These are simply not tasks that I am trained to do. Similarly, we can look to security in schools.  
 
Educators, resource officers, and civilians are all experts in their own domains, but none of these roles are  
afforded enough education to be ex perts in emergency gun violence response. This is the expertise of law  
enforcement officials, who receive an average of 840 hours of basic training including 168 hours of  training on 
weapons, self -defense, and the use of force 
1. This is not possible to e nsure for those outside of  law 
enforcement, especially when their focus should be on the education of our children.  When firearms are in 
schools, children can get access to them. Most children know where their  parents store their firearms, and in 
fact, mor e than one third of those children reported handling their  parents’ firearms (many without the 
knowledge of their parents) 2.  
 
It is unreasonable to expect that this  will be different in the school setting, and many reports exist that suggest 
firearms in s chools are just as accessible to children 3. If children can gain access to firearms at school, then 
this increases the injury and  mortality risk of serious assault, suicide attempts, or accidental injuries all of which 
are known to be more  lethal with fi rearms involved. Alternatively, we have evidence to suggest that restriction 
of firearms on  school property is protective for students. For example, federal laws that were passed in the 
1990s that  prohibited firearms within 1000 feet of school grounds were associated with decreases in school - 
associated student homicide rates 4. 
 
Parents and tea chers agree with our stance. In a March 2018 survey of almost 500 U.S. teachers,  
73% opposed proposals to arm school staff 5, and another survey found that 63% of parents of K -12 school  
students oppose arming teachers 6. Using what we know about firearm violence, our best chance of protecting 
Maine’s children in  schools are preventative, rather than reactive, approaches. These include policies that 
prevent shooters  from gaining access to guns, protecting schools through trauma -informed threat assessment 
programs to  identify and manage potential threats of violence, implementing basic security upgrades (access 
control  measures and door locks), and planning in advance for emergencies7. Join Maine pediatricians in  
opposition to LD 52, LD 518, and LD 1557, a s we believe these are counterproductive to and lack  evidence 
that they improve the safety of Maine’s children in schools.  
 
Thank you for your consideration!  
 
 
References  
1. Reaves BA. “State and local law enforcement training academies, 2013.” US Department  of 
Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics. July 2016. https://bit.ly/2pg0whI. 
2. Baxley F, Miller M. “Parental misperceptions about children and firearms.”  Archives of  
Pediatrics &amp; Adolescent Medicine. 2006; 160(5): 542- 547. 
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapediatrics/fullarticle/204929  
3. Drane K. “Every Incident of Mishandled Guns in Schools.” Giffords Law Center. April 2023.  
https://giffords.org/lawcenter/report/every -incident -of-mishandled -guns -in-schools/  
4. Centers for Disease Control &amp; Prevention.  “School -Associated Student Homicides –United 
States,  
1992- 2006” Morbidity &amp; Mortality Weekly Report. Jan. 18,  
2008. http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5702a1.htm  
5. Brenan M. “Most US teachers oppose carryin g guns in schools.” Gallup. March 16, 2018.  
https://bit.ly/2MPTRV5.  
6. PDK Poll. “School security: is your child safe at school?” September 2018. 
https://bit.ly/3VeRkGW.  
7. Everytown Research &amp; Policy. “Arming Teachers Introduces New Risks into Schools” May 
2019.  
https://everytownresearch.org/report/arming- teachers- introduces -new-risks -into- 
schools/?_gl=1*fpqq8g*_ga*mtmynjqxntm3mi4xnjgymzgxmdm4*_ga_lt0fwv3ek3*mty4mjm4  
mtazos4xljeumty4mjm4mta5ny4wljauma.  
 
