Ann Sawchuck
Cumberland
LD 1557
STRONGLY OPPOSE LD 1557
Chairpersons Rafferty and Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee, thank you for reading my testimony strongly OPPOSING LD 
1557, An Act to Increase and Enhance School Safety by Allowing Individuals with 
Concealed Carry Permits to Possess Handguns on School Property.
My name is Ann Sawchuck and I am a resident of Cumberland, Maine. I am the 
daughter of a public school teacher and for 10 years, following my retirement from 
business, I was a volunteer academic coach for ESL students in the Portland Public 
Schools. I am also a grandmother with a grandchild yet to enter school in Maine.
Maine has been fortunate to escape a mass shooting in our schools, maybe because 
our schools are now firearm free zones (20 MRSA 6552, Firearms), like Maine’s 
courts and the Statehouse. LD 1557 will do nothing to increase school safety and 
much to harm it by intentionally bringing dangerous weapons into schools. Will you 
open up the courts and the Statehouse to danger in the same way?  It is likewise 
unthinkable to invite guns into our schools. 
Maine’s voluntary concealed firearm permit law (25 MRSA 2003) is a very low-bar 
permit law which will issue permits to persons who are 18 years old with minimal 
weapons training. In other words, many high school seniors could probably get a 
permit. LD 1557 happily extends its in-school concealed carry permission to 18 year 
olds with a permit.   
Our children have enough stress to deal with already. Do you want to introduce even 
more emotional turmoil?  How will your young child feel if they see someone with a 
“concealed” weapon in their school? How about your high school student who knows 
that a teen acquaintance carries a concealed weapon and there is nothing to be done 
about it?  Will you arm your teen so they will feel safer?  Do you want to worry about
which minimally trained volunteer is roaming the halls of your child’s school with a 
concealed weapon? Maybe leaving it somewhere where a child can find it? These 
thoughts are terrifying.  
My heart hurts for all the families who have lost cherished children to the relentless 
carnage of our gun culture. Please do not invite guns into Maine’s schools. This is not
a solution.
LD 1557 is a bad idea.  Please OPPOSE it.  

