LD1557 
"An Act to Increase and Enhance School Safety by Allowing 
Individuals with Concealed Carry Permits to Possess Handguns on 
School Property" 
Sponsored by Representative Reagan Paul 
Greetings to the committee. 
I am here today in full support of a unanimous ”Ought to Pass" for LD1557, LDS2 
And LD518. 
It's high time we changed the Maine law that makes it illegal for adults to protect 
our children on school grounds. ”Gun Free Zones" is one of the most 
counterproductive type of laws ever passed. Simply posting signs and wishing for 
the best does not work. 
lt's time to face the reality that sociopaths and lunatics with evil in their hearts 
and minds will never, ever follow the rules or laws of others. Once they have seta 
goal of inﬂicting harm or death on innocent people, the only thing that will stop 
them is to meet them with equal or greater force than what they have. 
To think that a sign on a door or window will stop them is at best delusional, at 
worst, continuing to support them is being complicit in the death and mayhem 
they invite. History has proven, time after time, after time, that GFZs do not 
provide any safety whatsoever. 
Approximately thirty years ago this body made the promise to protect our 
children and up until today, it has remained just that, a promise. But, to merely 
declare a particular place or area as being ”Gun Free" without taking measures to 
either enforce that or provide adequate protection to those people in that place 
or area does not fulﬁll that promise. 
In the decades since, there has been much discussion about how to keep that 
promise which has resulted in very little actual, effective action. The most 
dominant discussions have been to ban certain types of guns or to attempt to 
restrict who can have guns.
As to banning so called ”Assault Riﬂes" , even if it happened it would not have 
any measurable effect on the murder rate in the US or safety of our children. As 
per the FBI, they are used in less than 300 murders annually of the over 14,000 
committed. That is less than one percent and is also an argument by itself for 
another day. Also, there are approx. 30,000,000 of them already in circulation and 
it would be a few more decades before they were all collected, even if that were 
possible. Guns are not going to just disappear or become illegal to possess 
anytime soon, probably not even in our lifetimes. 
Regarding restrictions on who can possess ﬁrearms, that is a discussion that has 
been going on for decades and unless we can come up with a way to foresee the 
future of each individual human, will continue to go on for decades more. 
Hardening our schools would take billions of dollars that right now aren't there 
and would take, again, decades to implement. 
Hiring and training enough Law Enforcement to have them present in every 
school building in the state would also take years and massive amounts of money 
to get in place. 
In the meantime, our children are still not adequately protected, and, in my 
opinion, those other discussions are distracting our minds and resources from 
doing anything meaningful to that end. 
Federal law has always had an exception from the GFSZA for permit holders to 
carry on school grounds. Around 16 other states have always allowed it, and more 
are looking at doing it, including Ohio which had hearings on it last week. 
This is the most economical way to protect our children, it costs the taxpayer 
absolutely nothing! It is also the simplest and fastest way to ﬁnally give our 
children and school staff the means they need to protect themselves. 
There are over 800 school campuses in Maine and all of them currently havea 
sign on the door that basically says, ”Please don't hurt me" . Let's change those 
signs to say, "Staff may be Armed" . That type of sign, all by itself, is a greater 
deterrent than any GFZ sign has ever been. Truthfully, even if not one person on 
campus is armed it still does more to deter a would-be shooter than the previous 
sign!
Most perpetrators of such heinous crimes are, more often than not, cowards. 
There are many published accounts of them searching out the most vulnerable, 
unprotected targets they can ﬁnd. Let's take that advantage away from them! 
There have been many reports of teachers putting themselves between the 
shooter and the children. While that is a noble, valiant gesture, it does not protect 
the students. The reality is that they're merely sacriﬁcing themselves ﬁrst. If the 
adult in the room is willing to do that, let's at least give them back the choice of 
actually being able to protect themselves and our children. 
There are always going to be "what ifs" , but history and many studies say that 
people with carry permits are overwhelmingly the politest, most law-abiding 
demographic in the US. Those studies were published by the Universities of 
Chicago and Harvard Law, the FBI and the CDC. 
The rules of engagement for CCW holders are much higher than that of LEOs or 
security personnel which, I believe, also plays a major role in why they almost 
always have little or no collateral casualties when they do engage an active 
shooter. We also tend to train much, much more often with our carry ﬁrearms 
than the majority of LEOs. 
l have heard the words ”common-sense" many times when referencing gun laws. 
LD1557 is actually one most common-sense laws proposed of late when talking 
about gun laws. Having the adults present prepared with the means to defend 
themselves should an incident occur would be one of the most common-sense, 
cost effective things we can do to immediately provide protection for our schools. 
Again, l support an Ought to Pass vote for LD1557, LD 52 and LD518. 
Respectfully, 
Bruce M Ashmore 
Sgt USA, Ret. 
Bucksport, ME
