LD52 — ACT TO ALLOW CERTAIN SCHOOL EMPLOYEES TO CARY FIREARMS ON 
SCHOOL PROPERTY 
Sen. Rafferty, Rep. Brennan and members of the Joint Committee on Education and Cultural 
Affairs. l am Carol Selsberg, ani85-year-old mother of 3, grandmother of 5, from Eliot, Maine.I 
am here urging you NOT to pass LD52. One of my daughters is a 20-year former teacher. Asa 
single Mom, she had toleave her profession during Covid to protect herself and her kids. There 
was a Waiting List to get into her.AP classes in her rural Maine high school. She spent an 
unbelievable amount of time talking kids off ledges and being the Mom they needed when they 
couldn't come out to the parent at home. Active Shooter Drills 401 was neither included nor 
required for any of the advanced degrees she has...or she would never have become a teacher. 
She was profoundly disturbed when taught how to stop the bleeding from a gunshot in her 
classroom. I don't know what any of you do or did for a living, but if you are not police authorities, 
security professionals, or career military, I ask you to consider whether learning how to shoot 
someone in order to defend yourself and/or your co-workers was in yourjob description. You 
cannot ask our underpaid and undervalued teachers to save the lives of our kids while educating 
and nurturing them, PLEASE vote NOT TO PASS THIS BILL. 
LD 518: AN ACT TO ALLOW ARMED SECURITY IN SCHOOLS 
Sen. Rafferty, Rep. Brennan and members of the Joint Committee on Education and Cultural 
Affairs, I am Carol Selsberg, 85-year-old mother of 3, grandmother of 5 from Eliot, Maine, urging 
you NOT to pass LD 518 
§1ne1a_.rly1 “3 ,.times as many "casualties.-in . incid'en ‘ts;.with}§armed-gfficers 
on the $.99"? was the inumbertofner tfaétérr 
Imereasedi%?§ééEi§l.tié§;1*% ,(.E¢rbes.:6/2/22) “Good guys with guns,dc>_nit;Ealwiaysiwirieul ﬁfiieshtsJ ’ 
-1€i§ir¢.¢i0l .r olfther Hiawards lni.u.ry C<>ntrQI rRe'$f¢i8lr¢h .,'-lqeﬁier' 
8-rid . the 
Hafij/ard-Youth=jiVi1dlf8-nee"-P ﬁéi/enti.on.:Center. , So ‘fgood .guys” with-guns lajc*k"i ‘ ng“ =-t'ra'i'n ‘isng or 
qual i.fi_ca‘tio_n.s.jonIy¢.p,rdmi' se' . add-itiona,l chaos and p.otenti ‘a|.’|ossi of ‘lives. ¥Fi ¥l_;eYaSe' - 
voite ; NOT 
fopélss. -.3 . “ 
I fi 
=’
» 
.' 
_ . - 
i" 
LD 1557: An Act to Increase and Enhance School Safety by Allowinq 
Individuals with Concealed Carry Permits to Possess Handguns 
Sen. Rafferty, Rep. Brennan and members of the Joint Committee on Education and Cultural 
Affairs, I am Carol Selsberg, from Eliot, Maine, urging you NOT to pass LD 518. Your kid or 
grandkid is in a classroom. All the usual safety band-aids have failed. The shooter with the 
assault rifle got in by splintering the locked doors with their long gun. There is an armed, trained 
resource officer inside. Your friendly volunteer neighbor with his long gun but no training or 
qualifications runs int the lethal chaos to shoot and be shot by the assailant and/or the resource 
officer. Concealed carry permittees are not qualified to defend a school full of kids unless they 
are a cop or a Marine. Safety training may be suggested but is not mandatory. I believe in the 
integrity and wisdom of teenagers and young people. l keep and treasure a bunch of them in my 
family. But like old people, they need to be trained and solidly qualified to do theirjobs, especially 
when lives are at stake. Piease vote NOT to pass.
