DocuSign Envelope ID: 8A656A9E-C1AC-4BEF-A12D-6A2EEFOAFFD8 
STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
. 3'5?’ 23 STATE HOUSE STATION ' 
“z“ ,__;-;4;~ AUGUSTA, ME 04333-0023 
11%’-",‘r.:;. 
JANET T. MILLS PENDER MAKIN covmmon COMMISSIONER 
April 26, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Senate Chair’ 
Representative BI‘6I‘lIl8l’l, House Chair 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Distinguished Members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee: 
LD 1557, An Act to Increase and Enhance School Safety by Allowing Individuals with 
Concealed Carry Permits to Possess Handguns on School Property, would allow a person witha 
permit to carry concealed handguns to possess a ﬁrearm on public school property or the 
property of an approved private school. 
The Maine School Safety Center believes that there is an unnecessarily high level of risk of 
danger and hann to students when ﬁrearms are carried by individuals other than law 
enforcement. Allowing adults to carry concealed weapons in school introduces a ﬁrearm into 
every interaction that person has throughout the day. Further, it creates an additional level of 
confusion for law enforcement Who may respond to the school in case of an emergency. 
Both Federal law and Maine Statute prohibit the possession of ﬁrearms on school property, with 
some exceptions. The Gun-Free School Zones Act (GFSZA) is an act of the U.S. Congress 
prohibiting any unauthorized individual from knowingly possessing a loaded or unsecured 
ﬁrearm at a place that the individual knows, or has reasonable cause to believe, is a school zone 
as deﬁned by 18 U.S.C. § 9211:1525 ). The law applies to public, private, and parochial 
elementary schools and high schools, and to non-private property within 1,000 feet (300 m) feet 
of them. It provides that the states and their political subdivisions may issue licenses that exempt 
the licensed individuals from the prohibition. This bill allows for concealed carry-on school 
grounds and in schools Without any safeguards. Title 20-A §6552 states “A person may not 
possess a ﬁrearm on public school property or the property of an approved private school or 
discharge a ﬁrearm within 500 feet of public school property or the property of an approved 
private school.” There are exceptions for law enforcement ofﬁcers, School Resource Ofﬁcers, 
and other speciﬁc cases in which explicit permission has been granted by the local school board 
with expectations for appropriate safety measures. 
LD 1557 would not require the permit carrier to notify the school that they have a weapon. 
There are no requirements for separation of ammunition or other safe storage. There are no 
expectations for specialized training for permit carriers related to active shooter situations. The 
OFFICES LOCATED AT THE BURTON M. CROSS STATE OFFICE BUILDING AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER 
PHONE (207) 624-6600 FAX: (207) 624-6700 TTY USERS CALL MAINE RELAY 711 ONLINE: V\TVVW.MAINE.GOV/ DOE
