April 26, 2023 Joan Newkirk 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 52 
An Act to Allow Certain School Employees to Carry Firearms on School Property 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education Committee, my 
name is Joan Newkirk. I am a resident of Bath, a retired teacher, and a grandmother. l am 
opposed to LD 518, LD 52 and LD 1557, and I am writing today to address LD 52. 
During my 32 years as a teacher of elementary-aged children, I was fortunate not to have 
experienced gun violence in my school. However, the threat of gun violence was often in my 
thoughts. With the heartbreaking news of each school shooting in our country, I would dread 
retuming to work the next day. l wondered how l would talk to my students about the latest 
shooting. How could l reassure them that the adults would keep them safe? 
Certainly, arming teachers is not the answer. When surveyed, the vast majority of teachers 
indicated that they do not want to carry a gun in school. Studies have shown that guns in 
schools are dangerous, they can be improperly used or stored - resulting in dire consequences. 
It is unreasonable and unfair to expect a teacher to be able to react effectively amid-a chaotic 
shooting situation. 
l worry about the message we send to our children. Elementary teachers spend time every day 
supervising students while they have recess. inevitably, when conﬂicts arise, we remind them to 
use their words, that sticks should not be used as weapons, and that we don't throw stones at 
classmates. Instead, we encourage students to ﬁnd common ground, and settle their 
differences in reasonable ways. As adults, we can ﬁnd altemative ways to deal with gun 
violence. We can agree on reasonable gun safety laws, and work towards providing a nurturing, 
peaceful environment for our students. 
Our students have a right to a safe environment, without worrying about being caught in the 
crossﬁre. No child should be fearful of attending school and growing up in an environment 
where guns take priority over leaming. 
Please oppose LD 518, LD 52 and LD 1557. We can do better in protecting our kids by passing 
common-sense gun laws, which most people in Maine support. Laws that encourage safe 
storage of ﬁrearms, extensive background checks, and banning assault weapons are better 
alternatives that we owe to our children and grandchildren.
