 
LD 1557 - An Act to Increase and Enhance School Safety by Allowing Individuals with Concealed Carry Permits 
to Possess Handguns on School Property 
  
 
Memorandum of Support  
Date:  April 26, 2023 
To:  Honorable Members of the Committee On Education and Cultural Affairs.  
From:  Jonathan Martell  
RE:  LD 1557 - An Act to Increase and Enhance School Safety by Allowing Individuals with Concealed Carry 
Permits to Possess Handguns on School Property 
 
 
Members of the committee, I would like to express my Support of LD 1557 - An Act to Increase and Enhance 
School Safety by Allowing Individuals with Concealed Carry Permits to Possess Handguns on School Property 
 
My Name is Jonathan Martell. I am a Sanford City Councilor, Head of The Southern Maine Chapter for Gun 
Owners of Maine, Legislative Officer for Sanford Springvale Fish and Game Club and NRA Member.  
 
School shootings have been an issue since they were made into gun free zones in 1990. Title XVII, Section 
1702, of the Crime Control Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-647), the Gun-Free School Zones Act of 1990, makes it 
illegal for any individual to knowingly possess a firearm in a school zone. 
 
Clearly, the opposite of the intended effect has happened since we now hear of school shootings in various parts 
of the country Maine is the safest state in the country, except for our schools where everyone but possibly a 
School Resource Officer that may or may not be at a school based on funding and other factors. School 
Resource Officers have been used with success at some locations, but are limited to to availability of officers, 
budgeting limitations and other factors.  
 
One benefit of this bill would be that it would allow those with a carry permit to have a defensive firearm with 
them as they pick up their children. What could be worse than having a mother dealing with a stalker, ex or other 
person intent on hard having to disarm to drive to pick up children.  
 
Another would be the benefit of the main reason that Maine is the safest state in the country, because criminals 
prefer unarmed victims. Permit holders could be anyone, but like those that have stopped mall and church 
shootings, they were not paid professionals.  
 
While I would like to see Gun Free Zones go away completely, this is a good first step in allowing Concealed 
Carry Permit holders to carry on school property.  
 
 
Please support this bill as we need to better protect our children.  
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Jonathan Martell 
Sanford, ME 
Sanford City Councilor 
Head of The Southern Maine Chapter for Gun Owners of Maine 
Legislative Officer for Sanford Springvale Fish and Game Club 
National Rifle Association Member 
 
