Michele Stapleton 
Brunswick, l\/laine 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 52, 518 and 1557 
Dear Chairs Rafferty, Brennan and Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee: 
Studies from Harvard researcher David Hemenway show that simply owning and 
carrying a gun creates new risks for the gun owner. "[E]very day, they have a chance 
to use the gun inappropriately." How Often do People Use Guns in Self-Defense? 
https://www.npr.org/2O'l 8/O4/l3/602143823/how-often-do-people-use-guns-in-self- 
defense 
I'd like to illustrate how inviting guns into our schools also invites opportunities for 
them to be used "inappropriately." 
Giffordsorg records incidents of mishandled guns in schools. https://giffords.org/ 
lawcenter/report/every-incident-of-mishandled-guns-in-schools/ Their chart runs for 
pages, so l picked out ten to share with you. 
' The District Transportation Director left her pistol in a small unlocked plastic case 
near her desk when she went to the restroom. The director had been trained as 
part of the district's concealed carry program and allowed to have a gun on school 
property. Two first-graders who were left alone in the office accessed the gun. 
' A gun brought to a middle school by a teacher was stolen by two students. 
~ A school superintendent left a loaded gun in a school van, which was found bya 
student when the van was used during an athletic event. 
' A school security guard unintentionally shot a school maintenance worker in the 
eye while showing him his gun. 
' A sheriff's deputy unintentionally discharged his gun while alone in a classroom. A 
teacher in an adjacent classroom was hit in the neck. 
Q A school resource officer threatened to shoot a student trying to leave campus 
because the officer mistakenly believed the student was being truant.
' A school security guard pulled a gun on a student after breaking up a fight at 
school. The guard also threatened to kill the student while holding them by the 
neck. 
' During a physical struggle between a student and an officer, the officer's gun 
unintentionally discharged when the student tried to grab it. 
' A middle school basketball coach brought a handgun to school, which he showed 
to his team during practice. 
' An off-duty police officer serving as a school security guard left a gun in a school 
bathroom where it was discovered by three young students. [There are at leasta 
dozen gun-left-in-the-bathroom incidents in the chart] 
What really blows my mind is how many of these incidents involved police officers, 
sheriff's deputies, and school resource officers. People who had to go through months 
of training to carry a gun and have yearly training requirements. 
lf even these highly-trained people can momentarily screw up, it should bring home 
the point that the more guns we invite into our schools, the more risk we're creating 
that guns will be used "inappropriately. ” 
Guns will be left in bathrooms, on buses, in classrooms unattended. For six or seven 
hours a day, five days a week, plus after-school activities, we will invite the potential for 
new risks for our students. All we need is a momentary lapse in attention orjudgement 
and a lethal weapon is in the wrong hands. Or worse yet, it fires. 
This proposed legislation ought not to pass.
