Lb 1557 
Honorable Senator Rafferty, Honorable Representative Brenner and all 
members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee 
l don't know if any of the members of this committee have a conceal 
carry permit, and it is something that shouldn't really be revealed 
except in extraordinary situations. I'm going to assume that you don't 
so here are the steps to apply for a conceal carry license in Maine. 
Step 1: Read the Maine concealed carry pamphlet: Laws 
Relating to Permits to Carry Concealed Handguns which is 37 
pages 
Step 2: Download the application. 
Step 3: Mail your completed application to the state police or 
take to your local police station. You will need the following: 
- An application for a concealed carry permit 6 pages 
- Two Authority to Release Information forms 3 pages 
- A valid copy of a birth certificate or INS document 
. One 2-inch by 2-inch color passport photograph 
. A copy of a certificate that has been issued within the past5 
years that shows proof of knowledge of handgun safety 
. Any necessary copies of CCW permits issued by other states 
or municipalities within Maine 
- A valid copy of the DD-2 14 form for members of the Armed 
Forces 
. The appropriate fees 
Then you wait for about 30 days.
So anyone who has a conceal carry license meets all the 
requirements set out by the State of Maine, which includes a lot 
of personal information. 
Now, do I look like someone who carries a gun? I know you can’t 
see me since I wasn’t able to come testify in person. I am a kindly 
looking grandmother with grey hair up in a bun. I have been 
licensed in 3 states over a period of 20 years. I have also been 
subjected to authorization by the FBI every time I’ve purchased a 
gun in all three of those states. 
So, to say that I am qualified to conceal carry, authorized to 
conceal carry and maybe the most important of all, not expected 
to be conceal carrying by those intending to do harm (surprise 
does give me a great advantage). 
I ask you to approve LD 1557. It is people, like me, who are on 
site that have the opportunity to help stop a tragedy as it unfolds. 
This is not something I every want to do, but to not be allowed to 
defend myself, the staff and especially the children is an absolute 
horror. 
/\;,,,,,c/ fmlw 
%%/
