Peggy McGehee 
Falmouth, Maine 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1557 on allowing individuals with concealed 
weapons permits to possess handguns on school property 
Dear Chairs Raﬁerty, Brennan and Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Connnittee: 
l am Peggy McGehee, a resident, former school board member and town councilor of the Town 
of Falmouth. l oppose L.D. 1557, as someone who believes fervently that we need to protect our 
students, and who is part of a grm-owning, public service family. 
This bill would allow anyone, 18 years of age or older, with a Maine concealed handgun permit, 
to conceal carry their handgun in Maine's schools including well over 10,000 18-year-old 
seniors, their 18-year-old friends, their parents, relatives, teachers, security guards, lunch staff, 
contractors, landscapers, political activists, protesters- —anyone. 
Maine’s voluntary concealed ﬁrearm permit law, 25 M.R.S.A. §2003, is a very low-bar permit law. 
Unlike other states, its gun safety knowledge requirement has no requirement for hours of either 
classroom or ﬁre range training, and no written exam, and no showing of competence. The permit 
application screens only for those with criminal records or applicable restraining orders, or self—admitted 
dangerous mental disorders or drug addiction Without such low-bar disquali ﬁers, the State must issue the 
applicant the pennit. 
The shooting on the Colby College campus in March is instructive — where a guest at a campus wide 
party pulled out his concealed carry gun when he got in a ﬁght and shot it twice—~in a hallway packed 
with students. Allowing everyone with a permit to carry ﬁrearms in Maine’s schools, risks similar 
incidents, from classrooms to athletic events to senior proms. 
This bill is unlikely to save lives in an active shooter situation. When rampage shootings do 
occur, they are almost never stopped by armed civilians. An ABA 2019 Report found that in 160 
shooter incidents, there was only one successful armed civilian intervention - by a U.S. Marine. 
There is a greater risk of injury from accidental shootings. 
indiscriminate numbers of persons carrying guns in schools will increase exponentially the risk 
that students will access and accidentally discharge them. In the 5 years previous to last July, 
there were nearly 100 such incidents, where guns were stolen from teachers by students, where 
guns were misplaced and later found in the hands of students, and where guns were intentionally 
or unintentionally discharged on school grounds. Some caused eye, leg, foot and neck injuries. 
Arming schools this way will also undoubtedly expose schools to liability from shootings, by 
having allowed untrained and unsupervised persons to have guns on campus. It is doubtful this 
liability would even be insurable as such a gun carrying policy is so dangerous. 
Thank you for your consideration of these comments. 
Peggy McGehee pmcgehee4@gmail.corn
