 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  
 
In Opposition to  
 
LD 1557 - An Act to Increase and Enhance School Safety by Allowing  Individuals with Concealed Carry 
Permits to Possess Handguns on  School Property  
 
April 25, 2023  
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Educational and Cultural Affairs 
Committee , my name is Rebecca Lambert,  and I am providing testimony in opposition to LD 1 557 on behalf 
of Maine Municipal  Association’s (MMA) elected 70 -member Le gislative Policy Committee (LPC). For 
reference, the LPC provides direction to the advocacy team at MMA and establishes the position on bills of municipal interest.   
 Local leaders are opposed to allowing concealed carry permittees to possess handguns on school 
property. With the increase of school shootings in recent years across the nation, they recognize why the discussion of allowing it arises time and time again. However, local officials  fear that the authority 
provided in LD 1557 could  lead to uninte nded consequences should an active shooter event occur.  
 Even if law enforcement were supplied with a list of every concealed carry permit holder, it would 
be nearly impossible to determine who had a firearm and who did not within a school during an event , 
where time is of the essence  and action rather than research is necessary . Law enforcement responding 
to an active shooter event may not have this information at hand and could mistakenly shoot an innocent 
person trying to protect those involved, ra ther than the one with ill intent.  
 
Having the ability to hire a contracted and trained student resource officer, typically employed by 
a law enforcement department and already allowable by current law, would be a more palatable  way to 
provide additional s afety in schools particularly in rural areas where response time is longer.  
 Furthermore, individuals come from a variety of backgrounds, some of whom find firearms 
unsettling or downright scary, and should not be subjected to that fear while working in a school or participating as a student.  
 
Thank you for your time and for considering the municipal perspective on this issue.  
