Testimony to the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee regarding: 
\“ 
.An;~Actqtojlncfeasejaiid Enhance}School Safety by Allowing Individuals with CO1i(§“ 6sZl_ll;3'.Cl,;Q21t ‘1‘YfP_6i_‘11fliiS1"tQ 
Bcssess Hwdguns <>n..$¢h<1<21.1?r<>p@r1 ‘ s/'.’§ 
I am Richard Coshow, a registered Democrat, a citizen of Bridgton, Maine and an unpaid volunteer 
citizen. I am not a paid lobbyist. 
To the honorable members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, thank you for taking your 
time to receive input from citizens of Maine on this important piece of proposed legislation. 
But before I begin, I note seven states allow carry by allowed individuals (Delaware, Hawaii, Kansas, 
Mii ssijssippi, New Hampshire, Oregon, andfUtah) and eleven more allow carry by'teachers! (Florida, 
Qeorgla, Kansas; Missouri,North- Dakota, Ohio,‘ Oklahoma, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, and 
Wyoming.) Qver1 _6’stat _es. ~_1_6_§_ 
So, I promise to keep my comments short, as you have a full day regardless, but present you with a stark 
choice today, based on my brief allotment: 
“Values” 
Values are simply deﬁned as the principles that help you to decide what is right and wrong, and how 
to act in various situations. 
“Right and Wrong” in various situation. A simple concept. 
What you value, how you show your values, and how you act to protect and support your values tell me 
everything I need to know about you. 
Do you value your children, your grandchildren, spouses, friends and other relatives more than your value 
yourself? Your own being? 
Of course not. You value all lives equally, and your life no more than others. Equally. Perhaps more, as in 
the case of children, or grandchildren. 
So I propose a rhetorical question: 
Why are you guarded by armed guards? Why are you generally ensconced behind guards at a security 
station, attended by guards that are armed? 
Do you believe yourselves more worthy than children? Your answer to that question tells me everything I 
need to know about you. 
The Bills before you today in this Hearing Room, LD’s 52, 518, 1326 and 1557 are all value assessments 
that will tell me your values. 
Do you value children, and will you suppoit these four Bills, or will you ignore my question and reject the 
Bills?I 
Do you value children, and will you support these four Bills, or will you ignore the question
