April 23, 2023 
 
Dear Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee, 
 
LD 1557 is a terrible bill for many reasons, but primarily because we do not need individuals 
with concealed guns in our schools. My husband is a high school teacher and I retired from 
classroom teaching in 2020. We have spent our careers trying to give children a safe and 
stimulating educational experience, and reaching out to those marginalized children so 
everyone feels welcomed In our classrooms. Our schools are places of learning. You must not 
give in to people’s fear and the gun lobby’s talking points. Armed persons in schools will put 
everyone at risk of harm.  
 
I find it unreasonable allow people with concealed guns in our schools. As you know, some 
students in our high schools do not “age out” until the age of 21. This law, if passed, would 
allow high school students, 18 or older, to conceal carry their weapons while attending school. 
The presence of armed individuals will cause children and teachers more anxiety and make it 
harder for us, as teachers, to create a welcoming culture in our schools. The idea of hardening 
our schools is the opposite of what we need to do. This bill is yet another shallow ploy by the 
gun lobby and those legislators who benefit from the NRA to make guns more prevalent in our 
society.  
 
I say, “Enough is enough.” We must say “No” to more guns as the solution to the epidemic of 
gun violence. Let’s treat the disease at its root—by addressing the causes of gun violence 
through research-informed policies at the state and national level.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Robin Brooks 
(she, hers) 
 
47 Ivanhoe Drive 
Topsham, Maine 04086 
 
207-232-9734 
 
 
 
 
Robin Brooks
Topsham
LD 1557
April 23, 2023
Dear Members of the Education and Cultural Affairs Committee,
LD 1557 is a terrible bill for many reasons, but primarily because we do not need 
individuals with concealed guns in our schools. My husband is a high school teacher 
and I retired from classroom teaching in 2020. We have spent our careers trying to 
give children a safe and stimulating educational experience, and reaching out to those 
marginalized children so everyone feels welcomed In our classrooms. Our schools are
places of learning. You must not give in to people’s fear and the gun lobby’s talking 
points. Armed persons in schools will put everyone at risk of harm. 
I find it unreasonable allow people with concealed guns in our schools. As you know, 
some students in our high schools do not “age out” until the age of 21. This law, if 
passed, would allow high school students, 18 or older, to conceal carry their weapons 
while attending school. The presence of armed individuals will cause children and 
teachers more anxiety and make it harder for us, as teachers, to create a welcoming 
culture in our schools. The idea of hardening our schools is the opposite of what we 
need to do. This bill is yet another shallow ploy by the gun lobby and those legislators
who benefit from the NRA to make guns more prevalent in our society. 
I say, “Enough is enough.” We must say “No” to more guns as the solution to the 
epidemic of gun violence. Let’s treat the disease at its root—by addressing the causes 
of gun violence through research-informed policies at the state and national level. 
Sincerely,
Robin Brooks
(she, hers)
47 Ivanhoe Drive
Topsham, Maine 04086
207-232-9734

