Proposal for an Amendment to: Title 9-A:  Maine Consumer Credit Code Article 8-A:  Maine Truth-In-Lending §8-509. Credit card and debit card surcharge prohibition Current Law States: 1.  Surcharge prohibited.  A seller in a sales transaction may not impose a surcharge on a cardholder who elects to use a credit card or debit card in lieu of payment by cash, check or similar means. For purposes of this section, "surcharge" means any means of increasing the regular price to a cardholder that is not imposed on a customer paying by cash, check or similar means. A discount or reduction from the regular price is not a surcharge.   [PL 2011, c. 427, Pt. A, §15 (NEW).] 2.  Surcharge permitted for governmental entity.  Notwithstanding subsection 1, a governmental entity may impose a surcharge for payments made with a credit card or debit card for taxes, fines, charges, utility fees, regulatory fees, registration fees, license or permit fees or the provision of a specific service or good provided by that governmental entity if the surcharge:   A. Is disclosed clearly to the consumer prior to payment; and   [PL 2011, c. 427, Pt. A, §15 (NEW).] B. Does not exceed the costs associated with providing the credit card or debit card service that are directly incurred by the governmental entity or assessed by an authorized 3rd-party payment service provider for a credit card or debit card transaction. If there is not a cost assessed by an authorized 3rd-party payment service provider for a debit card transaction, the governmental entity may not impose a surcharge associated with a debit card transaction.   [PL 2011, c. 427, Pt. A, §15 (NEW).] A governmental entity shall disclose to the consumer that the surcharge may be avoided if the consumer makes payments by cash, check or other means not a credit card or debit card. A governmental entity is not subject to any liability to the issuer of a credit card or an authorized 3rd-party payment service provider for nonpayment of credit card charges by the consumer. As used in this subsection, "governmental entity" includes, but is not limited to, a state department or agency, a county established or governed by Title 30-A, Part 1, a municipality as defined in Title 30-A, section 2001, subsection 8, a plantation established or governed by Title 30-A, chapter 301, a quasi-municipal corporation as defined in Title 30-A, section 2604, subsection 3, the Judicial Department as described in Title 4, the University of Maine System, the Maine Community College System and the Maine Maritime Academy.     Amendment Proposal:  1.  Surcharge prohibited.  A seller in a sales transaction may not impose a surcharge on a cardholder who elects to use a credit card or debit card in lieu of payment by cash, check or similar means. For purposes of this section, "surcharge" means any means of increasing the regular price to a cardholder that is not imposed on a customer paying by cash, check or similar means. A discount or reduction from the regular price is not a surcharge.   *Surcharge is not prohibited so long as the business is registered with the State for the Surcharge Program and using a Maine State Approved Vendor for the implementation and facilitation of their Payment Processing Service and Surcharge program.      To summarize the below proposal:  Allow merchants to surcharge and subject the entire surcharged amount to sales tax or a newly formed “surcharge tax.” The additional tax due will be collected and paid by the approved vendor, which alleviates the State and the merchant of any additional burden related to the program. The result is increased tax revenue for the State in multiple categories and the clarification of a current “gray area” law relating to surcharge and cash discount programs.        
 Problems with the current law:  It is arguably improper to allow the State Government to recoup the expense of payment processing for their payment activities, but to disallow private, tax paying businesses to do the same.  This Amendment would provide an avenue that is advantageous to both the merchant as well as the State of Maine for all merchants to have the ability to recoup their payment processing expenses, as opposed to only allowing it for “Government Entities.”  Allowing a “Cash Discount” is essentially the exact same thing as a credit card surcharge. Under the current law, merchants currently are able to impose the “surcharge” by simply increasing all prices by the surcharge amount, and then offer a cash discount for the exact same % as the increase.  However, this option is not available for businesses that sell a product where the price is mandated by the state, because they are not allowed to increase the price of those products to then allow the discounted amount to reflect the State Mandated Price for that product.     This Amendment would provide those merchants with an avenue to also recoup the necessary payment processing expense incurred by their business if they wanted to, without being in violation of the law.  The current “Cash Discount” solution/remedy poses a Sales Tax conundrum for both businesses and the State.  Currently, any amount collected by a merchant from a customer for the sale of a taxable product, good, or service is subjected to the Maine State Sales Tax.  The only exception currently is gratuity.  Gratuity is not subjected to Sales Tax.   Depending on the manner in which the “Cash Discount” program is set up by the Merchant’s Payment Processing Company, the additional revenue generated by the merchant (the % in which the price is increased in order to offset the Payment Processing Cost) is never actually deposited to the merchant’s bank account.  It is held by the processing company in order to offset the fees.  This presents an opportunity (intentional or unintentional) for the Sales Tax Due by a merchant running such a program to be undercalculated.   Discovering and remedying one of these miscalculations would be very difficult for the State because again, the funds are never deposited to the merchants’ bank account.    A correctly run “Cash Discount” program, would calculate the sales tax based on the increased amount prior to any discount.  However, the lack of clear guidance surrounding the rule/law, as well as the primary purpose/objective for the program being to completely offset the cost of payment processing, has resulted in the increased amount customers are being charged not being calculated as a taxable amount.    
Example 1 below illustrates this example.  The amount of Sales Tax charged on both transactions is the same, and that is not correct.  The State should be collecting the Sales Tax on the total amount the merchant receives from the customer for the taxable item sold.   
   When Cash discount is done correctly, while the State will receive additional revenue on the taxable item sold when the customer is paying by credit card, when the customer pays cash the State loses tax revenue, because the sales tax is applied to the amount after the discount.  Example 2 below illustrates an example of how a surcharge will increase the Tax Revenue due on the same sale from example 1, a sale from an establishment with a taxable item and a non-taxable item.  
  

By simply allowing the merchants to surcharge, and subsequently taxing the additional revenue, the State will greatly increase its tax revenue, while simultaneously removing any doubt on the legality surrounding surcharge and cash discount procedures.  Furthermore, it will level the playing field and not discriminate against business types as it relates to who is able to recoup payment processing costs and who is not in accordance with State Law.  By requiring the business to Register and use a Maine State approved vendor, this provides the State of Maine with a List of all Merchants that have a Surcharge program implemented.   If the Merchant is registered and, on that list, the State of Maine is no longer at risk of having their Sales Tax due amount curtailed by means of such a program because the Processing Entity (Approved Vendor) will Pay the Sales Tax due on behalf of their merchant for the incremental amount resulting from the Surcharge.  The Processing Company (approved vendor) will then be responsible for the collection of the amount due from the merchant and assume any risk associated with the collection thereof.    With this solution, identifying possible Sales Tax shortages resulting from surcharge (or incorrectly run cash discount programs), is much less daunting for the State.  If the business is Registered, all is well.  If they are not Registered, then further investigation is warranted.   The State could simply impose a fine for merchants that are operating a Surcharge Program that are not Registered.  They must be registered to operate and use the program.  A warning letter, more often than not, would result in them seeking out an approved vendor to ensure their registration is completed and their program run in the correct and legal manner.     Furthermore, by taxing the entire surcharged amount, the State is able to capture sales tax revenue from purchases that they currently are not (non-taxable items and services).  By way of the surcharge being an entire separate line item and having its own tax associated with it, this presents an entire new category of taxable revenue for the State.                  
Approved Vendor Duties  The Card Associations (Visa, Mastercard, Discover, and American Express) have already provided very clear guidelines for how surcharge and cash discount programs are to be run.  There are necessary requirements the merchant must adhere to in order to be compliant.  Proper Signage at the point of sale, language and line items on the receipt, and the appropriate amount of the surcharge are the cornerstones of these requirements.    The approved vendor will be responsible for the education and adherence to these guidelines by their merchants.    The approved vendor will be responsible for providing the merchant with the proper credit card processing and/or point of sale software to accurately account for and legally run a surcharge program.  The approved vendor will also be responsible for Registering the merchant with the State as a merchant with a surcharge program implemented.   For Registration, the Maine State Sales Tax EIN number for the business will be among the information needed.  If the merchant currently does not have a Sales and Use Tax number because they do not sell products or services subjected to sales tax, then one will be created for them to pay this tax.      The approved Vendor will submit the Sales Tax due to the State of Maine for the Incremental Amount collected from the merchant’s customers for the surcharge collected that offset the merchant’s payment processing expense.  The approved Vendor is then responsible for the collection of that amount from its merchant’s.                    
Conclusion  This will result in additional tax revenue for the State of Maine, without the need for an increase in expense for the enforcement of, nor for auditing purposes related to, for the State. The Approved Vendor being responsible for the adherence to the Card Association guidelines by the merchants, as well as the Sales Tax remittance and collection of the additional sales tax due by the merchant, alleviates the State of Maine from these burdens while simultaneously increasing its tax revenue.  By subjecting the surcharge amount to the State Sales Tax (or newly formed “surcharge tax”), the State will now essentially be collecting sales tax on a portion of sales from currently non-taxable items and services.  Merchant’s will happily pay the tax on this amount due to the drastic savings they realize from the program.  Furthermore, because the merchant is realizing such a drastic savings, their profit will increase.  With increased profits, the State of Maine will benefit again from the correlating increased income tax from the merchant.    Benefits to the State Increased Sales Tax Revenue. Collection of Sales Tax on a portion of currently non-taxable items via the tax on the surcharge. Increased Income Tax Revenue from the merchant.  Benefits to the Merchant Drastic Savings on their Payment Processing Cost. Ability to expand and improve their business. Ability to offer more jobs. Ability to increase wages paid to employees.  Benefits to the Public (Customers) By allowing the merchant to eliminate such a large expense, the merchant is then able to offer specials or discounts that they otherwise would not be able to offer.  They are also able to offer more competitive pricing on the goods or services they provide. The business will also be able to expand upon their product offerings and improve their establishment in which the customer frequents.   They will be able offer higher wages to their employees and perhaps hire additional employees.  When you put money back in to the business owners’ pocket, the customer will always benefit because the merchant is there to please its customers.    Surcharge is a more transparent method for a merchant to recoup payment processing expenses than the current “cash discount” method.  Customers have a right to understand what they are paying for, and providing this avenue eliminates the possibility of trickery relating to such efforts.   
