   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Barbara Burt, Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Lucy Van Hook, Vice -Chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lee Webb  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
Testimony in support of LD 1718, An Act to Encourage Participation in Maine's 
Essential Support Workforce Through Access to Higher Education  
Arthur Phillips, Maine Center for Economic Policy   
May 2, 2023   
 
Senator Curry, Representative Robert s, and members of the Committee  on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business , thank you for the opportunity to 
testify before you today.  My name is Arthur Phillips, and I am an analyst at the Maine 
Center for Ec onomic Policy (MECEP). I am testifying in support of LD 1718 because  this 
proposal represents a s traightforward opportunity to reward  essential support w orkers 
and attract more workers into this  critically important  field.  
 
In rece nt years, lawmakers have made significant investments in Maine’s essential support 
workforce. Following the 2019 C ommission to Study Long -term Care Workforce Issues, a 
law was passed to require the labor portion of MaineCare reimbursement for direct care 
services be at 125 percent of the minimum wage. The state also invested state and federal 
funds to shore up nursing homes, residential care facilities, and to provide bonuses to help 
retain workers. Despite these efforts,  however,  employment among essential  support 
workers remains well below its pre -pandemic levels : one  recent estimate suggested Maine 
lost more than 4,000 workers in between 2019 and 2022, while  projecting demand to grow 
significantly over the next decade.  LD 1718 is a  straightforward  opportunity to continu e 
making direct care jobs more attractive . 
 
Last week, my organization published a report looking at the economic costs of the direct 
care workforce shortage. Some highlights from that report include the following:  
 
• Our collective failure to adequately support direct care workers is keeping more 
than 8,000 people out of Maine’s labor force.  
• Maine is missing out on over $1 billion  per year in additional economic activity as a 
result of people dropping out of the labor force due to direct care challenges.  
• Undervaluing care work imposes significant public costs on our state, as low wages 
lead more direct care workers to rely on publ ic assistance programs , and fewer 
workers are contributing taxes. These combine to cost our state and federal 
budgets more than $70 million each year.  
• Direct care workforce shortages place undue strains on our health care system. In 
March 2023, Maine Medi cal Center had about 50 people under its care who were 
approved for discharge but could not find an alternative care setting; Northern Light 
Health noted that over a nearly six -month period, the cost of delayed discharges 
across the system’s hospitals tota led $13.6 million and amounted to approximately 
$63,000 per person.  
 
   
  
LD 1718 will not solve all these  issue s, but it will help. For the benefit of our direct care 
workers, the consumers they serv e, and our shared economic prosperity, we think this 
proposal is a solid step in the right direction. We urge you to support LD 1718.  
 
