 
 
 
To: Senator Chip Curry  
Representative Tiffany Roberts  
Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement  
and Business  
From:  Becky Smith, Director of Government and Community Relations  
Re: Statement in support of LD 1718 An Act to Encourage Participation in Maine’s Essential 
Support Workforce Through Access to Higher Education  
Date:  May 2, 2023  
 
 
Senator Curry , Representative Roberts  and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, 
Development, Economic Advancement and Business , please accept this testimony in support of the 
concept behind LD 1718 An Act to Encourage Participation in Maine’s Essential Support Workforce 
Throu gh Access to Higher Education  on behalf of the Maine Community College System.  As you have 
heard in testimony today, the essential support workforce is critical to the health and safety of our most 
vulnerable residents.  They are also undervalued by  many i n society —that is until someone finds 
themselves in the position to need support to care for a family member.  At that time, they are often 
surprised by waiting lists and lack of available help.  
 
I have been in that position on and off for the better part o f five years with aging family members.   I 
have watche d, assisted , and learned from each of the people who have taken care of my family.  Often,  
they are balancing their own family commitments , low pay , and long commutes  with the  physically and 
emotionally demanding work of providing care.   As I got to know them , they often expressed their 
interest in continuing their education  or their concerns that they could not afford the education their 
spouse or children  needed to fulfill their dreams .  Many were working two or more jobs just to make 
ends meet and perhaps save a small amount of money for education. However, one medical bill, a bout 
with COVID , or a car repair sets them back to zero.  
 
The voucher program envisioned by LD 1718 would take some of the burden from  those who have 
dedicated their career to be an  essential support worker (ESW).  Our understanding of the bill is that 
each year a person is employed by an agency as an ESW  and works 30 hours, they earn a voucher. They 
can earn up to four vouchers and save  them for five years.  Each voucher has a value of $4,000.  The 
student must fill out a FAFSA.  
 
As you well know, Maine has committed to providing free community college for those who receive a 
high school diploma or equivalent  in 2020, 2021, 2022 and 2023.  The Governor has proposed 
continuing this program for the years of 2024 and 2025 in her proposed budget (this is not yet 
approved). MCCS also has several  short -term workforce training programs that are free to participants 
regardless of when they received their diploma.  These programs are funded through the  State’s  Maine 
Quality Center funding , private foundation support and the Maine Jobs and Recovery Funds.  MCCS 
also has the lowest  community college  tuition in New England .  We are the most affordable option  to 
earn a certificate  or an associate degree.   
 
 
  
However, both the University of Maine System and Maine Maritime, due to the nature of their programs  
and degrees granted , have higher  student  costs .  Both strive, within their existing budgets, to provide 
financial aid to students with need. We see the benefit of this program to be primarily for students 
hoping to attend one of Maine’s great four-year public colleges.  However, Free College is not 
guaranteed to be continued and has been funded with one -time money, so this program, if continued, 
would definitely benefit our students as well.  It would also benefit students who are not recently out of 
high school and do not qualify for Free College.  
 
We would like to caution the committee that some of the language in the bill could be made a bit more 
clear  in order for the program to be designed as the sponsor and advocates intended.  I believe that 
FAME has the expertise on structuring and managing a pr ogram such as this, but we are more than 
willing to work with the committee if you choose to move forward.  
 
Thank you.  
 
