 
 
 
Testimony for the Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement and Business  
May 2 , 202 3 
 
Regarding LD 1718 :  An Act to Encourage Participation in Maine's Essential 
Support Workforce Through Access to Higher Education.  
 
Good afternoon , Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and esteemed members of 
the Committee o n Innovation,  Development, Economic Advancement and Business.  
Thank you so much for the opportunity to speak today.  My name is Kristen Farnham .  
I am VP of Legal Affairs and Advancement at  Spurwink . I am here to speak in 
support of LD 1718 .  At Spurwink, we provide behavioral health and educational 
services to children, adults, and families across Maine. Last year, we served over 
8,100 Maine people  affected by trauma, mental h ealth challenges, substance use disorders , 
developmental disabilities  and autism , so they can l ead healthy, engaged lives in their communities . 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony in support of LD 1718, which is a visionary bill in 
support of educational attainment.  The bill would  award a tuition voucher to a worker who works for 
a year, 30 hours per week, for a participating employer.  An employee can earn up to four vouchers 
over four years .  There are several appealing as aspects to this voucher program:  
• The vouchers are good for five years;  
• The vouchers have a value up to $4,000 and can be used by:  
o The worker ;  
o The worker’s spouse or domestic partner ; and/or  
o The worker’s children or grandchildren, creating a legacy opportu nity. 
• The vouchers c an be used all at once, or one at a time within  the University System, 
Community College System or at Maine Maritime Academy . 
 
There are several reasons that Spurwink is here in support of LD 1718:  
 
First, it will help us fill job s, making the critical job of direct support worker more appealing.  In our 
Adult programs that employ essential care workers, w e have 24 FTE open positions at this time, 
and cannot compete with the wages offered at other local businesses.  We are currently  filling 
positions with 235 hours per month of contracted staff due to the inability to hire.  As we know, this 
is an inefficient way to care for our clients.  Any proactive steps that we can take, such as wage 
increases and tuition vouchers, will help in filling these vacancies.  
 
Second, it will help workers by encouraging  educational attainment.  Education is referred to as the 
great equalizer , as it can open the pathway  to jobs, resources, and skills that help a person not just 
survive, but thrive.  We also know that the cost of tuition is a major factor in a person’s decision to 
pursue further education.  By lowering the financial barriers, this bill will allow more Main e people to  
pursue their educational goals.   
 
Third, LD 1718 will help families.  By allowing a worker’s family  member to use the tuition voucher, 
the bill is offering a multi -generational solution and reducing the financial barriers to pursuit of post-
secondary education.  This option will open  the door to educational attainment for many more 
people . 
 
Lastly, but perhaps most importantly, we see this bill as an anti -poverty measure.  As we know, 
education reduces income inequality.  It also promote s economic growth as it offers skills that 
increase e mployment opportunities and income.  UNESCO reports that nearly 60 million people 
could escape poverty if all adults had just two more years of schooling .  We’d like to see Maine take 
steps to be part of  that solution.   

 
 
 
We great ly appreciate the vision for a brighter Maine that LD 1718 represents.  I urge your support  
for this bill . Thank you for your time and consideration.   
  
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Kristen Farnham  
kfarnham @spurwink.org    
