  
 
 30 Association Drive, P.O. Box 227, Manchester,  Maine 04351 -0227   
Ph: 207 -213-6125   |  Fax: 207-213-6127  
www. Home CareAlliance.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Senator Curry , Representative Roberts , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business , 
my name is Laurie Belden, a resident of Durham and the Executive Director of the 
Home Care & Hospice Alliance of Maine (All iance).  The Alliance is a network of 
home health care, hospice, home care and personal care providers across our 
State delivering in -home care to older adults and disabled individuals of all ages, 
allowing them to stay in their home and community.  
I’m he re today to testify in support  of LD 1718, An Act to Encourage Participation 
in Maine's Essential Support Workforce Through Access to Higher Education . 
 
Workforce shortages remain one of the primary obstacles to ensuring access to 
long -term services and  supports for older adults and individuals living with 
disabilities. High turnover rates (estimated between 40% and 60%) and increased 
demand for direct care services due to an aging population continue to 
exacerbate the shortage of direct care workers.i 
 
Home care essential support workers assist older adults and individuals of all ages 
with Activities of Daily Living (ADLs). ALDs include housekeeping, meal 
preparation, transferring/mobility; as well as more intimate care such as bathing, 
dressing and toil eting. By supporting these basic health care needs, Maine’s older 
adults and those with disabilities are able to stay in their home and community.   
 
In February, the Department released their Second Annual Report on “Efforts 
and Progress in Implementing the Recommendations of the Commission to 
Study Long -term Care Workforce Issues .” This report indicates that  one-third of 
beneficiaries are  only  receiving partial or no care at all under Section 19; and, 
even more alarming is the near fifty percent of Secti on 96 beneficiaries only 
receiving partial or no care at all .   
 
The gap between the numbers of patients and  families seeking assistance and 
the availability of workers to provide that care is accelerating at  an unsustainable 
pace.  Essential  support  worker s are the backbone  of home  and community -
based  service  and the tuition  grant  program  proposed  in this bill would  help  to 
strengthen  the pool  of qualified,  educated  workers  to meet  the rising  demand  
for services.  
  Board of Directors  
 
President  
Colleen Hilton  
Northern Light Home Care  
 
Vice President  
Daryl Cady  
Hospice of Southern Maine  
 
Treasurer  
RJ Gagnon  
Androscoggin Home Healthcare + 
Hospice  
 
Secretary  
Laurie Bourgoin  
Home Hope & Healing  
 
 
Members  
Ken Albert  
Androscoggin  Home Healthcare + 
Hospice  
 
Patricia Aprile  
MaineHealth Care at Home  
 
Kyra Chamberlain  
Hospice of Southern Maine  
 
Elaine Collins  
MaineHealth Care at Home  
 
Chris Costello  
CHANS Home Health& Hospice  
 
Zetta Fogg  
McKesson Medical -Surgical  
 
Lisa Harvey -McPherson  
Northern Light Home Care & Hospice  
 
Adam LaMonica  
Maxim Healthcare Services  
 
Amy McVety  
Mount Desert Nursing Association  
 
Greg Pizzo  
MaineGeneral HomeCare & Hospice  
 
Amy Shawley  
St. Joseph Homecare and Hospice  
 Testimony in Support of  
LD 1718,  An Act to Encourage Participation in Maine's Essential Support 
Workforce Thr ough Access to Higher Education  
 
May 2, 2023  
 
 
  
 
 30 Association Drive, P.O. Box 227, Manchester,  Maine 04351 -0227   
Ph: 207 -213-6125   |  Fax: 207-213-6127  
www. Home CareAlliance.org  
  
Providing educational vouchers would help attract new workers into the caregiving field and could encourage 
current essential workers (often lower -wage workers) to access higher education for themselves and others in 
their family.   
 
Maine has demonstrated the value of essential support workers through increased reimbursement for 
compensation. Adding free higher education options is yet another positive step to reward (and entice) 
workers.  Targeted initiatives, such as tuition vouchers , are imperative to clo se the gap of the thousands of 
hours of care undelivered to Mainers each week.   
 
Please vote “ought to pass” to help stabilize the essential care workforce  and to ensure that home care 
remains a viable care option for Mainers.   
 
Laurie Belden , Execut ive Director  
laurie@homecarealliance.org  
                                                 
i National Conference of State Legislatures  
