295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMain e.org  
 Allia nce for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1718  
An Act to Amend the Social Work Education Loan Repayment 
Program  
Sponsored by Representative Meyer  
May 2, 2023  
 
Good afternoon,  Senator Curry , Representative Roberts , and esteemed 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, 
Economic Advancement and Business . I am Malory Shaughnessy , a resident of  
Westbrook , and here on behalf of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental 
Health Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the 
majority of Maine’s community -based  mental health and substance use 
treatment providers. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound 
policies and evidence -based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.  
 
On behalf of the A lliance, I am here to speak in support of LD 1718 , “An Act 
to Encourage Participation in Maine's Essential Support Workforce Through 
Access to Higher Education .” This bill creates the Essential Support Worker 
Tuition Grant Program  to provide up to 4 educat ion vouchers equal to a 
year's tuition up to $4,000 for an essential support worker employed at     
in-home or community support services reimbursed by the MaineCare 
program or other state program , or a family member of the essential 
support worker.  
 
Mainers all across our state are having a hard time finding home care, 
behavioral health services, support for people with intellectual or 
developmental disabilities, and access to  assisted living and nursing home 
care for themselves and their loved ones.  
 
Maine d oesn’t have enough “essential support workers” – people who work 
in home and community -based settings to provide  vital assistance and daily 
support with core aspects of life to all kinds of people who need help.  This 
means thousands of older people, peopl e who have physical, intellectual, or 
developmental disabilities, and people with behavioral health challenges 
cannot get the  support they need . 
 
In fact, a recent report, The High Cost of Undervaluing Direct Care Work1, 
“details the far -reaching costs of our broken direct care system. Some of the 
findings include:  
• Our collective failure to adequately support direct care workers is 
keeping more than 8,000 people out  of Maine’s labor force.  
                                                           
1 Arthur Phillips, Economic Policy Analyst &  Josie Phillips, State Priorities Partnership Fellow. The High Cost of Undervaluing  Direct Care Work. 
April 26, 2023. Accessed: https://www.mecep.org/wp -content/uploads/2023/04/The -High -Cost -of-Undervaluing -Direct -Care -Work.pdf   
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  Mental Health  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Concepts, Inc.  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Couns eling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
KidsPeace Maine  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Pathways of Maine  
Portland  Recovery Community 
Center  
Rumford Group Homes  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMain e.org  
  
 
 
• Maine is missing out on over $1 billion per year in additional economic activity as a 
result of people  dropping out of the labor force due to direct care challenges.  
 
• Undervaluing care work imposes significant public costs on our state, as low wages lead 
more workers to  rely on public assistance programs, including M aineCare and 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program  (SNAP). Meanwhile, the decline  in labor 
force participation due to direct care responsibilities means fewer  workers are 
contributing taxes. These combine to cost our state and federal budgets more than $7 0 
million each year.  
 
• Direct care workforce shortages place undue strains on Maine’s health care system. In 
March 2023,  Maine Medical Center had about 50 people under its care who were 
approved for discharge but could  not find an alternative care setting;  meanwhile, 
Northern Light Health noted that over a nearly six -month  period, the cost of delayed 
discharges across the system’s hospitals totaled $13.6 million and  amounted to 
approximately $63,000 per person. ” 
 
Clearly, the workforce shortage of essential  direct care workers is harming us all. I urge 
committee members to support LD 1718 and applaud Representative Meyer for bringing it 
forward. Thank you.  
