 
University of Maine ∙ University of Maine at Augusta ∙ University of Maine at Farmington ∙ University of Maine at Fort Kent ∙ University of 
Main e at Machias ∙ University of Maine at Presque Isle ∙ University of Southern Maine ∙ University of Maine School of Law  
 
DATE:  May 2, 2023  
TO:   Committee  on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
FROM:  Samantha Warren, UMS Director of Government & Community Relations   
                       samantha.warren@maine.edu  / (207) 632 -0389  
RE:   Support for LD  1718 , An Act to Encourage Participation in Maine's  
  Essential  Support Workforce Through Access to Higher Education  
 
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business: I write on 
behalf of the University of Maine System (UMS) in support  of LD 1718 , An A ct to Encourage 
Participation in Maine's Essential Support Workforce Through Access to Higher Education.  
As Maine’s largest education and economic development asset and one of its largest 
employers, with more than 30,000 students , faculty and staff who are  also parents, children, 
spouses  and siblings, our System  relies upon, respects and values the state’s direct 
care workforce . We recognize the severe shortage of direct care workers challenges our 
students and employees to fully meet their university commitments and  threatens  the health 
and productivity of Maine ’s people , communities and economy . 
UMS is grateful that Representative Meyer and LD 1718’s c osponsors and supporters 
rightfully recognize that public postsecondary education is the mos t proven path to 
social and economic mobility , and thus that tuition vouchers to Maine’s public universities, 
community colleges and maritime academy could  be a compelling  recruitment and retention 
benefit. A bachelor’s degree improves one’s earnings, health and life expectancy, and 
decreases the likelihood of poverty and unemployment. For example, working age alumni of 
our flagship, the University of Maine, earn more than double the state’s average 
median income  and pay nearly 50% more in state income taxes.  
Maine’s Commission to Study Long -term Care Workforce Issues noted in its 2020 report  that 
direct care worker turnover rates were as high a s 70% annually and that “ more employees 
were leaving for small incremental increases in pay than ever  before.” LD 1718  does not 
directly address wages and working conditions , yet we see th e education voucher program it 
proposes as a win -win. These vouchers will  provid e direct care workers a  valuable  
incentive t hat supplement s their pay and increase s their earning potential  and career 
opportunities through postsecondary education al attainment . At the same time, t his 
benefit  also improv es patient s’ health , safety  and ability to live in the community  by 
reducing direct care worker turnover and strengthening employees’  professional knowledge  
and skills . 
Based on our experience with other tuition voucher programs for which funding is limited , we 
encourage the Legislature to provide the Finance  Authority of Maine direction on how to 
prioritize applications and also adequate appropriation for its important administrative duties.  
Thank you for your support of the University of Maine System and your ongoing efforts to 
ensure  door-opening postsecondary education is accessible to all Mainers.  
