TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN SUPPORT OF L.D. 531 
“AN ACT TO ADD GRAY SQUIRRELS TO THE SPECIES LIST FOR THE OPEN TRAINING 
SEASON FOR HUNTING DOGS" 
- 
SPONSORED BY: Representative Bradstreet of Vassalboro 
DATE OF HEARING: April Z4, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Nate Webb, Wildlife Division Director at the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in 
support of L.D. 531. 
This bill adds gray squirrels to the list of those animals upon which a person may train 
dogs during the open training season for dogs. This provision would be in addition to 
the species that this activity is already provided for during that timeframe, including 
foxes, raccoons, and snowshoe hare. There are separate statutory requirements for 
training bears with dogs. 
Similar to snowshoe hare, gray squirrel are considered upland game and can be hunted 
during the open season (last Saturday of September through December 31 (traditional) 
or until February 28"‘ (falconry)). Squirrel hunting is a popular activity and can bea 
great way to recruit new hunters because it is low impact, can be done almost 
anywhere, and requires relatively little equipment. Using trained dogs to hunt squirrels 
is a well-established form of small game hunting in the southern United States and is 
gaining popularity elsewhere, including the northeast. Allowing the use of dogs to hunt 
squirrels has many benefits, including providing a unique hunting experience that is 
family-friendly, often with plenty of action and high success rates. 
Gray squirrels are abundant in Maine and the Department doesn't believe that this 
additional opportunity to train dogs will have any negative implications for squirrel 
populations or other wildlife. Additionally, the Department believes that adding the 
ability for a person to train their dogs to hunt squirrels is not likely to cause any major 
issues for landowners or other hunters. Squirrel hunters typically hunt with a small
number of dogs at a time (1-2 dogs) and dogs are trained to hunt close to the owner, 
trail silently and only bark when they have a squirrel treed. 
lf the committee is in favor of moving this proposal forward, we would suggest that you 
also add red squirrels to the bill, as this would simplify enforcement and provide 
additional opportunities for training dogs on an abundant squirrel species. 
l would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
