TESTIMONY OF SUSANNA RICHER  
IN OPPOSITION TO   
L.D. 531, “An Act to Add Gray Squirrels to the Species List for the Open Training Season for Hunting Dogs ” 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife  
April  24, 202 3 
 
 
Senator LaFountain , Representative Landry  and distinguished members of the Committee:  
 
Thank y ou for considering  my testimony in opposit ion to  L.D. 531 - An Ac t to Add Gray Squirrels to the Species List for the 
Open Training Season for Hunting Dogs .  This bill should n ot be passed  for the following reasons:  
 
1) While it is unclear whether this bill intends  to allow  trapped / penned squirrels or  free-roaming squirrels for training, it is 
important to note that squirrels are no t included  on the species list  covered  by the recently passed Civil Trespass with 
Hunting Dogs .  As a result , this bill , if passed , could allow hunting d ogs being trained on grey squirrels  to legally tresp ass on 
private posted land every day including Sun days during the very extensive training season ( July 1st through the following 
March 31st).   
 
Maine Landowners that have gone to the tr ouble  and expense to post their land,  have clearly communicated that they do 
not want to have the intrusion of hunting  dogs on their property.  We need to respect landowner  rights to peace and privacy . 
 
2) Squirrels have a long and frequent breeding sea son that occur s during hunting dog training season  (July 1st through the 
following March 31st).  Squirre ls will abandon their nests and young when scared /threatened .  There is not  much  scarier  to 
an animal  than being pursued  by a pack of dogs. This bill if passed would likely result in th e abandonment and inhumane 
death of many baby squirrels.  
 
3) Squirrels play an important role in supporting biodiversity and healthy ecosystems.  They plant seeds and are an 
important food source for many wild animals and birds of prey .  While  they may seem like disposable pests to some, it is 
important for us to prote ct healthy squirrel populations  in our state.    
 
4) There are viable alternatives available to using live squirrels for hunting dog train ing.   
 
For all the ab ove reasons, p lease vote “ought not to pass ” on L.D. 531.  
 
Thank you for your t ime and consideration.  
 
Susanna Richer  
Portland, ME  
 
