Senator Lafountain, Representative Landry and esteemed members of the 
Legislative Committee for Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, my name is Tyler Brown andI 
am submitting testimony in support of LD 531 “An act to add grey squirrels to the 
species list on the open training season for hunting dogs” introduced by Representative 
Bradstreet at my request. 
Through the pandemic, my two sons and I found solace and respite in the woods, 
engaging in many first time hunts together. During that time, we all found a passion for 
hunting gray squirrels over the many other species we pursued. The fast paced nature 
and ample opportunity of squirrel hunting, allowed my sons to remain engaged in the 
hunt and has led to many great memories in the woods together. 
During my research into the tactics and traditions of squirrel hunting, I happened 
across many hunters across the US that engage the use of hounds to track and "tree" 
squirrels. Last year, our family was able to work with a highly reputable breeder to add 
an English Coonhound named Taber to our family. I was fortunate enough to find a local 
club to learn the ins and outs of handling, training, bench shows and hunting with this 
amazing breed. 
Our initial training process involved scent drags and skins which present some 
limitations as they failed to provide opportunities for Taber to track live squirrels across 
the treetops once he arrived at the end of the scent trail. Upon reaching out to our local 
biologist with MEDIFW, I learned that training Taber on live squirrels could only be done 
during the hunting season for grey squirrels from late September to the last day of 
December. We took every opportunity in those three months to train Taber, resulting in 
his first squirrel on Thanksgiving day. To see Taber and my son's excitement upon our 
first successful hunt was truly extraordinary. 
Training a hunting dog takes time and many miles in the woods, more time than 
can be provided by the three months currently under Maine law. With the training 
season opening in July and ending the following March, many hunters enjoy up to eight 
months a year to be able to train their dogs on raccoons, birds and snowshoe hare.I 
requested this legislation from Representative Bradstreet in order to enjoy the same 
training period all other trainers have so that my sons and I can engage in the sport we 
love with Taber. 
I ask that you vote ought to pass on LD531 and thank you all very much for your 
time, consideration and service to our state.
