From: Janet Lynch, Pownal, representing myself Date of hearing: 8 May 2023 Re: the following bills: LD 624, “ An Act to Prohibit Government Officials from Maintaining Records Related to Firearms Owners” LD 943, “An Act to Enhance Privacy and Prohibit Shipping Companies from Maintaining Records of Firearm and Ammunition Shipments” LD 1451, “An Act to Prohibit State and Local Enforcement of Federal Firearms Laws” LD 1561, “ An Act to Restore Firearm Rights and Hunting Privileges to Persons Previously Convicted of Certain Nonviolent Felony Crimes” Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury, and Members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee. I oppose LDs 624, 943 and 451, and am deeply concerned by LD 1561 on common sense and public safety grounds. Specifically, I oppose LD 624, “ An Act to Prohibit Government Officials from Maintaining Records Related to Firearms Owners” because it makes it impossible to trace guns, which are inherently dangerous and are intended to kill. Keeping a database of firearms is a reasonable step toward ensuring that, if they are lost or stolen, firearms can be traced and taken out of circulation or returned to the original owner. Absent an ability to track firearms, anyone can easily traffic guns, because there is no record of these dangerous instruments. Motorists must register cars and the state may keep records on automobiles for public safety and indeed common sense reasons. While automobiles can be dangerous, they are intended for transport, not killing, but this cannot be said of guns whose sole purpose is to kill. It is well known that this country is awash in guns, and the result is horrific gun violence on a near daily basis. To address this public safety crisis, keeping track of firearms is fundamental to at least understanding the scope of the problem. Of particular concern are automatic and semiautomatic weapons, as these are the most deadly and the most commonly used in mass shootings with high mortality. Yet this bill specifically prohibits government from collecting even basic “information regarding the make, model, caliber or serial number of a firearm.” If we do not even know what kind and how many firearms are out there, we cannot hope to control this extreme public health crisis. The bill makes no sense and OUGHT NOT TO PASS. I also oppose LD 943, “An Act to Enhance Privacy and Prohibit Shipping Companies from Maintaining Records of Firearm and Ammunition Shipments” on similar grounds. It is common practice for shipping companies to keep records on all sorts of items, and in the case of items like alcohol, must report and keep records on those items to comply with legal requirements and to ensure that such items to not get into the hands of minors. To do their job properly, shipping companies must keep detailed records of items and those shipping them, to ensure that that items get where they are supposed to be going. This bill would make it impossible for shipping companies to conduct their business, as their business is based in keeping careful track of items shipped. The bill is frankly nonsensical and OUGHT NOT TO PASS.Page ! of !12
I also oppose LD 1451, “An Act to Prohibit State and Local Enforcement of Federal Firearms Laws.” There are not enough federal law enforcement ofﬁcials to enforce federal laws, so state and local and federal authorities must work together to ensure that the relatively few federal laws we have relating to ﬁrearms are in fact enforced. Tying the hands of state and local authorities when it comes to the enforcement of federal ﬁrearms laws would ensure that most federal laws would never be enforced for lack of law enforcement capability, making those laws ineffective and unenforceable. That is likely the intent of this bill, which is aimed at creating an environment where there is no regulation or oversight of ﬁrearms of any kind. Bills such as this make it nearly impossible to address the number one cause of death for American youth, which is ﬁrearms. This bill is dangerous and OUGHT NOT TO PASS.I am very concerned about LD 1561, “ An Act to Restore Firearm Rights and Hunting Privileges to Persons Previously Convicted of Certain Nonviolent Felony Crimes.” I note that the recent mass shootings in Bowdoin and Yarmouth were carried out by an individual who had recently been released from prison, and who had a history of violence. Perhaps I am missing something, but I do not see an exemption for those convicted of domestic violence for example, or those under restraining orders. Generally, I am concerned that the deﬁnition of “Certain Nonviolent Felony Crimes” may not be speciﬁc enough to prevent guns from getting into the hands of those with a proven history of violence and a willingness to use them for violent ends. The committee must carefully weigh the dangerous potential for deadly harm to the public when allowing previously convicted felons to own guns, and should seek more information about which kinds of felonies may be here exempted. I do not believe this bill should pass.Sincerely,Janet Lynch, Pownal
Page ! of !22

Janet Lynch
Pownal
LD 624
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury, and Members of the Criminal Justice and
Public Safety Committee,
Please find the text of my testimony in opposition to LD 624. In addition, I am 
attaching a signed pdf of my written testimony regarding LDs 943, 1451 and 1561
I oppose LD 624, “ An Act to Prohibit Government Officials from Maintaining 
Records Related to Firearms Owners” because it makes it impossible to trace guns, 
which are inherently dangerous and are intended to kill. Keeping a database of 
firearms is a reasonable step toward ensuring that, if they are lost or stolen, firearms 
can be traced and taken out of circulation or returned to the original owner. Absent an 
ability to track firearms, anyone can easily traffic guns, because there is no record of 
these dangerous instruments. Motorists must register cars and the state may keep 
records on automobiles for public safety and indeed common sense reasons. While 
automobiles can be dangerous, they are intended for transport, not killing, but this 
cannot be said of guns whose sole purpose is to kill. It is well known that this country 
is awash in guns, and the result is horrific gun violence on a near daily basis. To 
address this public safety crisis, keeping track of firearms is fundamental to at least 
understanding the scope of the problem. Of particular concern are automatic and 
semiautomatic weapons, as these are the most deadly and the most commonly used in 
mass shootings with high mortality. Yet this bill specifically prohibits government 
from collecting even basic “information regarding the make, model, caliber or serial 
number of a firearm.” If we do not even know what kind and how many firearms are 
out there, we cannot hope to control this extreme public health crisis. The bill makes 
no sense and OUGHT NOT TO PASS.
