Maine Sheriffs ’ Association  
“One Team, One Mission”  
 
Sheriff Dale P. Lancaster, President  
 
Sheriff Scott Nichols , 1st Vice -President, Sheriff William King , 2nd Vice -President – Sheriff Barry Curtis, Secretary –  
Sheriff Todd Brackett , Treasurer – Sheriff  Troy Morton, Immediate Past President –  
Sheriff Joel Merry, Past President -at-Large - Mary -Anne LaMarre, Executive Director  
 
  
 
  
 
     
 
May 8, 2023 
 
 
L.D. 624 – An Act to Prohibit Government Officials fro m Main taining  
Records Related to Firearms Owners  
  Senator Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury , and esteemed  members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety , my name is Dale Lancaster . I am t he Sheriff 
of Somerset  County and President of the  Maine Sheriffs Associatio n.  This testi mony is  on their 
behalf.  
 Maine sheriffs  discussed th is bill and those present voted to take a position of Neither For Nor 
Against  L.D. 624 – A n Act to Prohibit Government Officials  from Maintaining Records Related 
to Firearms Owners . 
 It’s important to note that sheriffs are  not unanimous on this  position.  We had a very detailed 
and careful discussion as we scrutinized the language for L.D. 624.  The concerns presented are primarily related to the well- being of our deput ies as they conduct the ir day -to-day patrol 
responsibilities.  
 The word ‘ record ’ is broad and not clearly defined in this bill as written.  Currently, if a deputy is 
dispatched to a residence where we know fi rearms are contained , it’s in the best interest of the 
deputy to know that information prior to approaching the situation.  S heriffs do keep internal 
records for this very specific purpose.  When an emergency call is made for a resident that is in 
need of law enforcement , it’s irresponsible to expect that deputy to assess the situation without 
sufficient information to protect not only the  deputy, but any citizens inside the dwelling.   
 Additionally, law enforcement certification requires regular firearms training to ensure the 
upkeep of critical sk ills needed to perform in the field.  Sheriffs ’ offices currently document the 
firearm used during these trainings.  L.D. 624, as written, would prevent law enforcement f rom 
recording the  firearms used to complete the required training . 
 Maine sheriffs appreciate the opportunity to share our position of opposition for  LD 624, and we 
urge each of you to carefully consider the language of this bil l and the un intended consequences 
that could result in its passage.  I welcome any questions you may have.  
 Sincerely,   
  
 Sherif f Dale P. Lancaster  
President , Maine Sheriffs’ Associatio n 

