 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Opposition To 
LD 624 - An Act to Prohibit Government Officials from Maintaining Records Related to Firearms 
Owners 
And 
LD 1451 - An Act to Prohibit State and Local Enforcement of Federal Firearms Laws 
May 8, 2023 
 Sen. Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury and distinguished members of the Criminal Justice and Public 
Safety Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I providing testimony, in support of LD 624, An Act 
to Prohibit Government Officials from Maintaining Records Related to Firearms Owners, and LD 1451, 
An Act to Prohibit State and Local Enforcement of Federal Firearms Laws, on behalf of the Maine 
Municipal Association, which represents the interests of municipal government before the Legislature. 
The positions of the Association are established by our 70-member Legislative Policy Committee (LPC), 
who are elected by the councils and selectboards of municipalities in each of Maine’s 35 Senate districts. 
LD 624 would interfere with the ability to provide concealed handgun permits to residents of the 
state of Maine. The applicant not only enjoys the ability to carry a concealed handgun inside state and 
national parks, it also allows them to carry in more than 30 states that provide reciprocity to permit 
carriers. While no weapons are associated with the records maintained for permit holders, the base 
assumption is that one does not apply for a permit without the need for one, or ownership of a handgun. 
LD 624 would prohibit the issuance which clearly has value to the people of Maine as these applicants 
have only increased since Maine became an “Open Carry” state.  
LD 624 would also prohibit the logging of evidence of a crime involving a weapon, the 
confiscation and temporary holding of weapons under the “Yellow Flag” laws that are intended to remove 
dangerous firearms and other weapons from individuals who are a danger to themselves and others 
through a judicial process to ensure their due process rights. Stolen weapons would not be allowed to be 
tracked or returned to their owner if located. This bill simply makes no sense. However, should the 
committee decide to move forward with the bill, the storage problems experienced by municipalities and 
counties who are maintaining weapons for a period of two years under the “Yellow Flag” bill would be 
solved as the operational reality would mean they could not be returned to the owner following their 
statutory retention and could simply be destroyed without the ability to retain ownership records.  
LD 1451 would worsen the outcomes of LD 624 and allow prohibited persons to obtain and 
distribute weapons and remove the ability for law enforcement to disrupt the flow of drugs into the state 
with their federal partners. It would further guarantee that law abiding gun owners could not benefit from 
purchasing weapons or obtain a concealed weapons permit, as Maine authorities could not report 
disqualifying criminal activity to the federal authorities to meet gun purchase background check 

requirements. The likely result could be an exclusion from those claiming Maine residency from being 
trusted to meet federal background checks and unable to buy from the legal market as no federal firearms 
licensee could ensure they are not selling to a prohibited person under 18 U.S.C. § 922(d). Such efforts in 
other states are unlikely to survive a constitutional challenge as the federal government has explicitly 
occupied this field.  
At a time when municipalities are increasingly reliant on our federal and multi-jurisdictional 
partners to address significant upticks in interstate violent drug crime, human trafficking and domestic 
threats against our schools and community institutions, this is not the time to remove any agency from 
police to cooperate with our federal law enforcement partners.  
 
 
