March 8, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee. As co-founder of Orono Brewing Company i would like to offer testimony in strong 
support of LD 740, “An Act to Clarify the Criteria for State Approval of Alcoholic Beverage 
Container Labels” . LD 740 provides clarity and predictability in the process of approving beer 
container labels. 
As you may know, all brewery and small brewery licensees must register their product labels 
with BABLO prior to selling their product in Maine. Any licensees wishing to sell their products 
outside of Maine must also obtain label approvals (known as a “COLA") through the Federal 
Alcohol, Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau (“TTB”). We register all of our labels with BABLO and 
most of them with TTB. in 2022 Orono Brewing Company worked with the marketing company 
that represents University of Maine athletics, and Orono Brewing Company became a major 
marketing sponsor of athletics. Part of that sponsorship package included the right to use the 
athletic logo of the University of Maine in the branding of Let’s Go Black Bears IPA, the ofﬁcial 
beer of the Black Bears, brewed by Orono Brewing Company. We were very excited to have this 
opportunity, and agreed to donate a portion of all Let’s Go Black Bears sales to the Alfond Fund. 
We submitted the label to TTB, and it was approved. We then submitted the label to BABLO, 
and it was rejected based on the use of the University of Maine athletic logo. The rejection was 
based on the interpretation that because the University of Maine has a liquor license, we can’t 
use their athletic logo. My hope is the LD 740 will help clarity regulations so we can maximize 
these great collaborations. I'd like to have the athletic logo on Let's Go Black Bears lPA next 
yeaﬂ 
LD 740 provides very clear rules about what criteria BABLO can use to reject a container label. 
It puts guardrails on how labels will be evaluated and most importantly — provides clarity and 
predictability to manufacturers seeking to comply with the label requirements. Clarifying these 
criteria will provide a clear set of guidelines for alcoholic beverage producers to follow, which will 
help to streamline the approval process and ensure that all labels are consistent and meet the 
necessary standards. This will ultimately benefit both consumers and producers, as it will help to 
create a more transparent and efﬁcient marketplace. Thank you for consideration of our 
testimony, and please note we would be happy to discuss this matter further at any time. 
Sincerely, 
Abe Furth 
Qrono Brewing Company
