g STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
5’; BUREAU OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND LOTTERY OPERATIONS 
8 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04330-0008 
1" KIRSTEN LC FIGUEROA 
COMMISSIONER ,3 1:13?‘~ 
JA GREGORY R. MINEO 
NET T‘ Wm Testimony of DIRECTOR 
GOVERNOR 
Gregory R. Mineo 
Director, Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages and Lottery Operations 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
LD 740 — “An Act to Clarify the Criteria for State Approval of Alcoholic Beverage Container Labels” 
March 8, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs, my name is Gregg Mineo and I am the Director of the Bureau of 
Alcoholic Beverages and Lottery Operations. I am providing testimony neither for nor against LD 
740. 
LD 740 proposes limiting the criteria the Bureau currently applies when reviewing alcoholic 
beverage registrations as required by statute under 28-A MRS §6-A. 
Admittedly, at several times during the last two years, turnaround times for label approvals have 
swelled to several weeks due to compounding staff vacancies. BABLO understands the frustration 
that this causes the industry and that such backlogs impede the course of business. The division 
within the Bureau that processes label registrations is currently staffed at four FTEs. The Bureau 
requested and advocated for an additional Tax Examiner and Office Associate II position in the 
biennial budget to increase staff capacity to accommodate with the proliferation of labels. The 
current turnaround time for label review is three days; with the additional staff, the Bureau can 
ensure that turn around is maintained. 
Pursuant to Chapters 104 and 107 of the Bureau’s administrative rules, labels are reviewed for the 
following items: inducement of minors, unfounded health statements, profanity, and private 
labels. The language of the proposed legislation has been lifted from the Bureau’s administrative 
rules, but eliminates the criteria related to unfounded health statements and private labels which 
the bureau feels are important. 
Of all the labels submitted for approval of which there were 10,376 in 2022, only a small 
percentage were ﬂagged for further review by a three-person panel 25 labels appealing to 
minors, 68 with unfounded health statements, l for profanity, and l5 as private labels. The Bureau 
always advises manufacturers on what changes, usually minor design edits, will get their label 
approved and into the marketplace. 
Page l of2
The greater source of delay is the 20% of label registrations that are ﬁled incomplete and require 
the Bureau to follow-up to obtain missing information such as price-posting and territory 
assignment needed to complete processing. This issue will be largely addressed by the Bureau’s 
modernization project, when label registrations will be submitted online and required ﬁelds will 
prevent incomplete submissions. 
In closing, the 21$‘ Amendment gave states primary responsibility for regulating liquor. The 
Bureau has signiﬁcant concerns about deferring the responsibility to the TTB. Only products being 
shipped across state lines require TTB approval. The TTB does not review for the same criteria as 
BABLO and is generally permissive. We would ask the Committee to allow time for BABLO to 
sit down with the in-state manufacturers and ﬁnd a mutually agreeable solution to bring back to 
the committee. 
Thank you for allowing me to testify before the Committee today. I am happy to respond to any 
questions, and of course will be available for the work session. 
Page 2 of2
