‘*2 brewers’ guitd 
March 8, 2023 
LD 740 “An Act to Clarify the Criteria for State Approval of Alcoholic Beverage Container 
LabeIs” - TESTIMONY IN SUPPORT 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Veterans and Legal Affairs 
Committee. 
On behalf of the Maine Brewers’ Guild, who represent the interests of the craft beer industry in 
Maine, including brewers who brew 99.9% of all beer brewed in Maine, we would like to offer 
testimony in strong support of LD 740, “An Act to Clarify the Criteria for State Approval of 
Alcoholic Beverage Container Labels". 
LD 740 is the first of two bills put forth by the Guild seeking to provide clarity and predictability in 
the process of approving beer container labels. The second bill, LR 1164, has not yet been 
printed. The goal of the two bills in combination is to say that any brewery obtaining a federal 
label approval (a “COLA”) would simply need to file a notice of that label approval to BABLO 
without waiting for a duplicative state approval. Brewers who do not apply for a COLA would file 
a label registration with BABLO, but the review of that application would be limited to the factors 
outlined in LD 740. 
The goal of these proposals is to not to weaken or eliminate the label approval process but to 
provide sorely needed streamlining and clarity to a process that has become slow, unduly 
cumbersome and confusing for brewers and other manufacturers. 
As you may know, all brewery and small brewery licensees must register their product labels 
with BABLO prior to selling their product in Maine. Any licensees wishing to sell their products 
outside of Maine must also obtain label approvals (“COLAs“) through the Federal Alcohol, 
Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau (“TTB”). The majority of brewers in Maine register their labels 
with the TTB as well as with BABLO. 
BABLO’s labeling rules simply state that “all labels on malt liquor, wine, sparkling and fortiﬁed 
wine, low-alcohol spirits products, and hard cider shall be in conformity with the regulations 
adopted by the Federal Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau (“TTB”). All labels on malt 
liquor, wine, sparkling and fortiﬁed wine, low-alcohol spirits, and hard cider must be registered 
with the Bureau. Registration is accomplished by submitting the label, the appropriate fee, and 
application for registration demonstrating that the label has been approved by the TTB...”
While this rule appears straightfon/vard, Maine brewers increasingly report rejections of label 
registrations based on subjective criteria not articulated or contemplated in the rule or statute. 
In addition, the timeline for approval has been steadily increasing and now stands at overa 
month to receive approvals. That delay in approval times is very problematic for brewers who 
are under increasing pressure to produce new and novel beers by tasting room visitors. Having 
special product is an important part of how the craft brewing industry has differentiated itself 
over the years and is a major driver for return business to local breweries. Long delays in label 
approvals mean breweries cannot sell beer that is ready to be sold, which not only affects the 
freshness and quality of the product but also restricts critical cash flow to these small 
businesses. 
In addition to time delays, members have reported mistaken and inconsistent denials of 
registrations based on questions about issues that don’t relate to label registrations, including 
trademark law and private contract arrangements. One member was told that a label for a beer 
could not be approved because the beer could not be named after a ski trail without the ski 
resort’s written permission. As you likely know, that situation would be governed by private 
contract and has nothing to do with label registrations and does not fall under that regulatory 
authority of BABLO. These kinds of rejections not only slow the process down, they create 
confusion and frustration on the behalf of manufacturers. 
LD 740 provides very clear rules about what criteria BABLO can use to reject a container label. 
lt puts guardrails on how labels will be evaluated and most importantly — provides clarity and 
predictability to manufacturers seeking to comply with the label requirements which should lead 
to more timely issuance of approvals. This will ultimately benefit both consumers and producers, 
as it will help to create a more transparent and efficient marketplace. 
Thank you for consideration of our testimony, and please note we would be happy to discuss 
this matter further at any time. 
Sincerely, 
<>v@<a Kate Knox 
Bernstein Shur 
Lobbyist, Maine Brewers Guild
