Janet T. Mills  
GOVERNOR   
S T A T E  O F  M A I NE  
M A I N E  L A B O R  R E L AT I O N S  B O A R D  
90 S T A T E  H O U S E  S T A T I O N  
A U G U S T A ,  M A I N E   0 4 3 3 3 -0 0 5 4  
( 2 0 7 )  2 8 7 -2015  
W W W . M A I N E . G O V / M L R B  
 
 TESTIMONY NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST L.D. 1922  
 
“An Act to Allow Bargaining Agents for Public Sector Unions to Merge ” 
 
Neil P. Daly, Executive Director  
Maine Labor Relations Board  
May 16 , 2023  
 
Senator Tipping , Representative  Roeder , and members of the Jo int Standing Committee on 
Labor and Housing , my name is  Neil Daly , and it is my privilege to serve as the  Executive 
Director of the Maine Labor Relations Board  (MLRB) . 
 
This testimony is  neither for nor against L.D. 1922  but will review my understanding of  the 
proposed changes set forth through the bill . 
 
As backgro und, u nder the Municipal Public Employees Labor Relations Law, the MLRB  is 
responsible for certifying unions as the designated bargaining agents for groups of employees, 
known as bargaining units .  This is typically accomplished through either the majority sign -up 
process or through an election.  Thereafter , if the bargaining unit wants to change union 
representation, they must generally do so through another election in which the employees 
choose  between the incumbent union and a new union.  These elections are known as 
decertification/new bargaining agent elections.  
 
Currently, if two  or more  local affiliates of the same labor organization want to merge into a 
single local, and each of the local affiliates is the certified bargaining agent for their respective 
bargaining unit, the MLRB  would need to conduct  separate decertification/new bargaining agent 
elections  for each of the bargaining units in question .  In contrast, u nder L.D. 1922, the MLRB  
would conduct a single election for all of the bargaining units at issue to determine if they want 
to merge into a single local affiliate.  
 
Notably, L.D. 1922 only addresses the merger of the actual bargaining agents , but not  the 
bargaining units .  In other words, should L.D. 1922 be enacted, local union affiliates could merge 
into a single entity .  However, the actual bargaining units represented by that new local would 
remain separate.  If the parties wanted to merge the actual ba rgaining units into a single unit, that 
requested merger would remain subject to the established unit merger process set forth in 26 
M.R.S.A. 966(4).  
 
Thank you for this opportunity to discuss L.D. 1 922. 
