1 Office of Policy and Legal Analysis Committee: EUT LA: LJL LR (item): 1674(02) New Title?: Y Add Emergency?: N Date: 3/27/2023 Filename: G:\COMMITTEES\EUT\Amendments\131st R1\167402.docx  LD496 PROPOSED SPONSOR AMENDMENT Offered by Rep. Boyle Strike and replace the title with the following: An Act to Address Energy Storage System Decommissioning and Clarify Solar Energy Development Decommissioning Strike everything after the title and before the summary and replace with the following: Sec. 1. 35-A MRSA §3496 is amended to read: §3496. Administration and enforcement; rulemaking The Department of Environmental Protection shall administer and enforce this chapter with respect to the decommissioning of energy storage system developments for which it is the environmental permitting entity, subject to the same powers and authorities granted to it pursuant to Title 38, chapter 2, including but not limited to which may include, but is not limited to, the adoption of rules and the establishment of reasonable fees. The Maine Land Use Planning Commission shall administer and enforce this chapter with respect to the decommissioning of energy storage system developments for which it is the environmental permitting entity, subject to the same powers and authorities granted to it pursuant to Title 12, chapter 206-A, including but not limited to which may include, but is not limited to, the adoption of rules and the establishment of reasonable fees. Rules adopted by the Department of Environmental Protection or by the Maine Land Use Planning Commission pursuant to this section are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.  Sec. 2. 35-A MRSA §3497 is enacted to read:  §3497. Applicability This chapter applies to a solar energy development with ground-mounted solar panels occupying 3 or more acres on which construction begins on or after October 1, 2021 and to any other solar energy development with ground-mounted solar panels occupying 3 or more acres that undergoes a transfer of ownership on or after October 1, 2021. 
2 Office of Policy and Legal Analysis  Sec. 3. 35-A MRSA c. 34-E is enacted to read:  Chapter 34-E Energy Storage System Decommissioning §3498. Definitions As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have the following meanings. 1.  Decommissioning.  "Decommissioning" means the physical removal of all components of an energy storage system development, including but not limited to, energy storage modules and associated anchoring systems and foundations to a depth of at least 24 inches or to the depth of bedrock, whichever is less, and other structures, buildings, roads, fences, cables, electrical components or associated facilities and foundations to a depth of at least 24 inches or to the depth of bedrock, whichever is less, to the extent the components of the development are not otherwise in or proposed to be placed in productive use or otherwise authorized to remain in place by the environmental permitting entity.   For any portion of an energy storage system development located on land classified as farmland any time within 5 years preceding the start of construction of the development, "decommissioning" means the physical removal of all such components of the development to a depth of at least 48 inches or to the depth of bedrock, whichever is less, to the extent such components are not otherwise in or proposed to be placed in productive use or otherwise authorized to remain in place by the environmental permitting entity.   "Decommissioning" includes the grading to postconstruction grade and revegetation of all earth disturbed during construction and decommissioning, except for areas already restored. 2. Energy storage system. “Energy storage system” has the same meaning as in section 3481, subsection 6.  3.  Environmental permitting entity.  "Environmental permitting entity" means: A.  The Department of Environmental Protection in the case of an energy storage system development: (1)  Located wholly or partly outside of the unorganized and deorganized areas; or (2)  Subject to the department's jurisdiction pursuant to Title 38, chapter 3, subchapter 1, article 6; or B.  The Maine Land Use Planning Commission in the case of an energy storage system located wholly in the unorganized and deorganized areas and not subject to the jurisdiction of the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to Title 38, chapter 3, subchapter 1, article 6. 
3 Office of Policy and Legal Analysis 4.  Farmland.  "Farmland" has the same meaning as in Title 36, section 1102, subsection 4. 5.  Transfer of ownership.  "Transfer of ownership" means a change in the legal entity that owns or operates an energy storage system development.  A sale or exchange of stock or membership interests or a merger is not a transfer of ownership as long as the legal entity that owns or operates the energy storage system development remains the same. 6.  Unorganized and deorganized areas.  "Unorganized and deorganized areas" has the same meaning as in Title 12, section 682, subsection 1. §3499. Decommissioning plan required 1. Prohibition. A person may not construct, cause to be constructed or operate an energy storage system development occupying 3 or more acres without first obtaining approval of a decommissioning plan from the environmental permitting entity under this section. 2. Plan requirements. A decommissioning plan must provide for the decommissioning of an energy storage system development and include demonstration of current and future financial capacity, which must be unaffected by the owner's or operator's future financial condition, to fully fund decommissioning in accordance with an approved decommissioning plan under this chapter. 3.  Standards. An environmental permitting entity shall approve a decommissioning plan whenever it finds the following: A. The plan, if implemented, will result in successful decommissioning of the energy storage system development, including the restoration of farmland sufficient to support resumption of farming or agricultural activities; B. The plan provides for the recycling of the waste components of the energy storage system that are recyclable and disposing of the components that are not recyclable at facilities authorized to accept such components; C. The person identified in the plan as responsible for decommissioning demonstrates financial assurance, in the form of a performance bond, surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit or other form of financial assurance acceptable to the environmental permitting entity, for the total cost of decommissioning, including the cost of recycling the waste components of the energy storage system that are recyclable and disposing of the components that are not recyclable at facilities authorized to accept them; and D. The plan requires the financial assurance be updated 15 years after approval of the plan and no less frequently than every 5 years thereafter. Updates to financial assurance required under this subsection must be submitted to the environmental permitting entity on or before December 31st of the year in which such updates are required. 
4 Office of Policy and Legal Analysis 4. Applicability. This section does not apply to an energy storage system development on which construction began prior to January 1, 2024 unless the energy storage system development undergoes a transfer of ownership on or after January 1, 2024 in which case the energy storage system development is subject to the requirements of this section.  Upon a transfer of ownership of an energy storage system development subject to a decommissioning plan approved under this section, a person that transfers ownership of the development remains jointly and severally liable for implementation of the plan until the environmental permitting entity approves transfer of the decommissioning plan to the new owner or operator. 5. Administration and enforcement; rulemaking. The Department of Environmental Protection shall administer and enforce this chapter with respect to the decommissioning of energy storage system developments for which it is the environmental permitting entity, subject to the same powers and authorities granted to it pursuant to Title 38, chapter 2, which may include, but are not limited to the adoption of rules and the establishment of reasonable fees. The Maine Land Use Planning Commission shall administer and enforce this chapter with respect to the decommissioning of energy storage system developments for which it is the environmental permitting entity, subject to the same powers and authorities granted to it pursuant to Title 12, chapter 206-A, which may include, but are not limited to the adoption of rules and the establishment of reasonable fees.  Rules adopted by the Department of Environmental Protection or by the Maine Land Use Planning Commission pursuant to this section are routine technical rules as defined in Title 5, chapter 375, subchapter 2-A.  Sec. 4. PL 2021, c. 151, section 2 is repealed. SUMMARY This amendment replaces the bill. It prohibits a person from constructing, causing to be constructed or operating an energy storage system development occupying 3 or more acres without first obtaining approval of a decommissioning plan from an environmental permitting agency. It establishes the requirements for a decommissioning plan, including the removal of the energy storage system development components, the recycling of the waste components that are recyclable and regrading and revegetation of all earth disturbed during construction and decommissioning. The plan must include demonstration of current and future financial capacity to fully fund decommissioning under the plan.  The amendment clarifies in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 35-A, chapter 34-D, related to solar energy development decommissioning, that the Department of Environmental Protection and the Maine Land Use Planning Commission are authorized, but not required, to adopt rules to implement the requirements of the chapter and adds language to clarify the applicability of the chapter. It repeals the unallocated language related to applicability in Public Law 2021, chapter 151, section 2. 
Greg Robie
Highland Mills/Winslow/China
LD 496
I seem to have not effected the intended upload I want to link to, so I am trying again. 
Maybe attachments update on a different timeframe, or I am less than skilled in this 
stuff. Regardless, and again (and edited – this thing goes back to a March public 
hearing, not the April one I imagined. MyBad!:
When updating the evolving #BeltwayOfBills snookering Maine document (May 2, 
2023), I discovered that this 3/27/23 ammendment to LD 496 by its sponsoring 
Representative is yet to be uploaded into the database for the Legislature. This 
amendment is dated 11 days after the public hearing on the bill. Today, an additional 
36 days later, it is not in the public record. The [misleading] "Concept Draft" remains 
the public face of the snookering. 
By asking for this of the Committee Clerk I got this 3/27/23 version on April 5, 2023. 
Since I can upload this, and I need a linkable version of it for the #BeltwayOfBills 
thing, I am posting it today. Article I, Section 2. of our Constitution demand this 
posting for the required transparency regarding our legislative process that is obscured
from view – and for whatever the cause that it is not yet posted.
=)
(My guess is that by not uploading the amended version, further amendment become 
possible – along with whatever else is integral to less than transparent legislative 
processes ... except that it is voted out of committee, as OTP-AM on March 29th, but 
ALSO listed as "Not Reported Out" on the same rastered page concerning this bill. 
Perhaps a "Bugs Happen" thing?)
