April 10, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
RE: LD 208 An Act Concerning Home Care Services 
My name is Adam LaMonica and l am the Operations Manager at Maxim Healthcare Services, Inc. (“Maxim”). 
Maxim is a national provider of home healthcare, homecare, and additional in-home service options. WeV 
provide over 100,000 hours of service per year throughout Maine via our Portland ofﬁce employing 
approximately 140 nurses who care for over 75 patients a year, primarily offering private duty nursing (PDN). 
These services are provided in the home for medically-complex and vulnerable pediatric and adult patient 
populations under Medicaid, many of whom require assistive technology such as ventilators and 
tracheostomies to sustain life. We are also members of the Home Care and Hospice Alliance of Maine 
(Alliance), which represents the interests of home healthcare providers throughout the state. 
I am testifying today in support of LD 208, An Act Concerning Home Care Services. Over the years, home* 
healthcare stakeholders have advocated for fair rate adjustments for home healthcare nurses and caregivers. 
While this is an ongoing initiative for the industry we would appreciate better oversight on the type of services 
patients are waiting to receive. This legislation would provide transparency for the community by incorporating 
a wait list on how many medically complex children and adults are waiting for PDN nurses to care for them in 
the comforts of their homes. In addition, this legislation would ensure that providers conduct a MedKids A 
assessment for the under 21 population even if there are not any available nurses to work. By including this 
population in the State's Statewide Assessing Sen/ices, the community will be better informed on the number 
of those receiving care and those awaiting PDN services. 
Currently, agencies like Maxim are instructed to only administer an assessment and submit them via MedKids 
to DHHS once staff is identified and ‘admission for PDN care is imminent. In this process, only those individuals 
who are getting staff are visible to DHHS and the State. It is for this reason that Maxim supports LD 208's 
proposal for a new assessment process to be established so that MedKids can be completed and submitted at 
the time of need instead of when the need is ﬁlled. 
Maxim currently has over 40 patients who are waiting for a home healthcare nurse. Either they are waiting to 
be discharged from a hospital or they are being cared for by their primary caregiver in their homes, this gives 
us a slight glimpse of those who are waiting for PDN services. These individuals require skilled nursing' 
services performed in the home by a registered nurse (RN) or licensed practical nurse (LPN) under the 
supervision of an RN from between 4 to 24 hours per day every day in order to manage their chronic condition 
and keep them safe in their homes and communities. Our goal is to keep these individuals in the setting that 
promotes their highest quality of life and allows them the opportunity to engage in their Maine communities. 
Without nursing care, parents are forced to leave theirjobs to care for their loved ones which puts an 
unnecessary burden on their livelihood. 
CARiNG. SERVING. ENRiC¥~i!NG LIVES.
5 
Thank you for your support of home healthcare and Private Duty Nursing sen/ices across the state. We hope 
that the committee will consider establishing a PDN waitlist. This legislation would benefit the state’s efforts 
related to reimbursement, recruitment, and care coordination in order to do a better job caring for Maine’s 
medically-complex children, adults and individuals of all ages with disabilities. 
CARING. 3ERVlNG. ENRiCH§N €3 LIVES.
