2 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES i“? 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Margar; Craven TTY: Maine Relay 711 
41 Russell Street 
Lewiston, ME 04240 
(207) r83-1897 
Margaret.Craven@legislature.maine.gov 
April 10, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Margaret Craven introducing 
LD 208, An Act Concerning Home Care Services 
Before the Health and Human Services Committee 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and fellow members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee, my name is Margaret Craven, and I represent House District 93, which 
includes part of Lewiston. I am here today to present LD 208, An Act Concerning Home Care 
Services. 
This bill requires the Department to establish a waiting list of individuals who are eligible for 
home care services under Section 19 and Section 96 and to publish certain information about the 
waiting list on the Departrnent ’s website. This bill also requires the Department to submit an 
annual report to this committee regarding the waitlists beginning in February 2024. 
Lastly, the bill requires the Department to contract with a third-party entity to conduct 
assessments for children who have not attained 21 years of age who the Department determines 
are eligible for private duty nursing and personal care services provided in a residential setting or 
other setting where normal life activities take place. My understanding is that assessments for 
disabled infants and children under the age of 21 are conducted at the discretion of home health 
care providers. Given the shortage of home care nurses, many children who would be eligible for 
services are not being assessed. By adding this requirement, the state will be better informed on 
the number of disabled children receiving care and those awaiting services. 
There are providers here today who are better positioned to speak to the needs of this bill, soI 
would ask that you hold your questions for those experts who are with us this aftemoon. 
Thank you for your time and attention.
