                                                          
 
April 1st, 2023 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services, my name is Parame Limvattanalert, a resident of Westbrook, Maine and Assistant 
Director of Nursing Southern Region of COR Health Services. We are also a member of the Home Care & 
Hospice Alliance of Maine.  
 
COR Health is a home health agency. We provide Private Duty Nursing, Home Care Services, Medical 
Staffing, Behavioral Health Professionals and Targeted Case Management Services throughout the State 
of Maine  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide written comment in support of LD 208, “An Act Concerning 
Home Care Services”. I wish to thank Representative Craven for sponsoring this important legislation to 
keep home care patients safe. 
In my experience with pediatric home care, I have been a private duty nurse serving children with 
medically complex needs for 5 years, was also a nurse coordinator responsible for pediatric referrals, 
client admissions including performing assessment and finding staff. Shortage of staffing is one of the 
most challenging obstacles for these families especially families living in rural areas. Even though our 
team works cooperatively and efficiently to track and to prioritize our referrals waitlist by medical needs, 
we are unable to share client health information with other agencies due to HIPPA. We can only 
encourage families to reach out to other agencies to ensure care can be provided from multiple agencies. 
 
As of right now, our process is to receive referrals, request medical records to determine the appropriate 
services, identify staffing, once staff is identified then we onboard staff, provide training, perform client 
admission and assessment in the home, and wait for approval from MaineCare. During this long process, 
which could take months, we often lose caregivers or find out approved services will not meet the 
caregiver’s needs. This causes us to lose a caregiver and disappoint a family.   
 
Lastly, I strongly believe having a third-party entity conduct assessments for all clients and provide 
information about the number of clients waiting for these services, the number of unmet hours, and the 
geographical distribution of these clients across the State of Maine will be a tremendous help to families 
in need of services. 
 
Sincerely, 
Parame Limvattanalert, BSN, RN                             
Assistant Director of Nursing Southern Region 
COR Health services 
Email: plimvattanalert@corhealthservices.com 
Tel: (207) 209-0096  
