 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 10 , 2023  
 
Senator  Joseph  Baldacci , Chair  
Representative  Michele Meyer , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 208 - An Act  Concerning Home Care Services  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative  Meyer , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Services:  
 
This letter provide s information regarding LD 208, An Act Concerning Home Care 
Services .  The Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) is neither for nor 
against this bill.   
 
The bill would require  DHHS  to do the following:   
• Establish a waiting list for individuals  eligible  to receive home care services 
under rule Chapter 101; MaineCare  Benefits Manual, Chapters II and III, 
Section 19, Home and Community  Benefits for Elderly  and Adults with 
Disabilities, and MaineCare State Plan Section 96 , Private Duty Nursing and 
Personal Care Services;  
• Publish  certain information about the waiting lists on its publicly  accessible 
website;  
• Submit an annual report to the joint standing committee of the Legislature  
having jurisdiction over Health  and Human services  matters relating to the 
waitlist;  and  
• Contract with a 3rd party entity to conduct  assessment s for children  who have 
not attained 21 years of age that are e ligible  for private duty nursing  and 
personal care services provided in residential settings o r other settings where 
normal life activities take place.  
 
Neither Section 19 nor Section 96 have program waitlist s. Once an adult MaineCare 
member has been found eligible for these services through a functional assessment, the 
member is referred to a Service Coordination Agency to identify providers and authorize 
services.  Some providers maintain wait lists  for prospective new clients.  However, if  
this bill is referring to wait lists maintained by individual providers,  the Department does 
not have a mechanism for collecting and compiling that data .  In order to do so, the 
Department would need to procure a system for collecting such information and adopt 
rules requiring providers to report into the system , and the  fiscal note would need to be 
amende d.   
 
OADS does maintain  a webpage where program -level waitlist information for home and 
community -based  programs is publicly posted  on a quarterly basis . 
 
Currently, Maine Care  members under twenty -one years of age  are assessed by  the Private 
Duty Nursing  agenc ies that will provide staffing for the m. There is no current assessment 
conducted by a third -party  vendor , as there is for adults (the “Maximus” assessment) . If 
the Department were required to develop a third -party assessment for children, a vendor 
would need to be procured and funds appropriated for development and ongoing 
assessment costs.  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going 
forward. If you have any further questions, please feel free to cont act me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Paul Saucier  
Director, Office of Aging and Disability Services  

