TESTIMONY OF 
CHASE HEWITT, STAFF ATTORNEY FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: April 11, 2023, at 1:00 P.M. 
L.D. 1118 - “An Act to Reduce the Sales Tax on Automobiles ” 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee — good afternoon, my name is Chase Hewitt, Staff Attorney for Tax 
Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services. I am here 
today at the request of the Administration to testify Against L.D. ll 18, “An Act to 
Reduce the Sales Tax on Automobiles. ” 
This bill seeks to exempt from the sales and use tax the ﬁrst $7,500 of the 
“mal<er’s list price” of an automobile purchased on or after January l, 2024. Sales 
tax is calculated on the “sale price” of the item being sold, and the “sale price” of 
an automobile is not always equivalent to the “maker’s list price” as deﬁned in 
Title 36, section 1482, subsection 4. “Maker’s list price” as described in that 
section is generally equal to the MSRP for a motor vehicle, and is the value used to 
calculate the vehicle excise tax due at a vehicle’s annual municipal registration. 
There is a question whether the bill as written would actually reduce the 
amount of tax due on the sale of an automobile. If the bill is intended to exempt 
the ﬁrst $7,500 of the price actually paid for an automobile, the term “maker's list 
price” should be replaced with “sale price, less any applicable trade-in credit.” 
“Automobiles ” as deﬁned in the sales tax law includes all-terrain vehicles, 
and pickup trucks or vans with a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or 
less; as written, this proposal would extend the partial exemption to those vehicles
1
as well. It is unclear if the bill seeks to exempt only sales of new vehicles; the 
current language would appear to exempt the sale of used automobiles, as well as 
automobiles purchased in a casual sale. 
A 
The Administration looks forward to working With the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee ’s questions.
