March 31, 2023   
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director 
The Nature Conservancy in Maine 
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org 
 
14 Maine St., Suite 401 Brunswick, Maine 04011 nature.org/maine 
 
Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government 
 
RE: LD 671 – An Act to Factor Revised Projections of Sea Level Rise into State Planning on Climate 
Change 
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local 
Government, my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo and I am the Government Relations Director for The Nature 
Conservancy in Maine. I appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of LD 671, An Act to 
Factor Revised Projections of Sea Level Rise into State Planning on Climate Change. Specifically, 
we support the sponsor’s amendment and new title that were circulated to the interested parties list on 
March 10, 2023. 
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to conserving the 
lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we create innovative, on-the-ground 
solutions to our world’s toughest challenges so that nature and people can thrive together. We use a 
collaborative approach that engages local communities, governments, the private sector, and other 
partners. The Nature Conservancy has been leading conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is 
the 12th largest landowner in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres. We also work 
across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the Gulf of Maine to rebuild 
groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to address our changing climate. 
 
The sponsor’s amendment to LD 671 requires the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of the Maine 
Climate Council to submit a report every 4 years that includes expected or likely sea level rise 
projections. It allows the state to review and update data on a more regular basis and creates a mechanism 
where the relevant legislative committees can report out legislation based on these reports.  
 
The impact of changing climate conditions is already being felt on the ground in Maine. In Portland, sea 
levels rose by roughly eight inches during the 20th century, about seven inches higher than expected 
based on prior data. In this century, sea levels are projected to rise another one to six feet globally, with 
sea levels expected to rise more in the Northeastern U.S. than the global average, according to the 2018 
National Climate Assessment. 
 
Any action to raise awareness around sea level rise will support communities across our state in planning 
for the effects of climate change. Consistent and clear guidance from the state on sea level rise projections 
will provide vital information, form the baseline data for existing climate planning efforts, and reduce 
overall risks. Our organization works hard to make this information available to communities, state 
agencies, other NGOs, and the public through our online tool – the Coastal Risk Explorer. The Coastal 
Risk Explorer predicts road flooding at the town level under sea level rise scenarios provided by the state. 
This planning tool has been used by dozens of coastal communities since it’s development in 2017.  
 
Providing these regular updates on sea level rise scenarios will ensure Maine state agencies and 
communities are using the most up to date information and projections in their planning exercises. TNC 
relies on this data for our own tool and we enthusiastically support LD 671. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of the sponsor’s amendment to LD 671. I am happy to 
answer questions about this bill at any time. 
