S'i‘;t'i't£ or Peiiitéi-I 
aﬁ I, *3. 
G0vERr~z0it ‘s (A)?-‘FELTE or POLICY INm3\.~’ATi<)N .~‘\?~ilT§ TH;-i FUTURE . \_‘ Z“7 
,5 V,-;~?=' ~: _< 
7‘ ‘ i8i §>'i}¢\’£‘E House S'!' _~\'i‘§£‘2N 
in‘ " 13 
'*‘=‘ , Auousrix, M.=\i:~ze
L 
{. 
04333~€ll8i 
LD 671 An Act to Factor Conservative Projections of Sea Level Rise into 
State Planning on Climate Change 
Testimony in Opposition 
March 31, 2023 
Good morning Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and members of the Committee on State and 
Local Government. My name is Sarah Curran and I am the Deputy Director for Climate Planning and 
Community Partnerships in the Governor's Office of Policy Innovation and the Future. 
l am here today to testify on LD 671, ”An Act to Factor Revised Projections of Sea Level Rise into State 
Planning on Climate Change." We appreciate the bill's intention to support the Legislature, state, and 
communities to make informed decisions about infrastructure and investments relative to sea level risk. 
However, the bill as initially proposed conflicts with existing state law and as amended duplicates 
existing law and efforts already underway across state agencies. Therefore, we testify in opposition to 
the bill as proposed and amended.- 
On December 1, 2020 Governor Mills welcomed the release of Maine Won't Wait (E_D_E), the four-year 
Climate Action Planfrom the Maine Climate Council. The actions and goals in Maine Won't Wait put 
Maine on a trajectory to decrease greenhouse gas emissions by 45% by 2030 and 80% by 2050, and 
achieve carbon neutrality by 2045. Maine Won't Wait also focuses on preparing our communities, 
economy, and people to better withstand the rapidly accelerating impacts from climate change. 
The statute that establishes the Maine Climate Council, 2019 Public Law, Chapter 476, also establishes 
the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee within the Council, "to identify, monitor, study and report out 
to the council and to the working groups under subsection 7 relevant data, findings and 
recommendations related to climate change in the State and its effects on the State's climate, species, 
marine and coastal environments and natural landscape and on the oceans and other bodies of water.” 
The law specifically assigns the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee the task of establishing science- 
based sea level rise projections for the State's coastal areas and updating those projections every four 
years.. 
The Subcommittee delivered projections of sea level rise to the Maine Climate Council in 2020 (E, 
p.83), with the recommendation that Maine should manage for the highly probable scenario of 1.5 feet 
mean sea level rise by 2050 and 3.9 feet by 2100. The recommendation also provided more 
"conservative" , or worse-case, scenarios of 3.0 feet by 2050 and 8.8 feet by 2100, guiding planners and 
engineers to ensure that our state's most critical infrastructure is prepared for more extreme scenarios. 
The Climate Council unanimously accepted the Subc0mmittee ’s recommendation for inclusion in the 
Maine Won't Wait plan, along with "Strategy F” to Build Healthy and Resilient Communities. Within 
Strategy F, the Council recommended developing and implementing updated land-use regulations, laws, 
and practices by 2024 in order to enhance community resilience to flooding and other climate impacts. 
PHONE 207662497458 WWW.MAlNE.GOV/FUTURE
During the 130"‘ Legislature, LD 1572, Resolve, To Analyze the lmpact of Sea Level Rise, was signed by 
Governor Mills in June 2021 and followed the next year by Public Law 2021, Ch. 590 —An Act to 
Implement Agency Recommendations Related to Sea Level Rise and Climate Resilience. This law revised 
municipal planning definitions to clarify the definition of a climate action plan and its inclusion in other 
municipal planning efforts; it also adds a requirement that the award of financial assistance is prioritized 
in communities who prepare climate vulnerability assessments and adopt climate action plans. P.L. 
2021, Ch. 590 also added requirements to consider the effect of at least 1.5 feet of relative sea level rise 
by 2050 and 4 feet of relative sea level rise by 2100 when evaluating harmonious fit of a project under 
the Site Location of Development Act, within the service area of the Land Use Planning Commission, and 
under the Maine Hazardous Waste, Septage and Solid Waste Management Act. 
We believe that LD 671 as initially proposed conflicts with existing law. 
LD 671 recommends using sea level rise projections produced by the United Nations‘ Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change, while the existing law relies on projections calculated by the Maine Climate 
Council's Scientific and Technical Subcommittee with a thorough analysis of conditions in the Gulf of 
Maine that cause local sea level rise along our coasts to vary from global projections. 
Even as amended, LD 671 duplicates existing law as well as significant actions the state is already 
taking to provide agencies and communities with the information needed to make infrastructure 
investments and development decisions that are informed by robust, Maine-based projections of sea 
level rise. 
Existing law already requires the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee to update science-based sea 
level rise projections for the State's coastal areas every four years. Existing law also already requires the 
Maine Climate Council to report recommendations for climate adaptation and emissions reduction to 
the Governor and Legislature every four years. As such, the Maine Climate Council, not its Scientific and 
Technical Subcommittee, is the appropriate body to report projections and make recommendations to 
the Legislature pertaining to sea level rise. 
Additionally, agencies are taking significant steps to incorporate sea-level rise projections as well as 
provide them to communities. The Maine Department of Transportation, acting on behalf of the State of 
Maine, was awarded a $1 million grant from the US Department of Commerce, to develop a Maine 
Coastal Flood Risk Model (M E-CFRM) — a high-resolution, dynamic, and probabilistic model of current 
and future flood risk along the Maine coast. The model will integrate the Maine-based sea level rise 
projections in existing law with data about coastal storm events. Preliminary output from the model is 
expected to be available beginning in the spring of 2024, with final results by the fall of 2025. Products 
from the model will be made available across state government as well as with communities and 
regional planning organizations across the state.- 
The Governor's Office of Policy Innovation and the Future recently applied for a Building Resilient 
Infrastructure and Communities (BRIC) grant from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 
for funding to ”Assess Climate Vulnerability and Provide Climate-Ready Design Guidance" , as 
recommended by Maine Won't Wait. This proposed project includes a climate change vulnerability 
assessment of state-owned assets and certain critical private assets in order to provide an 
understanding of the climate hazards — including sea level rise — to which the assets are exposed, their 
susceptibility to damage or failure, and the corresponding consequences. This assessment will give
particular attention to areas of the state where socially vulnerable communities and vulnerable state- 
owned assets overlap. The project will also develop a climate resilience tool that state agencies and 
municipalities can use to incorporate climate and sea level rise resilience into project planning. 
ln summary, the risks of sea level rise to Maine communities and to state and local infrastructure are 
significant. We appreciate the need to consider sea level rise projections in state decision-making, and 
to provide communities with information they need to make capital investment and development 
decisions informed by data about sea level rise projections. However, we believe that the bill as initially 
proposed conflicts with existing law, and as amended, duplicates existing laws and the significant steps 
the state is already taking to develop, use, and share critical sea level rise information with agencies and 
communities. 
Thank you for your service and for the opportunity to testify today.
I
