Karen A Parker
Brunswick
LD 1844
Written Testimony addressed to the 
Joint Select Committee on Housing in support of LD1844
Cross Building, Rm 216
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Karen Parker
Mid Coast Hunger Prevention Program
Brunswick Maine
5/11/2023
To Chair Senator Teresa Pierce and Chair Representative Traci Grere,
My name is Karen Parker I am testifying on behalf of myself and my community in 
support of this legislation. I appreciate the opportunity to testify in support of 
LD1844, An Act to Support Emergency Housing Facility Construction, Renovation 
and Acquisition Statewide by Creating a Matching Grant Program, which would 
greatly improve the quality of life for many Mainers statewide. 
I live in Brunswick where the number of people experiencing homelessness is large 
and the need for emergency shelter remains. I support emergency shelter 
organizations across the state, and support any expansion of their services and 
programs to members of my community that are in need. 
Housing organizations around the state would be able to serve more people 
experiencing homelessness in their local communities if the state rewarded their 
fundraising and expansion efforts with a State-funded matching program.  The 
emergency housing provider for my town and the southern midcoast region is Tedford
Housing.  Last year, Tedford served over 550 people facing housing insecurity andI 
know they would be able to serve significantly more of our neighbors if this bill 
passes. 
Emergency housing needs to play a critical, larger role in solving our housing crisis, 
but it has been neglected by other legislation that aims to address the problem. This 
bill offers a meaningful step in filling in that gap.
Nobody plans to become homeless. When a family or individual’s life stability is 
threatened by the financial impact of a medical emergency, divorce, death of a wage 
earner, or loss of job, emergency housing is a key tool in maintaining their stability 
and self-sufficiency. Please vote Ought to Pass on LD 1844, so Maine’s emergency 
shelters can do their part in building a healthy, productive populace.
Thank you for your consideration.
Karen Parker
Executive Director 

