  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
In support of LD1844 “An Act to Support Emergency Housing Facility Construction, 
Renovation and Acquisition Statewide by Creating a Matching Grant Program .” 
Before the Joint Select Committee on Housing   
May 12, 2023  
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on 
Housing, I am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)1 in 
support of LD1844 “An Act to Support Emergency Housing Facility Construction, Renovation 
and Acquisition Statewide by Creating a  Matching Grant Program .” 
 
MCEDV member programs provide shelter to survivors from all 16 counties and have 
been doing so since the 1970s. There are 12 domestic violence specific shelter buildings and 1 
specifically for people escaping Human Sex Trafficking  and Sexual Exploitation in Maine with 
a total of 143 beds available, and they are typically operating at capacity. They are experienced 
shelter providers uniquely structured and staffed to assist adult survivors of domestic abuse 
and violence and their ch ildren, and they need support to continue to do so for the years to 
come.  
 
Every year Domestic Violence Resource Centers (DVRCs) receive significantly more 
requests for emergency shelter than they can fulfill. And, due to the lack of safe, accessible, 
affordable housing in Maine, more survivors are staying for longer in shelter . This directly 
impacts the number of survivors who can access emergency shelt er. Between October and 
December 2022 , there was a 22% increase in the number of nights survivors stayed in 
emergency shelter  and during the same period there was a 15% increase in survivors 
requesting shelter. There are simply not enough emergency beds in the state to adequately 
shelter all those who need them .  
 
 
1 MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than 12,000 victims of domestic 
violence in Maine last year .  
MCEDV   Page 2 of 2 
Having access to additional dollars through a matching grant program will help the 
DVRCs renovate aging buildings and add to their emergency shelter capacity . Survivors of 
domestic abuse an d violence, including children, deserve access to high -quality  & safe spaces  
in which they can begin to rest and heal from the harm they experienced. They deserve this in 
a shelter  where trained advocates are available to support them through this journey .  
 
Because of this, we encourage you to support LD1844 “An Act to Support Emergency 
Housing Facility Construction, Renovation and Acquisition Statewide by Creating a Matching 
Grant Program.”  
  
Contact Information:    
Kate Easter  
Housing Services Coordinato r 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)   
Ph: (207) 430 -8334   
Email:  kathryn@mcedv.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
