Toni Kemmerle
Brunswick
LD 1844
To Chair Senator Teresa Pierce and Chair Representative Traci Grere,
My name is Toni Kemmerle, and I am testifying on behalf of myself and my 
community in support of this legislation. I appreciate the opportunity to testify in 
support of LD1844, An Act to Support Emergency Housing Facility Construction, 
Renovation and Acquisition Statewide by Creating a Matching Grant Program, which 
would greatly improve the quality of life for many Mainers statewide. I live in 
Brunswick where the number of people experiencing homelessness is large and the 
need for emergency shelter remains. I support emergency shelter organizations across 
the state and support any
expansion of their services and programs to members of my community that are in 
need. Housing organizations around the state would be able to serve more people 
experiencing homelessness in their local communities if the state rewarded their 
fundraising and expansion efforts with a State-funded matching program. The only 
emergency housing provider for my town and the southern midcoast region is Tedford
Housing. Last year, Tedford served over 550 people facing housing insecurity and 
will be able to serve significantly more of our neighbors if this bill passes. Tedford 
has a shovel ready project for a new facility and is in the process of raising funds.  
This bill offers the possibility of a funding source that would speed up the 
construction of the new Tedford facility that will serve people experiencing housing 
insecurity or outright homelessness throughout the entire southern midcoast region.  
Nobody plans to become homeless. When a family or individual’s life stability is 
threatened by the financial impact of a medical emergency, divorce, death of a wage 
earner, or loss of job, emergency housing is a key tool  in maintaining their stability 
and self-sufficiency. Please vote Ought to Pass on LD1844 so that Maine’s 
emergency shelters can do their part in building a healthy, productive populace.
Thank you for your consideration.
