  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
May 1, 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1601 – An Act Regarding Visitation Policies for Long -term Care Facilities,  Hospice 
Providers and Hospitals  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services:  
 
The Division of Licensing and Certification (“DLC”)  within the Department is neither for nor against 
LD 1 601, An Act Regarding Visitation Policies for Long -term Care Facilities, Hospice Providers and 
Hospitals , and we offer the Committee the following information for your consideration.   
 
This bill requires long -term care facilities, hospice providers , and hospitals to adopt a visitation policy 
that is provided to the Department of Health and Human Services by January 1, 2024. That policy 
must permit in -person visitation in certain circumstances , and infection control and education policies 
for visitors . It also requires that policies  allow residents to designate a family member, friend, 
guardian , or other person as a designated visitor that may visit in person for at least 2 hours a day in 
addition to other visitors. It would  prohibit policies  from  requir ing visitors to provide proof of 
vaccinations. It would require policies  be posted on a websit e if such a website exists , and  the 
Department would also need to  post information on visitation requirements on its website and establish 
a process for the public to report complaints against providers.  
 
DLC does not object to long -term care facilities, h ospice providers, and hospitals adopting a visitation 
policy that is provided to the Department of Health and Human Services. DLC also does not object to  
policies that include infection control and education policies for visitors. However, DLC suggests  that 
whether these facilities require visitors to provide proof of vaccinations be up to the provider , based 
on a current assessment of the infection threat posed by unvaccinated individual (s), and which doesn't 
conflict with federal guidelines. 1  
 
                                                 
1 See also Federal Hospital Regulation  §485.635(f) Standard: Patient visitation rights : “A CAH must have written policies and 
procedures regarding the visitation rights of patients, including those setting forth any clinically necessary or reasonabl e restriction 
or limitation that the CAH may need to place on such rights and the reasons for the clinical restriction or limitation.”  In addition , “a 
CAH must meet the following requirements: … (3) Not restrict, limit, or otherwise deny visitation privil eges on the basis of race, 
color, national origin, religion, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disability. (4) Ensure that all visitors enjoy  full and equal 
visitation privileges consistent with patient preferences.”  
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 6F4E0533-22DA-4A37-89E9-C69F32EA8195
 
 Regarding  Maine’s n ursing facilities , the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (“ CMS ”) 
advised State Survey Directors in 2020 via memorandum that “visitors are not required to be tested or 
vaccinated (or show proof of such) as a condition of visitation.”  
 
Regarding  hospice , Maine has 4 inpatient hospice providers.  Patients receiving hospice care in a 
hospital or S killed Nursing Facility or other Nursing Facility  would fall under the visitation 
requirements of those particular facility types. Other hospice patients receive care in their own homes , 
and DLC does not view  the hospice agency having the  authority to restrict/allow visitors in an 
individual’s own home .2       
 
And finally, a requirement to have policies posted on provider websites and information on the 
Department’s website is certainly feasible, as is responding to complaints,  however it will require 
funding and positions  to support this initiative and ongoing additional workload.   
 
DLC would point out that  that the bill  extends th ese requirement s to a “long -term care facility” which 
is defined in Title  22 §7852 . This would extend these requirements to broad range of facilities, and 
the Committee should review this impact to ensure it is not broader than intended .    
 
For these reasons, we are neither for nor against . I want to thank you for your consideration of this 
bill. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have and will attend your work session if 
needed.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Bill Montejo  
Director  
Division of Licensing & Certification  
                                                 
2 See also §418.60 Condition of participation: Infection control . “The hospice must maintain and document an effective 
infection control program that protects patients, families, visito rs, and hospice personnel by preventing and controlling 
infections and communicable diseas es.” (§418.110(f) Standard: Patient areas) “(2) The hospice must provide the 
opportunity for patients to receive visitors at any hour, including infants and small children.”   
DocuSign Envelope ID: 6F4E0533-22DA-4A37-89E9-C69F32EA8195

