Legal 
Services 
-iiii; Elderly Free Legal Help for Maine’s Seniors 
May 1, 2023 
Testimony of John Brautigam Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, neither for nor against 
LD 1601, An Act Regarding Visitation Policies for Long-term Care Facilities, Hospice 
Providers and Hospitals. - 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Services: 
On behalf of Legal Sen/ices for the Elderly I would like to testify neither for nor against 
LD 1601. Legal Services for the Elderly (LSE) is a nonproﬁt legal services organization. 
We provide free legal assistance to Maine’s older adults when their basic human needs are 
threatened. Our clients are all aged sixty or older and most have very low incomes. Some 
are the most physically and ﬁnancially compromised people in our communities. 
Our testimony focuses on long-term care facilities but could apply equally to hospitals 
and hospice providers. 
The issue of visitation is like many others — it requires balancing multiple important 
values. Here, those values include protecting the residents of these various types of 
facilities from exposure to very serious diseases circulating in the community; facilitating 
the well-being of residents by maximizing their opportunities for direct social interaction; 
and trusting the ability of the professionals who manage these facilities as they endeavor 
to comply with the array of requirements that already govern this speciﬁc question. 
The COVID-19 pandemic was especially difﬁculty for many long-term care facilities and 
their residents. We all saw firsthand how important it is to prioritize the safety and well- 
being of residents. However, we also saw reminders that residents cannot thrive when 
isolated from their loved ones and that these facilities are also entrusted with meeting their 
social and emotional needs. 
LSE consistently advocates for allowing as much visitation as possible. But we do have 
some concerns about LD 1601. This bill would allow unvaccinated visitors to enter even 
where facility personnel have reached the professional medical judgment that the risks of 
such visitation outweigh the beneﬁts. 
LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC. 
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333 
(207) 621-0087 Fax (207) 621-0742 
Offices in Aiugusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Prcsque Isle 
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (VoicefFTY) 
www.maineIse.org | !.~ 
I E? 
Ii 
‘é 
ti 
it 
it‘ 
5» 
1.- 
.. 
i 
if 
W 
!. 
it 
it 
ll. 
xi 
ll» 
‘I 
Z; 
»‘. 
ti
..
May 1, 2023 page2 
LSE testimony LD 1601 
As the committee is aware, a large number of the residents of the facilities covered by LD 
1601 have compromised health, weakened immune systems, or are otherwise at higher 
risk of harm or death from a virus such as COVID~19. 
Yet visitation has a profound positive impact on residents ’ quality of life, as they are able 
to connect with loved ones and have the social and emotional support they need. Speaking 
through a Plexiglass barrier should be required only in high-risk situations. 
One thing we learned in recent years is that each facility has its unique circumstances and 
challenges, and each phase of a pandemic poses its own level of risk. With this dynamic 
reality, a one-size- ﬁts-all rule probably will not maximize the well-being of anyone. 
Ideally, we would trust those who operate these facilities to create appropriate visitation 
policies that prioritize both safety and quality of life in their residential setting. 
We would be glad to discuss our perspective further as the committee moves forward 
with this bill. Thank you for the opportunity to share our thoughts with you on LD 
160].
2
