‘ks 
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 2 STATE HOUSE st/mom 
J% AUGUSTA, i\/IAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Arthur L. Bell MAINE RELAY 711 
14 Atlantic Reach 
Yarmouth. ME 04096 
Arthur.Bell@( legislatureinaine.go\' 
Cell:(207)4l5-I217 
Residence: (207) 8-‘l6-(H48 
Good afternoon Chairs Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business. My 
name is Art Bell, and I represent House District #103, the town of Yarmouth. 
l come before you today to introduce LD 1306, “An Act to Protect Homeowners from 
Unfair Agreements to Exclusively List Residential Real Estate for Sale”. 
l was asked by my constituent, Attorney Thomas Cox of Yarmouth, to offer LD 1306 
which is a bill to block an abusive real estate brokerage practice that has now spread 
across 32 state and is causing serious harm to low-income homeowners. In his Of- 
Counsel role at the National Consumer Law Center based in Boston and Washington, 
he has become aware of the predatory practices of a Florida based real estate company 
and became concerned about what might happen if these practices start to harm low- 
income Maine homeowners. 
This company, MV Realty, lures low-income homeowners into 40 year contracts 
whereby those homeowners agree that, if they ever want to sell their homes, they will 
use only MV Realty or an afﬁliate as the real estate broker. MV Realty offers those 
homeowners only a small cash payment - usually less than $1,000 - to lure them into 
thesecontracts. 
Tying a homeowner to a 40-year contract, which surely will be forgotten in a few years, 
is bad enough. But these contracts legally obligate the homeowners to pay MV Realtya 
3% commission even if it does nothing to earn it. For example, if the homeowner is 
foreclosed upon, they will be liable to pay the 3% commission even though the 
homeowner is broke. Or if the homeowner conveys their title to a spouse, the 3% 
commission will have to be paid. Or, if the homeowner dies, the 3% commission will be 
due and will become a claim against their estate. To make matters worse, the MV 
Realty scheme results in the recording of the summary of the 40-year contract in the 
registry of deeds, which encumbers the homeowner ’s propertyjust like a mortgage 
does, and which blocks the ability of the homeowner to even reﬁnance the house. 
Attorney Cox is here and will explain how legislatures and attorneys general across the 
country are taking action to stop these predatory practices, and why the Maine 
Legislature must act to prevent this predatory practice from spreading to Maine. 
l urge you to pass LD 1306 to protect low-income Mainers from this predatory practice. 
District 103 Yarmouth and Yarmouth 
Printed on iec\ cled paper
