 
 
TESTIMONY OF THE AMERICAN LAND TITLE ASSOCIATION 
 
ON 
 
L.D. 1306 –  “AN ACT TO PROTECT HOMEOWNERS FROM UNFAIR AGREEMENTS 
TO EXCLUSIVELY LIST RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE FOR SALE”  
 
BEFORE  
 
THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INNOVATION, DEVELOPMENT, 
ECONOMIC ADVANCEMENT AND BUSINESS  
 
TUESDAY,  APRIL 11 , 2023 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  
 
 Senate Chair Chip Curry, House Chair Tiffany Roberts and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business :  
The American Land Title Association (ALTA) appreciates the opportunity to submit 
testimony on L.D. 1306, “An Act to Protect Homeowners from Unfair Agreements to Exclusively 
List Residential Real Estate for Sale.” ALTA supports the passage of L.D. 1306, whi ch will protect 
homeowners from the predatory practice of filing unfair real estate fee agreements in property 
records.  
ALTA is the national trade association representing over 6,200 title and settlement agents, 
independent abstracters, title searchers, r eal estate attorneys and underwriters, ranging from small 
one-county operations to larger national title insurers across the United States.  
Last year, ALTA learned that real estate brokerage firms have been  paying homeowners as 
little as $300 to sign long- term real estate listing agreements, some for up to 40 years. The typical 
penalty for cancellation or non- compliance years later is 3% of property value, significantly more 
than any upfront payment received.  
Recording these agreements in the land records is an attempt to create a lien, which add s 
costs and complications to real estate transfer or financing, including access to home equity. Additionally, these agreements attempt to bind not only the signers, but also their heirs, who may or may not have knowledge of the agreement.  

2 
 
Over the last fe w months, ALTA along with AARP, industry partners and real estate law 
experts have drafted and promoted legislation to make these agreements unrecordable and 
unenforceable. Already, legislation restricting or limiting the use of these unfair agreements has  
passed in Utah, Colorado, North Dakota, Georgia, Tennessee, and Idaho with bills currently 
moving in another dozen states. Additionally, five state attorneys general have filed complaints regarding these agreements.  
A home represents a consumer’s largest financial investment, and the best way to support 
the certainty of land ownership is through public policy that ensures there are no unreasonable 
restraints on a homebuyer’s future ability to sell or refinance their property due to unwarranted transactiona l costs.  
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony on this important issue. We hope you 
will support the passage of L.D. 1306. ALTA looks forward to reviewing the comments and 
testimony offered by others interested in L.D. 1306, and we are happy  to serve as a resource for 
this committee  as any questions arise. For any questions, please reach out to Elizabeth Blosser at 
eblosser@alta.org  or Caroline Cone at ccone@alta.org
. 
 
 
