  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. M organ  
 
Treasur er 
Walt er F. McKee 
 
Secretary  
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph M ekonis 
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swans on 
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXECU TIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523-9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
April 14, 2023  
 
 
Senator Anne  Beebe -Center, Chair  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public  Safety  
100 State House Station Room  436  
Augusta, ME 04330  
 
RE: LD 994 --  An Act to Include Possession  of Compounds, Mixtures or  
 Substances Containi ng a Detectible Amount of Certain Scheduled Drugs  
 to Prove the Offense of Unlawful Trafficking of Scheduled  Drugs 
 
Dear Senator Beebe -Center , Represe ntative  Salisbury, and Mem bers of the Crimin al 
Justice and Pu blic Safety Committee:  
 
MACDL opposes  LD 994.   
 
This bill  would allow minute levels of drugs , simply a “detectible ” quan tity, to act as 
a presumption th at a person is trafficking in those drugs.  A person  who ha d in their 
possession a small amount of non -illegal substances that contained  .01 of a gram of an 
illegal substance would be automatically presumed to be trafficking in that drug.  If a 
person had a teaspoon of baking soda and within that te aspoon there w as a fleck of 
heroin or other substances, the person would be pres umed to be trafficking . 
 
This is troubling.  The goal of this bill appears to be to make persons who are addicted 
to drugs more like ly to be presumed as traffickers in drugs.  That should never be the 
case. Drug addiction is a terrible affliction, and the Legislature has recognized this in 
the recent years and worked towards helping those who are addicted as opposed to 
creating greater  punishments .  With this bill, people who are addicted to drugs will be 
presumed to be traffickers in drugs and sub jected to massive felony consequences.  If 
the goal here is to lock up drug addicts for what could be decades, then this bill will 
certainly accomplish tha t, but that is not something that the Le gislature should ever be 
considering.  
 
Finally, “presumptions ” of trafficking are particularly dangerous .  A jury would be 
instructed about these very presumptions, and presumptions are very dangerous a nd 
can le ad a jury to convict someone for tr afficking when they may have only possessed 
a trace amount of the actual drugs that the y possessed.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to address this bill.  
 
 
 
 
Page 2  
April 14, 2023  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Walter F. McKee  
Chair, Legi slative Committee  

