 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1359  (Opposed  as Drafted ) 
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1359, An Act to Provide an Opportunity for Resentencing for Individuals Who Were 
Sentenced for Crimes Committed as Juveniles  
 
DA: May 18 , 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 1359  as drafted .   
 
 To the extent the bill authorizes resentencing (“motion for reduction of sentence”), it would 
likely be unconstitutional as a  violation of the separation of powers clause in the Maine 
Constitution.  The proposed process is effectively a commutation that overlaps with the Governor’s 
exclusive clemency authority.   The Law Court’s opinion in State v Hunter , 447 A2d 797 (Me. 
1982), likely controls the const itutional question raised by the current draft.    
 
 CLAC members were not unanimous with regard to the policy of wh ether a life sentence 
should be available for persons under 18 who are bound over and convicted as adults.  This is a 
policy decision squarely wit hin the province of the Legislature, but which all agreed should be 
addressed with a different drafting approach  (see below) .   For additional context, i n Maine, only 
the crimes of murder and aggravated attempted murder are eligible for l ife sentences, and then only 
if the sentencing court finds certain factors.  17-A M.R.S. §§ 152-A, 201, 1603 , 1604(2) ; State v. 
Waterman , 2010 ME 45.  The crime s of aggra vated attempted murder and gross sexual assault (in 
certa in limited circumstances —"repeat sexual assault offender ” and GSA agains t a child under 12 ) 
may also expose a defendant to a sentence of incarcer ation of “any term of years. ”  17-A M. R.S.   
§§ 152-A, 253, 253 -A, 1604(2).       
 
 Currently, there are multiple avenues to challenge convictions and sentences, including by 
direct appeal (legality of sentence), sentence appeal (propriety of sentence), post -conviction review, 
and Maine Rule of Unified Criminal Procedure 35 (motion to correct sentence within one year).   
 
  CLAC noted a number of drafting errors in the proposal, which appears to be based largely 
on Maryland’s law  rather than Maine’s statutory structure .   Because juveniles who are “bound 
over” are treated as adults and prosecuted under Maine’s Criminal Code, any amendments should 
be made in Title 17 -A.  Thus if the Legislature wished to exclude such defendants  from life 
sentences, it should do so in Title 17 -A, not Title 15 , and with any needed cross -references between 
the substantive crimes in Part 2 that carry life sentences and the sentencing statutes in Part 6 .  The 
propo sal also  refers to parole, not currently a sentencing option, but not supervised community 
confinement, which is available in Maine.    
 
  
 If sentences other than current mandatory minimum sentences are authorized for juveniles 
who are bound over (who  engaged in the conduct while under 18  but who m the court has 
determined should be treated as adults ), this language should also be in Title 17 -A and not the 
Juvenile Code.   The statutes that define the subst antive crimes and those that govern the sentencing 
process  would have to be amended.    
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351-1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administ ration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultan ts.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to oth er statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
