 
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE , ESQ. , ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN CIVIL 
LIBERTIES UNION OF MAINE AND MAINE PR ISONER ADV OVAC Y COALITION  
 
Ought to Pas s – LD 1359  
 
An Act to Provide an Opportunity for Resentencing for Individuals Who Were 
Sentenced for Crimes Committed as Juveniles  
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CRIMINAL JUSTICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY  
 
May 18, 202 3 
 
Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. On behalf o f the American Civil Liberties Union of 
Maine  and the Maine Prisoner Advocacy  Coalition , I urge you t o support this bill because it would 
ensure that our laws  are fairer and our state more just.  
Even before  the popularization of the so -called “superpredator” label in the 1990s, many 
states’ criminal laws started  treating  some youth as adults beginning in the 1980s.1 Maine was no 
exception. 15 MRS § 3101 (allo wing juveniles to be tried as adults). Since those times, public 
opinion has shifted, thanks in no small part to advances in neuroscience that have reveal ed 
fundamental differences between adult and developing minds , and between neurotypical minds 
and mind s deeply shaped by complex trauma .2 Prominent policymakers like Hilary Clinton, who 
famously called teenagers “superpredators,” have apologized for their mistake.3   
Unfortunately, Maine law has not caught up with science. Some juveniles tried as adults 
are still serving prison sentences that should have been available only to adults. This bill would 
offer some relief to some people in Maine who were tried as adults, even though they were children  
 
1 Jeff Slowikowski, Juvenile Transfer Laws: An Effective Deterrent to Deliquincy? , OJJDP, June 
2010, available at  https://www.ojp.gov/pdffiles1/ojjdp/220595.pdf  
2 Christopher M. Northrop, Jill M. Ward, Jonathan J. Ruterbories & Jess N. Mizzi,  What's  My Age 
Again?:  Adolescent  Development  and the Case  for Expanding  Original  Juvenile  Court  Jurisdiction  and 
Investing  in Alternatives  for Emerging  Adults  Involved  in Maine 's Justice  System , 74 Me. L. Rev. 243 
(2022), available at  https://digitalcommons.mainelaw.maine.edu/mlr/vol74/iss2/5  
3 Katie Reilly, Hillary Clinton Apologizes for 'Superpredator' Remark , Feb. 26, 2016, Time, available 
at https://time.com/4238230/hillary -clinton -black -lives -matter -superpredator/  
  
 
when they committed the act  for which they were sentenced . If enacted, this bill would allow 
juveniles convicted as adults to petition courts to modify their sentence in a variety of ways. It 
would also prohibit  courts to sentence juveniles tried as adults to death in prison.  For ju veniles 
convicted as adults who were sentenced prior to October 1, 2023 and who have been imprisoned 
for at least 20 years, this bill will provide an opportunity to request a sentence reduction, even if 
the original motion for modification of sentence was denied.  
This bill is modeled on Maryland’s Juvenile Restoration Act, which, since its enactment in 
late 2021, has provided much needed relief to dozens of people who, although children  at the time 
of their offense , were tried as adults. This bill will move Maine away from irrational and fear -
based punishments, and ensure that our laws are just, humane, and rooted in science. We urge you 
to vote ought to pass . 
 
