LD 1862 
Dear Senator Nangle and Representative Stover and members of the Committee on State and 
Local Government my name is James White, I am the Representative from District 30 and I am 
here today to present LD 1862 an Act to Restore Balanced Powers During a State of Emergency. 
We all witnessed, whether or not, we were in the 130*‘ Legislature, the historic events that took 
place as a result of our reaction to the Covid 19 pandemic. The incredible burden put upon the 
chief executive is something that none of us have witnessed in our lifetime. Unlike the days of 
our founders, we live in a time that not only transportation, but communication, has advanced 
far beyond what they could have imagined. I believe it is time for us, now that we are beyond 
the active pandemic stage to look at what worked well, what worked poorly, and what we can 
do better. Looking back at 2020 I personally was put in a position in which I was urged to holda 
vote at the county level to enact emergency powers which would have brought all of the 
authority for decision making from ourcounty commissioners board and placed it solely on my 
shoulders as the chair of that commission. At the time, Piscataquis County had yet to be 
affected to the degree that counties in the south, like York and Cumberland, had and fortunately 
we truly never were. So, the decision was made that if we started to see a sharp spike in cases 
that we would hold our meetings remotely and if a third ofthe board of commissioners were to 
become ill that we would then discuss implementing executive powers. Fortunately, all the 
commissioners stayed healthy through the whole ordeal. We continued meeting as we had 
historically met. . 
I am not going to go through the details of this whole bill today, however I will be available for 
work session, and I understand that Senator Brakey has proposed a very similar piece of 
legislation. I for one believe that the more people that are involved in making these difficult 
decisions the better we represent our constituents and that stands true no matter what party 
the occupant ofthe Blaine House belongs to. I hope you will take a good look at what is in this 
bill and consider as the Bible states, the rain falls on the just and the unjust alike, which is to say 
in this circumstance, emergency powers can happen under any administration, and We should 
try to ﬁnd the most equitable manner in which a chiefexecutive cancarry out these duties with 
the tools at their disposal. <71-
, 
I thank you for your time and your consideration at this late date in this session and would be 
happy to answer any questions.
