I oppose LD 1574. My business provides several renting housing units in the greater Waterville 
area. Historically, rent control has increased housing demand and stifled local economies. Rent control 
will stifle growth and fail to house Mainers during this housing crisis. Vote No on this bill. 
Rent control has been tried in various places in the US and the world, including San Francisco, 
Cambridge, and Sweden. It’s common knowledge that these rent control systems fail the people they 
are meant to protect. Rent control raises demand and stifles growth in the following ways: 
1. Loss of total units overall increases housing demand. Landlords rent units in order to make 
money; when rent control makes a unit unprofitable, landlords are incentivized to sell their rentals as 
single family homes or to convert multi-families into condos.
2.  Rent control leads to inefficient distribution of housing. Renters locked into their rent control
units are more likely to stay, even when they no longer need the space. For example, if someone’s 
household size shrinks, they may elect to stay in a large multi-bedroom unit that is rent controlled 
rather than downsize into a more appropriately sized unit. This decreases the capacity of the rental 
market.
3. Rent control discourages investment. Investors are motivated to build to make profit; if rents 
are too low to justify the cost of building, investors will spend their money on projects other than 
housing. This causes growth to stagnate. 
4. Rent control leads to deterioration of housing quality. In my business, we focus on providing 
excellent housing with beautiful floors, trim, kitchens and bathrooms – we do this by 
installing/refinishing hardwood floors, installing tiled kitchens and bathrooms, and replacing old trim 
and doors. This costs significantly more money than cheaper installations such as carpeting, using 
standard glue-ups in the bathroom, leaving old trim in place, etc. We justify these expenditures because 
we can command a higher rent in return. With rent control, my business will stop investing in these 
more expensive repairs overnight, as the low rents imposed by rent control make these costly 
investments unsustainable. I take considerable pride in my housing and do not want to see it degrade 
over time, however I need to make some profit from my investment to make it worth my time. It’s been
shown that in the Cambridge area, housing values of both rent-controlled and non-rent controlled 
housing actually increased substantially once rent control was terminated in the 90’s due to the increase
in investment.
5. Rent control can actually lead to gentrification. Depending on how rent control is regulated, 
rent control can actually incentivize excessive repair and upgrade so landlords can justify a rent 
increase. This leads to gentrification that normally would not have occurred under normal market 
forces. 
Overall, it’s been shown that rent control only benefits current renters and does not actually help
new renters trying to enter the market for the reasons shown above. Maine has a housing crisis driven 
by a lack of units to meet demand. Imposing rent control does not increase the supply but decreases it. 
Maine should seek out successful markets for their model, such as those in Phoenix, Dallas, and 
Atlanta. These cities have made it easy to build to meet the market demand. This makes housing 
available and affordable and keeps the local economy prosperous. It also increases competition among 
rental providers, as landlords have to increase housing standards to attract renters. Rent control is 
politically popular when times are tough. I encourage the Maine legislature to put their talent to 
developing good policy instead of pandering to well-meaning, but ultimately ineffectual and misguided
fads. Please invest in Maine people the right way and vote no on LD 1574. 
Jamie Nickerson
Fairfield, ME
