5/13/23  
RE: LD 1574  - An Act to Create Rent Stabilization and Amend the Laws Regarding Termination 
of Tenancy and Rent Increase Limitations.  
 
Committee on Judiciar y, 
VOTE NO on LD 1574. There are numerous issues with this bill. If you type into Google the 
terms “rent control failure” you’ll see many economists who have studied the issue say that it 
does more harm than good. Although I majored in biochemistry at Bates College , I also studied 
economics during my time there. If you talked to my  economics  professor in college  about this 
bill, he would say how it leads to inefficiencies in the market. We are a free market democracy , 
let the market work.  It’s well known that anti -housing bills like this make it harder fo r the poor to 
get housed.  
The Brookings Institute , which is a centrist think tank has a particularly good article on the 
subject by Stanford  Professor of Economics, Rebecca Diamond .1 She says : 
While rent control appears to help current tenants in the short run, in the long run it 
decreases affordability, fuels gentrification, and creates negative spillovers on the 
surrounding neighborhood.   
It also leads to a misallocation of rental unit resources. For example, empty nesters may stay in a 
large 3-bedroom  apartment that is rent controlled rather than downsi ze to a 1 -bedroom that 
would be more affordable  in a free market . This keeps large families  cramped in small 
apartments that don’t meet their needs.   
Furthermore, in San Francisco  they found tha t there is less density of people per unit under rent 
control  due to market inefficiencies . This helps explain why they have such a high rate of 
homelessness. In the same city they found  rent control  led to a 15% decrease in available 
rental units.  Does Maine need fewer  rental units available?  
Rent control leads to a decay of the rental housing stock. After rent control, the options are 
simple. Convert multi -families to condos , sell single family homes , or keep the units  as rental s 
and let the units decay. If rent prices are fixed, we simply won’t invest as much time or money to 
keep them great places to live  (the thought of that is very sad as we are so proud of the buildings 
we developed) . Over the period of decades that will lead to blight. Rent control does nothing to 
decrease the cost of building new units  and getting the cost down to dev elop new units is where 
we should  focus our energy.  
Although the cost  of units is an issue in our state, anot her issue is the lack of high -quality rental 
housing to attract the professionals we need to help our state function. We get calls from doctors 
 
1 https://www.brookings.edu/research/what -does -economic -evidence -tell-us-about -the-effects -of-rent-control/  
and professors coming to our state begging to get one of our units. The cost of the units is not the 
issue. The issue is we don’t have enough to offer them.  
Even if rent control benefits some tenants  in the short term,  researchers  have found that the 
overall cost of rent control for society is much too large.  
Cambridge, MA dropped their failed rent control  law in 1994 . Studies on this community found 
that rent control makes areas under rent control less desirable places to live. This makes sense as 
no money is going into these areas to make them good places to live. In fact, Cambridge 
properties no longer under  rent control  after 1994 increased in value by 45%.2 Owner -occupied 
single -family  houses not under the rent control order also increased in value. Does the legislature  
want to steal home equity from both housing providers and middle -income  homeowners ? That is 
the main net worth of the middle class.  
The Brookings Article concludes there are better ways to help housing affordability. The 
government can offer subsidies or tax credits to those who need it. I believe this would work well 
if it was not tied to  the red tape of most of the housing programs. This would prevent the supply 
and demand imbalances that rent control would cause.  
Furthermore,  there is no income qualification to getting a rent-controlled  unit. This means that 
renters  with six figure inco mes will benefit from lower rents  even when they don’t need the help. 
This will help the affluent while robbing property owners  of their property rights  and income.  
This, coupled with the fact that less rental units will be available , and there  will be less housing 
density per unit after rent control passes means that even less at-risk tenants will find housing.  
Just simply writing this bill created panic in the rental market. You must  understand that many of 
us have at least some units that ar e rented  under market value. For example, we just signed a 
yearlong  renewal  agreement for a great family we’ve been renting to for 4 years now. In order to 
keep them in their house we have only gone up gradually  on their rent around 3 -6 % per year. 
Even w ith those increases, we are about $300 per month below the market. When they leave, 
we’d like to bring the price back up to the market rate. It’s perplexing how this bill will punish us 
for giving that family a good deal. It’s outrageous that this bill doe s not allow us get up to the 
market  price between tenancies. I’m sure the corporate  landlords in the state are already charging 
market rents and are better positioned than small mom and pop housing providers who care 
about our tenants.  
Rent control conflicts  with the taking clause of the 5th Amendment of the US Constitution which 
states, “ Nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation .” Rent 
control is the taking of private property by forcing the owners to offer public housing. If you 
want more public housing,  offer us a fair price for our buildings and do as you wish with them.   
I’m also opposed to extending lease terminations to 90-day notices and having to pay a tenant 
one month’s rent if they are served with a notice. This is outrageous. Usually,  the law tries to 
balance the responsibilities of housing providers and tenants as equal. Housing providers need 
 
2 Autor, Palmer, and Pathak (2014)  
time to plan the turnover  just as tenants need to plan their move. If housing providers need to 
provide 90 days’ notice  so should tenants. Why do housing providers need to pay if they end the 
lease with 90 days’ notice , but tenants do not? That fee is outrageous for either party to  have to 
pay.  
We are a small rental housing provider in the greater Waterville area. Our business model has 
been to convert unlivable properties and make them great places to live.  We are so proud of our 
community and how we have been able to improve it.  This bill as written will completely put our 
business model out of business. There will be no reason to renovate any properties as we will not 
be able to raise rents . For example, what happens when a building unit rented for $500 per 
month, was in foreclo sure for years and we pick up the building. If we spend  a year working in 
the building - are we still fixed at its historical price of $500 plus the number increase of CPI 
plus 7% ? 
Offering rental housing is a job , and it can be difficult.  We deserve to be paid just like any other 
occu pation. Frankly a lot of small landlords don’t have the deep pockets everyone seems to think 
they do. We don’t have the funds to offer public housing. I work full time as a teacher. During 
the school year  in addition to teaching and coaching, I work around 40 hours per week physically 
working on our rental business and 80 -100 hours per week during school vacations. Do I not 
deserve compensation for my time?  Where is the minimum wage provision in this bill  for 
housing providers ? 
I’d also add that you are playing with people’s retirement funds by making bad laws like this. It’s 
the equivalent of robbing from IRAs, 401k’s, 403b’s, and the Maine State Retirement programs. 
Many mom -and-pop landlords buy a build ing or two as a means to both save for retirement and 
invest capital into our state rather than sending it away to Wall Street. We are proud to have 
invested in and improved our community. Anti -rental housing proposals laws like this really have 
us second guessing if investing in our state was a wise choice after all.  
I’m also part of the leadership of the Central Maine Apartment Owner’s Association. Due to that 
role, I received several panicked calls from  both small and some large  housing providers this 
weekend about this bill. Every call that I took was from housing providers currently giving their 
tenants a good price and are worried if they should raise their rents to market rents before this 
law proceeds. The main  problem  is this increase will put sing le moms on the street. Should they 
continue to help the mom  stay housed , or posture their business to be prepared for this terrible 
law? You are putting housing providers into impossible situations by submitting this bill to the 
legislature. If this bill pa sses you will put us into an even worse situation  by forcing u s to let our 
units (our pride and joy) decline into barely livable homes. It’s just detestable.  
On average we currently increase our rent by 3% each year. Last year we increased by 6%  on 
some unit s that were very far below market and due to massive inflation that year. CPI is 
currently 5% and this bill allows for 7% over CPI so this will force us to now increase rents by 
12% each year to make sure we never get so far below market rent that we lose our buildings to 
foreclosure.  That is 4x more increases than before. That is not good for tenants. If you talk with 
housing providers in Portland, they will tell you this is happening. Many providers never  
increased rents on their current tenants  prior to  rent control.  Now they take the maximum 
increase each year .  
In summary, rent  control does not solve the core issue of expensive rental housing which is the 
lack of supply.  Rent control is a failed policy.  Developers including myself will leave the marke t 
of Maine if this bill passes. If this passes, we will simply move our funds to areas of the country  
that are  pro-rental housing that will not fix the price of rent. We will attract talent to those areas 
because we will make those areas  great places instead of doing it in Maine.  Please don’t pass this 
bill. I want to keep working on developing small housing projects in my community. I really 
enjoy the work and I’m pro ud of the product we offer our residents , but I will not coexist  with 
rent control.  
 
Regards,  
Justin Giroux  
Manager, Habitat For ME LLC  
Fairfield, ME   
 
 
