Michael Beck
Bangor
LD 1574
I’m here to testify in strong support for LD1574.
You all know that we’re in a housing crisis. People can’t afford to stay in their homes 
because rents are rising faster than wages. This bill would create a rent stabilization 
program that would limit annual rent increases to a reasonable rate, and protect 
tenants from unfair evictions and rent hikes.
I want to address the common argument that I hear from the opponents of this bill. 
They say that if you pass this bill, you’ll stifle investment in housing. They say that 
landlords will stop maintaining and improving their properties, and that new housing 
will not be built.
My response to that is: where is the investment now? Where was it when landlords 
had it their way for decades and decades? Our housing stock is among the oldest in 
the nation. It’s falling apart. Houses are not being updated. New housing is not being 
built at a meaningful pace. So if their threat is “we’ll stop investing”, then I think 
we’ll be okay. There are other bills in the works that will spur that investment. This 
bill is about bringing stability and security to the rental market.
This bill is about ensuring that tenants can afford to stay in their homes and 
communities, and that they are treated fairly and respectfully by their landlords. This 
bill is about balancing the interests of tenants and landlords, and creating clear and 
consistent rules for both. This bill is about addressing the urgent needs of thousands 
of Mainers who are facing housing instability and displacement.
If landlords want to keep using that tired old argument, you need to ask them: “Where
has the investment been?” Because we can’t see it. If they had invested in housing, we
wouldn’t be standing here having this discussion today.
I urge you to vote ought to pass on LD1574. Let’s plug the hole and go back to 
working on making investments happen, instead of relying on a string of empty 
promises and threats.
Thank you,
Michael Beck
Bangor
