Cherri Crockett
Maine Registers of Deeds Association
LD 1470
MAINE REGISTERS OF DEEDS ASSOCIATION
26 Western Avenue, PO Box 179
South Paris, Maine 04281
President: Cherri L. Crockett, Registrar, Oxford County
Vice President: Jessica Spaulding, Registrar, Cumberland County 
Testimony of the Maine Registers of Deeds Association 
Against 
LD 1470, An Act Regarding Transfers of Land in Resource Protection Areas
April 20, 2023
Senator Stewart and Honorable Members of the Committee on Environmental and 
Natural Resources, 
My name is Cherri Crockett.  I am the Registrar of Deeds for Oxford County and the 
President of the Maine Registers of Deeds Association. 
I am speaking today against LD 1470, An Act Regarding Transfers of Land in 
Resource Protection Areas, as we currently seek further clarification, specifically that 
part of the proposed bill that addresses “the register of deeds mark the deed as 
“Protected Land” and include a reference to the law under which the land was 
designated as resource protection land. The register of deeds shall mark the deed 
accordingly.” 
The concern of the association is as follows: we are currently advised by state law that
it is unlawful to “practice law” or provide advice that could be construed as legal 
advice. Would the “marking” of the deed require registrars to self-determine the legal 
status of lands described? If so, this would put us in violation of the statute, not to 
mention placing our offices at a liability to illegally interpret the intention of the 
document presented. 
We are charged with ensuring a document meets recordable standards, not to 
determine the legality of the document. 
In addition, it is not clear to the Registrars how we are to actually “Mark” the deed. 
Since we don’t know what that means, we are not sure we’re capable of following this
directive. We are not allowed to alter a deed once it has been recorded and the 
Registrars are concerned that this may be in conflict with existing statutes. If the 
intention is to have some type of electronic mark, then it may require computer 
software updates.  
We would like to suggest an edit to the proposed bill placing the legal responsibility 
of “marking the deed” as the responsibility of the drafting party of the document for 
recording at the registry of deeds.  
The Registers of Deeds Association urges you to vote Not Ought to Pass on LD 1470.
Respectfully submitted on behalf of the Maine Registers of Deeds Association
If there are any questions, please feel free to contact myself, Cherri Crockett, 
207.743.6211 x1401 or Jessica Spaulding, Cumberland County Registrar, 
207.871.8399. 

