STATE or MAINE 
DEPARTMENT or AGRICULTURE, CoNsERvATIoN & FOREsTRY 
'~ 
_ 
V‘ OFFICE or THE CoIvIIvIIssIoNER 
Ia 22 STATE HoUsE STATIoN 
I 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 
JANET T, MILL$ AMANDA E. BEAL 
GovERNoR CoMMIssIONER 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT 
AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
IN OPPOSITION TO LD 1470 
An Act Regarding Transfers of Land in Resource Protection Areas 
April 20, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Judy East, and I am the Director of the Bureau 
of Resource Information and Land Use Planning in the Department of Agriculture, Conservation 
and Forestry. I am speaking in opposition to LD 1470, An Act Regarding Transfers of Land in 
Resource Protection Areas. 
This bill requires that land designated as resource protection land be marked as "Protected Land" 
on the deed when the land is transferred. 
The proposed change to Title 33 has implications for Titles 30-A, 12, and 38. These statutes 
authorize the preparation of local comprehensive plans and local land use ordinances (MRS 30-A 
Chapter 187), land use rules in several different protection sub-districts throughout the 
unorganized territories §Chapter 10), and the shorelands of the coast, lakes, rivers, and most 
streams in organized towns (Chapter 1000 Guidelines for Shoreland Zoning Ordinances). 
Calling districts described in the future land use map of a comprehensive plan as "Protected 
Land" in a deed is legally inaccurate. The future land use map in comprehensive plans provides 
policy guidance. Until and unless a zoning ordinance is adopted that establishes regulatory 
districts pursuant to the comprehensive plan, the future land use map has no regulatory effect. 
The guidelines for municipalities under the mandatory shoreland zoning law allow a minimum of 
38 different types of uses within the Resource Protection Zone, either by right or with the 
approval of the Code Enforcement Ofﬁcer, the Planning Board, or the Local Plumbing Inspector. 
Given the variety of uses allowed in Resource Protection Zones, the term "Protected Land" is 
unclear and ambiguous. 
There are 14 protection sub-districts in the rules of the Land Use Planning Commission, which 
have a comparable regulatory effect of a resource protection designation under the mandatory
1 
HARLOW BUILDING ;?,,"i'é ‘;'i;:,‘ re PHONEZ (207) 287-3200 
18 ELKINS LANE conservation FAX; (207) 287-2400 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 8; Forestry WEB: WWW.MAlNE.GOV/DACF
shoreland zoning law. There are town-wide zoning ordinances in effect in 200 out of 454 
municipalities in Maine with multiple types of protection zones, many of them described in ways 
comparable to the 14 protection districts of the Land Use Planning Commission. This wide range 
of deﬁnitions and allowable uses of resource protection zones across the state means there would 
be considerable ambiguity as to whether the deed of any particular parcel should be recorded as 
"Resource Protection" as called for in this bill. 
Finally, any one of the districts or areas designated in comprehensive plans, local regulations, 
shoreland zoning minimum standards, or Chapter 10 regulations of the LUPC can and has 
changed over time. This results from statutory changes to regulatory minimums called for by 
legislatures and from shifting boundaries of resource protection districts due to inaccurate 
mapping and changes in wetland conﬁgurations. These changes are likely to increase as the 
climate changes and the land-water interface changes from sea level rise and extreme weather. A 
deed describing a parcel as "Protected Land" one year may be inaccurate some years later, 
resulting in incorrect and confusing infonnation in a parcel's title history. 
Thank you for considering this issue. I will be available to answer questions at the work session.
