 1 
 
           April 24, 2023  
 
 
Submitted Electronically 
 
Senator Pinny Beebe-Center  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
100 State House Station, Room 436 
Augusta, ME 04333 
 
RE: Testimony in Support of LD 433, a Resolve, Directing the Commissioner of Corrections 
and the Commissioner of Health and Human Services to Establish a Working Group on the 
Relocation of the Division of Juvenile Services 
 
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety Committee,  
 
My name is Jill Ward, and I am a resident of Portland, Maine. I have worked on juvenile justice 
policy and reform for more than 20 years and for the past decade have served as a policy 
consultant on juvenile justice and children’s issues both nationally and here in Maine.  Currently, 
I am Director of the Maine Center for Youth Policy and Law in partnership with the Youth Justice 
Clinic at Maine Law. My testimony in support of LD 433 represents my personal views only and 
not the position of the University of Maine School of Law or the University of Maine System. 
 
The working group established in LD 433 would initiate an important process recommended by 
two statewide system assessments to review the current structure of our juvenile justice system 
and determine how best to serve system-involved youth outside the adult corrections system. 
The Resolve is a modest first step in implementing this recommendation and would help to 
bring Maine in line with national best practice around the most effective and appropriate 
structure for the delivery of supports and services for youth under state care.  
 
In May of 2019, the Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment and Reinvestment Task Force was 
established to work with the Center for Children’s Law and Policy (CCLP) to conduct an 
assessment of the state’s juvenile justice system.  I served, along with Rep. Michael Brennan and 
Department of Corrections Commissioner Randall Liberty, as one of the three co-chairs of that 
Task Force.  The 10-month process culminated in a February 2020 final report from the CCLP 
which included findings and comprehensive short, medium, and long-term recommended goals 
to improve Maine’s youth justice system.   
 
One of the long-term goals recommended in the report is for the state to “ Plan for and 
transition juvenile justice responsibilities to a new agency or different child-serving 
agency.”1  This goal comes from findings in the report that Maine could better align its child and 
youth serving activities to improve delivery, access, and outcomes. Section J of the final report 
addresses the financing of Maine’s system and notes that the state’s existing organizational 
structure may be a barrier to effectively meeting the needs of system-involved youth and 
recommends that it be reviewed.2  
 
1 Center for Children’s Law and Policy et al. (February 2020). Maine Juvenile justice System Assessment. Longer-Term Goal #7. p. 136. Available at: 
https://www.mainejjtaskforce.org .  
2 Center for Children’s Law and Policy et al. (February 2020). Maine Juvenile justice System Assessment. Section J. Financing Maine’s Youth-Centered 
Juvenile Justice System, p. 117.  Available at: https://www.mainejjtaskforce.org.  
 2
 
 
 
Specifically, recommendation #5 states:   
 
“Review the existing organizational structure for juvenile justice to support a new  
vision for serving children and youth. Improving the juvenile justice system goes beyond 
financial investments. Organizational structure and alignment are key to building and 
maintaining a vision that best meets the complex needs of youth. At the beginning of 2019, 
only 10 states, including Maine, had responsibility for juvenile justice services within their 
adult corrections agency and since then, California has moved juvenile justice services out of 
adult corrections and Kansas is in the process of reorganizing their juvenile justice services 
into a broad child and youth-serving agency.  Maine should review its existing juvenile 
justice structure and consider moving responsibility for juvenile services to OCFS or an 
independent agency, as recommended elsewhere in the assessment.”  
 
The vast majority of states serve children and youth involved in the justice system through an 
independent juvenile corrections agency, as a family and child-serving division or agency within 
a broader social or human services agency, or as an independent children and youth serving 
agency that manages both child protection and juvenile corrections.3  The 2020 assessment 
notes that Maine is an outlier in that it still houses juvenile services within its adult corrections 
agency and recommends that the state reassess this structure.  To date, only eight states, 
including Maine, continue to house juvenile justice under adult corrections.  
 
A similar recommendation was put forward in the 2018 statewide Children’s Behavioral Health 
Services (CBHS) Assessment. That report called for strengthening the coordination between 
juvenile justice and CBHS at the state and individual client level to better serve the behavioral 
health needs of children and youth involved in these state systems.  Among the suggestions the 
report makes to the Departments of Health and Human Services and Corrections to improve 
communication, coordination, and service delivery for mutual clients is that the state “ move 
juvenile justice from DOC to OCFS .”4  Such a move would streamline access to services, reduce 
inefficiency, and ultimately improve outcomes for children.  
 
LD 433 would simply get a long overdue process going to examine our current structure with the 
goal of improving the youth justice system and, more importantly, increasing positive youth and 
family outcomes.  The Resolve presents the Committee with the opportunity to move this 
conversation forward and should be approved.  
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
 
Jill M. Ward 
jill.ward@maine.edu  
 
 
3 See JJGPS - Juvenile Justice Geography, Policy, Practice & Statistics, Corrections Agency at http://www.jjgps.org/juvenile-justice-services . 
4 PCG Human Services (December 15, 2018). Maine Department of Health and Human Services Office of Child and Family Services, Children’s Behavioral 
Health Services Assessment. Final Report. p. 106. Available at: 
https://www.maine.gov/dhhs/sites/maine.gov.dhhs/files/documents/ocfs/cbhs/documents/ME-OCFS-CBHS-Assessment-Final-Report.pdf   
