 
 
 
April 27, 2023 
Submitted Electronically  
 
Senator Pinny Beebe-Center, Chair 
Representative Suzanne Salisbury, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
100 State House Station, Room 436  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
RE: LD 433, Resolve, Directing the Commissioner of Corrections and the Commissioner of 
Health and Human Services to Establish a Working Group on the Relocation of the Division 
of Juvenile Services 
 
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety Committee: 
 
My name is Linda Barry Potter and I am submitting the following testimony on behalf of the 
Maine Juvenile Justice Advisory Group (JJAG), neither for nor against LD 433, to provide 
additional information for the Committee’s consideration.  
 
Maine’s Juvenile Justice Advisory Group (JJAG) was created in accordance with the Juvenile 
Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974 (“the JJDPA”). The mission of the JJAG is to 
advise and serve as a resource on state policy and practice and to promote effective system level 
responses that further the goals of the JJDPA. The JJAG is also responsible for ensuring 
compliance with the four core protections of the JJDPA and with administering the federal funds 
that come to Maine annually through the Act, which are distributed largely through subgrants to 
entities performing activities that are aligned with the JJAG’s 3-year plan. For more information 
about the JJAG, our members, and our work, please visit: https://www.jjagmaine.com/  
 
Members of the JJAG are volunteers appointed by the Governor to fill the required slots 
identified under the federal law. Some JJAG members work in state government; additionally, 
the Commissioners of the Department of Corrections, Education, Health and Human Services, 
and Public Safety, or their designees, serve as ex-officio voting members of the JJAG. When the 
JJAG takes any action related to legislative matters, executive branch employees have decided, 
as a matter of policy, to abstain from these decisions to avoid creating any confusion or the 
impression that the JJAG is speaking for any of the various Departments. 
 
As this Committee is aware, the JJAG funded an assessment of the juvenile justice system in 
Maine.  This assessment process, which lasted 10 months and was governed by the Maine 
Juvenile Justice System Assessment and Reinvestment Task Force, culminated in a February 
2020 final report, which is available here: https://www.mainejjtaskforce.org/ .  
 
Representative Brennan, the sponsor of LD 433, served as a co-chair of this Task Force and, as 
indicated in his testimony, one of the recommendations in the report was to “Plan for and 
transition juvenile justice responsibilities to a new agency or different child-serving agency.”1  
The report included the following information that might be of interest to the Committee as you 
consider this legislation: 
 
• “Although officials have in Maine have done a better job than some other states that 
house responsibility for juvenile justice in their Department of Corrections, the 
arrangement presents serious challenges…For these reasons and others, just eight states 
currently house the state agency responsible for juvenile justice within their adult 
corrections department… Indeed, many states have moved their juvenile justice agencies 
out of their corrections agencies in recent years… The reasons for doing so include the 
ability to work with youth in the most developmentally appropriate ways and the 
potential to create efficiencies with other child-serving agencies by pooling resources and 
making needed services available to youth and families regardless of the reason for their 
contact with a specific agency.”2 
 
• “The Assessment Team found that Maine would benefit from exploring alternatives to 
providing juvenile justice services through its Department of Corrections. This does not 
mean that the Assessment Team is implying that current DOC staff are doing a poor job 
of working with youth, or that DOC staff should lose their jobs if such a transition were 
to occur. Indeed, there are many states that have transferred responsibilities while 
preserving the best features of their juvenile justice system. However, the Assessment 
Team also recognizes the inherent limitations of the current structure in Maine, and the 
potential to achieve the best possible results for young people, families, and communities 
through a different structure.”3 
 
• “Consider moving juvenile services from adult corrections and reassigning 
responsibility for youth justice to a new agency or different child-serving agency. 
Maine is one of a shrinking number of states that continues to provide juvenile justice 
services within an adult corrections agency. The Assessment Team recommends 
exploring how the state could transition those responsibilities (including DOC staff with 
expertise in working with youth) to a new agency or a different child-serving agency, 
such as DHHS. While such a transition would have to be planned in a thoughtful way, 
 
1 Center for Children’s Law and Policy et al. (February 2020). Maine Juvenile Justice System 
Assessment. Longer-Term Goal #7. p. 136. 
2 Id. at pp. 110-11 
3 Id. at p. 111 
Maine could achieve the efficiencies and cost savings of other states that have 
transitioned this responsibility from corrections in the past decade.”4 
 
• “Review the existing organizational structure for juvenile justice to support a new 
vision for serving children and youth. Improving the juvenile justice system goes 
beyond financial investments. Organizational structure and alignment are key to 
building and maintaining a vision that best meets the complex needs of youth. At the 
beginning of 2019, only 10 states, including Maine, had responsibility for juvenile justice 
services within their adult corrections agency261 and since then, California has moved 
juvenile justice services out of adult corrections and Kansas is in the process of 
reorganizing their juvenile justice services into a broad child and youth-serving agency. 
Maine should review its existing juvenile justice structure and consider moving 
responsibility for juvenile services to OCFS or an independent agency, as recommended 
elsewhere in the assessment.”5 
 
 
 
Respectfully Submitted on behalf of the JJAG,  
 
 
Linda Barry Potter  
Juvenile Justice Specialist  
Linda.Barry-Potter@maine.gov   
(207) 707-2698 
 
4 Id. at p. 114 
5 Id. at p. 130 
