295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of LD 433  
Resolve, Directing the Commissioner of Corrections and the 
Commissioner of Health and Human Services to Establish a 
Working Group on the Relocation of the Division of Juvenile 
Services  
Sponsored by Representative Brennan  
4.24 .2023  
 
Good morning,  Senator Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury , and 
esteemed members of the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and 
Public Safety . I am Malory Shaughnessy, a Westbrook resident,  and the 
Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. 
The Alliance is the statewide association representing over 35  of Maine’s 
safety net community -based  mental health and substance use treatment 
providers. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound policies 
and evidence -based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 433, 
Resolve, Directing the Commissioner of Corrections and the Commissioner of 
Health and Human Services to Establish a Working Group on the Relocation of 
the Division of Juvenile Services . This resolve directs the Commissioner of 
Corrections and the Commissioner of Health and Human Services to establish 
a working group to plan to relocate the Department of Corrections’ division of 
juvenile services to the most appropriate organizational structure in State 
Government , as determined by the working group.   The Alliance would also 
ask for a place in this stakeholder group .  
 
Many states are re-evaluating how they handle , and who handles , juvenile 
justice issues . The Alliance believes that Maine needs to take on this work and 
explore alternatives to the current system of juvenile corrections in our state.  
 
California is currently in the process . California Gov . Gavin Newsom 
announced in 2019 that he  intends to shift control of the state’s Juvenile 
Justice Division away from corrections officials to government health and 
human services providers, a move he called “long overdue and necessary to 
build on past efforts to  divert children and teens from a path to prison. ” In 
California, “Corrections and health and human services officials say the plan 
hera lds a cultural change in the state’s approach to the youngest in the justice 
system, and creates opportunities to better bridge educational, mental health 
and social services to prepare minors for release. ”1 
 
                                                           
1 https://www.latimes.com/politics/la -pol-ca-gavin -newsom -juvenile -justice -plan -20190122 -story.html   
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
 
 
Alliance members agree  with this statement . This is not a new idea, no r would it make Maine an 
outlier  among states. Maine is actually now an outlier .  
 
Maine is one of only 9 or 10 states that continues to house its juvenile justice division under a 
state corrections agency.  Forty states have already placed their juvenile detention under health 
and human services or child welfare departments , or under their own indepen dent state entities .  
 
The vast majority of youth end up in the juvenile justice system for non -violent or relatively minor 
offenses, and unmet behavioral health needs are often a contributing factor.   
• Up to 70 percent of youth in the juvenile justice system have a diagnosable mental health 
disorder .2 
• More than 60 percent of those with a mental health disorder also have a substance use 
disorder.3 
• As many as 30 to 50 percent of incarcerated youth have a learning disability.4 
 
The Alliance supports this legislation  to review what is happening in other states, review what 
recent studies show is the most appropriate way  to approach juvenile justice issues.  Please give 
this an Ought to Pass vote for the future of our children.  
                                                           
2 Mental Health and Juvenile Justice Collaborative for Change. Better Solutions for Youth with Mental Health 
Needs in the Juvenile Justice System. Available at http://cfc.nc mhjj.com/ wp -
content/uploads/2014/01/Whitepaper -Mental -Health -FINAL.pdf  
3 Mental Health and Juvenile Justice Collaborative for Change. Better Solutions for Youth with Mental Health 
Needs in the Juvenile Justice System. Available at http://cfc.ncmhjj.com/ wp-
content/uploads/2014/01/Whitepaper -Mental -Health -FINAL.pdf  
4 National Council on Disability. Addressing the Needs of Youth with Disabilities in the Juvenile Justice System: The 
Current Status of Evidence -Based Research. http://www.ncd. 
gov/rawmedia_rep ository/381fe89a_6565_446b_ba18_bad024a59476?document.pdf  
