HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Michael Brennan TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
49 Wellington Road 
Portland, ME 04103 
Phone: (207) 939-6462 
Michael.Brerman@legislature.maine.gov 
April 24, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Michael Brennan introducing 
LD 433, Resolve, Directing the Commissioner of Corrections and the 
Commissioner of Health and Human Services to Establish a Working Group 
on the Relocation of the Division of Juvenile Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished members of 
the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. I am Michael Brennan, and 
I represent House District ll5, which includes a portion of Portland. I am here to introduce LD 
433, Resolve, Directing the Commissioner of Corrections and the Commissioner of Health 
and Human Services to Establish a Working Group on the Relocation of the Division of 
Juvenile Services. 
This resolve will direct the Maine Departments of Corrections and Health and Human Services 
to convene a stakeholder ’s working group to detennine how to best transfer the Division of 
Juvenile Services from the Department of Corrections to the Department of Health and Human 
Services or another appropriate agency. 
The working group would make recommendations to the Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Committee and the Health and Human Services Committee by January 15, 2023. I would also 
ask that this committee be given the authority to report out a bill next session based on the 
recommendations. 
Why is this bill before you? In 2019, the Juvenile Justice Task Force was convened. The Task 
Force was co-chaired by myself, Corrections Commissioner Randy Liberty and Jill Ward of the 
Juvenile Justice Advisory Group. 
The task force of over 25 people from various stakeholder groups across the state issued a report 
in February 2020 that offered over 60 recommendations. ‘ The report also detailed the housing, 
mental health and substance use needs of youth in Maine’s juvenile justice system. 
‘ Maine Juvenile Justice System Assessment. 
https://irp-cdn.multiscreensitecom/de72678O/ ﬁles/uploaded/Maine%20Juvenile%20Justice%20Svstem%20Assessment%20FIN 
AL%2OREPORT%202-25-20.gdf 
District 115: Part of Portland
The report emphasizes the need for secure residential capacity in the juvenile justice system. It 
also emphasized the importance of establishing a comprehensive array of community support 
services and diversion programs. 
As stated in the report, data provided by the Department of Health and Human Services from 
MaineCare records show that youth at Long Creek received services for a wide variety of mental 
and behavioral health disorders in the year prior to admission to the facility: behavioral 
disorders, mood disorders, trauma or adjustment disorders, anxiety disorders and substance use. 
Across the country, more states are moving away from a corrections response to a rehabilitation 
and community integration response. In fact, over the past two decades, research has been shown 
that brain development, particularly in youth, necessitates a different approach in all 
communities. 
Roughly 40 states have placed their juvenile detention under health and human services or child 
welfare departments? Another 17, including Texas, Florida and Washington, D.C., have made 
their divisions independent entities. 
I Want to make it clear that we should hold youth accountable for their behavior, and, at the same 
time, we know ﬁom extensive studies that incarceration and detention are often not effective and 
can be harmful. 
In 1996, I introduced a similar bill in the Maine Legislature. Obviously, it was not successful. 
Hopefully, this modest proposal will receive a more favorable response and we can begin to 
pursue a new structure to address the needs of youth who are involved with our juvenile justice 
system. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
2 
Newsom plans to move California Juvenile Justice Division out of corrections department. 
https://wvvw.Iatimes.com/polities/la-pol-ca-gavin-newsom-iuvenile-iustice-plan-20l90122-storv.html 
District 115: Part of Portland
