 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Commissioner’s Office  
11 State House Station  
109 Capitol  Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel: (207) 287 -3707; Fax: (207) 287 -3005  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
April 24 , 2023  
 
Senator Pinny Beebe -Center , Chair  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 433 – Resolve, Directing the Commissioner of Corrections and the Commissioner of 
Health and Human Services to Establish a Working Group on the Relocation of the Division of 
Juvenile Services  
 
Senator Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury , and Members of the Joi nt Standing Committee 
on Criminal Justice and Public Safety : 
 
This letter is to provide information regarding LD 433, Resolve, Directing the Commissioner of 
Corrections and the Commissioner of Health and Human Services to Establish a Working Group 
on the Relocation of the Division of Juvenile Services . The bill would direct the Commissioners  
of the Department of Corrections and the Department of Health and Human Services  to establish 
a working group that would study and develop a plan to relocate the D epartment of Corrections’ 
division of juvenile services to the most appropriate organizational structure in State 
Government.  
 
OCFS currently collaborates closely  with the Department of Corrections (and other  agencies , 
including the Department of Education) to ensure youth receive the services necessary to meet 
their needs and, whenever possible, avoid juvenile justice involvement. Furthermore, we are 
unaware of  evidence that supports the concept that relocating juveni le services would benefit 
Maine youth.  
 
The Department of Health and Human Services does not have expertise in juvenile corrections 
and believes the Department of Corrections is well -positioned to continue to serve youth who 
have committed crimes, some of which are very serious .  
 
The Department’ s expertise lies in facilitating services for individuals, including youth. OCFS 
staff work together with youth, parents, and providers to ensure the safety and wellbeing of 
families. Were juvenile justice to be add ed to the purview of the Department of Health and 
Human Services there are concerns that youth and families may be less likely to engage with the 
Department and the services we offer.  
 
Given the significant resources that would be required to establish an d support the proposed 
workgroup and the development of the required plan, OCFS is opposed to this bill. The proposed 
work group would take resources and focus away from OCFS’  current strategic priorities and 
initiatives targeted at rebuilding the children ’s behavioral health system . 
 
 
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Dr. Todd A. Landry   
Director  
Office of Child and Family Services
 

