 
TO: Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement & 
Business  
FROM: Coralie Giles, President of the Maine State Nurses Association, Vice President of National Nurses United, and resident of Brewer , Maine  
RE: Opposition to LD 342 DATE: Monday, April 24, 2023  
Testimony on Behalf of the Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United 
Before the Joint Standing Com mittee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement & Business 
  
In OPPOSITION to: LD 342, An Act to Streamline Licensing by Matching Federal 
Licensing Requirements for Occupations Licensed Federally 
 
Public Hearing: Tue sday, April 25, 2023, at 1 0:00 A M, Cross Building, Room 2 06  
 
Senator Curry , Representative Roberts  and distinguished members of the  Joint Standing 
Com mittee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement & Business : 
 My name is Coralie Giles. I am a resident of Brewer  and have been a registered nurse 
for nearly 45 years. I currently serve as the  President of the Maine State Nurses 
Association  and  as a Vice -President of National Nurses United.  The Ma ine State Nurses 
Association/National Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), represe nting 4,000 nurses and 
caregivers across the state of Maine, submits this testimony opposing LD  342 and asks 
for your “No” vote . 
 LD 342 has the potential to undermine occupational licensing requirements that are 
crucial to ensuring  safe, effective, and therapeutic patient care . As LD 342 was 
submitted as a concept bill, it is difficult to assess what professions may be included or what the consequences of changes to state licensing and reciprocity rules would be. A  
bill that covers occupat ions so generally cannot account for the specific needs of 
different professions in Maine.  
 The licensing requirements in Maine law  were put in place by the Maine legislature and 
agencies responding to the needs of Maine. LD 342 is a sweeping bill that cha nges 
regulations across professions to match federal licensing requirements for occupations 
  
licensed or certified at the federal level. Whatever these federal licensing requirements 
are, they were not created specifically with the needs of Maine in mind. Moreover, they 
may have been created to complement, not replace, state licensing requirements, since 
most occu pations  are licensed at the state level, not federally.  
 LD 342 allows licensing requirements to be weakened. Our  state has established 
minimum standards that nurses, doctors, and other health care workers must meet to practice in our state. H ealth care professions are generally licensed at the state level,  so 
they should not be included in this legislation. However,  without a full draft, it is 
difficult to assess what federal requirements or certifications may qualify. T o the extent 
that LD 342 does apply to health care professions, weakening these standards could lower the quality and safety of healthcare available within Maine.   
 MSNA/NNU  respectfully asks that committee members vote “No”  on this bill or , at the 
very least, ensure that  registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, and other health care 
occupations are not included in  the bill.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Coralie Giles, RN  
President, Maine State Nurses Association  
Vice -President, National Nurses United  

Coralie Giles
Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United
LD 342
TO: Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement
& Business
FROM: Coralie Giles, President of the Maine State Nurses Association, Vice 
President of National Nurses United, and resident of Brewer, Maine
RE: Opposition to LD 342
DATE: Monday, April 24, 2023
Testimony on Behalf of the Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic 
Advancement & Business
In OPPOSITION to: LD 342, An Act to Streamline Licensing by Matching Federal 
Licensing Requirements for Occupations Licensed Federally
Public Hearing: Tuesday, April 25, 2023, at 10:00 AM, Cross Building, Room 206 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement & 
Business:
My name is Coralie Giles. I am a resident of Brewer and have been a registered nurse 
for nearly 45 years. I currently serve as the President of the Maine State Nurses 
Association and as a Vice-President of National Nurses United. The Maine State 
Nurses Association/National Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), representing 4,000 nurses
and caregivers across the state of Maine, submits this testimony opposing LD 342 and
asks for your “No” vote.
LD 342 has the potential to undermine occupational licensing requirements that are 
crucial to ensuring safe, effective, and therapeutic patient care. As LD 342 was 
submitted as a concept bill, it is difficult to assess what professions may be included 
or what the consequences of changes to state licensing and reciprocity rules would be.
A bill that covers occupations so generally cannot account for the specific needs of 
different professions in Maine.
The licensing requirements in Maine law were put in place by the Maine legislature 
and agencies responding to the needs of Maine. LD 342 is a sweeping bill that 
changes regulations across professions to match federal licensing requirements for 
occupations licensed or certified at the federal level. Whatever these federal licensing 
requirements are, they were not created specifically with the needs of Maine in mind. 
Moreover, they may have been created to complement, not replace, state licensing 
requirements, since most occupations are licensed at the state level, not federally.
LD 342 allows licensing requirements to be weakened. Our state has established 
minimum standards that nurses, doctors, and other health care workers must meet to 
practice in our state. Health care professions are generally licensed at the state level, 
so they should not be included in this legislation. However, without a full draft, it is 
difficult to assess what federal requirements or certifications may qualify. To the 
extent that LD 342 does apply to health care professions, weakening these standards 
could lower the quality and safety of healthcare available within Maine. 
MSNA/NNU respectfully asks that committee members vote “No” on this bill or, at 
the very least, ensure that registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, and other health
care occupations are not included in the bill.
Sincerely, 
Coralie Giles, RN 
President, Maine State Nurses Association 
Vice-President, National Nurses United

