 
Testimony to the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
in support  
LD 1227, An Act to Balance Renewable Energy Development with Nat ural and Working Lands 
Conservation  
 
4/10/23 
Amy Wi nston, Senior Director, State Policy , CEI  
 
Dear Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker , and Distingu ished Members of the Committee:  
 
My name is Amy Winston , and I am Senior Director of State Policy  at Coastal Ent erprises, Inc. (CEI). I live 
in Edgecomb. I am submitting this testi mony  on behalf of CEI, to express our organization ’s support for 
LD 1227  (as amended).  
 CEI is a private, non -profit Community Develo pment Corporation (CDC) and Community Developme nt 
Financial Institution (CDFI)  based in B runswick. CEI was founded in 1977 to develop job -creating natural-
resource -based  business ventures in Maine ’s ru ral and coastal region s. Today we continue to work to 
build a just, vibrant, and climate  resilient future  for people in communities in Maine and other rural 
regions . We do this by  integrating finance, business expertise and policy solutions in wa ys that make the 
economy more equitable. In 2018, CE I established  a subsidiary, Bright Community  Capital, to increase 
access to solar ene rgy and specifically  to bring cost-effecti ve solar power to low-income  communities 
and neighborhoods . 
 
CEI has a 46 -year history of investment in Maine  agriculture . We provide business services including free 
sector -specific business advising  and technical assistance , and b y making loans and in vestments in new 
and existing farm and food rel ated  businesses . Our focus on an d commitment to Maine ’s agricultural 
and natural resource industries has o nly grown:  since 2018, CEI has provided $17 .5 million in financing 
to food and agriculture related enterprises , help ing them to  create or main tain 1,986 local food 
economy jobs, and provid ing customized technical assistance to 412 f armers and food entrepreneurs . 
CEI’s low-cost solar financing  has helped over 40 businesses to go green with $22 million in loan s 
leveraging $45 million in investments  across Maine and New England  to install solar arrays , generating 
enough  kWh s to power 3,500 homes . These loans prioritize low -income entrepren eurs an d business 
owners from  populations  that have historically lacked access to credit  and capital . For its part, Bright 
Community C apital, has provided $2.3 million  in financing to developer for  solar projects  and owns 1.6 
MWs in projects bringing affordable solar power to non -profits , municipalities  and affordable housing.  
 Our missioned approach to photovoltaics understands that without access to credit and cap ital, low-
income consumers are unable  to quali fy for a loan or federal tax incentives . Credit risk (real or  
perceived) , small er project  sizes , developer b alance sheet capacity, and technical assistance needs  are 
additional hurdles (see Carsey  Institute of Public Policy  White Paper on Scaling Solar Equitably 2021 ). For 
this reason, CEI was named to the Distributed Generation Stakeholder Group  convened  by the 
Governor ’s Energy Office pursuant  to LD 936  (P.L. 2021, C h. 390) to advise and ass ist in making  
 
recommendations for a cost-effective successor  program for distributed renewable energy program  that 
is equitable  in benefit ting ratepayers and energy burdened households and guiding the responsibl e 
siting of solar installations  in a way that is compatible with  agricultural land use . 
 
LD 1227 reflects the intent of the Distributed Generation Stakeholder Group to create a successor 
program that minimizes impacts to working lands . And it is a key  recommendation of the  Governor ’s 
Energy Office  Agricultural Solar Stakeholder  Group .  
 CEI supports the proposed process in this bill for developing and implementing a  dual -use pilot program 
that combin es solar energy and agricultural production . Specific elements that we believe position  this 
program  for success include:  
• Interagency  and stakeho lder coordination , including with research institutions , to develop a plan , 
eligibility criteria for continued  agricultural or horticultural use  of the affected land ; 
• Eligibility of developers, working in collaboration with and the inform ed consent of landowners , to 
participate in an application ; 
• Eligibility  of farms that have already deployed as well as those wh o are planning to install solar 
energy systems ; 
• Applied  research on compatible crop production , grazing, and other agricultural and hortic ultural 
uses of the land containing  solar installations  to determine best practices for optimizing agricultural 
and energy production ; 
• Assessment of any financial, location -based or other in centives  for dual - or mixed -use projects, 
inclu ding purposeful consideration  of mechanisms needed to minimize the cost of the pilot program 
on electric ratepayers in the sta te. 
In addition, we  
In addition  to the research agenda specified in the bill amend ment, we feel that it is critical  to research  
the proper  solar se t-up, including appropriat e panel height , optimal row spacing, and other design  
specifications .  
Thank you for considering our testimony. W e encourage the committee to vote O ught to Pass on LD 
1227.  
