 
One Short Street · Suite 2 · Northampton, MA 01060  
Phone: (413) 586 -9330 · Fax: (413) 586 -9332  
www.farmland.or g  
 
 
Testimony before the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  
By Chelsea Gazillo , American Farmland Trust, New England Policy Manager  
 
April 10, 2023  
Dear Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry:  
I appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of  LD 12 27 - An Act to Balance Renewable 
Energy Development with Natural and Working Lands Conservation . 
My name is Chelsea Gazillo, and I am American Farmland Trust's New England Policy 
Manager. American Farmland Trust (AFT) is the only national conservation organization dedicated to 
protecting farm land, promoting sound  farming practices, and keeping farmers  on the land. AFT is a 
national leader in promoting Smart Solar Siting on farmland to support clean energy capa city while 
protecting  our most viable agricultural lands fro m development pressures. AFT has a long history of 
working in Maine, stemming back to our role in supporting the first farmland protection projects 
undertaken through the Land for Maine's Future p rogram. Building off our New England Smart Solar 
initiative, AFT participated in the Agricultural Solar Stakeholder Group convened in 2021 by the 
Governor's Energy Office (GEO) and the Department of Agricultural, Conservation, and Forestry 
(DACF).1 
AFT supports LD 1227 as it advances critical recommend ations of the Agricul tural Solar 
Stakeholder Group, includin g planning the creation of the dual -use pilot program, creating a centralized 
database of energy projects and their key characteristics, and increasing participation of agricultural 
stakeholders i n solar energy workin g groups. These are all essential steps  toward a more balanced and 
transparent solar energy future in Maine. We also support amendments to LD 1227 that were put forth  
by the bill’s lead sponsor , Representative P luecker.  
As Maine moves to capture the environmental, economic, and e nergy benefits of cle an and 
renewable energy, we must also m inimize impacts on Maine's agriculture by protecting production on 
the state's best farmland. Well -sited and thoughtfully designed dual -use solar energy installations 
provide an opportunity to sim ultaneously protect f armland, advance clean energy generatio n, and 
support farmers through income diversification.    
In the summer of 2022, AFT released "Farms Under Threat 2040," which estimates that between 
2016 -2040, 6.2 million acres in the US will be converted to urban and highly developed land uses such 
as commercial buildings, industrial sites, and moderate -to-high-density residential development. The 
remainder, 12.2 million acres, will be converted to low -density residential areas, which range fr om 
large -lot subdivisions to rural areas with a proliferatio n of scattered houses. Furthermore, according to 
AFT's " Farms Under Threat 2020" report, it is estimated that from 2001 -2016, Maine lost roughly 
 
1 https://f armland.org/project/smart -solar -for-new-england/  

 
One Short Street · Suite 2 · Northampton, MA 01060  
Phone: (413) 586 -9330 · Fax: (413) 586 -9332  
www.farmland.or g 17,700 acres of land to urban development or hi ghly developed land use and low -density residential land 
use2. According to " AFT's Farms Under Threat 2040" report, if recent trends continue, 53,4000 acres of 
Maine's farmland will be paved over, fragmented, or c onverted to uses that jeopardize agriculture.  This 
is equivalent to 5% of the state's farmland, which is enough to generate $32 million in annual revenue." .3 
In short, Maine cannot afford to lose anymore farmla nd to development.   
AFT recognizes that depl oyment of solar energy is essential to meeting Maine's renewable 
energy requirements (100% renewable energy grid by 2050) as well as to national and global goals for 
mitigating climate change. A rapid expansion of solar in all its forms and scales is need ed – solar 
installed for on -farm energy, on most residential and commercial rooftops, parking lot canopies, as well 
as on landfills, brownfields, and highway corridors. In addition, a substantial area of land will still be 
needed for utility scale solar and community solar in Maine. Solar development in Maine is accelerating 
and the Solar Energy Industries Association projects that Maine will double its installed solar capacity 
(1,196 MW)4 over the next five years. By implementing recommendations from th e Governor's 
Agricultural Solar Stakeholder Group, Maine can be a regional leader in advancing agriculturally 
compatible solar (agrivoltaics) and Smart Solar strategies that protect farms and farmland needed for 
local food production.   
AFT supports  the amendment that encourages  a more substantial allocation of generating 
capacity - at least 60 MW  for a dual -use pilot program. Building on lesso ns learned with the dual-use 
solar program in Massachusetts and other states such as N ew Jersey  and N ew York , passing LD 1227 
and creating an agrivoltaic  pilot program and incubator initiatives will put Maine a t the forefront of 
clean energy innovations that directly su pport the state's farmers.   
A robust dual -use pilot program provides the opportunity to research production systems and 
project desi gns most compatible with Maine's agricultural landscape and economy. Dual -use solar 
installations have been reported to improve important soil metrics o n site, including:   
• Increased moisture retention in soil and plants in times of high heat and low preci pitation ;   
• Increase d in pasture grass biomass under arrays d uring summer months compared to areas in full 
sun; 
• Reduced heat stress in livestock by pro viding added shade in summer  and;   
• Increased yields for some vegetables under dual -use arrays (including pot atoes, celery, kale, and 
others)   
  While dual -use solar in stallation and crop production compatibility is often cited as a cause for 
concern, a dual -use pilot program that collects and evaluates Maine -specific crop, soil, and climate 
impact data is key t o addressing such concerns.    
Since 2013 farmers  have b een facing nearly a 50% drop in net farm income and continue to  
struggle to  meet increases in farm production expenses. This economic crisis has seriously impacted 
farm viability and  farmers’  well-being, thus threatening farmland security. As c limate impacts ravage 
growing seasons, and with the recent devastating discovery of PFAS con taminating our regions' soils, 
the livelihood of Maine's farmers has never been at greater risk. Dual -use solar installations can 
diversify income and improve incom e stability, leading to increased viability, security, and farmland 
 
2 https://storage.googleapis.com/csp -fut.appspot.com/reports/spatial/Maine_spatial.pdf  
3 https://farmlandinfo.org/publications/farms -under -threat -2040/  
4 https://www.seia.org/  
 
One Short Street · Suite 2 · Northampton, MA 01060  
Phone: (413) 586 -9330 · Fax: (413) 586 -9332  
www.farmland.or g protection. Agricultural  stakeholders must be represented in solar policy and program development 
conversations, including parti cipating in the GEO's distributed generation working group.   
AFT is confident that this piece of legislation will provide mechanisms that support th e State of 
Maine's renewable energy goals, increase agricultural representation during solar policy conv ersations, 
and improve solar energy project data transparency to better understand the potential impact that solar 
energy has on Maine's farmland and Ma ine's family farms.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity t o submit testimony. Please feel free to contact me at 
cgazillo@farmland.org  or my colleagues at American Farmland Trust if you have any questions about 
this testimony on LD 12 27.   
 
With s incer ity,  
 
Chelsea Gazillo  
New England Policy Manager  
American Farmland Trust  
 
American Farmland Tru st is an agricultural non -profit organization with a mission to save the land that 
sustains us by protecting farmland, promoting sound farming practices, and keeping farmers on the land. 
AFT is the only national agricultural organization that approaches its work in this comprehensive, holistic 
manner. We recognize the connection between the land, forward -looking farming practices, and the 
farmers who do the work.  

