MAINE 
A[II)L]ON 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry 
% Legislative Information Ofﬁce 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
April 10, 2023 
RE: LD 1227, An Act to Balance Renewable Energy Development with Natural and 
Working Lands Conservation 
Dear Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and Members of the Committee: 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in support of LD 1227, An Act to 
Balance Renewable Energy Development with Natural and Working Lands Conservation, on 
behalf of Maine Audubon and our 30,000 members and supporters. 
Maine Audubon supports this legislation because it will progress the recommendations of 
the Agricultural Solar Stakeholder Group convened by the Governor ’s Energy Ofﬁce (GEO) and 
the Department of Agricultural, Conservation and Forestry (DACF), of which Maine Audubon 
was a member. We also support the bill because it Will advance a number of strategies in Maine 
Won’t Wait, the state’s four-year climate action plan published in December 2020, including 
“develop[ing] policies . . . to ensure renewable energy project siting is streamlined and 
transparent while seeking to minimize impacts on natural and working lands and engaging key 
stakeholders. ” 
Maine Audubon is a strong supporter of renewable energy development, including solar. 
Rapid deployment of new renewable energy resources is critical to reducing our reliance on 
fossil fuels and avoiding the worst impacts of climate change»- —the leading threat to Maine’s 
wildlife and wildlife habitat, the conservation of which is central to Maine Audubon’s mission. 
At the same time, new renewable energy development, like any new development, if not 
thoughtfully sited, can displace wildlife habitat and negatively impact Maine’s natural resources, 
including agricultural resources. Currently, there is a robust interest in solar development in 
Maine. 
Policies that allow for the continued rapid deployment of renewable energy while 
encouraging projects that avoid, minimize, and/or compensate for Maine’s ﬁnite agricultural and 
critical natural resources are key to Maine’s current and future agricultural productivity, 
biodiversity, and climate resiliency. We believe that this bill is a positive step towards adopting 
such policies. 
2.0 GiiSi£i11dFa]."It1 Road, Fahnotltii, Maine 04105 (26?) 781—2g30 n1aineaud1§bon,01"g
Maine Audubon supports Section 3. Section 3 would create a publicly-accessible 
database of developed energy projects in the state that would allow the GEO, natural resource 
agencies, and the public to identify land use and other energy trends. Maine agencies, including 
the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) and DACF, have some data, but it is 
incomplete. For example, the Maine Natural Areas Program, part of DACF, tracks projects that 
have requested acreage reviews, but does not have access to information on projects approved 
for development. It is critical that the state work collaboratively with municipalities to collect 
this information, because not all projects require a state permit and thus are “trackable ” by the 
state. With this information, the state can track trends and tailor policy development, should it be 
necessary, accordingly. 
Maine Audubon supports Section 4 as proposed to be amended by Representative 
Pluecker in a correspondence that was shared with the Committee and interested parties on 
Friday, April 7. Section 4 represents the ﬁrst step towards the creation of a dual-use pilot 
program. Locating solar alongside agricultural production is a win-win. However, more 
information is needed to understand how to maximize agricultural productivity while 
maintaining low energy costs and efficiencies. Section 4 is the ﬁrst step toward gathering that 
information. 
Thank you for your consideration of our testimony. We strongly encourage the 
Committee to support this important legislation. 
Sincerely, 
Eliza Donoghue, Esq. 
Director of Advocacy 
120 GilSi2lJ1(lFE3lTl1RO3(i, Faliiiouth, Maine 04165 i 
(:;ao";~ ‘} 781-2330 > 
rnaineauduioo1i.org
