B VE 
April l0, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
BlueWave Testimony in Support of LD 1227 - An Act to Balance Renewable Energy 
Development with Natural and Working Lands Conservation 
Good morning Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry. My name is Kaitlin Hollinger and I am 
testifying today on behalf of BlueWave Solar in support of LD 1227, which would allow for the 
creation of a dual-use (solar plus agriculture) pilot program in Maine. Thank you for your 
consideration of this important piece of legislation today. 
BlueWave is a solar and energy storage developer and a leading innovator of dual-use solar 
projects in the Northeast. BlueWave developed the ﬁrst dual-use project in Maine on a wild 
blueberry farm in Rockport, which was completed in 2021. We are partnering with the 
University of Maine to study the impact of differing construction techniques on the blueberry 
crop. 
I was proud to represent BlueWave as a member of the Agricultural Solar Siting Stakeholder 
Group, crated by LD 820 and convened by the Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation 
and Forestry (DACF) and the Governor ’s Energy Office (GEO). After a robust stakeholder 
process, the group submitted a report to this committee in January 2022 with recommendations 
to ensure agricultural lands are protected while helping the state reach its renewable energy 
goals. One key recommendation was the creation of a dual-use pilot program, which this bill 
would enable. The report also recommended that future state-sponsored programs to support the 
development of solar resources, such as the successor to the‘NEB program currently being 
discussed, include consideration and prioritization of agricultural siting characteristics consistent 
with dual-use best practices. 
The term “dual-use ’_’ (or agrivoltaics; solar plus agriculture) refers to solar projects that allow for 
continued agricultural production under and around the solar panels, so that the same parcel of 
land can serve two uses. Dual-use solar projects are designed to provide appropriate height and 
spacing between the panels to allow for continued or renewed agricultural activity either around, 
between, or under the panels. Representing real investment in local communities, dual-use 
projects provide important beneﬁts such as stable revenue for farmers, increased food security in 
the face of climate change, and electric savings to residents, nonproﬁts, municipalities, and small 
businesses. 
116 HUNTINGTON AVE, SUlTE 6O'l P BOSTON, l\/l/~\SS/ —\CHUSETTS 02116 
BLUE\/\/A\/EENERGY T: 617.209.3122
B VE 
Farmers who participate in clean energy often do so as an alternative to selling off their farmland 
to a form of development in which it would be irreversibly lost, such as housing or industrial use. 
Dual-use offers farmers another option as it is not a permanent form of development. In 
BlueWave ’s experience, dual-use solar projects provide the long-term ﬁnancial resources that 
farmers need to keep their farms viable in the face of development and other economic pressures 
by preserving and reactivating farmland that would otherwise lay fallow. As a result, farmers can 
pass on land to the next generation, or lease land to new farmers entering the ﬁeld. Dual-use is an 
important tool to achieve economic stability for farms and meet Maine’s ambitious climate and 
clean energy goals. 
LD 1227 would direct DACF, in collaboration with the Governor ’s Energy Ofﬁce, Public 
Utilities, and other stakeholders, to develop a plan for a dual-use pilot program and authorizes 
DACF to implement that plan. We look forward to a continued conversation about dual-use and 
the role it can play towards reaching Maine’s clean energy and climate goals. Empowering 
farmers while allowing them the ﬂexibility they need to diversify and expand their operations 
through dual-use will be a key step towards preserving farmland and farmers’ livelihoods in 
Maine. Please don’t hesitate to use BlueWave as a resource if you have any further questions 
about dual-use. Thank you for your work, time, and consideration. 
Kaitlin Hollinger Elizabeth Curran 
Policy Manager Senior Director, Policy & Govermnent Affairs 
khollinger@bluewave.energy ecurran@:blt1ewave.energy 
116 HUNTINGTON AVE, SUITE 601 ~ 
BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS 02116 
BLUE\/\/A\/EENERGY T: 6172093122
