'° 
Th@Natu1"e 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director COI1S€I‘VElI1Cy 
The Nature Conservancy in l\/laine p J Maine 
l<aitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org' 
Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
RE: LD 1227 - An Act to Balance Renewable Energy Development with Natural and 
Working Lands Conservation 
Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo andI 
am the Government Relations Director for The Nature Conservancy in l\/laine. I 
appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of LD 1227 - An Act to Balance . 
Renewable Energy Development with Natural and Working Lands Conservation. We 
appreciate Representative Pluecker's efforts to bring this idea forward and support the 
amended version he has introduc ed. 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to 
conserving the lands and waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we 
create innovative, on—the—ground solutions to our world's toughest challenges so that 
nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that engages 
local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners. The Nature 
Conservancy has been leading conservation in l\/laine for more than 60 years and is the 
12th largest landowner in the state, owning and managing roughly 300,000 acres. We 
also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with fishermen in the 
Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations, and develop innovative solutions to 
address our changing climate. 
LD 1227 and the accompanying amendment requires the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry (DACF), in collaboration with other state agencies and 
interested parties, to develop a plan to implement a dual—use energy pilot program. 
The amendment provides more flexibility by authorizing the department, inZ 
coordination with the Governor's Energy Office, to get started with the pilot if they are 
ready to but maintains a report back to the legislature in February 2025. importantly, 
the amendment also focuses on agricultural dual use projects, increases the possible 
size of the pilot program, and sets up the opportunity for DACF to accept funding from 
any source to develop or implem ant this effort. 
The Nature Conservancy's top priorities, in l\/laine and across the world, are conserving 
lands and waters and tackling climate change. These goals are tightly intertwined — 
conserving natural places helps draw down carbon from the atmosphere and provides 
space for wildlife to move and adapt as temperatures warm, while the rapid 
deployment of clean, renewable energy mitigates the cause of climate change that is. 
impacting natural and human communities alike. There is an inherently virtuous cycle 
between clean energy deployment and natural resource conservation. 
At the same time, clean energy projects require substantial space to build and can 
bump into important natural resources. Maintaining the virtuous relationship between 
clean energy and natural resources requires being intentional about where new 
14 Maine St., Suite 401 Brunswick, l\/laine 04011 natureorggmaine
projects are located. TNC believes that with the right policy frameworks in place, 
Maine and the region can build the clean energy we need in a way that is compatible 
with our natural and working lands. 
LD 856 represents an important step toward achieving this goal. We appreciate the 
work of Rep. Pluecker, the GEO, DACF, and partner organizations like Maine Farmland 
Trust in crafting this thoughtful legislation that builds on the work of the Agricultural 
Solar Stakeholder Group and is consistent with Maine's Climate Action Plan, which 
recommends that the State should, “Develop policies ny 2022 to ensure renewable 
energy project siting is streamlined and transparent while seeking to minimize impacts 
on natural and working lands and engaging key stakeholders. ” 
Thank you for the opportunity to weigh in on LD 1227. l’m happy to answer questions 
at any time.-
.
\
W
