April  8, 202 3 
Testimony - Maine LD 1227  
Members of the Maine Legislative Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry:  
I am writing to describe my support for the amended LD 1227 – An Act to Balance Renewable Energy Development with 
Natural and Working Lands Conservation  
It was my privilege to be a stakeholder/participant in the Maine Agricultural Solar Siting Stakeholder Group convened by 
the Governor’s Energy Office and the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry  in 2021.  It is unfortunate that 
recommendations from this group brought to the previous Legislature by LD 856 were not funded. As such, t wo key 
questions  from th at stakeholder process  remain unanswered: what w ill dual use solar projects look like in Maine, and can 
Maine afford agrivoltaics?  Passage and funding for LD 1227 will begin provid ing answers.    
An example of existing multi -use farming and solar  already at scale in the U nited States is livestock grazing in solar sites  
as a strategy for manag ing vegetation  and improving soil health . Sheep are  often  (not exclusively)  employed due to their 
stature, disposition,  and the fact that little modifications are required of solar infrastructure to accommodate them.  It is 
estimated by the American Solar Grazing Association  www.solargrazing.org  that in 2022 more than  >25,000 acres of 
ground -mount solar sites were grazed in 44 states . This include s only around 90 acres of solar in Maine  as the practice is 
largely unknown and large scale sheep grazing is culturally unfamiliar . 
The USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) uses Conservation Practice Standard (528) Prescribed 
Grazing to guide manage ment of  livestock grazing systems. The 2006 Targeted Grazing Handbook  from the American 
Sheep Industry Association and Univers ity of Idaho outlines standards of practice for using livestock behavior to control 
invasive plant species,  and fire fuel load , and t he USDA Grassland Conservation Reserve Program  “helps landowners 
and operators protect grassland, including rangeland, and pastureland, while maintaining the areas as 
grazing lands ... (it was) reauthorized by the 2018 Farm Bill”  www.fsa.usda.gov/programs -and-
services/conservation -programs/crp -grasslands/index  
The benefits of properly managed , holistic animal grazing systems are known. We simply need to  discover how they will 
be best combined with solar energy production in Mai ne.  However,  livestock integration with solar in the state is largely 
at a standstill without broad, inter -agency  State support for projects that propose this type  of agrivoltaics, and financial 
incentive to encourage  project collaborat ion amongst landowners, developers, and municipalities  and with agriculture , 
working lands and habitat conservation  communities . 
The Innovative Site Preparation and Impact Reductions on the Environment (InSPIRE)  project  is funded by the U.S. 
Department of Energy Solar Energy Technologies Office (SETO) and brings together Federal, State, private and nonprofit 
researchers, and environmental, energy and industry groups to look at various co -locations strategies with solar such as 
vegetable farming , pollinator habitat, native vegetation, and animal grazing. Research sites are located across the country, 
yet none closer to Maine than Massachusetts and New York.   
What type of agrivoltaic projec ts will be the most viable for Maine f arms and farmers?  What heritage industrie s and 
production m ight we  pair with solar? Blueberries are a great start  - what other agricultural enterprises would benefit from 
the shade and protection of solar?  How could emerging industries in which Maine has a significant investment be 
enhanced by solar -agricultural production? For instance, could component materials fo r the University of Maine 
Advanced Structures and C omposites Center be derived from Maine -based agrivoltaic projects?  
Solar energy production and farm ing can co-exist – it does not  have to be  an either/or proposition . LD 1227  provides a 
pathway for us to defin e how renewable energy and agriculture can work together and benefit  Maine . I encourage you to 
support its passage.  
Respectfully,  
Nick Armentrout  
Spring Creek Farm  
Lyman, Maine  
Nick Armentrout
Lyman
LD 1227
Members of the Maine Legislative Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry:
I am writing to describe my support for the amended LD 1227 – An Act to Balance 
Renewable Energy Development with Natural and Working Lands Conservation.
It was my privilege to be a stakeholder/participant in the Maine Agricultural Solar 
Siting Stakeholder Group convened by the Governor’s Energy Office and the 
Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry in 2021. It is unfortunate that 
recommendations from this group brought to the previous Legislature by LD 856 
were not funded. As such, two key questions from that stakeholder process remain 
unanswered: what will dual use solar projects look like in Maine, and can Maine 
afford agrivoltaics? Passage and funding for LD 1227 will begin providing answers.   
An example of existing multi-use farming and solar already at scale in the United 
States is livestock grazing in solar sites as a strategy for managing vegetation and 
improving soil health. Sheep are often (not exclusively) employed due to their stature,
disposition, and the fact that little modifications are required of solar infrastructure to 
accommodate them. It is estimated by the American Solar Grazing Association 
www.solargrazing.org that in 2022 more than >25,000 acres of ground-mount solar 
sites were grazed in 44 states. This includes only around 90 acres of solar in Maine as 
the practice is largely unknown and large scale sheep grazing is culturally unfamiliar.
The USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) uses Conservation 
Practice Standard (528) Prescribed Grazing to guide management of livestock grazing
systems. The 2006 Targeted Grazing Handbook from the American Sheep Industry 
Association and University of Idaho outlines standards of practice for using livestock 
behavior to control invasive plant species, and fire fuel load, and the USDA Grassland
Conservation Reserve Program “helps landowners and operators protect grassland, 
including rangeland, and pastureland, while maintaining the areas as grazing lands... 
(it was) reauthorized by the 2018 Farm Bill” 
www.fsa.usda.gov/programs-and-services/conservation-programs/crp-grasslands/inde
x
The benefits of properly managed, holistic animal grazing systems are known. We 
simply need to discover how they will be best combined with solar energy production 
in Maine.  However, livestock integration with solar in the state is largely at a 
standstill without broad, inter-agency State support for projects that propose this type 
of agrivoltaics, and financial incentive to encourage project collaboration amongst 
landowners, developers, and municipalities and with agriculture, working lands and 
habitat conservation communities.
The Innovative Site Preparation and Impact Reductions on the Environment 
(InSPIRE) project is funded by the U.S. Department of Energy Solar Energy 
Technologies Office (SETO) and brings together Federal, State, private and nonprofit 
researchers, and environmental, energy and industry groups to look at various 
co-locations strategies with solar such as vegetable farming, pollinator habitat, native 
vegetation, and animal grazing. Research sites are located across the country, yet none
closer to Maine than Massachusetts and New York.  
What type of agrivoltaic projects will be the most viable for Maine farms and 
farmers? What heritage industries and production might we pair with solar? 
Blueberries are a great start - what other agricultural enterprises would benefit from 
the shade and protection of solar?  How could emerging industries in which Maine 
has a significant investment be enhanced by solar-agricultural production? For 
instance, could component materials for the University of Maine Advanced Structures
and Composites Center be derived from Maine-based agrivoltaic projects? 
Solar energy production and farming can co-exist – it does not have to be an either/or 
proposition. LD 1227 provides a pathway for us to define how renewable energy and 
agriculture can work together and benefit Maine. I encourage you to support its 
passage.
Respectfully,
Nick Armentrout
Spring Creek Farm
Lyman, Maine

