4/6/2023 5:04 PM        Page 1 of 2 
 Amendment to LD 1227  -  
An Act to Balance Renewable Energy Development with Natural and Working Lands 
Conservation  
Proposed by Representative Pluecker  
April 10 , 2023  
 
Amend the bill in section 4 as follows:  
Sec. 4.  Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to plan for pilot program 
to study feasibility of dual -use projects.   The Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry, referred to in this section as "the department," in collaboration with the Governor's 
Energy Office, the Public Utilities Commission and other state agencies and stakeholders, 
including research institutions, shall d evelop a plan to implement a dual -use energy pilot program, 
referred to in this section as "the pilot program plan," to test and study the efficacy and potential 
benefits of innovative solar energy systems that are connected to the electric transmission an d 
distribution utility system and are located on natural and developed areas, including , but not 
limited to,  farmland that is maintained in active agricultural or horticultural use , parking lots and 
aquatic sites . For purposes of this section, "dual -use pr oject" means a mixed -use system combining 
use of land or aquatic sites  agricultural production with solar energy production . The department 
may accept funds from any source, public or private, for the purposes of this section  and may 
contract for professio nal services to carry out the purposes of this section.  
The pilot program plan must:  
1. Identify potential dual -use projects that collectively have a total capacity  of no t less than 20 
megawatts  nor more than 60 megawatts   of 30 megawatts, with at least 20  megawatts reserved for 
dual-use projects on agricultural land,  and that may warrant inclusion in a pilot program based on 
criteria including but not limited to emerging or potential commercial viability, potential 
applicability to the State, and potential  to contribute meaningfully and cost -effectively to 
achievement of the goals established in the Maine Revised Statutes, Title 35 -A, section 3210, 
subsection 1 -A; 
2. Identify and include eligibility criteria for dual -use projects to be included in the pilot  
program, including, but not limited to, the continuation of agricultural or horticultural uses of the 
affected land;  
3. Identify if financial incentives, location -based incentives or other incentives to dual -use 
projects that would be considered for inclu sion in the pilot program would be necessary, including 
mechanisms to minimize the cost of the pilot program to electric ratepayers in the State;  
4. Ensure all approved agricultural dual -use projects permit the department to conduct or direct 
research on c ompatible crops, grazing operations and other agricultural or horticultural uses of the 
land to determine best practices for dual -use projects.  The determination of best practices must 
consider both the duration of uses of the land and the energy producti on of the solar energy system;  
5. Include an application process for landowners  or developers, with the informed consent of 
the landowner,  seeking to be included in the pilot program, including landowners  those who have 
already deployed or are planning to deploy solar energy systems;   
4/6/2023 5:04 PM        Page 2 of 2 
 6. Examine benefits of dual -use project applications to individual landowners, the electric 
transmission and distribution utility system and the State's ability to meet clean energy and climate 
goals; and  
7. Include an evalua tion process and selection criteria that may result in the approval of dual -
use projects of varying sizes, in different geographic locations, that involve diverse types of sites, 
including agricultural sites, and, if applicable, minimize negative impacts t o farmland and the 
environment, and ensure appropriate innovation as well as planning for technical and financial 
feasibility, including interconnection with the electric transmission and distribution utility system.  
The department in coordination with the Governor's Energy Office may implement the pilot 
program and shall submit a report with a plan for implementing  relating to the pilot program to the 
joint standing committees of the Legislature having jurisdiction over agriculture, conservation and 
forestry matters; energy and utilities matters; and environment and natural resources matters no 
later than February 1, 2025 and each joint standing committee may submit legislation relatin g to 
the subject matter of the report to the First Regular Session of the  132nd Legislature.  
 
 
 
SUMMARY  
 
This amendment revises the definition of “dual -use” project to mean a mixed -use system 
combining use of agricultural production with solar energy produ ction.  
 
The amendment provides that the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
may accept funds from any source, public or private, for the development or implementation 
of a pilot program to study the feasibility of dual -use projects.  The a mendment also provides 
that the department may contract for professional services to develop or implement the pilot 
program.  
 
The amendment provides that the pilot program must identify dual -use project that 
collectively have a total capacity of not less t han 20 megawatts nor more than 60 megawatts 
rather than 30 megawatts  with at least 20 megawatts reserved for dual -use projects on 
agricultural land as proposed in the bill.  
 
The amendment clarifies that developers, with the informed consent of the landowne r, as 
well as landowners may apply for the pilot program.  
 
Finally, the amendment authorizes the department, in coordination with the Governor’s 
Energy Office, to implement the pilot program.  
 
