-'' 
:- 1' 
--; _..~\ .. 
Senator Anne Carney 
, . 
3 Slate House Sfaz‘10n 
Augusta, ME 04333-0003 
Oﬁice (207) 287-1515 
Testimony of Senator Anne Carney in Opposition to 
LD 718: An Act to Increase the Beneﬁcial Reuse of Construction and Demolition Debris 
before the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
May 8, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and esteemed members of the Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, I am Anne Carney, representing Senate District 29. I am 
before you today to speak in opposition to LD 718: An Act to Increase the Beneﬁcial Reuse of 
Construction and Demolition Debris. 
Colleagues, I ask you to think back to the significance of the vote we took to enact PL 2021, 
Chapter 626 (LD 1639) this time last year. Mainers from across the state reached out to us and 
asked us to stand up for preserving the capacity of our state-owned Juniper Ridge Landﬁll and 
protecting the Penobscot Nation and other communities that live in the surrounding area from the 
harms of toxic out-of-state waste. The 2022 legislation passed with a unanimous roll call vote in 
the Senate and 80% support in the House. 
With this strong support, Maine fmally closed a loophole that was allowing 235,000 tons per 
year of bulky waste (OBW) and construction demolition debris (CDD) to be imported from 
states with stricter laws. This was a historic vote to stop Maine from becoming New England’s 
dumping ground. Despite the passage of LD 1639, the pressure on Maine to accept out-of-state 
waste, including construction and demolition debris that contains toxins such as lead, mercury 
and arsenic, has continued in the face of other states’ steps to protect the environment within 
their jurisdiction. 
Today we are being asked to delay, retroactively, the implementation of this law. There is a very 
good reason for this request. Maine needs some additional waste to allow disposal of municipal 
Wastewater sludge at out state-owned landﬁll, Juniper Ridge. The request, though, is out of 
proportion to the need. In a March 28, 2023 letter to this committee, Casella told us they need 
25,000 tons of bulking agent. See Attachment 1, pg. 5. We also learned in a March 2, 2023 email 
exchange between Maine DEP and ReSource, the processing facility that sends OBW and CDD 
to Juniper Ridge, that Resource can generate more Maine-originated bulking agent at their 
Lewiston facility in the spring, summer and fall. In addition, they could supply approximately 
27,000 tons of already processed bulking material from their other New England facilities 
directly to Juniper Ridge. See Attachment 2, pg. 1.
l
The amended proposal before you would allow 235,000 tons per year of out-of-state OBW and 
CDD ~ nearly 500,000 tons during the delay, into Juniper Ridge. This far exceeds the 
demonstrated need of 25,000 per year. 
What harm is caused by such a drastic response to the demonstrated need? Under the previous 
system, the Juniper Ridge Landﬁll had become a dumping ground for toxic and harmful out-of- 
state waste like construction and demolition debris, a form of waste known to contain hazardous 
chemicals such as mercury, lead, and arsenic. The system was inconsistent with our solid waste 
hierarchy, and with state policy recognizing that landﬁlls, especially our state-owned landﬁll, are 
valuable resources that need to be conserved and used only as necessary. Our Waste 
Management statute declares “environmentally suitable sites for waste disposal are in limited 
supply and represent a critical natural resource. ” 38 MRS §l302. This committee and the Maine 
Legislature did important bi-partisan work when we prevented Maine’s state-owned landﬁll from 
becoming a refuge for harmful and unwanted waste from other states and preserving its capacity 
to meet the needs of Mainers. 
A less drastic and equally effective response to the demonstrated need for 25,000 tons of bulking 
material per year would be to amend 38 MRS §l303-C(40-A) to allow up to 25,000 tons per year 
of waste from a facility that falls within the exception created in 38 MRS §l3l0-N(5-A)(2) to be 
disposed of at Juniper Ridge without regard to its origin. This provision could still be in effect 
for the two-year timeframe set forth in the amendment. It would accomplish the same result of 
addressing the need for bulking agent for the sludge, eliminate the cost of shipping sludge to 
other locations, and keep the capacity of Juniper Ridge Landﬁll available for Mainers in the 
years to come. 
The bottom line is that Juniper Ridge Landfill is a state-owned asset that should be used to meet 
the needs of our state. In this instance, we can allow a limited increase in out of state bulking 
material to meet the needs of our municipal wastewater treatment facilities without re-opening a 
loophole that allows an unregulated amount of OBW and toxic CDD to ﬁll up that asset for the 
beneﬁt of the for-proﬁt operator of the facility. 
Thank you for your attention today. I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
3 
Anne Carney 
State Senator, Senate District 29 
South Portland, Cape Elizabeth, and part of Scarborough
20t
