Testimony of the Environmental Priorities Coalition 
’ 
In Opposition to LD 718 
“An Acz‘ to Increase the Beneﬁcial Reuse of Construction and Demolition Debris” 
Before the Environment and Natural Resources Committee 
May 8, 2023 
Good day Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the 
Environment and Natural Resources Committee. My name is Beth Ahearn andI 
offer testimony on behalf of the Environmental Priorities Coalition (EPC). The 
EPC is a partnership of thirty-seven conservation, enviromnental, and public health 
organizations who unify around a common agenda every year. The EPC represents 
over 120,000 members in Maine who want to protect the good health, good jobs, 
and quality of life that depend upon a healthy environment. LD 718, “An Act to 
Increase the Beneﬁcial Reuse of Construction and Demolition Debris” isa 
defensive priority for our coalition this year. 
LD 718 would roll back a bipartisan law passed last year to stop out-of-state waste 
from being dumped in Maine. That law, sponsored by Senator Carney (LD 1639), 
passed unanimously in the Senate and by a vote of 102-25 in the House. With that 
strong vote, the Legislature closed the out-of-state waste loophole and protected 
our communities and environment. We adamantly oppose rolling it back. 
A little history is warranted here: The State bought Juniper Ridge Landﬁll in Old 
Town, with taxpayer money, with the intent to reserve the limited capacity for the 
needs of Maine’s people. About one-third of the waste dumped in Juniper Ridge 
each year was construction and demolition debris from surrounding states. That 
amounted to about 16 forty-ton tractor-trailer loads of out-of-state Waste dumped in 
Maine every day of the year. Most of the construction and demolition debris that 
had been trucked to Maine had come from Massachusetts, which had strengthened 
its waste regulations and banned disposal of this type of waste. LD 1639 closed the
legal loophole that had allowed for waste to be classiﬁed as “in-state ” once it 
entered a solid waste processing facility in Maine —— no matter where it originated. 
LD 718 ignores the efforts and impacts to the Penobscot Nation and local residents 
who worked to get this common-sense enviromnental measure passed. This bill 
pushes back the start date by two years, which would allow for an additionalA 
400,000 tons of out of state Waste to get dumped in Maine. Rapidly ﬁlling landﬁlls 
require expansions and lead to increased pollution, which disproportionately 
impacts the Penobscot Nation, residents living near the landﬁll, and the Penobscot 
River and Bay. 
Casella argues that we need to repeal LDI639 to be able to provide construction 
and demolition debris to stabilize the sludge imports at Juniper Ridge Landﬁll. 
However, they have never explained wny out-of-state waste is the only material 
they can use to stabilize sludge. Other ;andﬁll operators around the country utilize 
other materials for sludge stabilization including contaminated soil, sawdust, and 
wood chips, as well as utilizing techno;ogy to dewater and dry sludge before it is 
landﬁlled, reducing the need for stabilizing agents. By refusing to accept sludge 
without earnestly exploring other stabiization options and adequately preparing for 
the implementation of LDI639, Casella is effectively holding Maine’s wastewater 
treatment plants hostage. We sympathize with these plants and ask this committee 
to explore other options for dealing with the disposal of PFAS laden sludge. 
We urge you to unanimously oppose and vote “Ought Not to Pass” on LD 718. 
Please protect Maine communities and natural resources by maintaining our 
current out of state waste law.
