Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and Members of the Environment and Natural Resources 
CommitteeA 
My name is Bill Lippincott; I'm speaking in opposition to LD 718. I’m Co-Chair of Don’t Waste ME, 
but I’m also speaking before you as a resident of Hampden, the site of the closed, still leaking Pine 
Tree Landﬁll. I've been able to watch how Casella has managed that landﬁll and I see the same 
behavior at work with how they're operating Juniper Ridge. There is a pattern with Casella, to fill 
the landﬁlls it manages as fast as possible, with as much waste as they can dump, after shaping 
the laws and rules to enable them to do so. 
A look at Casella's operations at the Pine Tree Landﬁll (PTL) in Hampden is revealing: 
In 1998, Casella estimated it would dispose about 143,000 tons a year in its Hampden landﬁll 
expansion, providing capacity for approximately 23 years. Which meant that the landfill's 
capacity would have lasted until 2021. 
But 6 years later, in 2004, Casella had almost quadrupled the amount of waste they were bringing to 
PTL to 568,000 tons of waste a year and estimated the landﬁll would run out of space by 2007, less 
than 10 years from the time of their original estimate. [They didn't get their expansion; ﬁnal closure 
was actually in 2010] 
Why? 
Through effective lobbying, Casella has been able to change the rules and then blast through the 
openings it creates: 
In 2001 PTL took in around 19,000 tons of MSW& demo debris from out of state. 
A year after a rule change to allow PTL to take in MSW Bypass from its MERC facility in 
Biddeford, out of state MSW and demo debris increased to 218,000 tons! 
An increase of over 10 times as much from out of state waste. 
DEP wrote in an August 24, 2005 letter to PTL: "waste volumes reported in annual reports since [2002] 
indicate that the current operation of the facility has resglted in the landﬁll capacity being used far 
faster than the timeframe anticipated in 2002 when the department reconﬁrmed the facility's 1997 
public beneﬁt determination.... Since 2002, the quantity of wastes armually disposed in the Secure III 
Landﬁll expansion has greatly increased." DEP cited the practice of MERC, "to routinely accept 
more MSW for incineration than they could handle - including from out of state sources-and then 
to dispose of the excess at PTL." **1 
In 2006, in the face of certain DEP denial, Casella withdrew its Public Beneﬁt application for 
expansion of PTL a central reason being the profligate manner in which PTL had squandered its 
valuable capacity. t 
PTL was a commercial landﬁll, but the state was dependent on PTL as a place to deposit waste from 
municipalities and businesses around the state. Because of the interstate commerce clause, the state 
could not exclude out of state waste from PTL. VI
' 
Juni per Ridge (JRL) was created as a state owned landﬁll so that Maine could ensure long term 
capacity for Maine waste; as a state owned landﬁll, Maine could exclude out of state waste from 
Juniper Ridge. But Casella, as operator of the landﬁll, lobbied hard and Well to create a deﬁnition of 
Maine waste that allowed waste from out of state, after minimal processing, to be declared Maine waste
so that Casella could dump it at Juniper Ridge. And until LD 1639 went into effect in February of this 
year, Casella had been routinely bringing around 200,000 tons of Massachusetts CDD, including a 
subset, Oversize Bulky Waste a year; around 90% of that CDD & OBW winding up at Juniper 
Ridge. 
Our bill, LD 1639, put an end date, February 2023, to that malpractice when the legislature 
overwhelmingly passed it in 2022. LD 718 would enable Casella to resume bringing in massive 
amounts of out of state waste: CDD as well as Oversize Bulky Waste, as LD 718 delays all aspects of 
LD 1639 until 2025. Casella worries about having space for additional sludge because LD 1911 puta 
stop to spreading PFAS laden sludge on farmland, but the majority of the sludge coming from 
wastewater treatment plants is already being landﬁlled at J RL, over 95%, because most test too high to 
be spread on land. **2 
What should worry all of us is having Casella return to importing 200,000 tons of out of state wastea 
year to JRL; it's ﬁlling up fast. 
IT'S EXTREMELY DIFFICULT AND EXPENSIVE TO LOCATE AND DEVELOP A NEW LANDFILL 
The state has only limited alternative options to its Juniper Ridge Landfill. At a presentation to the 
ENR in 2018, Michael Barden, manager of the state's landﬁlls, reviewed the status of the state's two 
other landﬁll sites: Carpenter Ridge and the Dolby Landﬁll. Both are further away than JRL, so 
trucking costs would be considerably higher over time. Both are much smaller in size than 
Juniper Ridge. Mr. Barden quoted a ﬁgure of $760,000 an acre to develop a landﬁll, and a 1995 
estimate of15 million dollars to develop the 35 acre disposal footprint of Carpenter Ridge. He 
wrote that “It would not be economical to develop that small of a footprint today.” [in 2018] He 
also noted Carpenter Ridge is surrounded by wetlands. Both landfills are close to the Penobscot 
River. 
Regarding Dolby, the original landﬁll is unlined and the state was pumping 60 million gallons of 
contaminated leachate from the site at a cost of $500,00 a year. If Dolby were to be developed, it 
would have only 400,000 cubic yards of capacity, equivalent to just 5 years for the Waste Casella is 
currently bringing to Juniper Ridge. But that landﬁll has now been closed and capped. It would be 
much more expensive now to reopen and develop. 
And he noted that “landﬁlls require perpetual care" despite a requirement of only 30 years after closure. 
It's questionable whether remediation at the Pine Tree Landﬁll will be ﬁnished 30 years from closure; 
after 13 years of remediation so far, contamination is still increasing in some areas of the landﬁll. And 
despite 13 years of remediation, PTL leachate at the Pine Tree Landﬁll has shown much higher 
levels of PFAS contamination than Crossroads or Juniper Ridge: over 100 times state drinking 
water standards. 
Landﬁlls are a precious resource, I was told by Evan Richert, head of the State Planning Office, during 
a 1999 State Solid Waste Task Force I participated in: extremely difficult to locate because of 
political and environmental factors, expensive to build, with long term environmental 
consequences while the landﬁll is in operation and long after it is closed. I speak with the 
experience of living a mile downstream from the now closed Pine Tree Landﬁll, with groundwater 
contamination that will need to be treated for unknown years into the future.
The purpose having the state own a landfill is the ability to preserve the state's landfill capacity 
for Maine generated waste; the state has the legal right to be able to exclude waste, such as out of 
state waste and MSW, that does not fit in with state policy. 
Given the limitations in size and cost to develop the two other state owned landfills, and adding 
the great difficulty of locating a new site because of political and environmental factors, we 
cannot continue to ﬁll Maine's state owned landﬁll, Juniper Ridge with out of state waste. The 
state does not have a viable long term alternative. 
While Eco-Maine has managed to mine its landﬁll in southern Maine and limit its growth, Juniper 
Ridge is still growing by leaps and bounds. We still have the same behavior from Casella at our state 
owned landﬁll as we did at its commercial landﬁll in Hampden. State capacity at Juniper Ridge is 
jeopardized by current practices. **3 
Casella has had two years to plan for the implementation of LD 1639 and ﬁnd alternative materials to 
refrigerators and mattresses from Massachusetts to use when stabilizing sludge. OBW is nota 
standard or common industry material to use for stabilizing sludge; in fact, it can containhigher 
amounts of PFAS with its fire retardant mattresses and sofas than municipal sludge. It doesn't 
appear that they've made any serious effort to ﬁnd any Maine based alternatives; they've rejected all of 
the materials that DEP has suggested. Instead, there is a sudden crisis in February 2023, just as the new 
law is going into effect. And the details of this crisis are oddly vague: 
At the March 8 ENR hearing on the sludge “crisis” , Representative O’Neill asked concerning the 
stability of landﬁll: .u 
Did you have an engineer assess the stability of the landﬁll when you determined it was becoming 
unstable? ' '
' 
Casella answer: No. That would’ve taken too much time 10 days or more. 
Sevee & Mahar, engineers for J RL, are regularly supervising Casella's landﬁll operations. One of their 
responsibilities is to assess landﬁll stability; they report on that to DEP. Their head office is in 
Cumberland, Maine, a few hours ’drive away on I-95 
Why didn’t Casella get its trained, qualiﬁed engineers to assess the stability of the landﬁll within 
a few hours of noticing of such a major problem, and why weren’t they tasked with reporting an 
assessment of the situation at that time? 
Why didn't they report the situation to DEP on that day? 
The bill you are considering today, LD 718, would allow Casella to continue to game the system to 
bring massive amounts of out of state waste to a landﬁll that was created to preserve capacity for 
Maine's needs. LD 718 is another Casella bill to changea law they don't like to increase their bottom 
line at the expense of the state's needs. I want to thank the committee for considering my concerns; 
I urge a vote of ought not to pass on LD 718., 
Bill Lippincott 
Co-Chair Don't Waste ME dontwasteIne.org
Don’t Waste ME is a coalition of people across Maine advocating for responsible policies that protect 
the health of communities mostat risk from negative impacts of landﬁll, incinerator, leachate and 
sludge disposal operations. - 
A A A _i,
I 
**1 WHY CASELLA'S EXPLANATIONS.ARE INCQMPLETE AND MISLEADING 
Casella attributed part of this increase to '“new”' customers, as if it had nocontrol over how much Waste 
PTL took in. The “new” customers-and wastes it cited were Maine ‘Energy Recovery Company 
(MERC), a waste to energy incinerator in Biddeford, and its Front End Process Residue (F EPR), 
incinerator ash, generators of wastewater treatment plant sludge and Bypass MSW from Maine's waste- 
to-energy incinerators. » » "
1 
-I 
.I
‘ I
Y 
Maine Energy was owned by Casella, and MERC FEPR was by volume one of the largest ‘ i 
I _ 
components of special Waste PTL took“ ineach month. T heqprincipal generatorpof wastewater treatment 
plant sludge to PTL was New England Organics, also owned by Casella, and this sludge was also by 
volume one of the main components PTL special waste (much ofiti from out of state). Bypass __ 
MSW was almost entirely iironi Ca_selia's IVIERC facility; very little came from PERC.I I I 
_VI 
The vague explanation was that the increase in Waste was due to "a number of factors." Casella is fully 
aware of What caused those “number of factors” - Cast-1€l'a’s own activities. . 
Casella stated that over half the increase , in the Waste disposal rate at PTL had been related to wastes 
generated within Maine, "including all of the increase in FEPR volumes, all of the ash-related Waste 
volumes, and signiﬁcant portions of the ,’ 
construction , and demolition debris and MSW bypass waste 
volumes." But much of the waste that MERC processed was from out of state, so that much of the 
FEPR that was pulled out from garbage as unsuitable for incineration was from waste coming 
from out of state, as was the raw garbage - MWS bypass - that stopped at the MERC plant, was 
not processed and then went on to Hainpdcn. "all of the ash-related Waste" again does not take into 
account that waste incinerators import large quantities of out of state waste to keep their facilities 
going. p~ 
g ,- 
At the time I made a request of the State Planring Office for out of state waste records at PTL. George 
MacDonald, head of the SPO replied: "In 2003, Pine Tree reported to us that they received 218,087 
tons of municipal solid waste and construction debris that was generatedout of state. In 2001, that" 
number was 19,313 tons.” So, after PTL was allowed to take in MSW Bypass in 2002, we know 
that it took over 10 times as much out of state waste in 2003 as it had in 2001. 
**2 DEP: THERE IS ENOUGH LANDFILL CAPACITY TO HANDLE THE ADDITIONAL 
SLUDGE - 
DEP has repeatedly afﬁrmed that there is enough landﬁll capacity at Juniper Ridge to handle the 3,620 
cubic yards of sludge that needs disposal as a result of LD 1911.‘ 
“I think the landﬁll capacity exists to accept it [sludge]. I don’t think that it would cause the landﬁlls to 
all of the sudden be depleted of capacity as a result of this [bil1].” Paula Clark, the Director of the 
Division of Materials Management at the DEP, during the legislative work session for LD 1911, Jan. 
31, 2022.
Data from the state-owned landﬁll, Juniper Ridge, shows that, currently, about 7.7% of all materials 
landﬁlled in 2020 was sludge. If sludge currently composted or land applied was sent to Juniper Ridge, 
this number would still be under 10%. 
**3 WHY HAS WASTE AT JUNIPER RIDGE INCREASED SO DRAMATICALLY? 
Oversized Bulky Wastes (OBW) increased at Juniper Ridge, from 9,649 tons in 2007 to 96,520 and 
98,888 tons in 2010 and 2011! Former DEP Commissioner Aho expressed concerns about this drastic 
increase, as well as the large amounts of CDD and CDD residues (including OBW) coming into JRL 
through Casel1a’s KTI processing facility (now ReEnergy: Renamed: ReSource) in Lewiston. 
The mystery is why the combined categories of CDD wastes into the state owned Juniper 
Ridge Landﬁll increased so drastically aﬁter the commercial Pine Tree Landﬁll, which had 
no rest1'ictL<;ns on out-ofstate waste, closed; if the increased volumes of CDD categories of 
wastes intq;;5;]RL post-PTL were truly restricted to Maine wastes, what explains the 
dramatic iggreases since PT L closed?
. 
In 2004, the yeféithat JRL opened, it took in approximately 54,000 tons of waste, followed by 
about 260,000L tons in 2005 “to help stabilize ” the Waste heap. Perhaps we should accept the second 
year ﬁgure as more representative of operations after the initial opening. That went up to 290,435 tons 
in 2006. 
That has increased, according to JRL annual reports for 2018,-2020, to 735,942 tons in 2017, to 
818,457 tons in 2018 to 835,320 tons in 2019 (each yearly report contains waste disposal data from the 
year before). 
And about 200,000 tons a year of that waste has been demo debris/OBW coming from out of state 
after minimal processing by ReEnergy/ReSource 
These ﬁgures are taken directly from the Amiual Reports of the Pine Tree Landﬁll, the Juniper Ridge 
Landﬁll and ReEnergy / ReSource.7
