____ 4_..M___..._~.,,.,.,A. E 5 T A ii; L | 5 H E D 15 7 5 ,,..,..,,........___.E_.u.._._ 
Testimony of Brian Oliver 
Vice-President, Eastern Region, Casella Waste Systems, Inc. 
Presented to the Joint Standing Committee on Environment and Natural Resources 
In Support of LD 718, An Act to Increase the Beneficial Reuse of Construction and Demolition 
Debris 
Sponsored by Senator Russell Black 
May 8, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Brian Oliver. I am a resident of Scarborough 
and Vice-President of the Eastern Region for Casella Waste Systems, Inc. l’m here to testify in 
support of the sponsor's proposed amendment to LD 718, An Act to Increase the Beneficial 
Reuse of Construction and Demolition Debris. 
We believe LD 718 will help restore stability to Maine’s biosolids disposal market. This will 
allow ReSource Lewiston, immediately or in the near future, to accept more construction and 
demolition debris and to send more oversized bulky waste that is a residual of its recycling 
operation to the state-owned Juniper Ridge Landfill (JRL). Oversized bulky waste is one of the 
best materials - if not the best — to provide landfill stability and presen/e landfill space. More 
oversized bulky waste allows JRL to accept more wet waste, thereby alleviating the immediate 
sludge disposal crisis our State is facing. In turn, that will reduce, if not eliminate, the recent 
and significant price increases associated with LD 1639 that wastewater districts have had to 
pass on to their customers. 
To be clear, we have no interest in revisiting the policy to end the spreading of biosolids in 
Maine. We understand that Maine has made the decision to landfill its biosolids, and we are 
working diligently to provide that sen/ice. What we are seeking is a reasonable path to do so 
safely, effectively, and to eliminate the number of variables that are causing changes in costs 
to Maine ratepayers. 
The additional 1,000 tons per month of sludge being brought to JRL for disposal because of 
LD 1911 — a 15% increase -would have been challenging under normal circumstances. That 
challenge is exacerbated by a substantial decrease in the availability of oversized bulky waste 
because of the LD 1639. This is further compounded by the volatility of the material delivered 
to JRL, including a likely reduction of 60,000 tons of municipal solid waste bypass. This was 
the result of an unplanned outage at ecomaine in 2022, which hopefully will not occur in 2023. 
Based on 2022 acceptance rates of all materials, we will need 85,000 tons of oversized bulky 
waste in 2023 to bulk the anticipated 105,000 tons of sludge sent for disposal. ReSource 
RECYCLING ~ SOLUTIONS ~ ORGANICS ~ COLLECTION 1* ENERGY r LANDFILLS CaSella.com 
#16019012v1
»~~~—~~-~w-ESTABLlSHEDl975~M--~-W~- 
Lewiston has indicated that they will only be able to send us roughly 60,000 tons of 
oversized bulky waste in 2023. This leaves a deficit of 25,000 tons of oversized bulky waste 
that must be replaced with an equivalent material. 
We have been able to patch together a temporary solution to solve this crisis through work with 
our wastewater district partners, but that solution is dependent upon our ability to send sludge 
to New Brunswick for disposal. Replacing 25,000 tons of oversized bulky waste cannot take 
place overnight, and the amount of wet waste generated in Maine is not decreasing. Earlier 
this month, JRL received a request to accept an estimated 11,000 tons of wet sediment froma 
dredging operation near the decommissioned Brunswick Naval Air Station. These types of 
eventjobs occur periodically and given the implementation of LD 1639, JRL is currently unable 
to accept these materials. 
LD 718 recognizes the magnitude of this challenge and puts a two-year extension on the 
implementation of LD 1639. Although we cannot predict when ReSource Lewiston ’s volume of 
residual oversized bulky waste will return to pre LD 1639 levels (an economic downturn could 
slow this process), JRL will be able to accept more biosolids when the waste mix received 
becomes more favorable. The passage of L.D. 718 is essential to making that happen. 
Two years should allow ReSource Lewiston time to reliably shift focus from construction and 
demolition debris originating outside of Maine to sources of construction and demolition debris 
within Maine. This will satisfy the requirement in 38 MRSA Section 1303-C, sub-§40-A, which 
limits the tonnage of residual that can be sent for disposal at JRL to no more than the tonnage 
that ReSource Lewiston has accepted from within Maine. A two-year extension also will 
provide time to incentivize the deployment of new infrastructure and technologies to help the 
State address its sludge management challenge. 
The Legislature and the DEP are an integral part of this solution. The State should implement 
strategies that provide incentives for the recycling of raw, in-state construction and demolition 
debris, estimated at 500,000 tons per year. The State also will need to expedite permitting and 
development of new technologies that can reduce biosolids amounts before they are landfilled. 
The 40% and 50% recycling thresholds included as part of LD 1639, though delayed, remain in 
law. ReSource Lewiston has previously expressed serious reservations as to whether it can 
meet those thresholds. Further, as the amount that ReSource Lewiston is required to recycle 
increases, the amount of the residual - and oversized bulky waste - that can be sent to the 
state-owned landfill decreases. LD 718 is not the vehicle to address this issue, though it is 
important to recognize that at some future time these recycling thresholds may createa 
circumstance that again challenges the State's ability to dispose of our wastewater sludge. 
Assuming this bill receives the full support from the Committee, we would suggest one 
amendment. An emergency preamble be added so that the extension of LD 1639 takes effect 
as soon as possible. Without this amendment, efforts to stabilize Maine’s biosolids disposal 
system would be put on hold until at least mid-September, and perhaps beyond. 
RECYCLING r SOLUTIONS 8 ORGANICS ~ COLLECTION Q ENERGY Q LANDFILLS casella Com 
#16019012v1
~w»-»M~W»ESTABLlSHEDi97E~w»~-~ —~~ 
Casella continues to pursue all available options to improve our biosolids management 
capacity and address the challenges associated with the management of sludge disposal. 
Construction recently began on a Renewable Natural Gas (RNG) facility at JRL that is 
projected to become operational in 2024. Landfilling sludge contributes significantly to the 
methane gas generated from a landfill, and this new RNG facility will collect that methane gas 
and put it to a beneficial use that reduces overall greenhouse gas emissions. 
Similarly, our planned pilot PFAS treatment program at our Coventry, Vermont landfill is one of 
the first in the nation to focus on removing PFAS from landfill leachate. We are testing a foam 
fractionation treatment method that has shown promising results in the removal of the primary 
regulated PFAS compounds. Our goal is to implement a treatment process that can reduce 
PFAS levels in landfill leachate below laboratory detection limits, and we believe we will be 
successful in doing that. 
We look forward to working with the administration and the Legislature to establish better 
solutions for sludge disposal as we continue to explore innovative ways to serve all our 
customers. l’d be happy to answer any questions and will be present for the work session. 
RECYCLING ' SOLUTIONS ~ ORGANICS Q COLLECTION @ ENERGY @ LANDFILLS Casella Corn 
#16019012v1
