Slingshot 
zglgggfgggggw 63 Exchange Street. #2ObO 
Portland, ME 04101 
slingshotorg 
Testimony in OPPOSITION to LD 718 
An Act to Increase the Beneﬁcial Reuse of Construction and Demolition Debris 
r 
*4 We _ '~ M .. .. “‘ . -"W _ ,1 § ,_ ~43: .~.-¢‘~..~».~".=
. 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramllch. and Members of the Environment & Natural 
Resources Committee, 
My name is Dana Colihan. and I am co-executive director of Slingshot. l‘m testifying in 
opposition to LD 718. an Act to increase the Beneﬁcial Reuse of Construction and Demolition 
Debris. A year ago. we celebrated when the Legislature and Governor passed a bill that closed 
the egregious loophole that had allowed for Maine to become a toxic dumping ground for the 
Northeast. in many ways. that bill was a culmination of almost two decades of grassroots 
community organizing. We decided at long last to put our communities ﬁrst. However LD 718 
threatens to throw all that away. and once again open the ﬂoodgates to out of state waste. 
Whether your community is facing polluted water, a leaking landﬁll or air pollution from oil 
tanks in your backyard, you deserve to know the facts, make your voice heard, and create the 
changes you want to see. Slingshot is an environmental justice organization. working 
alongside communities most impacted by environmental health threats to take aim at 
polluters and build community power. 
Since the state's purchase of Juniper Ridge in 2003. the landﬁll has been rapidly ﬁlled with 
toxic out of state waste. This has required repeated expansions. which has brought the 
landﬁll's total capacity to over 20 million cubic yards - or about 'l’l4 solid Eiffel Towers. 
Most of this waste was construction and demolition debris (CDD) from Massachusetts, who 
had banned the disposal of this type of waste to increase their recycling rates and divert toxic 
materials from landﬁlls. 1.01639 closed this loophole to preserve landﬁll capacity for the 
beneﬁt of all Mainers. 
However l_D 718 stands to once again allow an additional 400,000 tons of out of state waste 
to get dumped in Maine. LD 718 rolls back protections to our health. safety, and environment. 
l know that there are serious concerns about the best way to manage our sludge. However, LD 
718 is not the answer. Landﬁll operators around the country and also across the state. utilize 
numerous other materials other than Construction and Demolition Debris (CDD) for 
stabilization. Casella has enough in-state waste that could be used as stabilizing or bulking 
agents without importing trash. They have solid waste. wood chips, ash. lime. and even 
MAINE = 
MASSACHUSETTS = 
VERMONT 5 
NEW HAMPSHME s CONNECTKIUT =' 
RHODE ISLAND
contaminated soils at their disposal, which are all commonly used to stabilize and bulk sewage 
sludge prior to landﬁlling. 
I am more certain of Casella's mis—management of (Juniper Ridge Landﬁll than I am of the 
need to pass LD 718. By refusing to adequately prepare for the implementation of LD’lo39. 
refusing to explore other stabilization options. and then refusing to accept sludge. Casella is 
shirking responsibility and holding Maine's WaterTreatment Plants hostage. We cannot forget 
that Caselia makes a proﬁt off of the importation of out of state waste. and they are seeing an 
increase in their proﬁts this year. 
At the core of this. this continues to be an environmental justice issue. A polluting company is 
proﬁting from the destruction of the environment at the expense of the Penobscot Nation and 
the surrounding working class residents living close to Uuniper Ridge. The landﬁll not only 
threatens the drinking water for the area. but also sites of historical. cultural. spiritual 
signiﬁcance for the tribe. These communities bear the biggest burden. and yet have 
systematically been excluded from the decision making process. Old Town residents were 
repeatedly denied requests for hearings when Juniper Ridge was licensed back in the early 
2000s. the Old Town municipality was stripped of any right to regulate the landﬁll. and the 
"citizen advisory committee" has been excluded in any meaningful decision making. 
Rolling back LD 1639 would be another unjust decision on top of a history of 
disenfranchisement. Passing LD 7’l8 would be a slap to the face of the Penobscot Nation. 
Don't Waste ME. and everyone who worked to pass this critical legislation to protect our 
communities and environment. We can not go back. 
We hope you hold strong to your commitment to protect our communities and our 
environment with a resounding ought not to pass. Thank you. 
MAlNE » MASSACHUSETTS ~ 
VERMONT NEW H/'~\M¥5SHlRE re 
CQNNECIWCUT = RHODE ISLAND
