LD 718 Rebuttal Testimony 
Greeﬁngs Chairwomen Brenner and Gramlich and distinguished members ofthe Environment and 
Natural Resources Committee of the Great State of Maine, 
lam hear to speak against LD 718. My name is Ed Spencer and l live in West Old Town, less than two 
miles from the state-owned Juniper Ridge Landﬁll (JRL). I am co-chair of Don't Waste Maine, a citizen 
group that advocates for responsible and accountable waste policies and practices. 
I am a proud co-author of the legislation that became LD 1639, which last year passed overwhelmingly in 
the House and UNAMIMOUSLY in the Senate. In 2003, when JRL was becoming the ﬁrst operational 
state-owned landﬁll in Maine, we were promised by State, local, and Casella ofﬁcials that there would be 
no out of state waste permitted. Through a series of engineered crises, and the waste industry being 
allowed to write their own rules, JRL has become a dumping ground for millions of tons of other states’ 
discards and assorted toxic crap. 
The ﬁrst “crisis” was based on the promise that Casella would furnish the Old Town Mill with cheap fuel 
for their biomass boiler and save the mill jobs. Casella’s fuel was in violation of state standards for 16 of 
the 31 samples taken. Instead of saving the mill, burning Casella’s fuel resulted in the creation of 
hazardous waste, which will rest forever in JRL, even though that waste type is banned. But Casella got 
permission to import enough construction and demolition debris (CDD) and put the remainders into the 
State Landﬁll. The ﬂood gates were opened! 
The current "sludge crisis" blames last year's LD 1911 for forcing the landﬁlling of sewage and industrial 
sludges that Casella formerly spread all over Maine's agricultural land. In addition, they claim that LD 
1639 forced them to alter operations at JRL in such a way that it resulted in an impromptu refusal to 
landﬁll sludge due to an instability emergency on Feb. 23,2023. 
Let's think of the absurdity of what Casella is saying: They claim that they cannot keep our landﬁll stable 
and safe without importing Oversized Bulky Waste from Massachusetts and other states. They are saying 
it is impossible to operate JRL, which is supposed to b e reserved for true Maine wastes, without 
importing old couches and worn-out appliances. What's more, Casella’s own study shows that much of 
this OBW has the highest PFAS concentrations of any waste stream sampled, far more toxic than the 
wastewater treatment plant sludge! 
Please reject LD 718, and if Casella cannot operate JRL safely without imports, their license to operate 
JRL should be evaluated. Thank you. 
Respectfully yours, 
Ed Spencer 
Co-chair DWME 
PO Box 12, Stillwater, ME 04489 
207-827-8359 
/%/%%»rW" ’ 
05/05>’/2;?
