1 
 Joint Committee on Environment and Natural Resources  
 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION  
LD 718 – An Act to Increase the Beneficial Reuse  
of Construction and Demolition Debris  
Proposed Amendment ǀ Senator Black  
Public Hearing  
Jacquelyn Elliott ǀ May 8 , 2023  
 
Honorable Senator Brenner, Chair; Honorable Representative Gramlich, Chair; and 
Honorable Committee Members:  
 
 Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony IN OPPOSITION TO LD 718 AS 
AMENDED  by Senator Black . My name is Jacquelyn Elliott and I live in Waterboro. For 
three decades I have been engaged as an environmental health and justice advocate 
focusing on sustainable waste management policy. I am a member of DWME1 (Don’t 
Waste ME) a citizens’ group fighting for policies that actually protect communities from 
the harmful practices of waste facilities. Maine is facing the challen ge of being held in the 
grip of the mega for -profit waste industry who se goal is to always escalate  their profits2 
with  ever -increas ing quantiti es of waste that require  collection, transporting, processing 
and disposal . Two giants : Casella Waste Systems , Inc.  and WIN  Waste Innovations , 
formerly Waste Management , Inc. , constitute the major players for those  activities in the 
state  and across the region . Casella is perhaps provided an edge in influence due to  its 
partnership with the State to operate JRL ( Juniper Ridge Landfill), the State-owned landfill  
in Old Town. JRL was  built  with tax dollars specifically to conserve capacity for disposal of 
waste generated within our borders  with the promise that OSW ( out-of-state waste ) 
would not be landfilled there .  
Last year, the Legislature wisely passed LD 1639  closing the loophole in Maine’s 
weak laws that had allowed Casella to consume JRL’ s disposal capacity with hundreds of 
thousands of tons annually of OSW. That waste consisted primarily of CDD (construction 
and demolition debris) imported and processed at ReSource  Waste Services in Lewiston. 
That legislation carved out an exclusion allowing for a protracted time frame for ReSource 
to meet recycling goals established with the bill.  
Importantly, the bill amended the definition for waste generated within the State 
beginning February 1, 2023 .  The revised definition for in -state waste now provides t he 
 
1 https://dontwasteme.wordpress.com/   
2 April 27, 2023, Casella Waste announces 1Q 2023 results, revenues up over 12%:  
 https://vermontbiz.com/n ews/2023/april/27/casella -waste -announces -1q-2023 -results -revenues -over -12 
 
2 
 amount of imported waste processed and disposed in a Maine  incinerator or  landfill  
cannot exceed  the total weight of waste material initial ly generated within the State.  
Now, it feels as though Casella is strong -arming the DEP (Department of Environmental 
Protection) and Legislators to overturn this substantially supported bi -partisan legislation 
with what looks like a manufactured sludge -disposal crisis . Recently, Casella elicited3 a 
crisis with Maine WWTPs  (waste water treatment plant)  who  contract with the company 
for disposal of their sludge  when they announced they could no longer provide disposal 
capacity4 at JRL . They  claimed the landfill was unstable and without increased imports of 
OBW  (oversize bulky waste) , they could not safely accept sludge for disposal.   For all 
appearances, they are using this as an opportunity to gouge our communities’ WWTPs for 
sludge disposal. Casella is refusing to concede that any ‘emergency’ is of their own making 
and in fact, represents a lack of planning and preparation to meet the requirements of 
the law that went into effect February 1, 2023.  
Casella has pushed for a way around the provisions of LD 1639  seeking increases 
to the amounts of OBW , a subset of CDD permitted by DEP , that they are allowed to bury 
at JRL. Casella’s argument is they need the O BW to ostensibly stabilize the WWTP sludge 
that is landfilled  there . Or expressed another way: Casella require s couches and washing 
machines from Massachusetts to hold the pile. Neighbors and those concerned with 
operations at the landfill have pointed to the fact that Casella’s practice of using (mostly 
imported) OBW to manage sludge is not an industry standard5 method.  
Casella is quick to hurl the charge that residents do not understand how to run a 
landfill, but people  are informed and can assess that perh aps Casella does  not want to  
employ  what many in the industry would consider best practices6 to assure the stability  
of JRl and the safety of their workers.  The assum ption is  this stems from a  profit motive . 
Currently, Casella gets paid to accept by -pass and process CDD/OBW waste from 
 
3 Lowell, Jessica, March 5, 2023, Kennebec Journal, Environmental group alleges Casella Waste Systems 
manufactured sludge crisis:  
 https://www.pressherald.com/2023/03/05/environmental -group -alleges -casella -waste -systems -
manufactured -sludge -crisis/   
4 Clark, Paula, Director of the Division of Materials Management, Maine Department of Environmental 
Protection, legislative work session for LD 1611, January 31, 2022 : The DEP has repeatedly affirmed that 
there is enough landfill capacity to handle even  additional sludge  resulting from passage of LD 1611 . “I think 
the landfill capacity exists to accept it [sludge]. I don’t think that it would cause the landfills to all o f the 
sudden be depleted of capacity as a result of this [bill].”  
5 Kardis, Arlene, October 16, 2020, Waste 360, What Landfill Operators Should Know, Solidification and 
Bulking:  
https://www.waste360.com/landfill/what -landfill -operators -should -know -about -stabilization -
solidification -and-bulking   
6 The International Water Associates Publishing, Sludge Drying Overview – Treatment Methods and 
Applications:  
https://www.iwapublishing.com/news/sludge -drying -overview -treatment -methods -and-applicati ons  
3 
 ReSource. Some CDD waste can actually be accounted  as ‘recycling’ if it is utilized a s ADC 
(alternate daily cover)  for the landfill .  
LD 718  seeks to in effect, undo the protections of  the definition of ‘waste 
generated within the State’ put in place with LD 1639  and roll back safeguards  for public 
health ; the environment ; stipulations that conserve our valuable disposal capacity ; and 
obligations to employ EJ (environmental justice) considerations in decisions . LD 718  seeks  
a delay for the date of compliance for LD 1639 to June 1, 2024  and makes the change 
retroactive to January 31, 2023 . Presumably, this would allow Casella to ma intain , and 
perhaps  increase , the amounts of imported CDD/OBW i t accepts at JRL. Casella  and 
Resource are  lobbying for changes which would also roll back implementation of 
requirements for meeting recycling goals  codified by LD 1639  primarily affecting 
Resource’s operations  with additional delays  of January 1 of 2025 and 2026 . Citizens are 
lobbying to safeguard  the places they call home and where they raise their families . 
It must be agreed  that operations at JRL adversely impact the  health and quality 
of life , and are a matter of environmental injustice for its neighbors7. Environmental 
degradation is significant.  Rolling back protections in any form is unt enable. Air emissions 
are noxious and harmful  for people living in the proximity of JRL. Their complaints to DEP 
and other officials go unheeded and unaddressed. Water releases are a particular assault 
for our neighbors of Penobscot Indian Nation  who  are markedly impacted by millions of 
gallons a year of minimally treated toxic leachate discharged8 to the Penobscot River, a 
sacred relative of the people. The Penobscot Indian Nation is denied the ability to engage 
in their cultural tradition of subsistence fishing because the fish9 are contaminated with 
dioxin, PFAS (perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances) and other toxics which can 
endanger human health when consumed. JRL threatens Penobscot Nati on’s members 
safety for  gathering traditional foods and medicines  from reservation lands adjacent to 
the river. PFAS ‘forever toxic ’ chemicals are one class of many toxics in the leachate from 
JRL. Scientists say they  may affect every organ system in the body10. OBW contributes 
substantially to PFAS11 in the leachate.   
 
7 Loftus, Sawyer, March, 1, 2023, Bangor Daily News, It was going to revolutionize trash disposal. Instead, 
Maine is landfilling more than ever.:  
 https://www.bangordailynews.com/2023/03/01/mainefocus/hampden -trash -plant -delayed -recycling -
goals -joam40zk0w/  
8 Sunlight Media, Water Ceremony against leachate pollution of the Penobscot River:  
 https://vimeo.com/5 23344387  
9 2021 ATSDR Annual Report, Helping the Penobscot Indian Nation: Review of Anadromous Fish for 
Consumption:  
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/2021 -annual -report/listening -responding -taking -action/Penobscot -River.html   
10 Emanuel, Gabrielle, February 16, 2023, Tracing the path of toxic ‘forever chemicals’ inside the body:  
https://www.wbur.org/news/2023/02/16/pfas -biology -blood -new -hampshire   
11 October 2019, Sanborn, Head & Associates, Inc., PFAS Waste Source Testing Report, New England Waste 
Services of Vermont, Inc. : 
4 
 LD 1639  has provision for ensuring EJ (environmental ju stice ) that states: 
"[E]nvironmental  justice" means the right to be protected from environmental pollution 
and to live in and enjoy a clean and healthful environment regardless of ancestry, class, 
disability, ethnicity, income, national origin or religion. "Environmental justice" includes 
the equal protection and meaningful involvement of all people with respect to the 
development, implementation and enforcement of waste management laws, rules, 
regulations and licensing decisions.  Turning back the provisions of LD 1639  as Casella is 
asking, v iolates Maine’s commitment to EJ.  
We must acknowledge that the toxic impacts from JRL’s operations are cumulative 
and synergistic. No toxic exposure is a one-off.12 The effects  of toxic exposures combine 
and accumulate over time . Addressed from the perspective of waste management as a 
whole, Maine took bold and right steps with LD 1639  to begin to put a framework in 
place that protects the health of our residents and values our natural resources. If Casella 
wants to continue to operate our State -owned landfill, they should be required  to step 
up13 their game and implement best practices that honor  the rights of Maine citizens ; 
protect  our health  and environment ; and preserve our resources. Casella needs to stop 
holding Maine’s WWTPs hostage and earnestly explor e recognized  stabilization options 
and cease reneging on  implementation of LD 1639 .  
We should all recognize that waste is a choice we make and instead contribute to 
actual14 Zero Waste Goals that reduce what requires disposal; removes toxic inputs on 
the front end; re uses and recycles valuable resources; and establish es control of 
processing and disposal at the local level.  
The Committee has another important consideration required by LD 1639 : “The 
Department of  Administrative and Financial Services, Bureau of General Services shall 
evaluate options  for the renegotiation of the operating services agreement of February 
5, 2004 , as amended,  governing the operation of the state -owned solid waste landfill in 
Old Town for the purpose  of ensuring that existing capacity at that landfill is prioritized 
for management of waste  initially generated within the State  within the meaning of the 
Maine Revised Statutes, Title  38, section 1303 -C, subsection 40 -A, paragraph A .”  Any 
discussions pursuant to such negotiations must include those most impacted by JRL’s 
operations . Those citizens must hold meaningful and influential places at the decision 
 
https://anrweb.vt.gov/PubDocs/DEC/SolidWaste/OL510/OL510%202019.10.15%20NEWSVT%20PFAS%20S
ource%20Testing%20Rpt%20 -%20 Final.pdf   
12 Little Things Matter: Protecting Children from Toxic Chemicals: https://littlethingsmatter.ca/   
13 Sawyer, Loftus, Shepherd, Mic hael, Bangor Daily News, March 6, 2023, Maine calls out landfill operator’s 
‘disappointing’ response to looming sludge crisis:  
 https://www.bangordailynews.com/2023/03/06/politics/maine -calls -out-casella -disappointing -sludge -
crisis -n6hjn1me0n/  
14 https://just -zero.org/   
5 
 table from the outse t, something that has been denied to this point . Perhaps it is time to 
follow through with that directive. Maine citizens expect our Governor, Regulators and 
Legislators15 to stand up for the rights of the people they represent and intervene to 
protect our health and the places we call home from undue abuse from operat ions of  the 
waste industry. Overturning  LD 1639 disregards that obligation.  
 
Thank you for considering these comments. I would ask the COMMITTEE VOTE 
OUGHT NOT TO PASS.  
Jacquelyn Elliott  
Waterboro, ME  
j.c.elliott@roadrunner.com    
 
15 March 13, 2023, Bangor Daily News, We’ll hold Casella accountable to protect your health and 
environment:  
 https://www.bangordailynews.com/2023/03/13/opinion/opinion -contributor/casella -sludge -landfill -
accountability/  
