Kerry Sack
Old Town
LD 718
Testimony Letter in Opposition to LD 718
To: Sen. Brenner, Rep. Gramlich and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources 
From: Kerry Sack, 49 Woodland Avenue, Old Town, ME 04468
Re: LD 718
Maine separated from Massachusetts (MA) in 182O. 
Maine created a State-owned landfill solely for its own waste, so that is why we are so
grateful to our very hard-working lawmakers for continuing to make sure that Maine 
landfills aren’t filling up with toxic waste from MA and other states.
My flabber is gasted to hear that the only way to stabilize Maine landfilled waste is to 
import PFAS containing bulky waste from MA and other states!!
How can this be believed??!!
Casella and Maine DEP co-authored the 2020 Annual Report that stated that Juniper 
Ridge Landfill had enough other forms of waste that can be used as a 
stabilizing/bulking agent: MSW (116,336 tons); Wood/wood chips (2,107 tons); Ash 
(38,132 tons); Lime (1,039 tons); Contaminated soils (12,562 tons).
If the same amount of stabilizing bulking waste isn’t still available since this report, 
then:
- Is there not enough ash to be found anywhere in ME? 
- Is there no wood or wood chips to be found anywhere in Maine that can substitute 
for PFAS containing waste from other states??! 
- Is there no contaminated soils or lime to be found anywhere in ME? 
Maine cannot delay stopping more influx of hidden costs that LD 718 will perpetuate.
- Do we really want to take on the additional unknown cost burden of other states’ 
PFAS containing waste?
- Maine is/was already paying the currently hidden costs of heavy trucks running our 
roads carrying tons and tons of out of state waste into Maine.
  
Could Maine businesses benefit from becoming more involved with Maine’s waste 
disposal challenges? 
Casella as the sole contractor has not had to share its years of expertise and profits. 
Giving up any amount of its profits is not easy for any company. 
Could/should waste disposal solutions, costs and profits be shared within and among 
more Maine stakeholders?
- Dun and Bradstreet reports that there are 358 logging companies of all sizes 
throughout Maine communities in your legislative districts:
 Discover Logging Companies in - Dun & Bradstreet (dnb.com)
The costs will be shared and increased no matter what happens and when it happens, 
as evidenced throughout history.
- But should/could more Maine stakeholders, municipalities and businesses benefit 
and if so, should exploring these possibilities and opportunities be delayed?
Please do not pass LD 718.
To do so will help MA and other states dispose of its toxic waste to the detriment of 
Maine.
To do so will confirm that it is acceptable to delay seeking alternative solutions to 
very challenging waste disposal issues (that need to be shared among more Maine 
stakeholders). 
I thank the committee for your consideration of my request to oppose LD 718.
Kerry Sack

