 
64 Blueberry Road Portland, Maine 04102 
Testimony of Kevin Roche, General Manager, ecomaine 
before the Committee on the Environment & Natural Resources - 
Neither For Nor Against LD 718, An Act to Increase the Beneficial Reuse of 
Construction and Demolition Debris  
May 8th, 2023 
 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Committee on the Environment and Natural Resources, thank you for the 
opportunity to testify Neither For Nor Against this legislation which with one very 
important variable that needs to be addressed before moving forward.  
 
My name is Kevin Roche and I’m the General Manager at ecomaine. We are a 
quasi-municipal organization with more than 70 member communities managing 
waste and recyclable materials in Maine. We own and operate Maine’s largest 
recycling plant, a food waste recovery program, a waste-to-energy facility, and a 
landfill. Perhaps what’s most notable is our outreach & educational programs that 
are second to none.   
 
To address this proposed legislation (and this amendment), the question that 
needs to be addressed is straight forward. If we are going to allow Out-of-State 
Construction & Demolition Debris (CDD) to be considered in-state waste for an 
additional 2 ½ years (because it was processed here in Maine), then the State and 
its municipalities should get a financial benefit from that. It’s unreasonable for the 
State of Maine and its municipalities to get nothing in return for landfilling this 
additional CDD.  An $8 increase in the landfill fee for CDD would be fair (for 
storing waste in Maine) and go a long way to address the multiple challenges that 
the State is facing. The revenue generated from this would go towards supporting 
municipal waste reduction, reuse, recycling and composting. Because most of 
the CDD comes from commercial sources and much of that waste from Out-of-
State sources, the financial impact on Maine municipalities would be minimal.   
 
In summary, this proposal of increasing the CDD landfill fee by $8 per ton will do 
three things: 
 
1) Allow more time to address the biosolids/sludge issues. 

2) It will help address Out-of-State Waste. If Out-of-State CDD does come into 
Maine, then our State and our Municipalities will at the very least be 
compensated.  
 
3) Generates revenue and in return, provides funding to our municipalities in 
support of the higher rungs of the waste hierarchy such as reduction & 
reuse, recycling, composting, digestion and other strategies that help 
conserve our valuable landfill space.  
 
I applaud the work this Committee has done to tackle these complicated issues. 
We need to be sure we remain engaged in the shared long-term goal of keeping 
as much material as possible out of Maine landfills. This concept provides for a 
compromise that addresses the biosolids issue, the Out-of-State waste issues 
and the waste hierarchy all at the same time.   
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify and I would be happy to answer any 
questions.    
