Lokotah Sanborn
Indian Island
LD 718
My name is Lokotah Sanborn, I am Penobscot from Indian Island. I am here to 
testify against LD718. Our community has been deeply impacted by the poor health 
of the Penobscot River for nearly a hundred years. Though in recent decades the 
rivers health has come a long way as the result of the state and federal governments 
working with Penobscot Nation and various community partners who care about the 
river's health.
However there are still a number of toxic pollutants and ongoing environmental 
damages that are continuing to negatively impact the health of the river and the 
people who live within it's watershed. Juniper Ridge Landfill's leachate, which has 
tested positive for carcinogens like methyl-mercury as well as unsafe amounts of the 
forever chemicals known as PFAS, and PFOAs, is taken to ND Pulp Mill just 
downriver from Penobscot Nation where it is further processed with chemicals and 
dumped directly into the Penobscot River.
I am uncertain as to where this process is at given the temporary closing of ND 
paper in Old Town, as I did not get a clear answer when contacting manager Jeff 
Peletier at Juniper Ridge about whether this process would continue there. A 
considerable amount, nearly one-third of the waste that was dumped at Juniper Ridge 
that contributes to this toxic leachate came from out-of-state waste, particularly 
construction debris. In 2022, the Legislature and Governor passed LD 1639 to close 
the legal loophole that had allowed for waste to be classified as “in-state” once it 
enters a solid waste processing facility in Maine — no matter where it originated. 
The legislature closed the out-of-state loophole as a measure to protect Maine 
communities, rivers, and lands from toxic pollutants imported from out-of-state. 
Nearly one-third of the waste dumped at Juniper Ridge was from construction debris 
imported from surrounding New England states that have themselves strengthened 
their waste regulations to ban the disposal of said waste within their own borders.  
This construction debris often contains hazardous chemicals, toxins, and carcinogens 
and if the other states like Massachusetts, where the bulk of this waste comes from, 
have banned the disposal of this waste and debris, why should the people of Maine 
inherit their waste and allow it to poison our land, rivers, and communities?
Casella is a billion dollar company, they don't need financial assistance to make 
progress happen, it is their responsibility to make sure that waste treatment is 
effective, safe, and progressively developed and innovated to seek alternative 
methods that act to protect our environment. It's dishonest for Casella to argue that we
need to repeal LD1639 because they need this debris to stabilize sludge. Why exactly 
are they convinced that out-of-state waste is the only possible solution to stabilize 
sludge when other landfill operators across the country deplore a wide variety of 
methods, as well as using technology to dehydrate the sludge
This appears a non-argument which seeks to take us backward amid ongoing 
damage to our environment. It is critically important that as we push to address 
climate change and ongoing pollution and toxification of our water ways that we as 
the Maine people and you who are elected to represent us make it clear that we will 
not go back, or reverse progress that has been made. We will continue to build and 
find creative ways to innovate and lessen the impacts of climate change.
Thank you.
