Natural Resourses Control of Maine 
3 Wade Street Q Augusta, Maine 04330 Q (207) 622-3101 @- Fax: (207) 622-4343 a www.nrcm.org 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 718, 
"Au Act To Increase the Beneﬁcial Reuse of Construction and Demolition Debris" 
Sarah K. Nichols, NRCM Sustainable Maine Director, May 8, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Sarah Nichols, and I am the Sustainable Maine 
Director for the Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM). I appreciate this opportunity to 
testify in opposition to LD 718, as the bill is proposed to be amended by the sponsor. 
We urge the Committee to reject this proposal to allow a signiﬁcant volume of out-of-state waste to 
be dumped in our State-owned landﬁll for the next two years and weaken important reuse and 
recycling requirements for construction and demolition debris. 
NRCM understands that the sponsor’s amendment to LD 718 is intended to help address the sludge 
disposal problem faced by our towns. However, the proposed delay would amount to a major 
ﬁnancial gift to Casella Waste Systems that is far beyond any policy change that may be necessary 
to stabilize waste at Juniper Ridge. Casella was opposed to the passage of LD 1639 last session, 
which closed the out-of-state waste loophole, but the company’s position failed to carry the day. 
The bill received overwhelming public support and a unanimous vote by the Senate, and the 
Governor held a bill signing ceremony to celebrate the notable accomplishment. 
Casella is a multi-billion-dollar waste company with soaring proﬁts‘ that clearly doesn’t want to let 
go of revenues from importing waste or incur new expenses by operating the Juniper Ridge Landﬁll 
(JRL) in a fashion consistent with the interests of Maine people as reﬂected in Maine law. We 
believe Casella is exploiting current concerns about sludge disposal to undermine Maine law and 
maximize proﬁts, and itis using Maine towns to help the company overturn the law. 
In February, Casella’s representatives attempted to explain the reasons for their failure to foresee 
how sludge management at JRL would need to change following the passage of LD 1639. Despite 
Casella’s claims, the truth is that there are more ways to stabilize sludge in a landﬁll than with old 
couches from Massachusettsz However, the company did not make alternative arrangements to 
accommodate the loss of out-of-state stabilization materials, and refused solutions that were 
presented to it by DEP. Casella’s obstinance was further illustrated in an April 20, 2023, Bangor 
Daily News article describing the frustrating exchange between State officials and Casella that the 
paper obtained after a public records request. I’ve attached a copy of that article to my testimony for 
your reference. 
We are sympathetic to the wastewater treatment plant operators who have little choice but to accept 
rate increases imposed on them by Casella. We also understand that the State has essentially no 
1 hjttps:/[yermontbiz.com/news/2023/april[Z7/casella-w_aste~ann_ounces-lq-2023-_results~revenues-over-12 
2 Couches are a common example of "Oversized Bulky Waste" or ”OBW" , which has a standard industry meaning that 
includes large items that may be difficult to process, such as mattresses, furniture, appliances, and certain other 
components of demolition debris.
control over how the State-owned landﬁll is managed. And we acknowledge that landﬁlls must 
safely stabilize sludge by mixing it with a minimum amount of other waste, and that each type of 
stabilization material has its pros and cons. But we know that the proposal before you is optimized 
for Casella’s interests and not for the interests of Maine people or communities. 
Further, we ﬁrmly oppose weakening the recycling standards at one of Maine’s solid waste 
processing facilities, as proposed in the sponsor’s amendment. Doing so would be inequitable and 
move us further away ﬁom reaching Maine’s recycling goals. We urge you to reject LD 718 as 
proposed to be amended by the sponsor for all these reasons. Alternatively, we suggest that you use 
this bill as a vehicle to reevaluate the State’s contractual arrangement with Casella, investigate the 
company’s pricing strategies and management of the landﬁll, and create a formalized plan to 
sustainably manage the state’s sludge into the future. 
I appreciate this opportunity to provide comments on LD 718, and I would be happy to Work with 
the Committee to ﬁnd actual solutions that protect Maine’s people and our environment.
