Heather Merrill
Glenburn
LD 844
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and other Members of the Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services:
I am the Program Director of the Medical Radiography Program at Eastern Maine Community
College.  I am writing to urge you to oppose HD 533 LD 844 “An Act to Protect the Practice of
Certain Cardiovascular Professionals.”  This bill would allow untrained professionals to 
operate radiographic equipment in the cardiac catheterization and electrophysiology suites, 
among other things.  
The broad statement that the cardiovascular professional “may perform actions necessary to 
assist a physician…” will put patients, staff and physicians in the suite at risk.  According to 
that statement, it seems that there isn’t anything they can’t do if the physician asks.  That 
could mean operating the fluoroscopic equipment, giving medications, or anything else.  They
are not trained to do all those actions.
The premier Cardiovascular Technician program in the state does not train the students in 
radiation safety or radiobiology according to their course descriptions.  The students are 
taught mainly using ultrasound which produces no radiation.  Some of the current cardiac 
catheterization procedures provide the highest radiation doses to the patient and staff of all 
medical imaging procedures.  To have untrained individuals delivering that radiation is a 
detriment to all.
The goal of the radiographer is to provide excellent patient care and quality diagnostic images
all while delivering the lowest dose of radiation.  Without training, one would not know how to 
achieve that goal.  The current laws ensure that professionals delivering ionizing radiation are
educated and clinically competent to do so.  Allowing untrained professionals to deliver 
ionizing radiation, especially at those doses, would be putting our patients in danger.  That is 
the opposite of quality patient care.
Again, I urge you to oppose this bill.  If you have any questions regarding what I have written 
here, I would be happy to answer them for you.
