KENNEBEC VALLEY COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
vmlu RFPIDGF Tn A RPIGHTFQ FIITIHPF 
Jennifer Rines, M.S. Ed., R.T. (R)(CT)(ARRT) 
Radiography Program Director 
j a‘ii"scs%Z§lEkvcc.me.edu 
207-453-5143 
March 15, 2023 
RE: HD 533 LD 844 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance, and Financial Services, 
As an educator in the medical imaging profession, I am writing to express my concern regarding HD 533 
LD 844. I am the Program Director of the Radiologic Technology Program at Kennebec Valley 
Community College. I am also a committee member for the Maine Society of Radiologic Technologists. I 
want to urge you to oppose HD 533 LD 844, “An Act to Protect the Practice of Certain Cardiovascular 
Professionals. ” The current text in this bill is vague and undermines the current law regarding Medical 
Health and Safety act: MRSA-32, Chapter 103, which states that the “citizens of this State are entitled to 
the maximum protection practicable from the harmful effects of excessive and improper exposure to 
ionizing radiation; and that it is therefore necessary to establish standards of education, training and 
experience for these operators, to provide for the appropriate examination and licensure and to emphasize 
the professional nature of the service. ” HD 533 LD 844 directly contradicts this act. Allowing 
cardiovascular professionals to circumvent the Radiologic Technology Board of Examiners (RTBE) would 
put the State of Maine at risk for potential legal action. 
I am concerned for the people of Maine who could have procedures completed by professionals that are 
not adequately trained to utilize ﬂuoroscopic equipment. Fluoroscopic procedures produce some of the 
highest radiation exposures to the patient and the healthcare personnel. There are radiation safety 
principles and standards that must be followed to ensure radiation exposures are as minimal as possible. 
The positioning of the equipment and speciﬁc aspects of the machine directly affect the radiation exposure 
level that the patient receives. These principles are taught to students receiving their medical radiography 
degree throughout a two-year comprehensive education. The current law supports radiologic technologist 
professionals who have completed the educational requirements to administer ionizing radiation, which 
protects the people of Maine by utilizing appropriate radiation principles in practice. Students that receive 
their radiologic technology degree are educationally competent to perform these procedures in the ﬁeld 
from their didactic courses and clinical requirements that range between 1,000-1,600 hours of practicum. 
The verbiage outlining the summary of the cardiovascular professional who may perform “actions 
necessary ” while assisting a physician is concerning. The ambiguity embedded within the language of HD 
533 LD 844 puts patients and medical professionals in the state of Maine at substantial risk of being 
exposed to excessive radiation. Medical imaging professionals receive signiﬁcant education and training to 
ensure the health and safety of patients during procedures utilizing ionizing radiation. Allowing individuals 
to perform procedures that utilize ionizing radiation without adequate training is dangerous and would be 
putting the health and safety of patients and healthcare workers at risk. 
I look forward to attending the public hearing, and I would be happy to discuss these concerns further. 
Respectfully, 
Jennifer Rines, M.S. Ed., R.T. (R)(CT)(ARRT) 
_...E
