5 Wildwood Lane  
Gray, ME  04039  
207-795-5974  (w) 207-657-2587 (h)  
Judy.ripley@mchp.edu   
March 14, 2023  
 
RE: HD 533 LD 844  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance, 
and Financial Services:  
 
I am Dean Emeritus and Medical Imaging Faculty at the Maine College of H ealth Professions and  
Advocacy Coordinator for  the Maine Society of Radiologic Technolog ists.  I am writing to  urge you to 
oppose HD 533 LD 844 , “An Act to Protect the Practice of Certain Cardiovascular Professionals .” This bill  
undermines  the primary purpose of the current law, MRSA -32, Chapter 103, MEDICAL HEALTH AND 
SAFETY ACT , which is to provide the “maximum protection practicable from the harmful  effects of 
excessive and improper exposure to ionizing radiation ” for the people of Maine. This concern is based 
on the following key factors:  
• The bill would allow individuals with little  education  in radiation principles or safety to perform 
the responsi bilities of the radiologic technologist with no oversight by the Radiologic Technology 
Board of Examiners.  The current law ensures that individuals utilizing ionizing radiation are 
educationally prepared and clinically competent.  
• Fluoroscopic procedures pr oduce some of the highest radiation exposures to the patient and 
the healthcare team.  Positioning of t he equipment and the patient directly affects the quantity 
of radiation the patient receives.  An individual with out a comprehensive  education in radiati on 
principles would not be adequate to perform these procedures.  
• The primary responsibility  of radiologic technologists is  to provide excellent patient care while 
producing the highest quality images with the lowest exposure to the patient.  During 
fluoros copic procedures, the radiologic technologist is the radiation safety advocate for all 
involved.  The physician ’s primary concern is the invasive procedure , not  the patient's or 
healthcare team's radiation safety .  
I am also concerned with the blanket statement that the cardiovascular professional could provide ”any 
action” necessary to assist the physician. Are there no limitations to what they can do? If the physician is 
in the room, can they perform the entire procedure? I am very concerned that p atient safety, care , and 
satisfaction  would be  severely  compromised.  
 
I am sorry I could not attend the public hearing , and I would be happy to  discuss these issues with you.  
 
Respectfully,  
 
Judith Ripley, MS, RT(R)  

