For consideration by the Maine State Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial 
Services:  
 
I’m writing to express a combination of support and concern for LD844, and the expansion of 
Cardiovascular Technologists (CVT)  into operat ing the fluoroscope during Cardiac 
Catheterization procedures.  While not being an expert specifically on the role of either the CVT 
or the Radiologic Technologist (RT) in cardiac procedures, I am familiar with the dynamic 
multitasking required in similar case s in CT and Angiography.  It is not hard to imagine 
circumstances where it would be of great benefit to have CVT’s authorized to activate the 
ionizing beam, at the Cardiologist’s request.  To the extent that this would assist the focus and 
timeliness of ca re delivery by the physician, abbreviate the length of time under sedation for 
the patient, and improve the efficiency and handoff of tasks between team members, this 
expansion of the CVT’s role seems warranted.  
 
My concerns revolve around the generalized  phrasing of the bill, and the potential setting of 
precedent.  When the proposal was first presented to me the language was very specific about 
the required presence of the RT in the case, and the scope of what CVT’s would be allowed to 
do with ionizing r adiation and when .  The current phrasing of the bill seems much more open to 
broader interpretation, by its omission of some of the prior specifications.  Additionally, 
without  being an expert on legal precedence, it is concerning that this would set a lan dmark 
that could be used by other interested parties to circumvent or alter current radiation safety 
legislation.  There have been several generalized attempts over the past decade to allow non -
credentialed employees to activate ionizing radiation sources.   These have been very 
concerning to those of us who have attained the required training and licensure, due to the 
potential subverting of the ALARA principles we strive to uphold professionally.   It is our 
combination of clinical experience and board cer tification that insures the baseline radiation 
protection for patients.   While I believe this standard will be maintained by the CVT 
credentialling requirements, it is important that there isn’t a future loophole being created.  
Without a background in la w, it is hard to know how to prevent future misdirected 
interpretations from being sanctioned.  I wonder if there needs to be a clause that specifies 
something to the effect of “such that the actions don’t conflict with current State of Maine 
Radiation pol icies and/or result in greater patient dose” , or some other properly phrased 
consideration.  
 
The situation of CVT’s is unique because of how specific their practice is to the procedures that 
utilize ionizing radiation.  With physician oversight and the kno wledge base of RT’s present, the 
guardrails are in place to protect the patient.  That said, there is a difference between a general 
radiation safety training, and the formal in -depth training of technical factors that comprise the 
Radiologic Technologist certification.  I’m also not an expert on the curriculum of the CVT 
training but  feel strongly that  this legislation should be phrased in a way such that the presence 
of the technical proficiency  embodied by the RT isn’t diminished.   I sincerely hope that if this Bill 
does pass, its effects stay contained to the limited role expansion of the CVT in procedures and 
that that role does not exceed the competence of the credentialing.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of these remarks - 
 
Seth Doane RT(R)(CT), M.S . 
Associate Professor  
Radiography Program  
Southern Maine Community College  
