April 7, 2023  
 
Ashley Johnston  
1563 Post Road  
Wells, ME 04090  
 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry , 
My na me is A shley Johnston  and I have been an Animal Control Officer  (ACO)  in the 
Town of Wells since November of 2022 . My  testimony is in opposition to both LD 1121 and LD 
1216.  
Being newer to the field, I recently completed the training to become a certified Animal 
Control Officer. This included extensive training on proper living conditions for a variety of 
species, proper health and appearance of an animal, and signs of animal cruelty. Along with this, 
my training included proper techniques for investigative interviewing, report writing, evidence 
collection, awareness of behavior, de -escalation  tactics and crisis conflict management, ethics, 
etc. This education, along with my fi eld training, has allowed me to view cases with an open 
mind and a critical thinking perspective.  
It is hard for some people to understand animals and why they do the things they do. As 
an Animal Control Officer, I have the privilege of sharing the know ledge I have gained through 
education and experience with others. It is not always about wearing a specific uniform or 
carrying a firearm. It is allowing yourself to be approachable and opening a door to education for 
those that may not understand.  
During  my time in this position, I have utilized the agents f rom the Animal Welfare 
Prog ram on numerous occasions. Agent Nicole Doyle was the link between  myself and  other 
Animal Control Officers  when  a case bled over into other jurisdictions. She was able to use her 
knowledge and experience to speak with an animal  owner and obtain the full story before 
making any decisions for a case. Nicole  has been able to bridge the gap between jurisdictions to 
close a case quickly and effectively.  
There are many parties that are involved when investigating an animal cruelty case , 
inclu ding Animal Control Officer s, state veterinarians, Animal Welf are Agents , local animal 
shelters , etc. Animal Welfare Agents are trained to assist municipalities with animal cruelty 
cases, if requested, and most of  their job is spent responding to animal cruelty. Along with that, 
they do constant follow up with these cases and provide education and resources for animal 
owners and care takers. The Animal Welfare Program has always been respo nsive, easy to work 
with, and efficient  when investigating a case.  
The Animal Welfare Program has  provided me with additional training opportunities , 
been able to give me insight into best practices and has been  a great resource . They  have been an 
invaluable asset to my transition into my role as an Animal Control Officer . The addition of the 
Animal Cruelty Task Force, as outlined in LD 1216, would duplicate the investigations  that are 
already successfully completed by the Animal Welfare Program.  
I believe that a more practical approach to training , would be classes  offered , at var ied 
times,  by the Animal Welfare Program , allowing  for the part t ime A CO’s to attend . Having 
access to the knowledge and expertise of the Anim al Welfare Program has been very successful 
in the p ast and feel that the proposed  bills are frivolous and will cost taxpayers money 
unnecessarily .  
Furthermore , requiring all Animal Control Officers in the State of Maine to attend the 
Maine Criminal Justice academy would lead to  the resignation of many experienced  ACO’s in 
the state. The sys tem t hat w e have in place , through the Department of Agricu lture,  Conservation 
and Forestry,  has been effective and efficient at complet ing the duties  outline d in both LD 1121 
and LD 1216. I urge you to vote Ought Not T o Pass both LD 1121 and LD 1216.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
Ashley Johnston  
Ashley Johnston  
Town of Wells  
Animal Control Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
