Dan Davis
Porter
LD 1121
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Agriculture, Conservation, 
and Forestry Committee,
I am providing testimony in support of LD1121, and represent no entity or agency other than 
myself as a resident, property owner, taxpayer, and voter.
Laws and regulations surrounding Animal Control Officer roles, duties, responsibilities, 
expectations, and training need to be completely audited and overhauled. 
It is a new era, and animal welfare, types, and uses have changed over time. More uniformity 
is needed in the position, in terms of process, reporting, public relations, image, the 
increasing interface and overlap with other facets of governance (Code Enforcement, Local 
Health Officer, etc.), and more unintended involvement with peripheral socio-economic issues
while addressing animal welfare concerns (homelessness, drug, and mental health 
epidemics).
More and more frequently, local officials responding to land use, building code, and animal 
issues end up uncovering or confronting deeper issues with the individual(s). This requires 
more advanced training and available social service support from the State, things that are 
not currently provided, and training that these service providers largely do not possess.
I know of a nearby community that has recently invested in having their ACO complete the 
MCJA certification to carry a firearm, given the increasing risks of the position in this era. 
Situations are becoming increasingly dangerous for local officials, when they attempt to 
address minor nuisances and animal care concerns and run head-on into life-threatening 
living conditions and individuals struggling with mental health and drug addiction. 
The State should also consider that when mandating trainings and certifications (ACO, LHO, 
CEO, LPI), to actually provide ample accessible online training content modules for these 
service providers be able to seamlessly continue their education.
I urge the Committee to vote Ought To Pass on LD1121 to roll ACO training and certification 
under Public Safety.
Thank you.
Dan

