LD1121 — "An Act to Change Responsibility for Animal Control Officer Training to the Department of 
Public Safety" 
Members of the Committee, my name is Susan Milligan. I am an Animal Control Officer in Western 
Maine and have been for close to 20 years. I cover seven towns from Franklin County to the New Hampshire border. 
In my years as Animal Control Officer (ACO) I have learned a tremendous amount regarding laws and 
rules, court process, and animal handling. All things Animal Welfare Program did not teach, but should 
have. The types of things some District Attorneys and Law Enforcement Officers have tried to teach, 
such as Ethics, Report Writing, Drug Identification, Search and Seizure, Court Procedures, and Scene 
safety. ACO's have not been taught how to investigate, or how to interview a suspect. 
ACO's have been handed a badge, told how to write a summons, and set free. Small towns are hiring 
"warm bodies” to ﬁll the roll, not having any knowledge of the job and in most cases not caring. ACO's 
are often hired with no, or minimal background checks putting a huge liability onto the towns. ACO's 
are working day to day in extremely dangerous situations with no knowledge of scene safety, mental 
health issues, and with no protection. In these increasingly volatile times ACO's are a target for anyone 
in a bad mood. I have seen people get more angry over a warning issued by ACO, than being arrested. 
ACO's do not have weapons or bullet—proof vests, therefore requiring police response in many 
situations. ACO's are dealing with the same people and same locations as Law Enforcement Officers, yet 
in a lot of cases one side does not know what the other is doing. In my experience I have discovered the 
majority of ACO cases cross over to Department of Health and Human Services, Code Enforcement, and 
most often Law Enforcement. I have close working relationships with Law Enforcement, Warden 
Service, District Attorneys and courts, Code Enforcement, and Veterinarians. 
I have learned many things from these groups over the years and it is my opinion these things should 
have been taught to begin with and I see no better group to teach it than the Department of Public 
Safety. 
I urge the Committee to vote Ought to Pass on LD 1121 to change Animal Control training to Public 
Safety. 
Respectfully, 
Susan Ivliliigan 
Animal Control Officer
/
