State of Maine 
State Board of Education 
Testimony of Edmond Morin, Chair of the Career and Technical Education Committee of the Maine State 
Board of Education. 
L.D. 1158: An Act to Recognize the Critical nature of Workforce Development Through Career and 
Technical Education by Establishing an Adjustment for Career and Technical Education Centers in the 
School Funding Formula. 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. 
Presented by Representative White of Waterville. 
Date: April 12, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs. 
My name is Edmond Morin. lam the Chair of the Career and Technical Education Committee ofthe 
Maine State Board of Education. On behalf of the State Board, I am testifying neither for nor against LD 
1158. However, we do have a few concerns. 
The First Goal of the State Board's 5-year Strategic Plan for Career and Technical Education is to 
advocate for sustainable funding for CTE due a critical need to provide full and equitable funding for CTE 
programs, to keep CTE equipment and facilities aligned with current and emerging industry standards, 
and provide an educated and skilled workforce as an economic development driver for the State. 
In addition, the strategic plan suggests exploring the possibility of state capital funding for CTE 
equipment and CTE facility construction. 
The necessary equipment and infrastructure for CTE can be expensive. 
Currently CTE programs in Maine are paid for through a combination of cost-sharing agreements 
between sending and receiving schools, state funding, and grants such as the Federal Strengthening 
Career and Technical Education Act for the 21“ century, known as Perkins V. While an Essential 
Programs and Services per-pupil adjustment as set forth in the bill under consideration would be 
welcome, we would hope that passage of LD 1158 would not preclude CTE use of vital grant and cost- 
sharing funds. 
The Board feels the various funding avenues should be seen as vital investments as Maine prepares 
students to engage in what are very often high paying, high demand careers.
Another Concern the State Board has with the bill, as written, is that reference throughout is made to 
Career and Technical Education Centers. Technical education is available to all high school students in 
Maine, and some Middle School Students, both through centers and regions. A center is governed, 
operated, and administered by a single school administrative unit and makes its programs available to students 
from school administrative units with which it is afﬁliated. Regions are quasi-municipal corporations, which often 
sen/e more rural areas, comprised of all the school administrative units within its geographical boundaries. A 
region is governed bya cooperative board. In Maine there are 19 centers and 8 regions. While reference 
to CTE Centers is often used as shorthand for all Career and Technical Education in i\/laine, the State 
Board feels it best to remove any ambiguity and include both CTE Centers and Regions in the bill's 
wording. 
The State Board requests that this bill be discussed with a focus on the potential implications that could 
result as it is written. We will be available for the work session on this measure. llook forward to 
answering any questions you may have. Thank you so much for your consideration.
