Annette King
Old Town
LD 619
LD619 An Act to Ensure Coordination of Care for MaineCare Members.
Thank you for your time in reading my testimony today in opposition to LD619.
Allow me to introduce myself, my name is Annette King, I am a Certified Intentional Peer 
Support Specialist trained by the State of Maine. I reside In Penobscot county.
I struggled with some trauma that occurred in my life when I was a young Mother. I had 
worked my since the early age of 15, holding multiple jobs at a time. my trauma became too 
much for me to handle as that young mother and i lost the ability to communicate in the ways 
that I always had (with words). I now had to speak in "Code" that most people did not and 
could not understand. I only shared the language with the people who I trusted and it was not 
clinical medical folks.
The professional providers, (Nurses and Doctors) told me and my family that I would not gain 
the ability to talk like I had previously.We were told that i would not gain my emotions back, 
and I would not go back to work. I ended up getting a case manager, who set me up with 
SSDI and I received ECT Treatments (also known as Electrical Shock Treatment) for 9 
months, just about every other day. I had previously worked iin day programs and was a 
trained Job coach. Now I had to attend a day program.
I was introduced to Peer Support and trained as a CIPSS along with other trainings. The 
trainings helped me move forward into a healthy life where I can now advocate for myself and
work fulltime as a CIPSS. I build connections with all walks of life. Folks seek me out from all 
over the state and we build healthy connections, healthy relationships as we find a trust that 
we build from the ground up. I have not experienced this before in my life. 
I meet folks where they are at and they choose to speak freely. We connect with finding 
Mutuality in our lived experience.
 What I am talking about is in opposition to Section 5. By passing this law it would Jeopardize 
the way Peer Support is Presented and Practiced. Peer Support that is Maine care Billable at 
a Recovery Center or An Agency, means that not everyone will be welcomed or 
served/accepted.
Requiring a Peer Support to document, is going against the tasks that we as CIPSS hold up 
along with the Principals and the Code of Ethics that we have worked countless hours to 
create. We have done a lot of this work on our free time because of our passion of finding 
something that works for us. Peer Support being "Required" to document also goes towards a
medical module, Which, we are not. CIPSS should also NOT be "Required" to share 
privileged information, that was spoken to us under an understanding that we built a trust 
within the healthy relationship. Again, I will repeat "We CIPSS" are not of the "Medical model."
CIPSS meet folks where they are at, not in a Clinical role .
Thank you for this time while I explain my "Why" for opposing this matter. I would not have 
been able to gain this amount of support had it not been for Peer Support and being trained 
by the state of Maine.
