  
 
 30 Association Drive, P.O. Box 227, Manchester,  Maine 04351 -0227   
Ph: 207 -213-6125   |  Fax: 207-213-6127  
www. Home CareAlliance.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Testimony in Support of  
LD 619, An Act to Ensure Coordination of Care for MaineCare Members  
March 16, 2023  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing 
Commi ttee on Health and Human Services, my name is Laurie Belden, a resident 
of Durham and the Executive Director of the Home Care & Hospice Alliance of 
Maine (Alliance).  The Alliance is a network of home health care, hospice, home 
care and personal care provi ders across our State delivering in -home care to older 
adults and disabled individuals of all ages, allowing them to stay in their home 
and community.  
I’m here today to testify in support of LD 619, An Act to Ensure Coordination of 
Care for MaineCare Members .  I wish to thank Rep. Madigan  for sponsoring this 
important bill.  
During the 130th Legislature, w e were successful in achieving  unanimous support 
from this Committee on LD 1543, “An Act An Act To Improve and Modernize 
Home -based Care,” which inclu ded a provision directing the Department to 
review its rules to  determine if it is providing adequate reimbursement for 
activities performed outside of the home by a registered nurse .  Unfortunately, 
the bill ultimately died on adjournment in May 2022.  
Alliance  members continue to report the need for adjusting rates to account for 
the critical, patient -focused activities that clinicians perform outside of a home 
visit.  
Representative payee services provide valuable services to MaineCare 
beneficiaries to ensure that older adults and those Mainers with disabilities have 
the appropriate assistance to effectively manage their monthly finances. 
Currently , this vital service is not reimbursed although it  is critical to keeping 
individuals  in the home and community.  
The bill before you moves the needle in the right direction to ensure appropriate 
reimbursement for essential services being provided  for MaineCare members . 
Directing the Department to review its  rules for services to determine whether it 
is providing adequate reimbursement for activities performed outside of the 
home ; as well as providing funds so that beneficiaries have access to 
representative payee services , are imperative  to ensuring the safet y and 
wellbeing  of our older adults and disabled Mainers choosing to receive care in the 
home.  
  Board of Directors  
 
President  
Colleen Hilton  
Northern Light Home Care  
 
Vice President  
Daryl Cady  
Hospice of Southern Maine  
 
Treasurer  
RJ Gagnon  
Androscoggin Home Healthcare + 
Hospice  
 
Secretary  
Laurie Bourgoin  
Home Hope & Healing  
 
 
Members  
Ken Albert  
Androscoggin Home Healthcare + 
Hospice  
 
Patricia Aprile  
MaineHealth Care at Home  
 
Kyra Chamberlain  
Hospice of Southern Maine  
 
Elaine Collins  
MaineHealth Care at Home  
 
Chris Costello  
CHANS Home Health& Hospice  
 
Zetta Fogg  
McKesson Medical -Surgical  
 
Lisa Harvey -McPherson  
Northern Light Home Care & Hospice  
 
Adam LaMonica  
Maxim Healthcare Services  
 
Amy McVety  
Mount Desert Nursing Association  
 
Greg Pizzo  
MaineGeneral HomeCare & Hospice  
 
Amy Shawley  
St. Joseph Homecare and Hospice  
 
  
 
 30 Association Drive, P.O. Box 227, Manchester,  Maine 04351 -0227   
Ph: 207 -213-6125   |  Fax: 207-213-6127  
www. Home CareAlliance.org  
 Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony  in support of this important 
legislation to keep home care patients safe.   
 
Laurie Belden , Executive Director  
laurie@homecarealliance.org  
