Alliance 
MHNE 
"‘ 
Officers "' 
Dave McCluskey, President 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1" vice-President 
Day One 
Bob Descoteaux, 2" Vice- 
President 
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health 
Kara Hay, Secretary 
Penquis CAP lnc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
Aroostook Mental Health Center 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 
"' 
Board Members "' 
Adcare Educational lnstitute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, Inc. 
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare 
Assistance Plus 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties 
Community Caring Collaborative 
Community Health & Counseling 
COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine 
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization 
Maine Behavioral Heaithcare 
Milestone Recovery 
NFI North, inc. 
Northern Light/Acadia 
Portland Recovery Community 
Center 
Pathways of Maine 
Rumford Group Homes 
Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities 
Sweetser 
TriCounty Mental Health Services 
Wellspring, Inc. 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Sen/ices Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
Testimony in Support of LD 619 
An Act to Ensure Mental Health Coordination of Care for 
MaineCare Members 
March 16, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the 
Health and Human Services Committees. My name is Malory Shaughnessy and l am 
the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The 
Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine's 
community based mental health and substance use treatment providers, providing 
services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance advocates 
for the implementation of sound policies and evidence-based practices that serve to 
enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care system. 
On behalf of the Alliance, l am here today to speak in support of LD 619, An Act to 
Ensure Mental Health Coordination of Care for MaineCare Members. This bill has 
several distinct parts and lwould like to address them each. 
First: Transportation to services. MaineCare does pay for non-emergency 
transportation (NET) already, but there are also limits placed on distance allowed for 
the travel to a MaineCare provider, which can limit access to the preferred or most 
appropriate provider. This would expand this service for MaineCare Members. 
MaineCare Benefits Manual Chapter 2, Section 113.06—7 states that the NET is 
”generally limited to transporting the Member to MaineCare providers that are 
geographically proximate to the Member. These limits state that a MaineCare 
provider will be considered 
”a nearest appropriate provider if the distance between the Members residence 
and the provider location is less than or equal to: 
1. 30 Miles for non-pharmacy or waiver service providers in Urban areas. 
2. 50 Miles for non-pharmacy medical or waiver service providers in Rural 
areas. 
3. 15 Miles for pharmacies in Urban areas. 
4. 30 Miles for pharmacies in Rural areas. 
Second: Coordination of care. This is a critically needed service for MaineCare 
Members (both adults and youth) to assure that they are getting coordination of the 
semices they need in a timely and efficient manner, with seamless support as they 
move from one setting to another, or between various services they are eligible to 
receive. 
This would provide reimbursement for critical collateral contacts between the Members mental health professional, medical providers, psychiatric providers, residential 
providers, case managers, and if the Member is a child, with the parents or school 
personnel as long as the goal of the coordination or collateral contact is included in the 
goals of the individual treatment plan. Our reading of this language would also fix what is the constantly recurring problem of when someone has to be hospitalized and while 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 “' 
Phone 207.621.8118 "’ Fax 207.621.8362 '" 
theAllianceMaine.org
in-patient, the known case managers or mental health providers are excluded from coordinating care to assure success when the patient is discharged. Currently this is considered duplicative sen/ices even if it the best practice to assure stability for the Member's ca re. 
We wholeheartedly agree that this is in the best interest of the MaineCare Members treatment outcomes. We live in an increasingly complex world and coordinating services is difficult in the best of circumstances, but for someone in the middle of a mental health crisis, it is impossible. This expansion makes sense. 
Third: Representative payee services. There can be many reasons why Social Security decides someone needs a representative payee. However, i _t's usually because they have information that indicated someone needs help in managing their money and meeting their current needs. Many people who face the challenges of severe and persistent mental illness or developmental disabilities need this 
assistance. When they receive this assistance from a fee for service agency, they can be charged 10% of their monthly beneﬁt. Given the fact that Supplemental Security Income is only $914 a month for 2023, that can make a dramatic impact. lf they need this service due to their disability that makes them eligible for this income, it seems that this service should be one that is paid for by their MaineCare. 
Fourth: Transportation to psychosocial clubhouse services. The Clubhouse model of psychosocial rehabilitation is a community mental health service model that helps people with a history of serious mental illness rejoin society and maintain their place in it; it builds on people's strengths and provides mutual support, along with professional staff support, for people to receive prevocational work training, educational opportunities, and social support. Some studies have shown that clubhouse participation helps people avoid psychiatric hospitalization, improves quality of life, and may improve social integration ‘ . lf this is the case, and this is a MaineCare covered service that provides a 
therapeutic environment that assists in treatment and stability for those involved, it only makes sense that it would qualify for non-emergency transportation to a MaineCare service. 
Fifth: Certified recovery coaches and certified intentional peer support specialist services. According to SAMHSA, "peer support workers are people who have been successful in the recovery process who help others experiencing similar situations. Through shared understanding, respect, and mutual empowerment, peer support workers help people become and stay engaged in the recovery process and reduce the likelihood of relapse. Peer support services can effectively extend the reach of 
treatment beyond the clinical setting into the everyday environment of those seeking a successful, sustained recovery process." This applies to both certified recovery coaches and certiﬁed intentional peer support specialists. As the titles state, these are people who have had extensive training and are certiﬁed for this work. 
Maine has increasingly added peer supports to its services that have a wrap around support structure such as Behavioral Health Homes. Research shows us that "peer support specialists can uniquely contribute to the coordination of physical health and mental health services for individuals with serious mental illness?" It is time to add this as a reimbursable service in the MaineCare Benefits Manual. 
l urge you to vote Ought to Pass on adding these important services and supports for MaineCare Members. Thank you for your time and attention to these issues. l would be happy to get you additional information for the work session. 
1 McKay, Colleen; Nugent, Katie L.; Johnsen, Matthew; Eaton, William W.; Lidz, Charles W. (31 August 2016). "A Systematic Review of Evidence for the Clubhouse iviodel of Psychosocial Rehabilitation “ . Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services Research. 45 (1): 28-47. 
1 M Storm, KL Fortuna, JM Brooks, $1 Bartels - Frontiers in psychiatry, 2020 - frontiersin.org. "Peer support in coordination of physical health and mental health services forpeople with lived experience ofa serious mental illness." 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 "' 
Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fay ?n7 m1 122:1 ~ +i...xn ..__-..- _-
