Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
March 16, 2023 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair 
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333-0100 
Re: LD 619 – An Act to Ensure Coordination of Care for MaineCare Members 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services: 
This letter is t o provide infor mation and share the Departme nt’s conce rns with LD 619, An Act to 
Ensure Coordination of Care for MaineCare Members, as drafted .  
This bill requires the Department of Health and Human Services to provide nonemergency 
transportation services to MaineCare memb ers regardless of whether a member resides in a rural 
or nonrural setting; reimburse providers of behavioral health services and providers of physi cal 
health services for time spent engaged in coordination of care for MaineCare membe rs, including 
for critica l collatera l care coordination for hospitalized members; reimburse for representative 
payee services to members eligible for targeted case mana gement and community support 
services; reimburse for tr ansportation to and f rom psychosocial clubhouse services; and provide 
certified recovery coac h and certified intentional peer support specialist services to MaineCare 
members eligible for targeted case mana gement or community support services.  
The proposed bil l is vague and broa d reaching, and the Departme nt already meets severa l of the 
requirements the bill outlines. The Department address ed eac h section to the extent possible 
below. 
Section 1 : None mergency transportation (NET) as described in the proposed bill is already a 
reimbursable service available to MaineCare members, regardless of rural or non-rural residence. 
Chapter II, Section 113 of the MaineCare Bene fits Manual (MBM), Non-Emergency 
Transportation (NET) Services cove rs transportati on solely to and from MaineCare covered 
services. MaineCare already provides transportation to MaineCare covered services, regardless 
of rural or non-rural location. 
Section 2 : MaineCare reimburses for care coordination as a covered service unde r Ch. II Section 
13, Targeted Case Management ; Section 17, Community Support Services ; Section 91, Heath 
Home Service s – Community Care Teams ; Secti on 92, Behavioral Health Homes ; Section 93, 
Opioid Health Homes ; and Ch. VI Section 3, Primary Care Plus. Aside from the aforementioned 
services which are largel y reimbursed through bundled rates which incorporate othe r costs f care 
beyond those associa ted strictly with care coordination, MaineCare does not reimburse for a 
 
 standalone  care coordination  service . The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ( CMS ) 
has established requirements for states to ensure non duplication of payment and services, so 
providers delivering other service s to members receiving the above care coordination services 
would not be able to receive reimbursement for care coordination. MaineCare members under 
the age of 21 need not be included as care coordination services are available through Section 94 
of the M BM, Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis and Treatment Services ( EPDST ). In 
addition, there is a  requirement for hospitals to provide care coordination as part of the services 
they currently deliver.   
 
Section 3 : Benefits from the Social Security Administration are  separate from Medicaid . As the 
bill is written,  such inclusion of representative payee services as a Medicaid reimbursable service 
would not be federally permissible. The Department requires additional information regarding 
who would be considered a designated rep payee under this proposal.  
 
Section 4 : For members receiving mental health psychosocial clubhouse services, transportation 
that takes place as part  of the covered service is already built into  the bundled rate under MBM  
Section 65.  In addition, MaineCare already covers NET  to and from MaineCare -enrolled 
Clubhouse service locations.  
 
Section 5 : Recovery coaching and peer support services are provided through bundled, team -
based service models and are not eligible to be billed as standalone services. These services are 
currently supported through reimbursement under MBM Ch. II, Sections 17, 65, 92 , and 93.  
 
As this bill develops , the Department would like to emphasize that significant clarity is required 
for all section s. Additional detail surrounding the intended service offerings, populations, and 
providers  is required to further identify implica tions and impact.  We wanted you to be aware of 
the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If you have any further questions, 
please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  
 

