lVlaineHealth 
Local Health Systems 
Franklin Community 
Health Network 
LIl1COlI1I"lt?21ll'l1 
Maiuel—lealtl1 Care Ar Home 
Maine Belraviorzrl Healthcare 
Memorial Hospital 
Maine l\/lcdical Center 
Mid Coast-Parkview llealtlr 
NorD.\' 
Pen Buy l\"le<lic;rl Center 
Southern Maine Health Care 
Vvaldo County General Hospital 
Wcstc1'r1 h-Iairrc llcaltli 
Part of the 
Nlairiel-Icaltli Family 
l\'TlaincHcalth /\ccountnl)lc 
Cure Orgmri/irrtion 
l\/laincl-Iealtlr Aﬂilintes 
1\"luineGenerul Health 
New England Relrabilitzrtion 
Hospital of Portlrrnd 
St. h‘lary' s Health System l\/lainel-lealth 
Testimony of Sarah Calder, MaineHealth 
In Support of LD 619, “An Act to Ensure Coordination of 
Care for MaineCare Members” 
Thursday, March 16, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services, I am Sarah 
Calder, Senior Government Affairs Director at MaineHealth, and I am 
here to testify in support of LD 619, “An Act to Ensure Coordination of 
Care for MaineCare Members. ” 
MaineHealth is an integrated non-proﬁt health care system that provides 
the full continuum of health care services to the residents of eleven 
counties in Maine and one in New Hampshire. As part of our mission of 
“Working Together So Maine’s Communities are the Healthiest in 
America, ” MaineHealth provides a range of behavioral health services 
throughout our footprint. These range from community based outpatient 
therapy, medication management, substance use treatment and care 
management to inpatient treatment in four community hospitals and 
Spring Harbor Hospital. 
As you know, the pandemic exacerbated a pre-existing crisis in Maine’s 
behavioral health system and We are grateful for this Committee ’s support 
of the investments included in the Governor ’s proposed budget to createa 
signiﬁcantly improved ﬂoor for MaineCare rates. Due to chronic 
underfunding of community-based services and inﬂationary costs, Maine 
Behavioral Healthcare (MBH) lost $16.9 million in FY 2022 after 
including $3.9 million in federal and state relief dollars. This is simply not 
sustainable. 
The legislation before you today addresses many services that receive no 
reimbursement today, but are critically important to ensuring our clients 
receive the appropriate care they need to recover and live productive lives 
in the community. We are very supportive of each component of LD 619, 
but I will focus my testimony today on one speciﬁc component — Peer 
Support (Section 5). 
Peer Support is integral to the support we provide our clients as Peer 
Support Specialists know the challenges of our clients better than most 
because of their own lived experience. Our Peer Support Specialists 
practice Intentional Peer Support and support clients in connecting to 
wellness and recovery opportunities in the community and accessing other 
community support services when appropriate. Attached to my testimony, 
110 Free Street ' Portland, l\/IE D4101 Phone: 207-661-7001 F:1.\':2()7 —661—7()29 maineherltlr org
you will see the many ways that Peers are integrated into the services we provide, including in 
our Emergency Departments to support patients with Substance Use Disorder. 
Currently, only two sections of MaineCare - Behavioral Health Home S61'ViC6S and Opioid 
Health Home Services - offer a small allowance to fund Peer Support through the per member, 
per month reimbursement structure. To provide Peer Support to clients not served by these two 
sections of MaineCare, we are completely reliant on grant funding, which is time-limited, often 
speciﬁc is scope and reach, and is not a sustainable funding source. 
But other states are leading the way and reimburse for Peer Support Services through their 
Medicaid programs. In 1999, Georgia was the ﬁrst state to bill Medicaid for peer services. Since 
then, many states have expanded peer support services, including Indiana and Oregon. 
Research demonstrates that Peer Support facilitates recovery and can reduce health care costs, 
and it is for that reason that I urge the Committee to vote Ought to Pass on LD 619. 
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
P: 
EMERGENCY 
REcovERv1;aoAjeuH;ue ‘i
n 
The program is for adults1’vs]hoTliaVe 
been to the ED withinlt /lie'ljast ’6* 
months, identity as haililngj/substance 
use challenges, and wish/to utilize’ 
peer support. Multiple pathways and 
‘se_lf—reterrals are welcomeC 
l 
Locations: 
Maine Mecllcal Center (Portland) 
Mid Coast Hospital (Brunswick) 
Lincoln Health Miles Campus (Damariscotta) 
Southern Maine Health Care (Both EDs) * 
Waldo County General Hospital (Belfast) 
Stephens Memorial Hospital (Norway) 
Pen Bay Medical Center (Rocldand) -l 
Age: Adults 18+~ 
Peer Support Available: l:’l~in* -person and 
virtual; phone support ' C 
_, 
Requirements: ED Visit last months, No 
insurance requirements 
l:I Referral methods: _ 
Internal: EPIC AMB Referral to Peer 
Services [REFl54Ol]- —select Recovery Coach 
External: MBH Peeremmc.org_ Make sure to indicate program of 
interest for any referral.
‘1{£$U§SEANCEUSE ee-€?1REATMENT 
Subsiance /Use Treafmenf combines 
Therapy,/ medicaﬁon managemem ‘, 
%' 
and peer supporf 
Locaiigns: Biddeford, Springvale, Porfland, 
Wesfbroak, Scarborough, Norway, Brunswick, 
* 
Damarisco ﬁc, Rockldnd 
Age: Adulfs 18+ 
Peer Support Available; 1:1 in person and 
virtual; groups; phone supppn‘\ 
Requiremegp/j ‘;§5§€>uvb§1gnce use concern. No 
in’ surance”reiquirernen ’rs 
. I21 Referral meihods: 
Iniernalf lmferna /I EPIC Referral +0 Subsfance 
_ K K _ Use Treqfmenf 
Exiernall/Ce ‘m‘ra| intake line 874-1030
