219 Capitol Street, Suite7 
ﬁﬁmsurﬁer ﬁourwsii Sysiern of Meiirie Augusta’ ME 04330 
A Voice for Consumers of Mental Health Services 
Phone: 207.430.8300 
" 
Fax: 207.430.8301 
Toll-Free: 877.207.5073 
www.maineccsm.org 
March 16, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed members of the Health and 
Human Services Committee, 
My name is Simonne Maline. I am the Executive Director for the Consumer Council System of Maine 
(CCSM). I am here today on behalf of the CCSM to testify in support of LD 619 " An Act to Ensure 
Coordination of Care for MaineCare Members" . 
The Consumer Council System of Maine is a public instrumentality written into State Statute by the Maine 
Legislature to serve in an advisory capacity and to provide legislators with guidance and advice regarding 
the delivery of effective and appropriate adult mental health services from those served by them. 
Anything the Legislature can do to support the transportation system for MaineCare members, the CCSM 
wholeheartedly supports. Lack of access to transportation is most often the number one topic of discussion 
at our local councils and forums that we convene on a regular basis. Your constituents can give you 
numerous stories of how the system is not working for so many, making it impossible to access needed 
services on a regular basis. While we support transportation to clubhouses, I would be remiss in not 
mentioning that Maine does not provide transportation to mental health peer recovery centers. These are 
two very different programs. This issue of lack of transportation to peer recovery centers is brought up all 
the time as well. The reason transportation is not covered is because DHHS does not fund peer recovery 
centers of any kind whether mental health or SUD with MaineCare dollars. This leaves people ineligible for 
transportation through the brokerage system. We would love to see this issue rectified in some way as this 
is one of the lowest barrier services that people can access. Lack of access to transportation keeps them 
away from recovery centers. We need to fix this! 
Care coordination is another important piece of the many healthcare system gaps. Imagine that you are in 
the hospital getting ready to be discharged and your case manager, the person who may know you the 
best, is not allowed to participate in the discharge planning process because it is not a billable service. In 
the new model of Certified Community Behavioral Health Clinics (CCBHC) coming to Maine in 2024, this 
will be a covered service. We need to remedy these inconsistencies in care coordination for all who receive 
mental health services, no matter the program type. 
In Section 5 of the bill text there is language for billable recovery coaching and peer support services. For 
mental health peers, this has been a topic of conversation for years in Maine (as well as nationally). There 
is a spectrum of opinions about billable peer support that we want to honor. The vast majority support 
some version of this but there are some who feel that when you move into the insurance realm, you lose 
some of the fidelity of what is offered in this service. We would love to bring peers together with policy 
makers to discuss where peer support is most needed and could lend itself to a billable service and some 
that do not, for example the Intentional Warm Line. It would be very important to involve the Intentional 
Peer Support Advisory Committee (IPSAC), who advises OBH on all things related to the Intentional Peer 
~I 
. 0,, . .._._,w Y
, ﬁeiisvmer ﬁouswzii ﬁystem at Wtmirie 
A Voice for Consumers of Mental Health Services 
tr“
' 
1" 
Support Programing in Maine as well as other groups and individuals. We would like to see the State of 
Maine fully embrace this conversation and move forward initiatives to support this important work. 
Unfortunately, these important conversations have moved in fits and starts depending on different 
administrations and priorities. 
In closing we would like to see the initiatives put forth in this bill achieve better outcomes in coordination of 
care for members of our peer community. Therefore, we ask that you vote “Ought to Pass” on LD 619 while 
taking into consideration the items we have brought to your attention that need remediation. 
Sincerely, 
S7‘ )/(0/(/re /” /%Z%}(e 
Executive Director 
'- 
, :2, I " w F‘; .-;»r=-.'-;:~.;'.: ‘,; —"— ““"'* ;, ""f'-&“3.“l"f' W" '" "‘W-"":_1.: ‘; :~ ,~>-@ii1¢~s»»»:w;~¢:.u ~:,'~'::""""*" " "Mr";' 
: . ea » 
5» 
_ ;;,>,=--;: ,<<"'":1"
