One Weston Court, Box2 
DV. Augusta» ME @4330 .. 
207.430.8334 
The Maine Coalition 
to End Domestic Violence 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence 
ln Support of LD 1622: “Resolve, to Reestablish the Criminal Records Review Committee ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary 
Thursday, April 27, 2023 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, I am writing on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End 
Domestic Violence (MCEDV)‘ to provide our perspective on LD 1622, “Resolve, to Reestablish 
the Criminal Records Review Committee. ” 
We appreciate the desire for changes to the criminal legal system in our state and 
have welcomed being included in these important conversations. As leaders contemplate 
what actions should be taken to limit the collateral consequences of criminal convictions, 
careful thought must be given both to unintended consequences and the criminal legal 
system's accountability to victims of crime. Conversations convened by through various 
committees and working groups over the last several years have highlighted that 
attempting to categorize which crimes we are most concerned about and which we are not, 
as well as what processes should be utilized to give convicted individuals some form of relief 
from long—term economic and social consequences of their convictions is complex and does 
not readily lend itself to simple solutions. The approach of continuing to convene a broad 
range of interested parties to work through these issues is one we ask you to support. 
However, we would again ask you to consider that the timeframe proposed is not 
likely to result in thoughtful recommendations that fully address the scope of issues the 
Committee is asked to work on. This timeframe has been tried unsuccessfully before; the 
Committee doesn't start its work until mid-Fall, must wrap it up by early December, and this 
results in needing to come back with repeated requests for the Committee be reconstituted 
to finish the work, as there are issues that the Committee doesn't even begin to look at. The 
issues are not simple, and if the goal is for the group to report back with some sort of 
comprehensive proposal that thoughtfully addresses the long-term collateral consequences 
of criminal convictions, as opposed to continued attempts to address the issues piecemeal, 
it needs more time. 
1 
MCEDV serves a membership of eight regional domestic violence resource centers as well as the Immigrant 
Resource Center of Maine. Our member programs provided services to more than 12,000 victims of domestic 
abuse and violence in Maine last year, including court advocacy services in the civil and criminal courts to more 
than 5,000. 
Connecting people, creating frameworks for change. 
mcedv.org
MCEDV Page 2 of2 
As always, thank you for the opportunity to share our perspective with you. MCEDV 
and our member programs are available to support the Committee's work on this proposal 
in whatever way might be helpful. 
Contact Information: 
Andrea Mancuso, Esq. 
Public Policy Director 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV) 
Ph: (207) 650-4356 
Email: anclrea@mceciv.org
