STATE OE MAINE ~ 
HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
SPEAKERS oEE1cE 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1300 
RACHEL TALBOT RUSS* 
SPEAKE QF THE OUSE , R H 
Thursday, April 27:11, 2023 
Testimony of Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross presenting 
LD 1622 Resolve, T 0 Reestablish the Criminal Records Review Committee 
Before the Joint Select Committee on the Judiciary 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and esteemed members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Judiciary, I am Rachel Talbot Ross. I represent House 
District 1 18 which is the Portland peninsula. I also have the distinct honor of 
serving as the Maine Speaker of the House. I am here today to present LD 1622,a 
Resolve to Reestablish the Criminal Records Review Committee. 
In 2021, I introduced LD 563, a Resolve To Create the Criminal Records 
Review Committee. That resolve passed both Chambers and was signed by the 
Chief Executive in July of 2021. The committee was charged with reviewing the 
issues involved in sealing and expunging criminal records and exploring options to 
ensure that persons who have been convicted of crimes and served their sentences 
are able to return to their communities without their convictions holding them back 
from leading successful, fulﬁlling lives, while also protecting and advancing public 
safety. 
The committee met ﬁve times during the fall of 2021. I have attached a copy 
of the review committee ’s report, absent the appendices, to this testimony. The full 
report with its appendices can be found at httpsI/llegislature.tnaine.gov/doc/77 61. 
The review committee made three recommendations, the ﬁrst of which was to 
reestablish the review committee in 2022 so that it could continue its work. 
Therefore, I introduced LD 1818, Resolve, To Reestablish and Continue 
the Work of the Criminal Records Review Committee in late 2021 to advance 
that recommendation. A majority of review committee members voted to support 
LD 1818 as a way to continue this important work. Unfortunately, LD 1818 died 
when the Legislature adjourned Sine Die and was placed in the Legislative Files. 
LD 1622 is identical to the resolve that died last year except that the date for 
submitting its report to this Committee along with its ﬁndings and 
recommendations has been changed to December 6, 2023.
There are many reasons why this review committee should be reestablished. 
These are complex issues, in large part due to the numerous systems involved, and 
they deserve thorough attention. With the time that was allotted to the original 
review committee, it successfully identiﬁed resources, scheduled presentations and 
time for discussion to ensure that members had a foundational understanding of the 
issues before them. The review committee worked diligently on recommendations, 
which are included in the attached report, but also agreed on the importance of 
continuing its work. LD 1622 will allow this important Work to continue. For those 
reason, I ask you to act favorably on this resolve. 
Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to take any questions 
you may have for me.
