A 53-\_ '1 
“- 
\- 
*"‘17Zﬁ§'>@‘ 
Glenn "Chip" Curry THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District l l l3 l st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony of Senator Chip Curry introducing 
LD 1751, "An Act to Maximize Federal Funding in Support of Emergency Medical 
Services ” 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
May J, 2025’I 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished colleagues of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Services, I am Senator Chip Curry, and I represent the 26 rural, coastal, and island 
communities of Waldo County. Today I present to you LD 1751, "An Act to Maximize Federal Funding 
in Support of Emergency Medical Services. ” 
The recent Blue Ribbon Commission on Emergency Medical Services, which I co-chaired alongside 
House Speaker Talbot Ross, found that EMS agencies across Maine are in dire need of intervention. 
Without support, we can expect to see agencies close, leaving areas of the state unserved or poorly served 
and placing additional burdens on property taxpayers. 
The Commission highlighted in its ﬁnal report that EMS reimbursements are not keeping pace with the 
cost of providing services, and existing subsidies (such as through volunteerism, donations, or voluntary 
town appropriations) are insufﬁcient to close the gap. In fact, the topline ﬁnding of the report identiﬁed 
a need for an additional $70 million in funding per year for the next ﬁve years to support EMS services 
in Maine. 
LD 1751 directly addresses these challenges by maximizing federal funding for EMS providers and 
increasing MaineCare reimbursement rates. Every state dollar we spend in support of our ambulance 
services should be used to leverage additional federal dollars. This bill leverages additional dollars by 
establishing a provider assessment fee and by increasing the MaineCare reimbursement rate. 
There are experts here today prepared to speak on how these programs work in other states and Within 
other health care sectors. Broadly speaking, the ambulance service assessment fee would be based on 
the net operating revenue of each ambulance service provider. This fee would then generate the increased 
state ﬁmding necessary to draw down additional federal funding for the MaineCare program, creating a 
separate, non-lapsing ambulance fee fund. This fund will be used exclusively to reimburse ambulance 
service providers under the MaineCare program, supplementing General Fund appropriations. 
In combination with the assessment fee established in Section l, Section 2 of LD 1751 would raise the 
reimbursement level to 200% of the allowable reimbursement rate under Medicare for a variety of 
ambulance services 
Chair, Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business Committee 
In/and F is/reries and Wildlife Comrnittee 
State House: (207) 287-1515 * Fax: (207) 287-1585 * To//' Free: ]»8O()-423-6900 * TTY: 711 
Chip. Czm'y@legisf(1tz1re. Inainegov * legisfatzzre. maine.govlsenate
,. .._ 
I‘ ' 
<7: ;, _i 
;_x§;'7e»> 
%@ Glenn "Chip" Curry THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
Senator, District I l 13 l st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
By implementing LD 1751, we can respond directly to the Commission ’s ﬁndings and provide much- 
needed ﬁnancial relief to EMS providers, ensuring they can continue to deliver critical emergency 
services to Maine's communities, particularly in rural areas where access is often limited. 
I ask for this committee's support of LD 1751, "An Act to Maximize Federal Funding in Support of 
Emergency Medical Services. ” Since co-chairing the Blue Ribbon Commission I have received 
numerous calls from town leaders and legislators Whose services are facing the ﬁnancial cliff and at risk 
of closing. 
I do not believe it is right for us to leave this problem only to our towns, cities and volunteers. The state 
has an important role to play in ensuring the long-term sustainability of EMS in Maine. Thank you for 
your consideration, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Sincerely, 
‘tr 
Chip Curry 
State Senator, District ll 
Representing the 26 rural, coastal, and island communities of Waldo County 
Chair, Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business Commit/ee 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee 
Stafe House: (207) 287-1515 *7‘ 
Fax: (207) 287-1585 * TollFree: 1-800-423-6900 * TTY: 711 
Chip. C urry@legislature. maine. gov * legislaizlre.maine.govAre1-tale
