 
Via online portal  
 April 28, 2023  Senator Joe Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer , Chair  
Members of the Health and Human  Services Committee  
 RE: Testimony Expressing Concern about LD 1751 , An Act to Maximize Federal 
Funding in Support of Emergency  Medical Services  
 My name is Coralie Giles. I am a registered nurse  of nearly 45 years , President  of the  
Maine State Nurses Association, Vice -President  of National Nurses United, and a 
resident of Brewer . I am providing test imony to express concern about LD 1751  on 
behalf of Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), representing more than 4,000 caregivers across the state of Maine . 
 
While MSNA/NNU support s increasing MaineCare reimbursements, we are concerned 
that LD 1751’s inclusion of increased reimbursements for no -transport calls and 
community paramedicine c ould be used to support dangerous hospital- at-home 
programs. We urge you to include language in the bill to clarify  that Maine Care 
reimbur sement for no -transport calls and community paramedicine  does not include  
caring for  hospital- at-home  patients .  
 
Hospi tal-at-home programs  replac e the inpatient hospital care that acute -level patients 
need, in clud ing 24-hour care by a registered nurse and immediate emergency response , 
with two daily visits by  nurses or  community paramedics  and a 30- minute emergency 
response .
1 Hospital- at-home p atient s who remain in the home are at serious risk of 
worsening illness or even death , while patients treated in a hospital receive regular 
assessment by nurses and doctors. R esponse time is crucial when a patient’s condition 
deteriorates. Yet hospital- at-home patient s in the home may wait up to  30 minutes for 
an ambulance. In co ntrast , a patient in a fully operational hospital would receive  
immediate  emergency response.  
 
 
1 For an in-depth discussion of Medicare hospital -at-home programs, see National Nurses United’s report at 
https://www.nationalnursesunited.org/sites/default/files/nnu/documents/0922_Medicare_HospitalAtHome_Report.p
df. 
  
In sum, MSNA/NNU ask s you to ensure that LD 1751 will not be used to fund  hospital-
at-home programs.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Coralie Giles, RN President, Maine State Nurses Association  
Vice -President, National Nurses United 
 
 

Coralie Giles
Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United
LD 1751
 Testimony Expressing Concern about LD 1751, An Act to Maximize Federal 
Funding in Support of Emergency Medical Services
My name is Coralie Giles. I am a registered nurse of nearly 45 years, President of the 
Maine State Nurses Association, Vice-President of National Nurses United, and a 
resident of Brewer. I am providing testimony to express concern about LD 1751 on 
behalf of Maine State Nurses Association/National Nurses United (MSNA/NNU), 
representing more than 4,000 caregivers across the state of Maine.
While MSNA/NNU supports increasing MaineCare reimbursements, we are 
concerned that LD 1751’s inclusion of increased reimbursements for no-transport 
calls and community paramedicine could be used to support dangerous 
hospital-at-home programs. We urge you to include language in the bill to clarify that 
MaineCare reimbursement for no-transport calls and community paramedicine does 
not include caring for hospital-at-home patients. 
Hospital-at-home programs replace the inpatient hospital care that acute-level patients
need, including 24-hour care by a registered nurse and immediate emergency 
response, with two daily visits by nurses or community paramedics and a 30-minute 
emergency response.  Hospital-at-home patients who remain in the home are at 
serious risk of worsening illness or even death, while patients treated in a hospital 
receive regular assessment by nurses and doctors. Response time is crucial when a 
patient’s condition deteriorates. Yet hospital-at-home patients in the home may wait 
up to 30 minutes for an ambulance. In contrast, a patient in a fully operational hospital
would receive immediate emergency response. 
In sum, MSNA/NNU asks you to ensure that LD 1751 will not be used to fund 
hospital-at-home programs.
Sincerely,
 
Coralie Giles, RN
President, Maine State Nurses Association
Vice-President, National Nurses United

