 
  
Testimony Regarding Bill LD 1751 (SP 696) 
"An Act to Maximize Federal Funding in Support of Emergency Medical Services" 
Sponsored by Senator Glenn Curry 
 
Committee on Health and Human Services  
May 01, 2023 
 
Distinguished members of the Committee on Health and Human Services, we are pleased to 
provide some key details outlining the program in LD 1751, An Act to Maximize Federal Funding 
in Support of Emergency Medical Services. 
 
 
Why Implement a Provider Assessment? 
• There is great disparity in funding for ambulance providers with the most vulnerable Mainers 
the most significantly affected. 
• Federal Medicaid law allows states to collect an assessment on ambulance service providers 
and then use the money collected as the state share for federal Medicaid matching funds. 
• Using the additional federal dollars, Maine will effectively increase Medicaid rates by making 
supplemental payments to ambulance providers. 
• Since the state share comes from the assessments, the state can increase payments with no 
impact on general fund dollars. 
• Assessment programs like this have been used for years to benefit the hospital and nursing 
home industries in Maine and in nearly all states across the country. Many states have similar 
ambulance assessment programs or are in the process of implementing one. 
 
How will the Program Work? 
• State legislation will direct the Maine Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) to 
collect the assessment from each non-municipal (for-profit, non-profit, and volunteer 
ambulance services) ambulance service provider. 
• DHHS will use the new state funds generated from the assessment to match federal Medicaid 
dollars.   
• With the new federal dollars (and the new state dollars from the assessment), MaineCare will 
make supplemental Medicaid payments to non-municipal ambulance providers.  
 
How much will payments increase? 
• The amount gained by each individual provider will vary based on the volume of their 
Medicaid business compared to their overall mix of services (Medicare, commercial, self-pay, 
etc.). 
• The net gain (increase in payments minus the assessment paid) to each individual provider will 
vary. However, for the industry as a whole, the supplemental payments should be at least two 
times the amount of the assessments paid by providers. 
 
 
  
Have other states implemented these programs? 
• Yes, at least a dozen states have implemented provider assessment programs for ambulance 
services. Programs are operational or in the process of implementation in UT, VT, OR, WA, KY, 
GA, AR, MO, LA, MI, CA, and TN. Sellers Dorsey is actively working to develop programs in 
seven additional states. 
• Wisconsin recently passed legislation for an ambulance assessment program and Sellers 
Dorsey is currently working with the state on implementation. 
• In Massachusetts, Sellers Dorsey is working with the Massachusetts Ambulance Association 
and the Medicaid agency to implement a provider assessment that will generate state dollars 
sufficient to effectively double current Medicaid rates for ambulance transports.  
 
Example Ambulance Provider Assessment Program Flowchart 
 
 

