  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
May 1 , 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1751 – An Act to Maximize Federal Funding in Support of Emergency Medical Services  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information and express the Department’s opposition to LD 1751, An Act to 
Maximize Federal Funding in Support of Emergency Medical Services . This bill establishes an ambulance 
service assessment fee on ambulance service providers to maximize federal funding for reimbursement to 
ambulance service providers under the MaineCare program. It also increases the reimbursement rates 
under the MaineCare program for ambulance services, neonatal transport, no -transport calls , and 
community pa ramedicine.  
 
Although the Department is opposed to LD 1751, it is important to note that the recognizes the 
challenges facing some  EMS providers. To that end, the Administration is worki ng with the Speaker of 
the House, members of the Criminal Justice  Committee, and EMS representatives to pass LD 526, An 
Act to Provide Funding to Emergency Medical Services Organization , which is designed to provide both 
short -term emergency relief and incentives for long -term efficiency.  
 
Below is the Department ’s input on the sections of the bill:  
 
Section 1  – The Department is opposed to establishing a service assessment fee for ambulance services 
and creation of this fund. We do not believe CMS approval would be likely. While it is referenced as a 
“fee,” it would act more like a tax.  
 
This fund would be difficult and costly to administer. As interpreted, the Department assumes all data 
collection, calculations, and fee assessment would be conducted by the Division of Audit. This additional 
work would strain existing systems. The Departm ent currently does not have capacity to develop and 
implement such structure. Additional staffing, internal support, and systems would be required . 
 
Section 2  – The rate reform system established last year in PL21, Ch. 639 created a process for analyzing 
and prioritizing rates paid to providers. The goal of PL21, Ch. 639 was in part to move toward more 
consistent, equitable , and data driven rates that create incentives for efficiency and high -quality care for 
members. This b ill perpetuates a system of rate setting that conflicts with PL21, Ch. 639 by establishing 
percent increases that have not been developed through the systematic, methodological approach 
 
 mandated in PL21, C h. 639 which the Department is already undertaking.  Specifically, further concerns 
are:  
 
1. This bill proposes Ambulance Services under MaineCare be reimbursed at a level that is not less 
than 200% of the allowable Medicare reimbursement rate; no other Medicare -benchmarked 
services are reimbursed at such a h igh percentage. This massive rate increase would create 
significant inequity with other providers whose rates are also set at a certain percentage of 
Medicare.  
 
2. Neonatal transport is already a MaineCare covered service.  
 
3. No-transport calls – the Department  already reimburses for no -transport calls under Chapter II, 
Section 5, Ambulance Services: “Emergency medical services may be provided at the scene of 
an illness, injury or accident when transporting the member is not medically necessary.”  
 
4. MaineCare is c urrently leading a project to build a community paramedicine benefit model. In 
this effort, we are working closely with the Department of Public Safety, Maine Emergency 
Medical  Services (EMS), their Community Paramedicine Committee, and their vendor, the 
Cutler Institute. Recent work, including  the completion of  the Cutler  Institute ’s work this 
summer marks the beginning of MaineCare’s work to build a reimbursable model, gain 
stakeholder feedback, develop rate methodology and rates in compliance with P.L. 2 021 ch. 639 
and then to seek CMS approval. The timeline proposed in this bill is not feasible to allow the 
necessary time for these steps.  
 
Section 3  - The Department does not believe CMS would approve the service assessment fee.  
 
We would be happy to answer questions and provide additional information should it be helpful to the 
Committee.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

