 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Support For 
LD 1751 - An Act to Maximize Federal Funding in Support of Emergency Medical Services 
May 1, 2023 
 
 Sen. Baldacci, Rep. Meyer and distinguished members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, my name is Rebecca Graham, and I am providing testimony in support of LD 1204 on behalf 
of Maine Municipal Association which represents the interests of municipal government before the state 
and federal government. The positions of the Association are formed at the direction of our 70-member 
Legislative Policy Committee, (LPC) who are elected by the selectboards and council of the 
municipalities in each of the 35 Senate districts in Maine. 
 
 Municipal officials greatly appreciate the provisions in section 2 of the bill that expand coverage 
for community paramedicine and non-transport calls. First responders and Ambulance services have spent 
a considerable amount of time administering treatment such as naloxone to individuals who later refuse 
transport services. Falls, lift assistance, the administration of medicine that also do not result in a transport 
to a hospital have significant benefits to the individuals requesting the services, but no ability to be 
reimbursed through any insurance process. This leaves the costs to be shouldered by the property 
taxpayers who additionally shoulder the burden of the costs to keep the ambulance and staff on standby 
for universal availability at any hour.  
  
 These community administered services also divert costs from the hospital system when no 
transport is involved, but without receipt from the same insurance systems that would by triggered when 
the recipient is simply dropped off at the emergency room. The act of transportation alone should not be a 
qualifying act that allows for reimbursement of the costs for care. While such on scene care saves 
hospitals from the bureaucracy of billing, it simultaneously removes the ability for the service to recoup 
their costs establishing an unequal and adversarial care system at property taxpayer expense.  
 
Naloxone administration by police, volunteer fire departments and EMS services are providing 
lifesaving care of value to entire state, while the cost of that is shouldered by the few property taxpayers 
rather than state-wide revenue sources. 
 
 Insurance bureaucracy is challenging for many services, particularly in rural areas, or for non-
transporting services who may have the same licensed level of care responding, but do not transport thus 
are not eligible for reimbursement. Jumping through complicated administrative hoops for service 
provided by volunteers with no administrative staff should be avoided. For this reason, officials have 
some concern with regard to the added bureaucracy and fees outlined in Sec. 1 of the bill.  
 

 Officials ask that the committee make sure the rulemaking process delegated to the department, 
should this initiative pass, include additional language to guarantee that reporting and reimbursement 
requests be established to be easily achieved by a parttime service with no administrative staff and require 
very little additional reporting beyond current requirements.  
 
 Overall, municipal officials support the intent of the bill and ask that the committee consider 
additional language to remove all possible barriers to accessing reimbursement for the fees charged with 
the rural service and property taxpayer in mind.  
 
 
 
 
