                       Local Government Center 60 Community Drive Augusta, Maine 04330-9486 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Distinguished Members of the Health & Human 
Services, 
I am Chief Bill Gillespie from Liberty and I write to you today as a Fire & EMS Chief and the 
Legislative Liaison for the Maine Fire Chiefs Association, representing more than 400 Fire Chiefs 
throughout the state. I am writing in support of LD 1751 An Act to Maximize Federal Funding 
in Support of Emergency Medical Service. Thank you, Senator Curry of Sponsoring this 
Legislation. 
This is one of the many pieces of Legislation to come out of the Blue-Ribbon Commission. The 
efforts of this group have outlined a list of recommendations to help services that are struggling 
and develop more long-term plans for the future of EMS services in the State. 
As the Chief of a small Fire based transport service, I speak first-hand about the struggle we 
face. My department provides EMS services, including transport, to 3 towns in Western Waldo 
County with a call volume of 380 calls in 2022. With our current Billing amount for those calls 
we produce enough revenue to cover the basic supply cost and a small amount set aside for a 
truck replacement account. Due to the lack of volunteers in 2017 we were forced to request an 
increase from the town we provide services to. This was a 100% increase request to cover 
payroll for personnel to man the station during the day. This call volume is not adequate to 
provide the necessary income to cover all costs associated with running this service. 
With 65% of the transporting EMS services within the State of Maine, the members of the 
Maine Fire Chiefs have supported all efforts to increase Maine Care and Medicare 
reimbursement. Most small services struggle to make ends meet based on the current 
reimbursement rates. We also agree that adding the option of billing on non-transporting calls 
is a great idea as it will allow us to recoup some funds for expenses. This will no doubt assist 
with our bottom line.  
We strongly encourage your support in this legislation. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Chief Bill Gillespie 
Liberty Fire & Rescue, Legislative Liaison MFCA 
  

 
