A 
A/?C1l' f'iE?TS 
W Public 
Llniversifies 
UNIVERSITY OF MAINE SYSTEM 
Testimony from the University of Maine System presented by 
UMS Director of Government Relations Samantha Warren 
LD 65, An Act to Require That Printing Services Provided to the General Public 
by the University of Maine System Be Provided at Market Rates - Feb. 14, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business: My name is 
Samantha Warren and i am the Director of Government Relations for the University of Maine 
System (UMS). 
Currently within our public system, only the University of Maine has an in~house printing shop, and 
its sen/ices are limited to official university-affiliated individuals and organizations, and 
governmental and nonprofit entities. in FY22, UMaine printing services completed a total of 
$163,472 in jobs for non-university organizations. This includes the UMaine Alumni Association, 
the UMaine Foundation and the UMaine Pulp & Paper Foundation, which are closely affiliated with 
our R1 flagship university but are separate legal entities. 
Maine Public was the largest client of UMaine printing sen/ices, comprising more than half of the 
total value of jobs in FY22. As avid listeners and viewers of Maine Public will know, UMS and 
Maine Public are closely connected, and in its earliest years, administrative and legal 
responsibilities of the then-Maine Educational Television were actually assigned to the UMS 
Board of Trustees. To this day, our System retains a permanent seat on Maine Public’s volunteer ‘ 
board — the only organization to do so. 
Other clients of UMaine's printing services in FY22 include towns like Glenburn and Palmyra, 
cities including Rockland and Waten/ille, and the Knights of Columbus and the Milford Fire 
Department — all for small specialized printing jobs. 
UMS grows Maine’s private sector through our workforce development and research and 
innovation activities, as well as our own local spending. Most of our public universities— 
including UMaine — procure printing and related sen/ices from small Maine businesses and we 
have a list of commercial vendors who have been prequalified for this purpose. Of the $86.7 
million UMS spent in FY22 for goods and services provided by Maine businesses, nearly 
$500,000 was for printing and related services from print shops in communities like 
Hermon, East Machias, Farmington, Fort Kent and Skowhegan. 
Given this, UMS believes LD 65 is unnecessary. However, if the Legisiature wishes to codify our 
current practice, we would request clarification regarding the determination of “loca| market rates” 
and ask for a more detailed definition of “general public,” especially as it pertains to which 
organizations are considered affiliates. _ _ 
Thank you for ongoing support of the University of Maine System. I look forward to answering 
your questions. 
University of Maine - 
University of Maine at Augusta - 
University of Maine at Farmington - 
University of Maine at Fort Kent 
University of Maine at Machias - 
University of Maine at Presquelsle - 
University of Southern Maine - 
University of Maine School of Law
