. . STATE OF MAINE . 
$ DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE & FINANCIAL SERVICFS 
BURTON M. CRoss BUILDING, 3RD FLOOR 
78 STATE HOUsE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0078 
,1 
5,,‘ _t-I 
S SERvINO THE PUBLIC AND DELIVERING Ess_ENTIAL SERvIcEs To STATE GOVERNMENT , 
JANET T. MILLS KIRSTEN LC FIGUEROA 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
Testimony of Anya Trundy, Chief of Legislative and Strategic Operations 
Department of Administrative and Financial Services 
testifying neither for nor against 
LD 88, An Act to Provide Qualifying Municipalities a Percentage of Adult Use Cannabis 
Sales and Excise Tax Revenues 
Sponsored by Rep. Paulhus 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee, l am Anya 
Trundy, Chief of Legislative and Strategic Operations for the Department of Administrative and 
Financial Services, and I am providing testimony neither for nor against LD 88. 
This bill like other near identical bills this committee has considered in each of the last two 
legislatures, proposes to divert 12% of adult use cannabis sales and excise tax revenues from 
the General Fund to municipalities that host adult use cannabis businesses, in proportion to 
the sales and excise tax revenues generated by the adult use businesses located in each 
respective municipality. Unlike previous proposals, this bill does not afford the State Tax 
Assessor a portion of the funds to pay for administrative costs related to implementation of the 
fund; nor does the bill specify the date of the first transfer of revenue to the newly created 
Local Government Cannabis Revenue Fund. 
Before commenting on the text of the bill before you, l want to highlight some of the statutory 
changes that were implemented in the past year that may impact the committee ’s 
understanding of whether or not this unique kind of municipal revenue sharing is 
necessary. First, beginning with FY ’23, municipal revenue sharing was restored to 5% across 
the board-sales tax on adult use-cannabis is included in the base upon which revenue 
sharing is calculated, so through standard revenue sharing communities are receiving 5% of 
the 10% sales tax collected on the sale of adult use cannabis, as well as the standard sale tax 
rates of 5.5% and 8% applied to medical cannabis. Second, in the 130“ Legislature, DAFS 
worked with this committee and the sponsor of LD 1195 to craft an amendment that provides 
reimbursement to municipalities that opt in to host adult use cannabis businesses in their 
communities and became P.L. 2021, ch. 645. Cities and towns that have opted in to permit the 
operation of adult use cannabis businesses can apply for and receive reimbursement for up to 
$20,000 worth of qualifying expenses incurred by the municipality through the opt-in 
process. While these reimbursement funds are available only for costs associated with “opting 
PHONE: (207) 624-7800 www.Maine.gOv FAX: (207) 624-7804
in” , it is important to remember that eveiy municipality that hosts adult use cannabis 
businesses may establish licensing fees that are reasonably related to costs incurred by the 
municipality to administer and enforce the local license or permits issued by the municipality 
Turning back to the bill before you, we offer the following feedback for the committee's 
consideration: 1) There will be some initial costs associated with Maine Revenue Services ’ 
build out of the statistical report required to determine the percentage of revenues to be 
distributed back to each eligible municipality; 2) Depending on the number of revenue- 
generating adult use cannabis businesses in a particular municipality it could be possible to 
estimate gross revenues for a particular licensee based upon revenues returned to that 
municipality in areas where only one licensee is located; and 3) we recommend that any 
revenues distributed to host communities follow the distribution of 12% of those revenues to 
the Adult Use Cannabis Public Health and Safety and Municipal Opt-in Fund--implementing 
the cascade in this order will reduce the overall fiscal impact of this bill. 
Thank you for this opportunity to testify. l am happy to answer any questions. 
PHONE: (207) 624-7800 wwwiMainc.gov FAX: (207) 624-7804
