 
 
 
 
25 Cottage Road • P.O. Box 9422  
South Portland, Maine 04116 -9422  
Telephone (207) 767 - 7601 •  Fax (207) 767 -7620  
Monday through Friday 8:00 A.M.  -  4:30 P.M .• Thursday 8:00 A.M.  -  6:30 P.M.  
www.southportland.org  Emily F. Scully  
City Clerk  
 
Alice Kelley  
Deputy City Clerk  
 
Karen Morrill  
Licensing Administrator  
 
 
 
March 7, 2023  
 
RE: Support for LD 88 - An Act to Provide Qualifying Municipalities a Percentage 
of Adult Use Cannabis Sales and Excise Tax Revenues  
 
 
To Members of the Taxation Committee,  
 
The municipal officers of the City of South Portland have expressed unanimous support 
(through passage of South Portland Council ORDER #93 -22/23 ) for state tax revenue 
sharing generate d by the sale of cannabis with m unicipalities such as South Portland  that 
allow cannabis establishments to operate within their borders.    
 
South Portland was one of the first  municipalities in Maine  to allow all types of adult use 
cannabis establishments  within its borders.  Through adop ting local ordinance s in 2017, 
which established local land use  and licensing regulations  for this new and rapidly 
growing industry , the City  began licensing among the first adult use establishments in the 
State once the Office of Cannabis Policy  finalized and  adopted rulemaking.  To date, the 
City of South Portland licenses over 25 ad ult use cannabis establishments , among the  
highest number of licensed adult use cann abis establishments per municipality in the 
State . 
  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
 
 
Emily Scully  
City Clerk  
 

 
 
 
. 
                    
   
   
 
      EXECUTIVE  
       DEPARTMENT  
Telephone (207) 767- 7606 • Fax (207) 767- 7629  Scott T. Morelli  
City Manager  
 
Joshua Reny  
Assistant City Man ager 
 CITY OF SOUTH PORTLAND  
 
25 Cottage Road 
South Portland, ME  04116 
 
www.southportland.org  
 
 
MEMORANDUM  
 
TO:  South Portland ’s State Legislative Delegation  
FROM:   Mayor Lewis and the South Portland City Council  
RE:  Legislative Priorities  
DATE:   December 6, 2022 
 The South Portland City Council hereby requests that our legislative d elegation introduce, co -sponsor, or 
supp ort or oppose , depending on the issue. Mayor Lewis and City Manager Morelli are happy to meet with 
you to discuss any and a ll of these matters.  
 
Social Issues  
The pandemic exposed many weaknesses in our approach to homelessness, for both domestic and asylum -
seekers, as well as the dearth of available housing. It is imperative that permanent changes be made now that the shortcomings of these systems have been exposed. This should include:  
 
• General Assistance (GA) Reform . The GA system was not intended to function as it is now, with 
municipalities with numerous hotels being responsible for hundreds of clients, in addition to an unprecedented number of asylum -seekers looking for assistance. As the Council and other 
communit ies proclaimed earlier this summer, the State should regionalize the administration of 
public benefits (GA), establish a State resettlement office to assist individuals and families experiencing homelessness to locate emergency shelter and long -term housin g, establish a 
statewide emergency shelter system serving individuals across the state, and address issues impacting people experiencing homelessness, such as access to mental health services, education, workforce training, and permanent housing.  While the se changes are preferred, if  the status quo is 
to remain, the GA laws should be changed to remove the perverse incentive for municipalities to relocate their homeless residents to other communities. For example, i f Buxton places one of their 
homeless families in a South Portland apartment, Buxton only pays one month of GA expenses. After that, South Portland is on the hook for all the expenses (and staff time) until that family no longer qualifies. If Buxton were to place that family into a hotel, South Por tland would assume 
responsibility after six months. Unless the State or County takes over GA so costs can be shared 
equally by all communities to address homelessness (preferred), then the existing law needs to be 
updated. The above scenarios should be inc reased from one to six months and six months to twelve 
months, respectively.  
• Ban Flavored Tobacco.  South Portland will consider joining several other Maine communities in 
banni ng the sale of flavored tobacco. However, a patchwork solution is not ideal, since municipal 
borders are seamless to those seeking these products. Therefore, a state- wide ban on this product  
is desirable.  
 • Health Servi ces. Advocate for more substance use p lans (like York County)  and increase the 
availability of caregivers s uch as nurses aides to help address various community health needs . 
 
Financial  
As we emerge from COVID -19 and federal dollars related to the pandemic begin to dry up, it will be as 
important as ever for the State to maintain financial assistance t o local governments. To assist our 
community and many more across the state, our legislators should focus on the following financial- related 
items this session:  
 
• Keep Revenue Sharing at 5%. The City greatly appreciates the support from legislators and the 
Governor during the last biennium to increase State Revenue Sharing from 3.5% of sales and 
income tax to 5%. Years of cuts to revenue sharing by the prior Governor and legislatures resulted 
in higher property taxes and, in some cases, reduced services to r esidents. The legislature must 
retain revenue sharing at its historical 5% as it had been for nearly 40 years up until 2010.  
• Revenue Sharing for Cannabis Sales.  The state should share sales tax revenues generated by the 
sale of cannabis with those municipalities that allow cannabis retail stores to operate within their borders.  
• Amend the recently enacted Senior Tax Stabilization Law.  Various municipal groups including the 
Maine Association of Assessing Officer, Maine Government Finance Officers, and Maine Tax Collectors and Treasurers Association, are working with the Maine Municipal Association to address loopholes and implementation  issues with the law, which lack a lot of detail.  There are concerns 
about a lack of means testing (i.e., every senior qualifies, regardless of need), ability for seniors 
with multiple homes to “game” the system, addressing faulty deadlines in the law, an d ultimately 
the concern that the legislature will stop providing a refund to municipalities for the taxes forgone, necessitating either cuts in serving or raising taxes on all other residents and families to make up the difference.  
 
Sustainability  
The Cit y of South Portland has been a leader in the State on many climate action initiatives, and currently 
spends more than any other Maine community on sustainability. However, while one community can make a small difference, it will take the entire state and i ndeed the country (and world) to truly yield the 
necessary change to avert a climate disaster. The State can assist municipalities in moving forward by:  
 
• Addressing or removing regulatory impediments to electrification.  This includes supporting 
battery sto rage, enabling microgrids, and urging grid modernization. 
LD 1959 "An Act To Ensure 
Transmission and Distribution Utility Accountability,"  which passed in 2022, went a long way to 
require integrated grid planning tied to Maine’s climate goals but a lot remains to be done.  
• Carbon pricing on a national level  (see Citizens Climate Lobby ). In 2019 the City Council passed  
Resolve #4 -19/20 committing “the South Portland City Council and Mayor call on the United States 
Congress to address climate change at the feder al level by adopting as one important measure 
among others a Carbon Fee and Dividend as a sound, effective policy tool”.  
• Funding for Electric Vehicle Fleets/Charging Infrastructure and Lower Electric Rates for Vehicle 
Charging . Both the State and City hav e adopted aggressive goals to reduce carbon emissions. One 
of the major ways to do so is by reducing and eliminating gasoline - and diesel -powered vehicles and 
replacing them with electric. However, such vehicles are more expensive up front and while they 
show long- term fuel savings, the initial hurdle is too great for most municipalities to bear (without 
shifting more burden on to riders and/or property taxpayers). For example, to replace a bus in the 
Bus Service fleet, it would cost about $525,000 for a di esel bus and $875,000 for electric. This does 
not include costs for the necessary and expensive infrastructure to charge the fleets, nor does it 
 include higher electricity rates for charging during peak daytime hours. State subsidies are very 
much needed i n this area.  
 
Local Control  
South Portlanders have proven that they can make good decisions, and such decisions have helped to make 
our community one of the leaders in Maine on issues such as sustainability. But our ability to enact certain 
change or decid e what is best for our community can be hampered by State laws that deny voters and 
elected officials the opportunity to have a say. Therefore, our local delegation should support these two local control items:  
 
• Local Option Sales Tax . Allow municipalities  to decide for themselves as to whether they should 
enact a local option sales tax to provide an additional revenue stream to help lessen the burden on the property tax. Whether South Portland ends up enacting such a tax should be a moot point –  the 
real argument is that municipalities and their residents should be afforded the opportunity to consider it.  
• No Binding Arbitration on Wages/Benefits for Union Contracts . In 2019 , the legislature passed a 
number of labor- friendly laws, including LD 1177
, which imposed binding arbitration for disputes 
between municipalities and their unions  on wages, health insurance, and retirement ben efits . 
Although the City supports efforts to improve the plight of workers to earn better wages  and 
already offers exceptional health insurance and retirement benefits at low cost to many and no cost to some , we believe forcing binding arbitration for thes e issues onto Maine towns and cities 
was a legislative overreach. As you know, for a “service” business like a municipality, wages, health insurance , and retirement are substantial portions of the municipal budget. The impact of this law 
change would mean the Council could be forced to enact substantial tax increases to support decisions of arbitrators who may have no idea of the actual financial impact of their decisions on the community or who may have no concern about the financial impact as they have no  local 
interest.  Fortunately, 
Gov. Mills vetoed this law  (which the legislature sustained ), noting that it 
would take away local control from municipal elected officials who better know their communities than a hired gun arbitrator (or panel) from away. Our legislators should not re -introduce or support 
legislation to this effect if it is re -introduced.  
 
Housing/Land Use  
The legislature ma de progress on this important topic last session with the passage of LD 2003 . Continued 
efforts will be critical to ensuring the development of all types of housing. Some of the ways this can be supported in the upcoming session include : 
 
• Subdivision statute updates  to align with streamlined review for housing projects. Notably, the  
elimination of subdivision procedure for projects involving up to four  units.  
• Allow municipalities to adopt variable bulk and space standards in zoning districts.  This will allow 
us to tailor land use regulations to the types of projects we are seeing, and relax provisions for certain developments over others, notably housing with affordability. This would also reinforce 
form -based code provisions, which we don’t have, but that c ould be explored as a matter of land 
use and development policy  that supports  desirable forms of development as our community 
grows.  
• Allow municipalities to define bulk and space standards through diagrams/visual 
representations.  
• Additional funding for affordable housing projects . While South Portland has several Affordable 
Housin g Tax Increment Finance (TIF) districts  that provide aggressive tax rebates (aka “Credit 
Enhancement Agreements”) to developers as well as our own Affordable Housing Fund, the state 
 could assist municipalities  and developers  in providing additional funding to ensure projects 
happen.  
• LD 2003 . Ensure that any amendments or rule -making decisions to this law continue to ensure that 
all communities are part of the housing crisis solution, while also ensuring that elements of local 
zoning ordinances ar e respected.  
 
Education 
The importance of funding for education is a given. Continuing to provide a 55% share of state aid to 
education is critical to the success of our schools and to help lessen the property  tax burden on taxpayers, 
as a majority of property tax bills fund school expenses.  
 
   
 
 
 
 
District One  
 JOCELYN E. LEIGHTON  
 
  
 
District Two  
 KATHERINE W. LEWIS  
 
  
 
District Three  
 MISHA C. PRIDE 
 
  
 
District Four  
  LINDA C. COHEN  
 
  
 
District Five  
 DEQA DHALAC  
 
  
 
At Large  
 RICHARD  T. MATTHEWS  
 
  
 
At Large  
 NATALIE E. WEST 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             CITY OF SOUTH PORTLAND  
 
                       KATHERINE W. LEWIS  
                   Mayor  
 
                   SCOTT T. MORELLI  
                    City Manager  
EMILY  F.  SCULLY  SALLY J.  DAGGETT  
       City Clerk      Jensen Baird Gardner & Henry  
P.O. Box 9422  South Portland, ME 04116 -9422  
Telephone (207) 767 -3201  Fax (207) 767 -7620   
 
 
IN COUNCIL   
ORDER  #93-22/23 
 
 
ORDERED, that the City Council hereby authorizes the City 
Manager to submit, on behalf of the City, a letter to the City’s State 
Legislative Delegation outlining the City Council’s legislative goals.  
 
 
Fiscal Note:  Less than $1,000  
 
Date:  December 6 , 2022  
 
 
