 
  
TOWN OF THOMASTON  
TOWN MANAGER  
13 VALLEY STREET  
THOMASTON, MAINE 04861  
TEL: (207) 354- 6107  
 
March 7, 2023  
 
Maine State Legislature  
Taxation Committee  
 
LD 88-  An Act to Provide Qualifying Municipal ities a Percentage of Adult Use Cannabis Sales and 
Excise Tax Revenues  
 
Dear Taxation Committee:  
 I write on behalf of the Town of Thomaston in supporting LD 88. This proposed bill provides additional 
revenue to municipalities that are allowing and managing cannabis businesses in their communities. T he 
development of cannabis businesses has equated to additional costs to our municipality  in a few different 
ways : 
 
1) Legal fees and time in curred in  amending all ordinances that would allow cannabis businesses.  
2) Increased Code Enforcement Officer duties to inspect said businesses.  
3) Continued education each year  for our Planning Board and Code Officer to understand the 
evolving law changes each year that regulates cannabis businesses.  (This is a serious issue for 
smaller communit ies that may not have a full -time Code Enforcement Officer or an active 
Planning Board.)  
4) Increased Law Enforcement cost s caused by b usiness break -ins and increased traffic impacts in  
our community.  
5) Continued local public hearings and approval for cannabis businesses to renew their applications 
annually.  
 In the “ Adult Use Program”  2021 Annual Report provided to the Maine State Legislature, there w ere 
$12,362,620 in excise an d sales tax  revenue to the S tate of Maine. If LD 88 passes, then municipalities 
would receive 12% of this , at a n estimated $1.5 million  in revenues. However, the State of Maine would 
not have obtained such revenues with out the support of local municipalities that allow  cannabis  
businesses in their communities.   
 This would be a tremendous benefit to our town, as we are a full -service center  in our community with the 
second high est tax mill r ate in Knox County.  
 Thank you for your consideration in supporting LD 88  on the behalf of all qualifying municipalities.  
 
 
Best,  
 
 
Kara George  
Town Manager  

