A_ 
H" Moine Municipal 
Associotion 
60 COMMUNITY DRl\/E 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 0433049486 
(207) 623-8428 
www.memun.org 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association 
In Support of 
LD 88, An Act to Provide Qualifying Municipalities a Percentage of Adult Use Cannabis Sales and 
Excise Tax Revenues 
March 9, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry and members of the Taxation Committee, my name is 
Rebecca Lambert and I am providing testimony in support of LD 88 on behalf of Maine Municipal 
Association's (MMA) Legislative Policy Committee (LPC). For reference, the LPC provides 
direction to the advocacy team at MMA and establishes the position on bills of municipal interest. 
Across the country where adult use cannabis has been approved, local governments who have 
opted into the program have seen benefits in various ways from a portion of the tax revenue. For 
example, Nevada dedicates 15% of tax revenue to local governments, Massachusetts and 
California provide for a local option sales tax to be imposed, and in Michigan, 15% of the excise 
tax is earmarked for county government, with an additional 15% for municipalities —equating to 
a nearly $10 million dollar investment in municipal and county governments. 
Generally, Maine's local leaders are reluctant to take on new responsibilities at a cost to the 
property taxpayers. Since the adoption of the Cannabis Legalization Act, these leaders have spent 
hundreds of hours educating themselves and spent thousands of dollars perfecting and adopting 
related ordinances. Without the support and investment from municipal officials, the revenues 
to the state would be significantly less. For this reason, the LPC believes it is appropriate to share 
a portion of the related excise and sales tax revenues with the communities where the revenue 
was generated. 
It's safe to say, local leaders have stepped up to the plate to support the Office of Cannabis 
Policy's regulatory and educational efforts and have even helped to expand the industry where 
these businesses are welcome. Sharing a portion of the sales and excise tax revenues with the 
communities in which the revenue was generated, would help lessen the tight budgets that 
municipalities face annually and help foster the state/municipal/industry partnership that was 
envisioned in 2016. 
The bill before you would use a 12% share approach. Historically, LD 335, which was presented 
during the 129"‘ Maine State Legislature, also utilizing a 12% sharing method, received support 
from a majority of the Taxation Committee, was adopted by both chambers, but died on the 
Appropriations table when the legislature did not reconvene in 2020, due to the pandemic. 
The LPC kindly urges the committee to vote ought to pass on LD 88. Thank you for your time and 
for considering the municipal perspective on this issue.
