 
21434085_2   
 
 
 
 
 
LD 88, An Act to  Provide Qualifying Municipalities a Percentage of Adult Use Cannabis Sales and 
Excise Tax Revenues  
 
March 9, 2023 
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Joi nt Standing Commit tee on Taxation, my name is 
Stephen Gorden and  in addition to serving as a member of  the board of commissioners for Cumberland County, 
I am writing today in my role as chair of the legislative policy committee of the Mai ne County Commissioners 
Association . We appreci ate the opportunity to provide testimony to the Committee  in qualified support of LD 
88, with one recommended amendment  discussed below. 
 
About MCCA.  Briefly, the Maine County Commissioners Association was established in 1890 to assist 
Maine’s count y government in providing vital services to Maine cit izens in a responsive, efficient, and credible 
manner. The Association is based in Augusta , represents all of Maine’s 16 counties , and is governed by a b oard 
with representation from each par ticipating c ounty.  
 
Discussion.  LD 88 would establish the Local Government Cannabis Revenue Fund, which would require  the 
transfer to the Fund of revenue from the sales tax on adult use cannabis products and the cannabis excise tax . 
The Fund would be distributed to municipal ities in proportion to the ratio of revenues gathered on adult use 
cannabis within the municipality as compared to the revenues  generated  statewide . Our Association writes in 
qualified support of LD 88.  
 
The premise of LD 88 is to provide resources to local government to enforce adult use cannabis laws and 
otherwise maintain public safety.  However, as currently drafted, LD 88 would only provide financial support to 
one unit of local government:  municipalities.  We should be mindful that Maine’s counties also are units of 
local government who play an active role in cannabis  enforcement, including through the county sheriff 
departments. Much of the costs for these services ultimately fall on the local property tax. 
 
For this reason, if the Legislature decides to move forward with this bill, we would strongly encourage that it be 
amended to include county government as well. 
 
Conclusion.  We appreciate the opportunity to pr ovide testimony on this bill, and if you have questions or need 
additional inf ormat ion, please do not hesitate to let us know.  
 
Respectfully submitted,  
 
Stephen Gorden  
Chair, Legislative Policy Committee 
 
cc: Commissioner Richard Dutremble, MCCA Board President  
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP, MCCA Legisl ative Counsel  
Maine County Commissioners Association 
 
4 Gabriel Drive, Suite 2  Augusta, ME 04330 , 207-623-4697  
www.mainecountie s.org  
 
