 Thank you, Representative Madigan, Representative Baldacci, and the members of the 
Health and Human Services Committee. My name is Joshua Leonard, a person in long term 
recovery, Director and Operator of Portland Sober Living, and a member of the Board of 
Directors of the Maine Association of Recovery Residences. I truly appreciate the opportunity to 
speak today and I am here to testify in favor of this bill. 
 
 On May 16th, 2022 I was a live in house manager of the recovery residence I now operate. 
At around 12:45am 2 residents and the other house manager woke me up, screaming that a 
resident was overdosing. I sprinted out of bed, ran downstairs to find them trying to break the 
door in to the bathroom. This person overdosed and fell in between the door and the sink vanity 
making it impossible to open. I was able to squeeze my way through the door, get to the resident, 
turn him over and immediately administer Narcan. At this time, he was blue, and foaming from 
the mouth, gargling what seemed to be his final breaths. About 2-1/2 minutes later with no 
response, I administered another dose of Narcan, and continued sternum rubs. As paramedics 
arrived a few minutes later, the person came alive. All of this was happening in front of a house 
of 9 people who were woken out of their sleep to an incredibly graphic event, the likes of which 
they have never seen before. I found out the next day he was attempting suicide by overdose. 
 
 My reason for telling this story is to help people understand the urgent nature of a person 
who is experiencing a recurrence of drug use. I hold an obligation to know when a person is in 
danger and in need of a higher level of care. It is critical that I am able to take swift action to help 
prevent an event like this. That experience not only put one person’s life in jeopardy, but the 9 
other people in the house as well. 9 people most of which are in a vulnerable state of recovery, 
susceptible of the powerful lure of the presence of drugs. Others questioned wanting to stay, not 
wanting to have to experience that ever again, risking moving on too soon. 
 
 Current laws make it illegal for me to move a person forward to a higher level of care if 
they don’t agree to it, keeping that person from getting much needed medical, mental health and 
substance use care. It furthermore keeps a vulnerable population of people in an environment that 
is potentially harmful. Make no mistake. The person experiencing a recurrence is not a bad person 
we are trying to get rid of. This is a person that is in need of help while being caught in the 
dangerous grips of drug use. We need protections to be sure a person won’t make a potentially 
life ending decision by refusing to transition. 
 
 Operators, managers and people in recovery need the protections to be able to maintain a 
safe environment for people to prosper. We urge you to vote IN FAVOR of this bill. I am happy 
to answer any questions you may have. 
 
 Thank you.        
 
Joshua R. Leonard 
Portland Sober Living 
Maine Association of Recovery Residences  
