Steven Danzig testimony in favor of 
LD 597: An Act to Improve Conditions for People Living in Recovery Residences by 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, my name is Steve Danzig, I’m the Director of ENSO Recovery and The Bridge 
Sober Living. I am also a person with over 25 years in active recovery. We operate 2 outpatient 
substance use disorder treatment programs, 4 gender recovery residences totalling 50 beds, 
and 5 day per week medication assisted intensive substance use treatment programs with in 
Maine county jails. 
  
I am testifying in favor of LD 597. I will briefly describe an experience we had at The Bridge 
Sober Living between December 4, 2022 thru March 30, 2023 that directly identifies the need 
for specific changes in Maine’s tenancy law regarding recovery residences. I have submitted the 
full, detailed, chronological report which I would strongly encourage everyone to review as the 
time allotted today cannot adequately capture the intensity of the situation. 
  
John and Jane. Both had been through extensive substance use disorder treatment, and both 
had over 18 months of sustained, active recovery from substance use disorder when these 
events took place. Jane and John have been in a relationship together for nearly 15 years. The 
male recovery residence where they lived had an adjoining apartment with a separate entrance, 
Staff agreed they could live in the apartment together and serve as house managers at no 
charge. 
 
Both John and Jane had a recurrence of use in early December 2022, John’s was nearly fatal 
resulting in hospitalization. Shortly after, both agreed to relinquish the apartment and return to 
sober living in our gender specific residences. Within a few days, both left SL stating they would 
not be returning. Five days later they returned with several police officers stating they had 
tenants rights at the apartment and had filed criminal trespassing charges against staff for 
packing their belongings. They gained entry to the apartment. For the next 3 months there were 
multiple calls to police from staff for: trespassing, loitering, drug dealing, unauthorized parking, a 
suspected overdose, multiple No Trespass orders issued, calls to probation officers, a federal 
marshall intervention. Random individuals coming and going from the apartment 24/7 with many 
of them living in the apartment. All of the mentioned suspected and in many cases confirmed 
drug related activity was caught on camera and reported. During this period we lost individuals 
from sober living due to drug related activity and on at least 3 occasions, individuals that did not 
come to treatment with us due to what was happening. 
  
Had a mechanism like LD 597 been enacted, we could have created a compassionate and safe 
solution for everyone involved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Below account is from 2 MARR Certified, level 3, Maine recovery residences, one male and one 
female. John refers to a male resident, Jane refers to a female resident. Both had been through 
extensive treatment, both with over 18 months of sustained, active recovery from SUD 
(Substance Use Disorder). They have been in a relationship together for nearly 15 years. The 
recovery residence had an adjoining apartment to the recovery residence where the staff had 
agreed they could reside (the apartment and the men's recovery residence are the same 
dwelling but have separate entrances). Both were house managers and in an effort to elevate 
their sense of autonomy and independence they were provided the apartment at no charge 
under the agreement that they perform house manager duties. 
 
John-male 
Jane-female 
Staff-multiple staff on different occasions  
SL- Sober Living/Recovery Residence 
XXXX- resident of sober living  
 
 
12/4/2022:  
Email from staff: 
Good morning. John nor Jane showed up for John's mother's celebration of life. 5 of us went to 
town to support them both. Pastor was good enough to conduct John's mothers eulogy etc. So 
we stayed to support him and John's brother. Upon arriving John's brother was running things 
and stated that John and Jane had had a fight the night before and were officially broken up. I 
assumed the worst that John had used. He was not answering text or phone calls and neither 
was Jane. On the way home the women had been texting Jane and she finally replied stating 
she was sick with a fever and was sleeping and was okay. She stated she had heard that John 
was not at the celebration of life and she was upset about it.   
About 7 pm I got a call stating that John and Jane were at the men's house fighting and then I 
received a phone call from Jane as I was driving to town. She stated that John had followed her 
to the motel where she had taken a room for the weekend and that the police needed to be 
called because he was out of control and threatening her. She was hysterical on the phone 
stating she had never seen him this way. I told her I was on my way and to call the police to 
come to SL if need be and I would be there shortly. Directly after this John called me and stated 
that Jane "does not love him any longer" and that he had been the one to call the police when at 
the motel and that I could check with the motel if I did not believe him. He was very open to 
leaving SL without any push back what so ever, but was crying and trying to pull himself 
together. He stated that they went to the motel together and that Jane lost her mind with him 
and would not give him his phone or meds so he could leave. I asked him if she had used drugs 
with him? But of course he would state no because he would continue to protect Jane.    
When I arrived Jane was not at SL and John was in the apartment. I went straight upstairs. John 
was altered but not violent or intimidating in any way and was only emotional stating that she 
doesn't love him anymore. I tried to take him to his brother's house but he refused and left on 
foot. I will need to go to town today and talk to Jane and will ask her for a quick cup urine test. I 
honestly do not know the complete story of everything but regardless it is a very sad state of 
events all the way around. The death of John's mother and John trying to take on too much 
without assistance from anyone without the emotional or social skills needed have created the 
need for relief and to alter.  
I will not try to deny my disappointment and concern for John and Jane and I would not have 
done anything different than I have with the both of them. They both have the ability to do 
wonderful things in their lives for themselves and for others. At this point we will work with the 
community on the importance of a solid support system and the need to always ask for help in 
every situation and how emotional instability can create the desire and need to get high. 
Thanks. 
I have texted Jane and had no response as of yet and may need to deal with this tomorrow. Her 
car remains at the motel this morning after 11am which tells me she may have a room for more 
than 1 day. 
 
 
12/5/2022: 
Email from staff:  
Jane responded to me late last night. She says she didn’t use, but. 
I believe I still have a few of the immediate response oral swab tests in my office, if those are 
wanted. I wouldn’t trust a urine and I’m sure we want quick results. 
Email from staff: 
I am quite sure there is a good possibility that Jane was altered on something last night when 
she called me at 11. I was exhausted and sleeping. She stated she was taking John to her 
mothers because she could not leave him on the streets. She had moments of anger type 
outbursts and stated that the captain at the men's house was trying to get her out of the house. 
She claimed she never had conversations with XXXX or XXXX on Saturday which she most 
definitely did. I told her I would get with her and perhaps John at some point today. I most likely 
will need to try to get her to admit to what is going on with her use and see if she wants to get 
some help before she spirals out completely if it isn't already too late. Every day that passes for 
the two of them there is less chance of them turning this around. I apologize in advance for my 
emotional condition. This has just been a very disappointing and heartfelt weekend. A lot of 
work from all of us has gone into both Jane and John and once again the damned addiction has 
reared its ugly head. Lets at least hope they are willing to own what is happening and want to 
get help. 
 
12/6/2022:  
Email from staff: 
I spoke to Jane tonight. She has admitted to one use supposedly fentanyl and has been really 
sick with strep throat not to mention having a lot of shame as well as anger about what has 
happened. She has agreed to come into the women’s house and will go in with XXXX tomorrow. 
She will be packing up things from her apartment and will not live with John if he returns. She 
will be allowed to continue her schooling and complete and after stabilizing be placed back in 
the house managers position. John is at Maine General after some type of drug overdose from 
cocaine and some other substance and is sedated and on oxygen and may be released 
tomorrow. If he calls and is willing to come back to SL he will be in a double and will not be the 
house manager. Jane discussed at length what took place prior to his mothers death and there 
were significant secrets he was keeping and this will need to be addressed if he is to be 
successful. I am not convinced he will return but it would seem to be his only option other than 
continued use and whatever could come next for him. There is a possibility that he could return 
to jail unless he has a significant plan in place for XXXX at probation. I left him directions to call 
me tomorrow. 
 
12/7/2022: Jane and John returned to the apartment around 7:30pm, packed the things they 
would need immediately, and moved to the sober houses - Jane at SL, and John at SL 
downstairs. Jane moved in with XXXX, John moved in with XXXX. 
 
12/9/2022: Quick cups completed by Jane and John (which they both signed) 
John positive for Amphetamines, benzos, and cocaine 
Jane positive for benzos, cocaine, and fentanyl 
12/12/2022: Jane positive for amphetamines and fentanyl. John positive for cocaine 
12/14/2022: Jane positive for amphetamines and fentanyl. John did not complete a test, even 
though he received a test informing him that he needed to go to SL to complete one. 
 
12/14/2022: We received notice from an outpatient client (XX) that John had gone to his house 
around 1:30am stating that he was high and asking for money so he could get more 
substances. Two clients, who live at the sober house, also reported that John had offered to sell 
his Subutex to them. At this point we informed Jane of the issue, as she was planning on 
picking John up and going to her mother’s house. We did not want John to leave without 
speaking to him first and informing him that he would need to leave the residence. She reported 
that she thought something had been off with John, but was unaware of his continued use. Jane 
stated she would not follow John. Jane met up with John, and left the residence. Jane then 
claimed that “there was a lot going on in the house” and that John was a victim in some 
circumstances. John was calling Jane repeatedly while staff and staff were speaking with her. At 
approximately 12:30/1:00pm staff and staff went down to SL to remove John’s belongings from 
the sober house (bedroom shared with XX). John was not present at the sober house. We 
asked XX to identify John’s belongings to ensure everything was packed. Staff found an open 
padlock with white pill residue where the lock closes on John’s bureau.  
Staff and staff went to the apartment on XXXX and saw everything in there. Staff took pictures 
of the contents of the apartment. At this time, nothing was moved. 
Jane attended group Wednesday night and became argumentative with multiple clients in 
regard to John’s actions and any involvement. Jane made attempts to deflect. 
John did not return to the house. Staff sent him a message stating that he was not allowed to 
enter the sober house as he was a danger to others in the house. Staff informed him that his 
belongings had been packed by staff and he could pick them up. Jane stated that she would 
grab them for him. (John’s tv and fan are still at XXXX at this time 12/20/22). 
 
John never returned to the residence that night. Jane returned to SL in the evening and packed 
all of her belongings, telling several women that she was moving out.  
 
12/14/2022: lock codes were changed at SL ave for the safety of the residents at 9:07pm. While 
this took place, John and Jane were sitting in Jane’s car across the street watching the house, 
and called staff, yelling at her about changing the lock code.   
 
12/16/2022: staff, with the assistance of a handful of clients, packed the belongings in the 
apartment. Jane and John arrived at SL early afternoon, yelling about their belongings being 
packed. staff sent a text message to Jane and John at 3:42pm saying  “Hey guys, as you’re 
aware, the procedure is that you guys need to contact me to schedule a time to pick up your 
belongings. We have packed the apartment already for you. If you’d like to schedule an 
afternoon next week, maybe Tuesday or Thursday, we can plan to have everything outside 
waiting for you (you’ll need a uhaul truck or something). I don’t want this any more difficult or 
stressful than it needs to be, so please let me know what works best. Reminder that is needs to 
be during business hours” Jane replied with “police are calling you right now” 
I received a call from Officer XXXX at 3:50pm. She stated that Jane and John have a right to 
enter the apartment, and can kick the door down if they choose because the lock code was 
changed. She also stated multiple times that she was “warning us” because staff/clients entered 
the apartment without John or Jane’s permission, so it was considered criminal trespassing. I 
informed Officer XXXX that John and Jane were not to enter the building at all, as they are a 
safety risk to everyone else there. I also informed her that their access to the apartment was a 
civil matter, to which she responded that it didn’t matter because we crossed the line into 
“criminal” by entering the apartment and packing their belongings.  
At the end of the call, staff text Jane and John again, stating “nobody will be entering the 
apartment at this point. When do you want to get your belongings”? Jane replied with “I know 
the law..You have already criminally trespassed. I want everything put back. I will pack my own 
stuff. People’s stuff end missing all the time. If anything is missing it’s on you.” 
staff replied with “Well now you’re telling us to go back into the apartment, which we are not 
doing. When do you want to come get your stuff”? 
John replied with “We are not telling you to go into the apartment and never have!! It’s all been 
documented through the police department!!” 
 
Three times staff asked when they wanted to pick up their belongings, and three times it was 
ignored. No further communication until 12/19/2022. Nobody entered the apartment after 
speaking with Officer XXXX on 12/16/2022. 
 
 
12/19/2022: Staff received word that several police officers were at SL with John and Jane. Staff 
arrived at SL. Police reiterated what Officer XXXX had stated - that John and Jane have a right 
to access the apartment and can kick the door down should they choose. Police said that John 
and Jane just wanted to go into the apartment to ensure that their belongings were still there. 
While speaking with the officers, Jane went to the SL entrance and unlocked the door. She went 
inside and began yelling (unable to hear what she was saying). Jane and John then refused to 
leave the apartment. staff sent pictures of the apartment to the Officer, taken on 12/14/2022. 
 
12/20/2022: staff received a text message from a client at the women’s house stating that Jane 
had texted her at 8pm on 12/19/2022, stating “I know you can not answer so I don’t expect it. I 
was told it was you and XXXX that packed my stuff, I told you exactly what would happen and it 
is. I am going through my stuff to see what is missing. To be honest it looks like a lot. The DA 
has this case and I will be pressing charges. Police took pictures tonight when I was there. I 
hope to God it was not you guys that stole my belongings. That is why they had you pack it, 
they thought they couldn’t get in trouble. They made sure it was clients. So they didn’t get in 
trouble they were already told by the cops not to enter.” 
XXXX reports that she did not respond to Jane.  
 
1/3/2023: John began banging on the door at SL yelling that he needed Narcan at 6:08am. A 
client brought two boxes to him. John told the client that “it was for someone down the street.” 
Jane’s vehicle didn’t leave the property until 6:26am. Later that day while observing the 
cameras, staff witnessed Jane stumbling in and out of her vehicle in front of the SL entrance. A 
previous client who is currently in active addiction was also witnessed entering the apartment, 
after driving Jane’s vehicle with Jane as the passenger. 
 
1/17/2023 
Probation contacted XXXX to inform him that the federal warrant has been officially issued for 
John  as of 01/17/2023. She advised that she is now contacting the Federal Marshals to act on 
the warrant. She stated there was no timeline for the Marshalls to intervene. XXXX did provide 
her the code for the entry door and advised that if forceable entry to the apartment is necessary, 
that is acceptable. 
XXXX provided her with updates on APD involvement to date. 
Probation stated she will try and provide updates if available to XXXX. She also asked if XXXX 
has access to cameras, he confirmed and informed Probation that if Marshall needs anything to 
please provide them his contact information. 
 
03/20/2023 
Staff attended court for eviction process which started approximately 4-6 weeks prior to having 
John & Jane served with paperwork as prescribed by law. 
John did not show for court. Jane showed up late and a judgment had been rendered by the 
judge due to absence of any tenant to contest. 
The remainder of the legal eviction process will take approximately 2 weeks from 03/20/2023 for 
John & Jane to vacate the premises. 
 
In addition to this documentation there were multiple drug deals captured on camera. The local 
police department was called multiple times for: trespassing, loitering, noise complaints, illegal 
parking, drug deals (with graphic images captured on camera). 
 
No less than 5 residents of the sober living chose to move out due to the drug activity in such 
close proximity. On at least 3 occasions known to staff prospective residents chose not to come 
to the sober living due to the drug activity happening as it was well known in the community at 
that time. 
 
 
