 
 
 
 mepca.org  State of Maine | 13 1st Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony of Hannah A. Hudson on behalf of Maine Primary Care Association  
April 3 , 202 3 
 
Supporting:  
LD 979, “Resolve, to Fund Treatment Services and Certain Transportation Costs for Individuals with 
Substance Use Disorder ” 
 
Sponsored by Representative Crafts  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services, I am Hannah Hudson, Policy and Communications Manager at Maine Primary Care 
Association (MPCA) .  
 
MPCA is a membership organization that includes all of Maine's 20 Community Health Centers (CHCs), 
also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers  (FQHCs ). Maine's CHCs  make up the largest  
independent  primary care network in the state,  provid ing high quality and equitable primary and 
preventive medical, behavioral, and dental health services for over 200,000 people (1 in 6  Mainers ) at 
more than 70 service del ivery site s in all 16 Maine counties.   
 
They are at the forefront of delivering care to rural and underserved Maine communities. Community 
Health Centers provide all patients with comprehensive primary care services, as well as a host of other 
services tha t include transportation, translation, and case management services. They are further 
required to provide this care without regard to a patient’s insurance status or ability to pay.  
 
We support LD 979 and thank Representative Crafts  and the cosponsors  for bringing  this legislation 
forwar d. The opioid crisis has devastated our state, our communities, and our families. Mainers are 
dying unnecessarily, and the diseases of despair (addiction, depression , and suicidality) do not 
distingui sh among people by age, race, gender, or socioeconomic status. As the backbone of primary 
care in Maine, most especially for the state’s most vulnerable populations and in rural Maine, CHCs have 
mobilized to address this epidemic and know that we must cont inue this work, increase our capacity to 
respond to this crisis, and maintain our sense of urgency.  
 
Care managers, LCSWs, community health workers , recovery support specialists, peers, or other  care 
takers are often sitting with patients the moment that they are ready for detox or a higher level of 
support . When they call facilities, there are no beds – this is especially true for MaineCare patients. Just 
as we must maintain our sense of urgency when combatting the ov erall opioid crisis, we must be able to 
allow an individual with substance use disorder to continue moving forward and not lose the 
momentum that arrive s when they  are ready to  receive  necessary care. Safe medical detox is also 
essential in treating alcoho l use disorder, which , in addition to  opioid use , is a large  issue in Maine.  
 
On behalf of our network, I am providing a few points for consideration by the Committee : 
 
• In the fentanyl era that we are experiencing, the need for supervised withdrawal management 
is critically important. Patients are being given higher medication doses and adjunctive sedation 
is required. This leads to a need for more clinical expertise and increased levels of monitoring 
and oversight.  Additionally, discharge planning needs to be reviewed by the  whole  care team, 
 
 
 
 mepca.org  with special considerations for special populations , including pregnant people, people 
experiencing homelessness, and people with co -occurring disorders.   
 
• Reimbursement models for this higher level of care need to be addressed.  Well-trained RNs , 
recovery technicians , counselors , and clinicians who  provide medical oversight  are all needed 
for safe and effective medically supervised withdrawal.  
 
• Supervised withdrawal manage ment  could be done in an outpatient setting but is often not 
possible due to various barriers. More residential treatment is occurring because we don’t have 
a “middle option.” Stabilization housing for a few months coupled with outpatient treatment 
services  could be a solution for some patients. However, it  requires higher levels of support and 
pote ntially home visitation from clinical staff, behavioral health care providers, community 
health workers, and recovery support specialists. Additionally, there are variety of health equity 
and access issues  that can arise for the patient . As an example, reliable transportation is critical 
and needs to be coupled with the assistance recovery support specialists (possibly peers who 
can ride with the patient).   
 
Community Health Centers have been engaged in combatting the opioid crisis for many years. In 2018, 
in recognition of the need to allow for members to coordinate and collaborate, MPCA established an 
Opioid Work Group. In late 2019, all 20 of Maine’s CHCs p ledged to mobilize to provide a continuous 
response to the opioid crisis. They developed and signed a ‘Community Health Center Pledge Regarding 
Response to the Opioid Crisis’  1 which outlined efforts that health centers would take to increase 
capacity to respond to this crisis and maintain a sense of urgency.  
Additionally, on November 18, 2021, Penobscot Community Health Care (PCHC) and MPCA launched a 
joint 12 -month Project ECHO on implementation of a low barrier treatment model for opiate use 
disorder.2  The seven participating CHCs, along with PCHC, represented roughly 65% of the total patients 
served by Maine’s CHC network and encompassed a significant geographic footprint, especially in rural 
areas. As a result, this pilot supported increased access to vital treatment services in areas most hard -hit 
by the opiate crisis and  aligned with priorities outlined in the treatment and recovery sections of the 
Governor’s Maine Opioid Response Strategic Action Plan.3  
Thank you for considering our comments  and for your work on this extremely important issue . We 
would be happy to provide additional information as needed in advance of the work session.  Please do 
not hesitate to contact me directly at hhudson@mepc a.org  with any follow up questions.  
Hannah A. Hudson, MA  
Policy and Communications Manager  
Maine Primary Care Association  
 
1 https://www.dropbox.com/s/7cqmo45j7cnf3r7/CHC%20Opioid%20Pledge%202021 -11-08-FINAL.pdf?dl=0   
2 https://www.mainepublic.org/2021 -11-10/medication -first-opioid -treatment -model -expands -to-half-a-dozen -community -
health -center s-in-maine   
3 https://www.maine.gov/future/sites/maine.gov.future/files/inline -
files/MaineOpioidResponse.StrategicActionPlan.FI NAL_.12.11.19.pdf   
