Leslie Clark
Portland Recovery Community Center
LD 979
Written Testimony of Leslie Clark
In Favor of LD 979:
Resolve, to Fund Treatment Services and Certain Transportation Costs for Individuals
with Substance Use Disorder
Committee on Health and Human Services 
100 State House Station
Augusta, ME 04333
Re: LD 979
April 3, 2023
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Health and Human Services,   
My name is Leslie Clark. I am a person in long-term recovery and serve as Executive 
Director of Portland Recovery Community Center (PRCC.) I am writing to you in 
favor of LD 979, a resolve to fund treatment and certain transportation costs for 
individuals with substance use disorder.
Maine ahs bee especially hit hard by devastation and loss from the national opioid 
epidemic. Last year we lost 716 Mainers to fatal overdoses. As a recovery community
center, we witness every day the heartache of addiction. However, we also witness the
great hope of recovery as more and more people’s lives are saved and their 
dependency on dangerous substances is alleviated.  
The journey to finding and sustaining recovery often begins with medically managed 
withdrawal aka detoxification. Following detoxification, many seek additional 
support through inpatient treatment, intensive outpatient (IOP) programs, recovery 
residences, recovery community center participation, and more. We know that 
Mainers seeking recovery from SUD are facing a gaping hole in the continuum of 
care. There are currently not enough accessible detoxification and treatment beds 
available to the meet the demand of people that want help.  
In 2022, PRCC conducted a series of statewide listening sessions with persons with 
SUD(s), and we asked them what obstacles they face when seeking treatment. The top
barriers included lack of transportation, lack of financial resources or health 
insurance, and long waitlists. If LD 979 is passed, waiting lists for detoxification and 
treatment beds will go down. Furthermore, 50% of these newly funded beds will be 
accessible to MaineCare members and will make cost less of a barrier. This bill also 
helps alleviate the cost of transportation of MaineCare members to detoxification 
facilities. 
According to the American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM), prevention 
efforts and treatment approaches for addiction are generally as successful as those for 
other chronic diseases. In order for treatment to be successful, the barriers to access 
detoxification and treatment beds must be lowered. If LD 979 is passed, more 
Mainers will have the opportunity to access the essential services necessary for 
entering recovery. 
The window of time in which a person with active SUD wants help is often small. 
When a person with SUD decides they are ready to seek recovery, there needs to be 
beds available before their resolve subsides. Increased funding for accessible 
detoxification and treatment beds will save lives, prevent more families from 
immeasurable heartache, and create healthier communities. 
On behalf of PRCC I urge you to pass LD 979, Resolve to Fund Treatment Services 
and Certain Transportation Costs for Individuals with Substance Use Disorder.
Sincerely,
Leslie M. Clark
Executive Director
Portland Recovery Community Center 
