295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 979 
" Resolve, to Fund Treatment Services and Certain Transportation 
Costs for Individuals with Substance Use Disorder " 
Sponsored by Representative Crafts 
April 3, 2023 
 
Good morning Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and esteemed members of the 
Health and Human Services Committees.  My name is Malory Shaughnessy and I am the 
Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance 
is the statewide association representing the majority of Maine’s community based 
mental health and substance use treatment providers, providing services to over 80,000 
Maine men, women, and children. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of 
sound policies and evidence-based practices that serve to enhance the quality and 
effectiveness of our behavioral health care system. 
 
We support LD 979 and thank Representative Crafts and the cosponsors for bringing this 
legislation forward. The opioid crisis has devastated our state, our communities, and our 
families. Mainers are dying unnecessarily, and the diseases of despair (addiction and 
depression) do not distinguish among people by age, race, gender, or socioeconomic 
status. It is also important to remember that safe medical detox is essential in treating 
not only opioid use disorder, but other substances as well, especially alcohol use 
disorder, which is a huge issue in Maine and has been for many years. 
 
This bill would call for the Department of Health and Human Services to establish and 
fund medically monitored withdrawal beds for various age groups in Maine. It would also 
mandate that a percentage of these beds be held for the use of either MaineCare or 
Medicare eligible Mainers. Another section would provide for the reimbursement of 
transportation of MaineCare members to detoxification facilities.  
 
I would like to speak to this last section first. The Alliance fully supports this section and 
the need for reimbursement for the transportation of MaineCare members to access 
medically monitored withdrawal facilities. Many times, case managers or clinicians are 
working with someone that has the realization that they need, and are ready for, 
medically monitored withdrawal, or detox. Then the struggle begins to meet that need.  
 
Most times, they struggle to find an open spot and can spend hours calling all over the 
state. And then the struggle begins to find transportation for the person to get to the 
program when they do find an open spot. Often, they simply drive them there 
themselves with no reimbursement, even though it may be several hours away.  
 
When someone is ready to take the step to begin the path to recovery, they should be 
supported and not face barriers to get there. We wholeheartedly support this expansion 
of coverage.  
 
On the first part of this bill, members of the Alliance have some concerns. We do need 
more medically monitored withdrawal beds and treatment access, especially for youth 
under 18 years of age. However, the way this is phrased seems to be problematic.  
 
 ~ Officers ~
Dave McCluskey, President
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1st Vice-President
Day One
Bob Descoteaux, 2nd Vice-
President
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health
Kara Hay, Secretary
Penquis CAP Inc.
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer
Aroostook Mental Health Center
Eric Meyer, Past President
Spurwink
 
~ Board Members ~
Adcare Educational Institute
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare
Assistance Plus
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center
Common Ties
Community Caring Collaborative
Community Health & Counseling
COR Health
Crisis & Counseling Centers
Crossroads Maine
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry
Kennebec Behavioral Health
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization
Maine Behavioral Healthcare
Milestone Recovery
NFI North, Inc.
Northern Light/Acadia
Portland Recovery Community 
Center
Pathways of Maine
Rumford Group Homes
Brighter Heights Maine
Sunrise Opportunities
Sweetser
TriCounty Mental Health Services
Wellspring, Inc.
Wings for Children & Families
Woodfords Family Services

295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
  
 
MaineCare already covers this service with a reimbursement rate, and there are contract dollars to provide 
for the uninsured. There have also been grants put forth recently by the department for the expansion of 
capacity for these services, funding to be used to convert or build out facilities to meet the growing need.  
 
Rather than just directing the department to fund a certain new number of beds, it seems to our members 
that it would be a better approach to direct them continue to expand these current efforts which are 
beginning to get results. The department could be directed to add an enhancement to the reimbursement 
rate and increase the grant funding for the uninsured or those covered by Medicare. This committee could 
direct them to also add more funds for capacity expansion, and offer another round of grants for this 
purpose, adding that some must be used for the expansion of medical detox for youth under 18 years of age.  
 
Adding to what is already beginning to work makes more sense to Alliance members, than naming a set 
number of new beds to be created. By focusing on continuing and adding funding to these current efforts we 
could expand to meet the need that we know is in our communities.  
 
I would be happy to answer any questions you have for me and to bring any other information you need for 
the work session on this bill. 
