Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
April 3 , 202 3 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
Re: LD 979 – Resolve, to Fund Treatment Services and Certain Transportation Costs for 
Individuals with Substance Use Disorder  
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services:  
This letter is to provide information on LD 979, Resolve, to Fund Treatment Services and 
Certain Transportation Costs for Individuals with Substance Use Disorder . This bill establishes 
detoxification beds and inpatient treatment beds for children and adults with substance use 
disorder and requires the Department of Health and Human Services to fund those beds. It 
requires that 50% of the beds be reserved for MaineCare members or individuals eligible for 
Medicare. It directs the department to amend its rules to provide for the reimbursement of 
transportation of MaineCare members to detoxification facilities.  
This proposed bill appears to be a requirement of, and additional funding for, increased capacity 
of substance use residential treatme nt and Medically Supervised Withdrawal (‘Detox’) programs 
(or “beds”). These are licensed under 14 -118 Chapter 5, Section 19. This proposed bill also has a 
requirement for transportation reimbursement for MaineCare members to such facilities.  
The Department  has actively supported increasing Substance Use Disorder (SUD) treatment  
capacity . MaineCare has an 1115 waiver for SUD residential treatment and received  an 
appropriation in P.L. 2021, ch. 398 for increased utilization of residential SUD  treatm ent 
services resulting from that waiver.  Improvements have also been made on reimbursement 
through recent, substantial investments in Private Non -Medical Institution  Substance Use 
Treatment Facilities, and MaineCare is working on rate determination efforts  for distinct SUD 
units within hospitals, which will yield further investment in SUD services . Capacity building 
efforts are underway through the Department’s Capital RFPs to provide funding for building or 
expanding residential SUD treatment sites.  In SFY 23, the Department issued and awarded two 
SUD Residential RFAs to support the expansion of treatment beds in the State, providing up to 
$5.4M in capital and catalyst funding. The proposed biennial budget also includes funding to 
support expanding capacity of substance use residential treatment and Medically Supervised 
Withdrawal (‘Detox’) programs.  
LD 979 is somewhat unclear whethe r it is specificall y referring to hospital inpatient beds, or if it 
is more broadly about residentia l SUD treatment. It is also unclea r whethe r the intent is for the 
Departme nt to directly provide these residential services, or to ensure coverage of these services 
through enrolle d provide rs. The Departme nt can provide incentives a nd assistance for increasing 
service capacity and utilization, but does not have direct c ontrol over the creation of beds by 
providers. 
Section 2 of this bill would require Department reimbursement of transportation of MaineCare 
members to detoxification facilities, but MaineCare already covers medically necessary 
transportation to MaineCare-covered services, including to detoxification facilities , through 
Non-Emergency Transportation (NET) . We understand that the sponsor may be intending for 
non-NET reimbursement, and we will work to learn more about this before the work session.  
Additional reimbursement would require general fund .  
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact us. 
Sincerely, 
Michelle Probert  
Director 
MaineCare Services 

