Bruce C.Gerrity
bgerrity@preti.com
207.623.5300
20087780.1 
February 14, 2023 
Sen. Mark W. Lawrence, Chair 
Committee on Energy, Utilities & Technology 
Cross Building, Room 211 
Augusta, ME  04330Rep. Stanley P. Zeigler, Jr., Chair 
Committee on Energy, Utilities & Technology 
Cross Building, Room 211 
Augusta, ME  04330
RE: LD 122 – An Act To Authorize The Efficiency Maine Trust To Establish A 
Program To Support The Uptake Of Medium-duty And Heavy-duty Zero-
emission Vehicles By Maine Businesses And To Establish A Medium-duty And 
Heavy-duty Zero-emission Vehicle-to-grid Pilot Project 
Dear Senator Lawrence and Representative Zeigler, 
These comments are submitted on behalf of the Maine Automobile Dealers Association (the 
“Association” or “MADA”) neither for nor against LD 122.  The Association did testify regarding the 
concept draft, but did not have the proposed draft which was handed out to the Committee the day of 
the public hearing.   
MADA supports programs which effectively and practically facilitate the development of zero-
emission rebate programs for medium and heavy-duty trucks.  That having been said, the Association 
believes that the program should be carefully thought through with an eye towards making effective 
use of monies that are available, recognizing the needs that exist for all electric vehicles and the 
limitations on the effective use of electric vehicles at this time. 
As the Association testified, opening the program to heavy-duty tractors, large plow trucks and 
the like would not be an effective use of any of the monies involved.  The purchase at this time of a 
single tractor with an internal combustion engine is between $135,000-$150,000.  That same tractor, if 
electric, costs about $450,000.  The program would, at best, be able to fund one to two vehicles, which 
would not be an effective use of any monies that might be available.  Additional concerns with large 
heavy-duty trucks are that the weight of batteries, which are 32,000 pounds; about 14,000 pounds more 
than an internal combustion driven truck.  This will significantly limit the amount of goods that can be 
hauled given the limitations on truck weights on roads.  This means there would be many more electric 
vehicles on the road to deliver the same amount of payload that a single truck delivers at the current 
time.  MADA suggests that if LD 122 goes forward the most effective vehicles to make subject to the 
program would be box trucks and small delivery vans that do not have long range haul features.   
In addition, the Association urges the Committee to review the proposals that came before the 
Bureau of Environmental Protection to modify Chapter 128, which dealt with proposals to require a 
certain level of heavy and medium duty truck sales in the Maine market over time.  The DEP 
recognized that the current technology is such that requiring that set percentages of electric trucks be 
produced and sold in Maine is unworkable at this time.  Many of the truck styles simply are not 
available or are only in the planning stages. 
PRETI FLAHERTY
Sen. Mark W. Lawrence, Chair 
Rep. Stanley P. Zeigler, Jr., Chair 
February 14, 2023 
Page 2 
20087780.1 The Association appreciates this opportunity to augment its public testimony and looks forward 
to working with the Committee as it evaluates this legislation. 
Very truly yours, 
Bruce C. Gerrity 
cc: Committee members 
Lindsay Laxon, OPLA Analyst 
Jacob Faria, Committee Clerk 

