 
 
 
Testimony before the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
 
February  2, 202 3 
 
LD 122 – An Act to Authorize the Efficiency Maine Trust to Establish a Program to 
Support the Uptake of Medium -duty and Heavy -duty Zero -emission Vehicles by Maine 
Businesses and to Establish a Medium -duty and Heavy -duty Zero -emission Vehicle -to-grid 
Pilot Project  
 
Senator Lawrence , Representative Zeigler,  and members of the Committee  on Energy, Utilities 
and Technology, my name is Emily K. Green  and I am a senior attorney with  Conservation Law 
Foundation. I appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of LD 122, An Act to Authorize the 
Efficiency Maine Trust to Establish a Program to  Support the Uptake of Medium -duty and 
Heavy -duty Zero -emission Vehicles by Maine Businesses and to Establish a Medium -duty and 
Heavy -duty Zero -emission Vehicle -to-grid Pilot Project.  
 
CLF, founded in 1966,  is a public interest advocacy group that works to  solve the environmental 
challenges threatening  the people, natural resources and communities in Maine and across New 
England. In Maine for almost four decades,  CLF is a member -supported organization  that work s 
to ensure that laws and policies are developed, implemented and enforced that protect and restore 
our natural resources ; are good for Maine’s economy and environment ; and equitably  address the 
climate crisis.  
 
CLF supports LD 122 because it would take relatively small but important steps to advance 
Maine’s transition to electric vehicle s (EVs) . Reducing carbon pollution from cars and trucks by 
moving away from fossil  fuel is a key strategy in the state’s climate action plan. Maine’s Clean 
Transportation Roadmap  further emphasizes the importance of electrification, describing it  as the 
most important, feasible strategy for reducing emissions from transportation.   
 
As we understand it (the amended concept draft is not yet published at the time of drafting), LD 
122 would aid Maine’s transition to EVs, first, with minor tweaks to the existing EV fund (35 -A 
M.R.S. § 10126) administered by the Efficiency Maine Trust. The proposed minimal a djustments 
would  enhance cla rity and smooth the Trust’s operation of the state’s EV rebate program.  We 
support these fixes.  
 
It is our understanding that LD 122 would also establish a medium - and heavy -duty (MHD) EV 
pilot program. To achieve Maine’s mandatory decarbonization levels, the climate action plan and 
Clean Transportation Roadmap both specifically call for electrification of these vehicles in 
addition to personal cars . In Maine, trucks and vans contribute approximately one quarter of 
transportation carbon pollution, and almost half of smog forming nitrogen oxides and PM2.5 
 
 
from this sector. Transitioning away from conventional trucks is therefore not only c ritical for 
compliance with the state’s greenhouse gas emissions targets , but it  also offers significant public 
health benefits by reduc ing toxic air pollution on our streets.   
 
We staunchly support policies that will aggressively drive deployment of MHD EVs, policies 
that are called for by the state’s Clean Transportation Roadmap and necessary to comply with 
Maine’s mandatory carbon pollution levels (38 M.R.S. § 576-A). However, with the caveat that 
this pilot must not stand in the way of these strategies , we support the concept of a medium - and 
heavy -duty EV pilot program because it is a supportive complement that will help address 
certain  barriers to deployment .  
 
Although  in many cases, lower operating costs already  lead to savings  over the life of a MHD 
EV—and purchase prices are rapidly declining —today capital  costs  remain a hurdle  to fleet 
uptake. This time-limited pilot would presumably help Maine ’s fleet owners and managers 
overcome this up -front obstacle . Though certainly not adequate on its own, the pilot will 
contribute to accelerated demand for  MHD EV s, helping to advanc e the market and ultimately  
greater economies of scale, driving down costs.  
 
Another barrier to widespread use of MHD  EVs is the misperception  that electric versions of 
these vehicles are not ready to hit the roads  in Maine. This concern is generally overblown; 
commercial MHD EV offerings today are capable of supporting the majority of truck uses,  and 
rapid technological progress continues to expand commercial offerings and practical 
applications.  
 
Maine is ready for MHD EV s today. We support the proposed demonstration project not because  
it is necessary to prove that MHD EVs are feasible, but because it will help the people and 
businesses of Maine reach this inescapable conclusion. The pilot will increase Mainers’ 
understanding of the viability of these technologies and aid businesses in gaining familiarity with 
these highly efficient and cost -saving vehicles. The pilot must not be used to obstruct other 
policies to speed the deployment  of these vehicles.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testify in support of LD 122.  
 
Emily Green
Conservation Law Foundation
LD 122
Please find the testimony of Conservation Law Foundation in support of LD 122 attached. 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
Please contact Emily K. Green at egreen@clf.org with any questions.
