STATE or IVIAINE 
OFFICE or THE GOVERNOR 
ISTATE Housr. STATION 
AUGITSTA, MAINE 
04333-0001 
JANET MILLS DAN BURGESS 
GOVERNOR Dnuacron or Govi2m\'0R ‘s 
Ewncx-' OFFICE 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE ENERGY, UTILITIES AND TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE 
An Act to Authorize the Efficiency Maine Trust to Establish a Program to Support the Uptake 
of Medium-duty and Heavy-duty Zero-emission Vehicles by Maine Businesses and to Establish 
a Medium-duty and Heavy-duty Zero-emission Vehicle-to-grid Pilot Project 
L.D. 122 
GOVERNOR'S ENERGY OFFICE 
February 2, 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology (EUT): My name is Ethan Tremblay, and l am an Energy Policy Analyst in the 
Governor's Energy Office (GEO). 
The GEO testifies in general support of L.D. 122. 
L.D. 122 is a concept draft pursuant to Joint Rule 208. Based on the bill summary, the GEO understands 
the bill would establish a program using federal or other funding sources to support uptake of medium- 
and heavy-duty zero-emissions vehicles by businesses in the State, administered by the Efficiency Maine 
Trust in collaboration with the Department of Transportation (DOT), the Governor's Office of Policy 
Innovation and the Future (GOPIF), and the GEO. The program would be required to include, but not be 
limited to, a rebate program to support the purchase of medium-duty and heavy-duty zero-emission 
vehicles and associated charging or fueling infrastructure. 
The Efficiency Maine Trust would also be authorized to establish a vehicle-to-grid pilot project to 
evaluate the benefits of using battery electric medium-d uty and heavy-duty zero-emission vehicles, such 
as electric school buses and freight trucks, as energy storage resources that can deliver electricity to the 
grid when the vehicles are not being used for transportation. 
Maine has already successfully pursued federal funding to support deployment of medium-duty and 
heavy-duty zero-emission vehicles. In October 2022, 13 school districts across the state, with the 
support of the Department of Education, Department of Environmental Protection, and GOPIF, were 
awarded rebates from the Environmental Protection Agency under the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law to 
deploy up to 34 new electric school buses. 
As these and other vehicles are placed in service across the state, there are likely to be useful 
opportunities to explore their use as energy storage resources through vehicIe—t0-grid (VZG) or vehicle- 
to-building (V2B) technologies. V2G has the potential to deliver significant benefits to both vehicle 
owners and electricity customers through innovative technologies that allow vehicle batteries to provide 
energy, grid balancing, and other services to the electrical system.
I
The GEO is generally supportive of these concepts. We look forward to reviewing any new amendments 
to the bill and working with the sponsor and committee on language and implementation, including the 
role of the GEO and other agencies and potential sources of funding including federal funds. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
Qt;/@ Ethan Tremblay, Energy Policy Analyst 
Governor's Energy Office 
Page 2 of2
