 
 
 
 
Henry L. Ingwersen 
Senator, District  32 THE  MAINE  SENATE  
131st Legislature   
3 State  House Station 
Augusta, Maine  04333  
 
 
 
Testimony Introducing LD 122 “An Act to Authorize the Efficiency Maine Trust to 
Establish a Program to Support the Uptake of Medium -duty and Heavy -duty Zero -
emission Vehicles by Maine Businesses and to Establish a Medium -duty and 
Heavy -duty Zero -emission Vehicle -to-grid Pilot Project ” 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler, and honorable members of the Energy, Utilities, and 
Technology Committee. My name is Senator Henry Ingwer sen and I am here to testify in 
support of my bill LD 122, “An Act to Authorize the Efficiency Maine Trust to Establish a 
Program to Support the Uptake of Medium -duty and Heavy -duty Zero -emission Vehicles by 
Maine Businesses and to Establish a Medium -duty and Heavy -duty Zero -emission Vehicle -to-
grid Pilot Project. ” 
 
Transportation in Maine is responsible for 54% of Maine’s annual greenhouse gas emissions. In 
“Maine Won’t Wait,” the Maine Climate Council’s Four -Year Plan for Climate Action, Strategy 
A-1 is to “Accelerate Maine’s Transition to Electric Vehicles.” Mai ne has  begun to do that by 
creating a light -duty electric vehicle incentive program administered by Efficiency Maine Trust 
with much success. Strategy A -1 goes on to say “…By 2022, create policies, incentives, and pilot 
programs to encourage the adoption of electric, hybrid, and alternative -fuel medium and 
heavy -duty vehicles, public transportation, school buses, and ferries.” The goal of this bill is to 
do just that . 
 
This bill amends the language of Title 35 -A MRSA §10126, in order to direct the Efficie ncy 
Maine Trust to establish a pilot program over the next two years for medium -duty and heavy -
duty vehicles in commercial applications using a battery electric propulsion system. 
Participation is limited to businesses having their principal place of busin ess in Maine. The 
pilot program shall prioritize the medium and heavy -duty vehicle types that are most 
commonly used in  Maine where electric models of those vehicles types are commercially 
available, the duty cycle proposed by program participants is suit able for such electric models, 
with consideration for the amount and type of daily use and potential to improve energy 
independence and reduce greenhouse gas emissions . 
 
I have attached my proposed amended language for this bill. I am also recommending th at the 
second part of this bill summary, which establishes a vehicle -to-grid pilot project, be deleted 
from the bill, and that the bill title be amended to reflect that change . 
 
I’m willing to answer any  questions  you might have, and I believe those foll owing me in 
testimony may also be able to answer your questions . Thank you . 
 
 
Chair,  Agriculture,  Conservation  and Forestry  Committee  * Health  and Human  Servi ces Committee  
State  House  (207)  287-1515  * Fax (207)  287-1585  * Toll Free  1-800-423-6900  * TTY 711 
Henry.Ingwersen@legislature.maine.gov * legislature.maine.gov/senate  
 
Proudly  representing  Senate  District  32: Arundel,  Biddeford,  Dayton,  Hollis,  Lyman  
