Section 1 - Title 35-A MRSA §10126, sub-§3 shall be amended as follows:
§10126. Electric Vehicle Fund
…
3.  Rebate program established; eligibility.  In accordance with the provisions of this 
section, the trust shall establish and administer a program that provides rebates for the purchase or 
lease of electric vehicles. For purposes of this sub-section, any form of financial incentive 
approved by the trust, including but not limited to credits, discounts, mark-downs, or vouchers, 
may be substituted for rebates. A person may apply for and, as resources within the fund allow, 
receive a rebate for an electric vehicle, subject to eligibility requirements established by the trust. 
Eligibility criteria for the vehicle must include that the vehicle is: a battery electric vehicle or plug-
in hybrid electric vehicle; purchased, or leased from its original equipment manufacturer or an 
authorized licensee of the original equipment manufacturer or a licensed automobile dealer; if 
leased, the lease is for a term of 36 months or more, in the State; and registered in the State, except 
that a vehicle is not eligible if it has a gross vehicle weight rating of 6,000 pounds or less, is not a 
truck or an off-road vehicle and has a manufacturer's suggested retail price greater than $50,000. 
To the extent funds are available, the trust may extend program eligibility to medium duty vehicles 
and heavy duty vehicles that are battery electric vehicles or plug-in hybrid electric vehicles. 
Eligibility requirements for the recipient of the rebate must include that the recipient attests to a 
commitment to retain ownership, whether through purchase or lease, of the eligible electric vehicle 
for at least 36 months from the date of purchase or lease. The trust may require a recipient of a 
rebate under this section who does not retain ownership maintain a Maine registration of the 
eligible electric vehicle for at least 36 months to repay the trust up to the full amount of the rebate. 
 
The trust shall establish the rebate amount for each eligible electric vehicle. The trust shall establish 
rebate amounts that it determines most effectively increase the purchase and use of eligible electric 
vehicles in Maine. For each model of an eligible electric vehicle, the trust may establish different 
rebate amounts based on the size of the vehicle battery. The trust may establish different rebate 
amounts for the purpose of providing reasonable opportunity for participation in the program 
across different customer groups and geographic areas. The trust may establish reasonable limits 
on the number of rebates per vehicle or per person.  
Section 2: Medium and Heavy Duty EV Pilot Program
For fiscal years 2023-2024 and 2024-2025, the Efficiency Maine Trust shall establish a 
pilot program for medium duty and heavy duty vehicles in commercial applications using 
a battery electric propulsion system.  Classification for medium duty and heavy duty 
vehicles will rely on the U.S. EPA classification system and eligibility for the program 
will be limited to vehicles rated Class 2b through Class 7 using this system and will 
exclude school buses. Participation is limited to businesses having their principal place of 
business in Maine.  The demonstration program shall prioritize the medium-duty and 
heavy-duty vehicle types that are commonly used in Maine where electric models of 
those vehicle types are commercially available and the duty cycle proposed by program 
participants is suitable for such electric models, giving consideration for the amount and 
type of daily use and potential to improve energy independence and reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions. 
Section 3: Appropriations and allocations. The following appropriations and 
allocations are made. 
EFFICIENCY MAINE TRUST 
Efficiency Maine Trust Z100 
Initiative: Provides one-time funding to Efficiency Maine Trust to implement a pilot program for 
medium and heavy duty electric vehicles for commercial applications in Maine. 
XXXXX 2023-24 2024-25 
XXXXX $---,--- $0 
