Testimony  in support of LD 122, An Act to Authorize the Efficiency Maine Trust to 
Establish a Program to Support the Uptake of Medium -duty and Heavy -duty Zero -
emission Vehicles by Maine Businesses and to Establish a Medium -duty and Heavy -duty 
Zero -emission Vehicle -to-grid Pilot Project  
 
by Josh Caldwell, Climate & Clean Energy Outreach Coordinator  
February 2, 2023  
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, distinguished members of the Committe e on Energy, 
Utilities and Technology . My name is Jo sh Caldwell. I am the Climate and Clean Energy 
Outreach Coordinator at the Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM), and I am testifying 
today in support of  LD 1 22, An Act to Authorize the Efficiency Maine Trust to Establish a 
Program to Support the Uptak e of Medium -duty and Heavy -duty Zero -emission Vehicles by 
Maine Businesses and to Establish a Medium -duty and Heavy -duty Zero -emission Vehicle -to-
grid Pilot Project . 
 
Implement Maine’s Climate Action Plan  
 
Maine’s Cl ean Transportation Roadmap  identifies vehicle electrification as  the number one 
mechanism to meet ing our climate goals in the transportation sector.  In Maine, more than  half of 
all greenhouse gas emissions come from transportation, with 27 percent of those  emissions 
attributable to medium - and heavy -duty vehicles. Incentivizing the purchase and use of zero -
emission medium - and heavy -duty vehicles is a top priority for the  state to meet the climate goals 
laid out in Maine’s Climate Action Plan.  
 
Support Maine Businesses  
 
Transitioning to electric medium - and heavy -duty vehicles is an essential step in moving Maine 
toward climate solutions and will also save money over time on fuel costs for Maine businesses. 
In order to actualize those climate benefits and those savings, w e need to support businesses as 

they seek to purchase new zero -emission vehicles. New vehicles require a significant upfront 
expenditure for businesses operating medium - and heavy -duty vehicles, and incent ives such as 
this to help them make those purchases will lead to long -term savings and climate benefits.  
 
Improve Health Outcomes  
 
Medium - and heavy -duty vehicles represent approximately 6 percent of the on -road fleet as of 
2020 but  generate 59 percent of ozone - and particle -forming NOx emissions and 55 percent of 
the particle pollution (including brake and tire particles). Historically marginalized and low -
income communities are disp roportionately affected by this pollution. Incenti vizing the transition 
to zero -emission medium - and heavy -duty vehicles will directly improve air quality in Maine 
and reduce the negative health impacts associated with pollution from combustion engines.  
Early incentives have proved critical for accelerati ng clean energy technology adoption. Due to 
the massive investments from the auto industry in zero -emission vehicles, and new federal 
legislation focused on climate and electrification, we expect the adoption of zero -emission 
vehicles in Maine to expand ex ponentially over time. But the more quickly we can foster that 
transition, the sooner we will see the benefits of zero -emission  vehicles become widespread 
across Maine, improving businesses' bottom lines, health outcomes, and our ability to achieve 
the critical climate goals we've set as a state.  
For these reasons we urge the Committee to support the passage of this important clim ate bill. 
Thank you for your consideration, and I welcome any questions that you may have.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
