February 2 , 2023    
 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director  
The Nature Conservancy in Maine  
kaitlyn.nuzzo@tnc.org  
 
14 Maine St ., Suite 401  Brunswick, Maine 04011  nature.org/maine  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
 
RE: LD 122 – An Act to Authorize Efficiency Maine Trust to Establish a Program 
to Support the Uptake of Medium -duty and Heavy -duty Zero -emission Vehicles 
by Maine Businesses and to Establish a Medium -duty and Heavy -duty Zero -
emission Vehicle -to-grid Pilot Project  
 
Senator Lawrence , Representative Zeigler , and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology , my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo  and I 
am the Government Relations Director  for The Nature Conservancy in Maine. I 
appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of LD 122 – An Act to 
Authorize Efficiency Maine Trust to Establish a Program to Support the 
Uptake of Medium -duty and Heavy -duty Zero -emission Vehicles by Maine 
Businesses and to Establish a Medium -duty and Heavy -duty Zero -emission 
Vehicle -to-grid Pilot Project.  
 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization 
dedicated to conserving the lands and wa ters on which all life depends. Guided 
by science, we create innovative, on -the-ground solutions to our world’s 
toughest challenges so that nature and people can thrive together. We use a 
collaborative approach that engages local communities, governments, the 
private sector, and other partners.  
 
The bill before you represents an innovative, on the ground solution to 
addressing carbon pollution from the transportation sector. TNC staff served on 
the Climate Council and my former colleague Rob Wood co -chaired  the 
Transportation Working Group during his time at TNC. The Transportation 
Working Group recommended transportation electrification as a key strategy to 
meeting Maine’s emission reduction targets. Specifically, modeling showed that 
helping Mainers transi tion to electric vehicles (EVs) would be a key driver in 
achieving those targets.   
 
TNC has conducted polling, focus groups, and literature reviews over the past 
several years to investigate strategies to reduce barriers to EV uptake. Our 
research, and th at of others, notes that one of the primary barrier s to EV update 
is upfront cost. This is especially true of medium -duty and heavy -duty zero 
emission vehicles. These vehicles are major investments for the many 
businesses and institutions that need them to operate. The incremental cost of 
purchasing a Zero -emission medium or heavy -duty  vehicle vs a traditional one 
tends to be high, which makes it hard to justify for many businesses despite the 
clear benefits and long -term  cost savings.  
Efficiency Maine has already demonstrated high demand  for their general 
Electric Vehicle Rebate program s. And while they already have the authority to 
provide incentives a wide range of vehicles , further legislative direction would 
be helpful to the process of implementing and administering a pilot program 
specific to medium and heavy -duty  vehicles.  
 
MHDVs contribute more than a quarter of Maine’s transportation -related CO2 
emissions so creating and promoting a pilot opportunity will help spur market 
transformation in this sector.  We also know that $1 billion of federal funding is 
available for a subset of HDVs (class 6 & 7) through the EPA Clean Heavy -Duty 
Vehicle Program  under the Inflation Reduction Act. This federal  funding is 
targeted to state or municipal governments, schools, or tribal entities but 
demonstrates that there is a broad focus on helping transition these MHDVs to 
ZEVs.  
 
TNC has long supported Efficiency Maine and their many successful programs. 
We are  excited that they are interested in pursuing this opportunity and we 
want to give them the tools they need to develop a pilot program. LD 122 will 
direct them to create this program while giving them the ability to develop it in 
a way that makes sense wit h their existing incentives and based on their 
experience in implementing EV rebates.  
 
We urge this committee to support LD 122. Thank you for the opportunity to 
comment.  
