PO Box 88Belfast, ME 04915Phone: (207) 761-5616www.sierraclub.org/maine
To:
Committee on Energy, Utilities, and Technology
From: Matt Cannon, Sierra Club Maine
Date:
2/2/23
Re:
Testimony in Support of LD 122: An Act to Authorize
the Efﬁciency Maine Trust to
Establish a Program to Support the Uptake of Medium-duty and Heavy-duty Zero-emission
Vehicles by Maine Businesses and to Establish a Medium-duty and Heavy-duty Zero-emission
Vehicle-to-grid Pilot Project
 
Senate Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the EUT Committee, I am testifying on
behalf of Sierra Club Maine, representing over 22,000 supporters and members statewide.
Founded in 1892, Sierra Club is one of our nation’s oldest and largest environmental organizations.
We work diligently to amplify the power of our 3.8 million members nation-wide as we work
towards combating climate change and promoting a just and sustainable economy. To that end, we
urge you to support the programs laid out in LD 122 as they will facilitate more greenhouse gas
reductions from our largest emitting source: the transportation sector. And, the program is
expected to subsidize the cost of these vehicles, mostly through current federal funding
mechanisms. A win-win!
We agree the state should fully utilize federal dollars to support establishing a program to acquire
medium and heavy-duty vehicles for businesses as well as public institutions. We hope this
program grows signiﬁcantly, as Maine should be supporting the transition to electric and other low
or no emissions vehicles for all.
Additionally, a pilot project for a vehicle to grid program is another step in the right direction
toward our clean energy goals. Electric school buses and freight trucks hold tremendous battery
storage when not in use, and scholarly evidence suggests integrating battery resources into the
grid is a successful tool for leveling the grid and maintaining efﬁciency
1
.
We look forward to seeing more speciﬁc language to see how these programs might support
Maine Won’t Wait, be funded, and impact all Mainers, but we support the concept of LD 122.
Thank you for your time and consideration.
Sincerely,
Matt Cannon
Sierra Club Maine
1
h t t p s : / / w w w . s c i e n c e d i r e c t . c o m / s c i e n c e / a r t i c l e / a b s / p i i / S 0 3 0 1 4 2 1 5 0 9 0 0 3 9 7 8 ? v i a % 3 D i h u b

