 
 
 
 Testimony of the Efficiency Maine Trust  
 Michael D. Stoddard, Executive Director  
 
IN SUPPORT OF  
 
LD 122 - An Act to An Act to Authorize the Efficiency Maine Trust to Establish a Program to 
Support the  Uptake of Medium -duty and Heavy -duty Zero -emission Vehicles by Maine 
Businesses  
  
 Presented to the Joint Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology (EUT)  
 
 February 2, 2023  
 
  
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler , and Members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities 
and Technology, the Efficiency Maine Trust (the Trust) appreciates the opportunity to testify 
today in support of  LD 122 - An Act to An Act to Authorize the Efficiency Maine Trust to 
Establish a Program to Support the  Uptake of Medium -duty and Heavy -duty Zero -emission 
Vehicles by Maine Businesses .  
As originally printed , LD 122 is a concept bill seeking to authorize the Trust to (1) establish a 
program to promote  market demand for Medium and Heavy Duty  Vehicles (MHDV) that have 
no onboard emissions  and (2) establish a vehicle -to-grid pilot project  using MHDVs . 
However, the Trust now understands that the Sponsor is considering amending the bill by:  
• eliminat ing from the bill the provision to establi sh a vehicle -to-grid pilot ; 
• making some  clarifying edits to the existing statutory authority for the Trust ’s EV Rebate 
Program;  and,  
• establishing a new Efficiency Maine pilot program to demonstrate the functionality and 
applications of EVs in the certain classes and types of MDHVs . 
The Trust would support  such an  evol ution from the concept bill.   
Regarding the clarifying edits of the Trust ’s Electric Vehicle Fund ( Section 10126 of Title 35-A), 
the Trust supports these edits  to clean up the language of the  section . These edits specify that 
the Trust is authorized to use a wide variety of types of financial incentives,  including instant 
discou nts and vouchers,  which are  a popular tool in other state  programs, especially for MDHV 
2 
 
 
 
 
168 Capitol Street, Suite 1, Augusta, ME 04330     |     (866) 376 -2463     |     efficiencymaine.com  vehicles.   The language also  reinforces and clarifies the point that leases , a popular  alternative 
to outright purchases  especially for lower/moderate -income consumers and for businesses and 
municipalities , are eligible through the program.  
We understand that the Spo nsor ’s bill edits will add detail about a limited -time pilot program to 
promote electric  battery propelled MHDV s.  We support  a limited scope  for this initiative . In 
order to offset the incremental cost and make the  vehicles attractive to local businesses, a pilot 
program will likely have to provide incentives for these larger and heavier vehicles in the range 
of $25,000 to $75,000 per vehicle .  A pilot program, limited to two years and a fixed amount of 
budget, would enable  the Trust to demonstrate the types of electric MHDV models  that are a 
good fit for the needs of Maine businesses  and that offer the best early potential to help those 
businesses lower their operating costs and greenhouse gas emissions. We support  the 
Spon sor’s proposal to limit  eligibility of vehicles to Class 2b through Class 7 MDHVs , and limiting 
eligibility to Maine businesses.  We also support the proposed guidance to the Trust to 
“prioritize the … vehicle types that are common ly used  in Maine where … the duty cycle 
proposed by program participants is suitable for such electric models, giving consideration for 
the amount and type of daily use and potential to improve energy independence and reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions .”  
The Trust welcome s the opportunity to work with the bill ’s Sponsor and other stakeholders to 
develop language to acco mplish these objectives.  
Respectfully,   
/s/MDS  
Michael D. Stoddard  
Executive Director  
