ISLAND 
INSTITUTE 
Testimony of the Island Institute in Support of LD 122, An Act to Authorize the Efficiency 
Maine Trust to Establish a Program to Support the Uptake of Medium-duty and Heavy-duty 
Zero-emission Vehicles... 
February 2"‘ , 2023 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler, and members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities, 
and Technology, my name is Nick Battista, and l offer this testimony on behalf of the Island 
Institute in support of LD 122 and more broadly, establishing a pilot program to support the 
increased adoption of medium and heavy duty zero emissions vehicles by Maine businesses. 
The island Institute is a 40-year-old nonprofit organization based in Rockland, Maine. We work 
to sustain Maine's island and coastal communities. The Island lnstitute's community 
development work focuses on the marine economy, climate and energy pilots, small 
businesses, education, and leadership. 
According to data from SEAMaine, the seafood industry generates $3.2 billion a year for the 
State and supports about 33,000 jobs as a sector. However, with the Gulf of Maine warming 
rapidly, the natural resource base for this sector is shifting, changing, and volatile. That makes it 
more challenging for the businesses that support this sector to be profitable. The Island 
institute has been supporting seafood~related businesses with strategies to adapt to these 
changes. One approach we see some businesses employ is reducing their dependence on fossil 
fuels by implementing clean energy projects that help control their costs and lower their carbon 
footprint. 
We partnered with Luke’s Lobster, a vertically integrated Maine based seafood company, to 
undertake a groundbreaking assessment of the greenhouse gas emissions of their supply chain. 
The study showed that the lobster fishery has a relatively low carbon footprint compared with 
other animal protein production- —2.89 lbs of greenhouse gas emissions for every pound of 
lobster sourced from Luke's Lobster which compares favorably to animal protein, including beef 
(60 lbs emissions per lb of protein), lamb (24 lbs), pork (7 lbs), and chicken (6 lbs). 
Transportation accounts for 7.9% of these emissions. including zero emissions medium and 
heavy duty vehicles in the transportation supply chain will help further reduce the emissions 
associated with the lobster industry while building the resilience of seafood businesses. The 
technology is available, and we hear from our partners in the field who want to make this 
switch that support and incentives are needed to assist with start-up costs and infrastructure 
for early adopters, as well as demonstrate how these vehicles fit into logistic supply chains for 
perishable products. It is also worth considering whether the pilot could include zero emissions 
vessels as well, given that 61% of the emissions in Luke's supply chain come from on water 
activities. l strongly encourage you to move forward with this pilot. 
386 Main Street P.O. Box 648 Rockland, Maine 04841-0648 207-594-9209 islandinstitute.org
