Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy  
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony in Support  of LD 122 
 
“An Act to Authorize the Efficiency Maine Trust to Establish a Program to Sup-
port the Uptake of Medium -duty and Heavy- duty Zero -emission Vehicles by 
Maine Businesses and to Establish a Medium -duty and Heavy- duty Zero -emission 
Vehicle- to-grid Pilot Project ” 
 
February  2, 2023  
 
Patrick Strauch, Executive Director  
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Ziegler and members of the Committee on  
Energy, Utilities and T echnology, please accept this written testimony on behalf 
of the Maine forest Products Council in support of LD 122, “An Act to Authorize 
the Efficiency Maine Trust to Establish a Program to Support the Uptake of  
Medium-duty and Heavy-duty Zero-emission Vehicles by Maine Businesses and 
to Establish a Medium- duty and Heavy-duty Zero-emission Vehicle-to -grid Pilot 
Project.” The Maine Forest Products Council is an organization representing more than 300 members from all facets of the forest products industry.  
 
The shipment of manufactured forest products from our mills with more efficient 
trucking systems is important to our industry where customers are increasingly 
reviewing the carbon footprint of delivered products. Electrifying the logging 
truck fleet that operates in more remote regions of the state creates technical  
challenges that will require additional research and development. That said, we 
are supportive of the pilot project as vehicle  to move closer to closing the  
emissions gap of petroleum combustion engines. 
 Further, as a member of the Maine Climate Council, I am thankful to Senator 
Ingwersen for bringing this legislation for ward. Strategy A-1 in the Maine Won ’t 
Wait four-year climate action report is to “ Accelerate Maine ’s Transition to  
Electric Vehicles.” LD 122 will help achieve this goal.  
 
Thank you for your consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions the 
committee may have.  
 
 
