DocuS|gn Envelope ID: 33E2BB77-8D12-4DD4-BF2B-38A57F9FA68D 
STATE OF MAINE 
g DEPARTMENT or EDUCATION 
. s,_~ 23 STATE HOUSE STATION" :,' 
;:;' ,;'i » AUGUSTA, ME 04333-0023 
£'1.mi>‘ 
IANET T. MILLS PENDER MAKIN 
covaxmon COMMISSIONER 
February 16, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Senate Chair 
Representative Brennan, House Chair 
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Distinguished Members of the Education and Cultural 
Affairs Committee: 
LD 67, An Act to Increase the Number of Educational Professionals by Accepting Out-of-state 
Certiﬁcation proposes that the Department of Education accept certiﬁcates for administrators, 
teachers, education technicians, and education specialists that are issued out-of-state as qualiﬁcation 
for a corresponding certiﬁcate in Maine. 
The current certiﬁcation process is three weeks from the time an applicant submits a completed 
application through the online Maine Educational Information System (MEIS) until they receive 
either an evaluation letter asking for more information or a Conditional/Professional Certiﬁcate. The 
cost of the application is $100.00 for a teaching certiﬁcate and $200 for an administrative certiﬁcate. 
In addition, the applicant must pay $55.00 for ﬁngerprinting. 
Currently, the State Board of Education ’s newly revised Rule Chapter 115: The Credentialing of 
Education Personnel, has a provision which states that “individuals holding a full certiﬁcate as an 
administrator, a teacher, or a specialist issued by another state, the District of Columbia, a United 
States territory or other country deemed comparable by the Department may qualify fora 
professional certiﬁcate in the State of Maine.” In many cases, the out-of-state certiﬁcates and 
endorsements may not match with the ones outlined in Chapter l 15 . After a transcript analysis, the 
certiﬁcation team communicates with an applicant about which Maine endorsement they are eligible 
to receive. There is a wide variety in the kinds of credentials, certiﬁcate types, and ceitiﬁcate 
requirements from state to state. For example, Texas and Florida do not require the successful 
completion of coursework for certiﬁcation. New Mexico has three different levels of a professional 
teaching certiﬁcate, whereas in Maine we only have one. Determining the Maine credential for 
which out-of-state applicants are qualiﬁed is an important process that ensures the educators in 
Maine are appropriately qualiﬁed. 
The Department will be available to provide additional infoimation on LD 67 and respond to any 
questions during the upcoming work session. 
Sincerely, 
Docusigned by: 
[ 879B326A52BB412... 
Michael T. Perry, Acting Director 
Ofﬁce of Higher Education & Educator Support Services 
OFFICES LOCATED AT THE BURTON M. CROSS STATE OFFICE BUILDING AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER 
PHONE (207) 624-6600 FAX: (207) 624-6700 TTY USERS CALL MAINE RELAY 711 ONLINE: WWW.MAlNE.GOV/ DOE
