 
 
 
 
 
160 Capitol Street , Suite 4, Augusta, ME 0433 0 
207.626.2774 • 1.800.452.1948 • Fax: 207.621.1419 • drme.org  
 
MAINE’S PROTECTION AND ADVOCACY AGENCY FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES  
April 13, 2 023 
 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer , Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Cross Office Building, Room 209  
Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
 
 Re:   Testimony Neither For Nor Against LD 825, An Act Relating to 
Transportation Services for MaineCare  Members with Multiple Disabilities  
 
 
Dear Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Serv ices:  
 
My name is Lauren Wille and I am a managing attorney at Disability Rights Maine.  
DRM is Maine’s designated Protection and Advocacy Agency, and our mission is to 
advance justice and equality by enforcing rights and expanding opportunities for people  
with disabilities in Maine.  We submit this testimony neither to support nor oppose this 
bill, but to provide information that this Committee may find helpful.  
Transportation, and lack of meaningful access to it, is one of the most consistent issues 
that people with disabilities raise as a barrier to full community inclusion.  Lack of 
transportation prevents people with disabilities from getting to medical appointments, 
from getting to work, and from meaningfully p articipating in social activities that people 
who do not depend on services take for granted.  Some people experience repeated and 
chronic cancellation of rides, or worse, scheduled rides simply not showing up .  The 
result is that people miss work, they miss scheduled programming, or the miss medical 
appointments, sometimes for life -sustaining care such are cancer treatments or dialysis.  
DRM has  worked with members who were stranded at doctor offices b ecause it was the 
return ride that was canceled or did not show up at all .  Obviously, this can lead to bad 
health outcomes, but it also can lead to loss of employment, loss of services, and creates 
a great deal of unnecessary anxiety when people have to constantly worry if they ride 
will show up.  
All individuals who receive MaineCare , disabled or not,  are entitled to a service called 
“non -emergency transportation” (“NET”).  This service provides Medicaid -funded 
transportation to individuals to and from other Medicaid -funded services.  For example, 
a person who could n’t otherwise access  transportation is entitled to NET to and from a 
doctor’s appointment, or a physical therapist, so long as that service is funded by 
Medicaid/MaineCare.   This also includes transportation to and from Medicaid -funded 
work support and com munity support services.   The Office of MaineCare Services 
contracts with three regional transportation brokers (ModivCare, Penquis, and Mid 
Coast Connector) who arrange for this transportation.  Through the brokers, 
transportation can be provided by trans portation companies (e.g., KVCap), taxis and 
rideshares, reimbursement to friends and family, reimbursement for bus passes, or via 
the brokers themselves, some of which provide direct transportation services.  The rules 
regarding NET services are outlined in chapter 113 of the MaineCare Benefits Manual.  
LD 825  aims to improve transportation services for individuals with disabilities, and 
that goal is laudable , and it is sorely needed .  We have concerns about the practicality of 
additional requirements appl ying only to MaineCare recipients who have “multiple 
disabilities,” which is not defined in the bill or elsewhere in the statute.  Such a provision 
could require certain MaineCare members to disclose medical information that they 
would not otherwise be req uired to disclose to access NET services, and this could place 
a higher burden on them  to access transportation .  Currently, transportation brokers are 
required to confirm the person actually receives MaineCare, and that the transportation 
is to or from a MaineCare service.  In order to comply with this bill, transportation 
brokers would need to access sensitive and confidential medical information about 
member s in order to determine if the additional requirements would apply to the 
drivers.  DRM absolutely supports safe, accessible vehicles to users of NET services, but 
this is already required, both under NET regulations, as well as the Americans with 
Disabili ties Act, which requires that people with disabilities be reasonably 
accommodated in such services.  The bill presumes that a person with “multiple 
disabilities” would be in need of physical assistance by a driver in the case of an 
emergency in a way that a person without “multiple disabilities” would not.  Yet, 
disabilities are not always physical, and adding this requirement to a person who has 
more than one diagn osed disability,  but does not have a physical limitation , could have 
the unintended consequen ce of making transportation more  inaccessible to a person 
with more than one diagnosed disability.  For a person (who may have a disability or 
not) who does require physical assistance, the existing rules give a member the option of 
bringing a support pers on with them, or of requesting a reasonable accommodation 
specific to their own situation as needed.  
DRM recognizes and fully supports improving transportation for individuals with 
disabilities, and there is much work to be done in this area.  We hope the  information we 
have provided is helpful to the Committee as they consider this bill.  Thank you for your 
time and consideration.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Lauren Wille, Esq.  
Managing  Attorney  
Disability Rights Maine  

