2 STATE HOUSE st/mow 
= 
AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1440 
Michael H. Lemelin MAINE RELAY 711 
313 Hallo\\ell Road 
Chelsea l\'lE(l4?10 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
l\ l1cliael_Lemclin< ’(_i le~ __'isl:1lure.mame :O\ 
Residence: (Z07) 793-‘) 99 
Testimony of Rep. Michael Lemelin introducing 
LD 825 An Act Relating To Transportation Services for 
Mainecare members with Multiple Disabilities. 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Seivices. 
Good morning, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and esteemed 
members of the Health and Human Services Committee. My name is 
Representative Michael Lemelin of Chelsea representing House District 
53. I am here to present LD 825 An Act Relating T0 
Transportation Services for Mainecare members with 
Multiple Disabilities. 
There are currently serious issues in the transportation of individuals 
with multiple disabilities. So, I am asking that we place them ina 
separate category from people without those same needs. As of now 
drivers show up to a client's house unprepared for the individuals 
special needs. For example, if the person has a wheelchair a driver 
shows up in a vehicle that is not prepared or large enough to transport 
the chair, or the driver says, ”the chairs not going, is it"? Also, many 
individuals with disabilities need consistency in drivers due to their 
specials needs which gives them unnecessary anxiety. On occasion, a 
driver shows up that is unable to care for the individual in the case of an 
emergency. 
I ﬁnd these issues are unacceptable and can be easily remedied. 
Without this bill the provider can use multiple excuses to prevent 
solving these issues. Currently a computer program is used which does 
District 53 Chelsea, Dresden, Pittston and Randolph 
Primed on l€t.\ l.l€Cl papal
not take into account the person's speciﬁc needs, or the extra time it 
takes to get the individual settled in the car. Although the paperwork 
say the person's special needs, often the driver arrives without 
knowledge of the individual's needs. 
I ask for your support in solving these issues.‘
