  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
April 12 , 202 3 
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci , Chair  
Representative Michele Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 825 – An Act Relating to Transportation Services for MaineCare Members with Multiple 
Disabilities  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
and Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information on  LD 825, An Act Relating to Transportation Services for 
MaineCare Members with Multiple Disabilities . This bill requires that transportation services 
provided to members of the MaineCare program who have multiple dis abilities ensure that a 
vehicle transporting the MaineCare member is equipped in a manner that accommodates the 
member's disabilities safely, ensure that the driver is physically capable of assisting the member 
in the event of an emergency and, to the exte nt possible, provide consistency in drivers.  
 
Regarding Section 1A of the bill: Vehicles assigned to transport MaineCare members with multiple 
disabilities are already required to be equipped in a manner that accommodates the member's 
disabilities safely . The Department  requires  that NET brokers arrange transport for members 
receiving Home and Community Based Services  (HCBS)  and that drivers are trained in first aid, 
CPR , and receive sensitivity training in transporting persons with disabilities.  Brokers and 
transporters are required to provide ADA compliant wheelchair accessible vehicles and to properly 
secure wheelchairs and members during transport.   
 
HCBS providers and members with disabilities serve on NET Broker Advisory Counci ls and 
attend  meetings to provide important feedback on transport ation .  NET brokers contract with some 
HCBS providers to transport their members to and from services . This enables members to receive 
professional care during transport should it be necessar y. The Department also requires that NET 
brokers allow for a personal assistant , at no cost to the personal assistant , to accompany members 
with disabilities to help members transport safely.  
 
The requirements of Section 1B and 1C of this  bill are not operationally feasible and will c reate a  
significant increase in missed rides . Brokers and transportation companies contracted to provide 
transportation services to MaineCare members are experiencing significant difficulties recruiting 
staff to fill existing vacancies.  Regarding Section 1B of the bill: This requirement is not feasible. 
Transportation providers struggle to find and retain drivers  as it is . The ability to match drivers’ 
physical abilities with the weights and physical need s of m embers assumes a driver pool and 
capacity that unfortunately does not exist.  
 
 Regarding Section 1C of the bill: The same issue of limited drivers pertains here . There are not 
enough drivers to accommodate everyone getting their own driver or the same driver . Trips are 
scheduled in advance through multiple transporters on a first come, first served basis . Driver 
assignments are dependent on transporter and driver availability.  Requiring that specific drivers 
serve specific members will dramatically increase m issed trips.   
 
Despite our commitment to member -focused transportation services, g iven these concerns, we 
oppose the bill. We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going 
forward. If you have any further questions, please  feel free to contact me.  
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  
 

