Pinette, Susan 
From: Grohoski, Nicole 
Sent: Sunday, April 2, 2023 8:43 PM 
To: JUD 
Subject: Re: Submission of written testimony in support of bill LD 870 "An Act to Strengthen 
Freedom of Speech Protections by Extending Laws Against Strategic Lawsuits Against 
Public Participation" 
Hello Susan -- I will be presenting this testimony via Zoom for Annlinn tomorrow. I have registered and 
received the Zoom link. I just wanted to check with you -- were you able to print this out for members‘ 
folders? Would it help if I submitted it through the portal? 
Thanks, 
Nicole Grohoski 
Nicole Grohoski, Senator (she/her) 
District 7: Most of Hancock County 
Passamaquoddy & Penobscot Aboriginal Homeland 
PO Box 1732, Ellsworth, ME 04605 
207.358.8333 
***Please be advised that anything sent to me in my capacity as a legislator may become a matter of public record, per 
the Maine Freedom of Access Act, www.maine.gov/foaa/, which means that other people can ask to read these 
messages.*** 
From: annlinn kruger <ann3145@gmail.com> 
Sent: Thursday, March 23, 2023 11:50 AM 
To: JUD; Pinette, Susan 
Subject: Re: Submission of written testimony in support of bill LD 870 "An Act to Strengthen Freedom of Speech 
Protections by Extending Laws Against Strategic Lawsuits Against Public Participation" 
This message originates from outside the Maine Legislature. 
Hello Judiciary Committee Clerk Susan Pinette and All, 
I hope this ﬁnds you keeping well and enjoying heralds of a lovely Maine Spring. ThankYou for this 
opportunity to submit written testimony in support of LD 870. Please accept my apologies for possible multiple 
submissions. My only intemet connection is through an old iPhone (and is erratic at best.) I had problems with 
ReCaptcha on the website form and sometimes emails don't transmit. ThankYou for your patience. This bill 
really matters to me. 
Testimony 
ThankYou All for this opportunity to testify in strong support of bill LD 870 "An Act to Strengthen Freedom of 
Speech Protections by Extending Laws Against Strategic Lawsuits Against Public Participation"
1
My name is Annlinn Kruger and I live in Bar Harbor. 
From what I've read, Maine's 1995 AntiSLAPP law demonstrates the Legislature's intention to grant Mainers 
strong protection from those who'd use our legal system to intimidate us from, and punish us for, rightfully 
speaking out in the public sphere on issues of public interest. For instance, for this testimony. However, the 
wording of the law has confounded its purpose. In practice, the law's tortured history of changing 
pronouncements, of reversed and then reinstated decisions, has created a legal quagmire. LD 870 clariﬁes the 
intent of the law and strengthens its protections. 
Please let me tell you how my experience informs my support LD 870. When I wanted to do a public outreach 
project, I first checked with the Bar Harbor police leadership who then consulted with the Hancock County 
District Attorney. They all defended my project as protected by the First Amendment and compliant with the 
Maine Criminal Code. Yet the now disgraced former Bar Harbor Town Manager threatened me with charges of 
Criminal Mischief and the Town Council Chair upped it to Aggravated Criminal Mischief. When I wrote to the 
Town Council asking for an explanation of these official government actions, they ignored me. When I asked 
during the Public Comments at Town Council Meetings, councilors denounced me. Eventually a councilor 
suggested that there might be a legal remedy to our situation with Annlinn. 
When threatened with criminal charges, I could read up on the penalties and decide how much jail time I could 
bear and how much money I could afford. But with SLAPP suits, there's no way to ﬁgure out one's legal and 
ﬁnancial jeopardy - they can take all you've got and drain you dry in every way. For something like this 
testimony. That threat is exactly their only point. And it's terribly unjust. 
I am a 73 year old retiree living on a modest fixed income. What it took decades for me to save could be gone in 
an eye blink or over years of litigation. A SLAPP suit would devastate me. But as I live on my income, it would 
also hurt the local govemment, businesses, institutions, charities, causes, and neighbors which I help support 
through my tax payments, purchases, contributions, volunteerism, and civic engagement. In fact, a SLAPP suit 
could, unjustly but entirely legally, transform an economically independent contributing member of society into 
a destitute person dependent on govermnent assistance to survive. While SLAPP suits drain our resources, they 
drain justice from the American law. They pervert judicial proceedings to put the government's seal of approval 
on intimidation, suppression, silencing, and prosecution. Your vote for LD87O will help protect the rights of 
Mainers working to do right by our communities. ThankYou for your support.
2
