Benjamin J Brennan 
Portland, ME  
March 18th, 2023 
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Honorable Members of the IDEA Committee,  
As a Maine native, g raduate of the University of Maine and having worked in the State of Maine 
as an elevator industry professional for the last 10 years, I am proud to submit this testimony in 
support of aligning Maine’s Elevator Safety Law with Maine Uniform Building and Energy C ode 
(MUBEC) as proposed in LD 975.   
As written, LD 975 repeals the outdated Sec. 1. 32 MRSA § 15228 which requires all elevators 
to serve all levels within a building.  Sec. 1. 32 MRSA § 15228 was written at a time that most  
new buildings built in the State of Maine did not include multiple elevators .  As building designs 
have changed overtime to align with the needs of Mainers, Sec. 1. 32 MRSA § 15228 has not 
changed, and now clashes with both common building design and the more establish ed 
International Codes that the State adopted as part of MUBEC.   
As an example, consider  any one of our major hospitals that care for the people of Maine.  Most 
include multiple elevator types  to cater to many needs of that hospital; dirty elevators vs. clean, 
private vs. public, helipad elevators, freight elevators  - all potentially  serving different levels 
within the building to best serve the hospital ’s patients and staff.  Under Sec. 1. 32 MRSA 
§ 15228, the se same hospitals could not be built today witho ut major design changes  or a 
granted variance.  
The International codes adopted as part of MUBEC are reviewed meticulously on an  
international level and updated through formal processes .  Maine’s design & construction 
professionals are continually educated on these codes and how to abide by them.  Maine has 
established formal review processes for new buildings to ensure that these codes  are met well  
before construction begins .  Elevator plans  however, are reviewed by the Elevator & Tramway 
Safety Program when the elevator permit application is submitted, often halfway through the 
project.  On a few recent projects that were found in compliance with MUBEC, noncompliance 
with Sec. 1. 32 MRSA § 15228 was discovered at a later stage of the project.  This required 
substantial time and money of all parties involved (both private and public) to produce a 
resolution.  
I encourage the IDEA Committee to support L D 975, as amended.   By aligning Maine’s Elevator 
Safety Law with MUBEC, Maine provides a clear path forward for the building of projects that 
our state so desperately needs  – housing, medical buildings, education, infrastructure and so 
many more across both the public and private sectors.  
Thank you for your time and consideration, and for your public service to our great State of 
Maine. Sincerely,  
Benjamin J. Brennan 
 
