 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 2 07 
As Amended by the Sponsor’s Amendment  
Resolve, to Direct the Department of Public Safety to Examine the Responsibilities, Fees, and 
Duties of the Technical Building Codes and Standards Board 
March 20, 2023 
 
Senator Bibbe-Center , Representative Salisbury , and Honorable Members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety  Committee; 
On behalf of the American Institute for Architects , Maine C hapter  (AIA Maine), I am pleased to 
submit this testimony in support of LD 2 07, as presented by the Sponsor’s Amendment, entitled 
“Resolve, to Direct the Department of Public  Safety to Examine the Responsibilities, Fees, and 
Duties of the Technical Building Codes and Standards Board.”    
AIA members are the front line of interaction w ith the Maine Uni form B uilding and Energy Code, 
as archite cts engage regularly with code provisions in drafting and designing work. AIA Maine 
also has a repres entative on the M UBEC Board, which  plays an important role in the 
implementation of the international codes that m ake up the MUBEC: the International Building 
Code, the International Existing Building Code, and the International Energy Conservation 
Code.   
AIA Ma ine believes the  MUBEC Boa rd needs additional resources and long-term planning for 
funding its important work. Recently, the MUBEC Board has conducted important work and will 
continue to grow in importance as more buildings are constructed in Maine, and as climate 
action demands new and innovative methods of build ing. We believe the MUBEC is one of the 
State’ s most important building and energy regulation tools, and we look forward to continuing 
to be an i mportant part of the development, implementation, and enforcement of the state’ s 
building codes.  
AIA Maine supports LD 207 as ame nded by the sponsor ’s amendment and believ es that a long-
term funding and governance plan for the MUBEC will enable the important work of the board to 
continue and evolve. We also look forward to the opportunity  to serve on the study and believe 
our current role on the MUBEC Board makes us w ell suited to share impor tant insights into the 
process .  
Please support LD 2 07 unanimously with an Ought to Pass as Amended report.  
Sincerely,  
Elizabeth M. Frazier  
On behalf of AIA Maine  
efrazier@pierceatwood.com  
  
 
 
