MEDA Testimony in Support of LD 975, An Act to Align Maine's Elevator Safety Laws with the Maine Uniform 
Building and Energy Code Standards 
March 21, 2023 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts, and Honorable Members of the IDEA Committee; 
On behalf of the Maine Real Estate and Development Association (MEREDA), I am pleased to testify in 
support of LD 975, as amended by the sponsor's amendment, to align Maine's elevator safety law to the 
international standards in the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code. This bill, as amended, would 
repeal 32 MRSA § 15228, because it creates confusion with the standards in the Maine Uniform Building 
and Energy Code (MUBEC). MEREDA worked with Representative Crockett and the Department of 
Professional and Financial Regulation (the Department) to bring this legislation forward following a 
significant delay ofa project in Portland and anticipated delays for other similarly situated projects. 
Speciﬁcally, the new USM dormitory's elevators failed inspection last year, adding significant time and 
cost to that project. At the time, the statute at 32 MRSA § 15228 was interpreted to mean that all 
elevators in a building must accommodate a stretcher and must go to all floors~ essentially requiring all 
buildings to be squared off. The requirement in the MUBEC is that at least one elevator that can 
accommodate a stretcher be available on every floor. The international and MUBEC requirement makes 
sense — as long as you can access an elevator that can accommodate a stretcher on every floor of the 
building, you meet the standard. 
Given the confusion created by the existing statute and its misalignment with the MUBEC, we believe it 
is appropriate to repeal the statute at 32 MRSA § 15228. Repeal of this statute will not eliminate the 
underlying safety standard, which is governed under the MUBEC. We believe the MUBEC is also a more 
appropriate place because the standard can evolve — in recent years, stretchers sizes have increased, 
requiring a 120~inch elevator. The MUBEC is regularly updated as the international codes are revised, 
updated, and released every three years. This will ensure that the elevator size standard is also regularly 
updated. 
MEREDA believes this legislation is necessary to ensure projects, including needed housing projects, are 
not unnecessarily delayed. For this reason, we also urge that it be adopted on an emergency basis. 
We appreciate the help of the Department in working with us on this important issue, and 
Representative Crockett for his sponsorship of the bill. We urge the IDEA Committee to support LD 975 
with an Ought to Pass as Amended report. 
Thank you for your time and attention to this important and timely issue. 
Sincerely 
Elizabeth M. Frazier 
On behalf of Maine Real Estate & Development Association 
efrazier@pierceatwood.com 
V -” “if __ 
V. 
. WW ....~...._..._
