 
University of Maine ∙ University of Maine at Augusta ∙ University of Maine at Farmington ∙ University of Maine at Fort Kent ∙ University of 
Main e at Machias ∙ University of Maine at Presque Isle ∙ University of Southern Maine ∙ University of Maine School of Law  
 
DATE:   March 21, 2023  
TO:   Committee  on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business  
FROM:  Samantha Warren, UMS Director of Government & Community Relations   
                       samantha.warren@maine.edu  / (207) 632 -0389  
RE:   LD 975 , An Act to Align Maine's Elevator Safety Laws with Maine Uniform  
  Building and Energy Code Standards  
 
 
Senator Curry, Representative Roberts and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business: I write on behalf of the University 
of Maine System (UMS) to inform your consideration of LD 975,  An Act to Align Maine's Elevator 
Safety Laws with Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code Standards.  
Later this year, the University of Southern Maine will open a new 218,000 -square -foot, 580 -bed 
passive residence hall and 42,000 -square -foot Career & Stude nt Success Center that will incorporate 
innovative mass timber construction. This project will transform USM’s  Portland campus and the 
community, and our students’ experience and success  — including by providing needed affordable 
housing  that will make it more manageable for them to persist to degree completion while  alleviat ing 
demand on housing in the community . The $100 million  Portland Commons was  possible because of  
generous  private  philanthropy and public investment supported by the 128th Legislature and Maine 
voters in 2018. Thank you.  
As students excitedly submitted deposits to secure their spot in the new residence hall for Fall 2023, 
the university learned that the opening of th is highly anticipated  project may be delayed . 
The eight -story residence hall  included a double  elevator shaft , with one elevator extending to the 
roof-level mechanical “penthouse, ” essentially a shed that  functions as storage for mechanical 
equipment and i s not accessible to the public, and the other elevator stopping at  the top  occupied  
floor of the building.  
The International Building Code does not consider a mechanical penthouse to be a separate 
building floor. However, State statute requires that for new construction, “the passenger elevator 
must reach all levels  within the building.” Because of this statute, the Elevator and Tramway Safety 
Program with in the State’s  Office of Professional and Occupational Regulation  denied the elevator 
permit request  submitted  for the project by KONE . A later variance request  from KONE  was also 
denied,  and it appeared USM would be required to extend both elevator shafts, adding significant 
cost and time to the historic project that could delay occupancy this coming fal l.  
We are appreciat ive that K ONE’s  appeal of th at variance denial  ultimately  resulted in a consent 
agreement  being reached with the State last month , allowing our elevators to receive their proper 
permits and USM’s Portland Commons and its important  public benefits to move forward .  
Our System understands our  unique  experience has in -part led to the legislation. We hope our 
account detailed here is informative to t he Committee’s consideration of LD 975. Please let me know 
if UMS can provide additional helpful information in advance of your work session.  
