 
 
 National Elevator Industry, Inc. Statement for the Record Hearing on LD 975  Submitted to Committee on Innovation, Development, Economic Advancement and Business Maine State Legislature  Augusta, Maine March 21, 2023    The National Elevator Industry, Inc. (NEII) is the leading trade association for companies that manufacture, install, and maintain elevators, escalators, moving walks, and other building transportation products. NEII members collectively represent over eighty-five percent of the work hours in the building transportation industry.   NEII welcomes the opportunity to provide the industry’s views on LD 975, an act to align Maine's Elevator Safety Laws with Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code Standards. NEII commends Representative Crockett for bringing this legislation before the Legislature and joins with the Maine Real Estate and Development Association in support of LD 975.   LD 975 would ensure that passenger elevators conform to standards established in the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code. The bill would not make any change affecting the safety of the riding public but would alleviate costly inefficiencies in building and facility construction. Under current law (32 M.R.S. §15228 (2022)), each passenger elevator installed in a building must reach all levels of the building and be of sufficient size to accommodate the transport of a person on an ambulance stretcher in a fully supine position. In some cases, this design requirement is inconsistent with the requirements of the International Building Code as adopted by the State of Maine pursuant to Chapter 1103 of Title 10 of the Maine Revised Statutes. This inconsistency can lead to inefficient building design, added costs for building owners and operators, confusion in the marketplace and industry, and delays in construction. By aligning the elevator code with the building and energy code, LD 975 would greatly improve efficiency in the construction environment as well as clarify requirements in the oversight and administration of the State’s construction inspection and elevator programs.   NEII is aware that the Committee may consider an amendment in the nature of a substitute that would simply repeal the existing statutory provision in title 32 that this bill would otherwise amend. An amendment of this kind would result in an identical outcome. NEII would support that alternative if it is the recommendation of the Committee to the Legislature.   NEII appreciates the opportunity to provide the industry’s views on this legislation. We believe it is an important clarification to provide certainty in the regulatory environment and we urge the Committee to 
 
  
support it. NEII staff and member companies are available to provide any additional information as needed.    
