 
TO:   Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry  
Joint Standing Committee on Taxation    
FROM:  Becky Smith, Director of Government and Community Relations  
RE: Testimony  in Opposition  to LD 1 328, An Act to Fund a Public Defender’s Office 
Through a Tax on University Endowment Income  
DATE:  May 11 , 202 3  
 
 
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation , 
please accept this testimony in opposition to LD 1328  on behalf of the Maine Community College 
System.  
 
After consulting with our General Counsel ’s office  and our Chief Financial Officer, it is our 
understanding that this bill will  have a small but meaningful  impact  on the Maine Community College 
System .  
 
Although the majority of  the endowment funds  that benefit MCCS are held by the independent Maine 
Community College Foundation, some of our colleges do have endowment  funds  that are "held by the 
trustees of the university or college ” and would be taxed under this initiative.  Those  funds allow the 
colleges to provide  necessary  supports  not covered by tuition or our state appropriation.   
 
The vast majority of those  funds are from  five different endowments  from the Bernard Osher 
Foundation  and are to be used for  targeted financial aid to needy students at key moments in their 
educational journey.  Some  of these  endowment funds are targeted specifically to rural students, others 
for early college  programs  and all allow us to help students with great need .   
 
I should note that e ven with every dollar of our endowment  income  we still cannot meet all of our 
students’  needs.  In fact, we have told your colleagues on the Appropriations and Education Committees 
that we need at least $5  million more in state funding to help our colleges support students  with the ir 
increased academic, mental health and financial needs .  
 
Maine’s seven community colleges have long been the most direct, affordable, and effective investment 
for meaningfully advancing Maine’s economy.  Our fa ll enrollment was 16,791 students, including the 
5,574 who took advantage of the state’s Free College Scholarship, and we serve more than 25,000 
individuals through degree and certificate programs, customized short -term workforce training and 
credit and no n-credit offerings. We educate Maine people from all walks of life to provide them the 
skills and knowledge to excel in their chosen industry and create a fulfilling, stable and rewarding life 
for themselves and their families. The state’s partnership and financial support allows us to educate 

 
 
 tomorrow’s workforce in critical, innovative, and high -demand fields that sustain and strengthen the 
fabric of our entire society.  
 
We set our graduates on a path to college or career success and we ask that you partner with us to assure 
we have the resources we need to continue working with Maine’s businesses to rebuild a better, safer, 
and stronger economy.  To this end, we respectfully ask you to vote Ought Not To  Pass on LD 1328 and 
allow our endowments to support our students.  
 
Thank you.  
  
