 
University of Maine ∙ University of Maine at Augusta ∙ University of Maine at Farmington ∙ University of Maine at Fort Kent ∙ University of 
Main e at Machias ∙ University of Maine at Presque Isle ∙ University of Southern Maine ∙ University of Maine School of Law  
 
 
Testimony from the University of Maine System  
Presented by UMS Director of Government & Community Relations Samantha Warren  
In Opposition to LD 1328, An Act to Fund a Public Defender's Office  
Through a Tax on University Endowment Income  — May 11, 2023  
Senator Grohoski , Representative Perry  and distinguished members of the Taxation  Committee: 
My name is Samantha Warren  and I am the Director of Government Relations for the University 
of Maine System (UMS) . 
We share Representative Andrews ’ commitment to expanding access  to justice  in Maine . 
Through the University of Maine School of Law  and pre -law programs across our Syst em and 
state , we are preparing the next generation of public -service minded lawyers and leaders  and 
provid ing 14,000 hours of pro bono legal aid to Mainers in need  each year . More than two -thirds 
of Maine Law students rely on scholarships , many underwritten by endowed funds . 
LD 1328 would directly undermine the efforts of  our public universities to better ensure 
Mainers’ constitutional right to counsel and would violate the existing legal agreements 
our System  and supporting foundations have with hundreds of  donors .  
For this reason, we oppose the Legislature levying the new tax proposed by this bill .   
UMS and its public universities are grateful that donors have generously invested  in our ability  to 
advance student opportunity and teaching, research and innovation that matters to Maine . 
Endowments provide  stability to the state’s  largest educational and economic development 
enterprise,  especially given UMS has held tuition flat eight of the past 1 2 years  and during that 
same period, our annual appropriation has actually declined when adjusted for inflation . 
Currently, there are more than a half -billion dollars in endowments established for the explicit 
benefit of our public universities, though less than $180 million of that is held by UMS Trustees . 
The remainder is managed  for growth  by independent 501(c)(3) organization s that operate with 
their own elected Board of Directors, like the University of Maine Foundation , the University of 
Southern Maine Foundation  and Maine Law’s foundation. Nearly all of the  endowed  funds  
associated with UMS  are restricted and thus governed by  legally binding gift agreement s 
that direct how annual earnings are to be distributed , assuming  there have been  market 
gains . We do not believe the interest earned from these existing investments could be utilized 
for any other purpose, including remittanc e to the State.  
 
A vast majority of the hundreds of individually named funds that make up our university -affiliated 
endowments support student scholarships, ensuring door -opening postsecondary education is 
available to all Mainers, including those who are aspiring attorneys  and your constituents . For 
example :  
• The Warren C. and Jeanne F. Shay Scholarship provides financial assistance to UMaine  
students who are residents of Somerset County . 
• The Loring R. Swain  ’32 Scholarship Fund provides financial assistance to needy Oxford 
and Franklin County students who are studying engineering  at UMaine . 
• The Charles Leslie and Helen Eastman Scholarship Fund provides financial assistance 
to UMaine  students from Androscoggin and Sagadahoc Counties . 
 
Page 2 of 2 
 • The Hirshon Sch olarship underwrites a paid internship at Pine Tree Legal for first -year 
students at Maine Law, instilling the commitment to public service early in law school.  
• The Vincent  L. McKusick Scholarship, named after a former Maine Chief Justice 
appointed by Gov ernor Longley, provides financial assistance to Maine Law 
students  from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds.  
 
University -affiliated endowments already provide tremendous public benefit  and should 
not (and cannot) be redirected at the expense of our students , regardless of the worthiness 
of the cause. Please know UMS, led by its law school,  remains committed to  improv ing 
both access and quality of  counsel for the people of Maine , which would be most furthered 
by investments in, rather than taxes on, our public universities.  
 
On behalf of our students and our System, I want to publicly thank our donors and the 
Legislature for your ongoing support .  
 
 
