To: Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services
From:  Kimberly A. Feeney, M.A., CCC-SLP of Brownfield, Maine
Date: 3/20/23
RE:  LD 717
“An Act to adopt the Audiology and Speech-Language Pathology Interstate Compact”
To the Committee Members:
I am an SLP (Speech-Language Pathologist) in private practice in the State of Maine 
working with 3-5 year-olds as a contractor with Child Development Services (CDS) through 
teletherapy.  I also have provided these same services to 3 year-old up to 18 year-olds with one 
company in Georgia and another servicing clients in North Carolina, Arizona, and California.  
These other states are experiencing difficulties providing Speech-Language services just as we 
are in Maine.  Rural communities in all states are experiencing difficulties in serving this 
population who need these services.  
In Maine, my contract with CDS is to provide only teletherapy speech-language services.  
My practice is currently full, yet I continue to get referrals regarding children needing service 
and must then wait for openings. Most of these children do not go to daycare or Pre-K 
programs.  Their parents cannot get them to services at clinics and the only options are to be on 
a waitlist or utilize teletherapy services.  If the Compact is approved, it would become faster 
and easier for SLP’s to obtain licenses.  Out of state SLP’s could then see children using 
teletherapy and there would be more opportunities for the services to be provided.
I also live close to the New Hampshire border.  Having the Compact with our two states 
as participants would afford me the opportunity to see children in Maine and New Hampshire 
using teletherapy.  I have had children move across state lines and then not be able to find 
services available in the other state. 
To service the populations in the four states I have licenses in (other than Maine), I had 
to apply to each one individually.  Two of them required fingerprinting separate from those 
already on file in Maine.  Two of them also took three or more months to obtain.  This caused a 
significant delay in my employment with one company causing many clients having to wait even 
longer for services.
I hope the information I have relayed to the committee was helpful.  If you have any 
further questions, please feel free to reach out to me.
Kimberly A. Feeney, M.A., CCC-SLP
Speech-Language Pathologist
