OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT  SECRETARY OF DEFENSE  
  1500  DEFENSE PENTAGON  
  WASHINGTON, D.C. 20301 -1500  
 
March  21, 2023  
  
         MANPOWER AND  
       RESERVE AFFAIRS       
Maine State Legislature  
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04330  
 
Senator Donna Bailey  
Representative Anne Perry  
Co-Chair s 
 
Remarks  of 
Melissa J. Willette  
New England Regional Liaison  
United States Department of Defense -State Liaison Office  
 
Support: LD 717 , An Act to Adopt  the Audiology and Speech -Language Pathology 
Interstate Compact  
 
The Department of Defense is thankful  for the opportunity to support policy changes proposed in 
L.D. 717 , An Act  to Adopt the  Audiology and Speech -Language Pathology Interstate Compact  
(ASLP -IC), which addresses licensing issues affecting our service members and their families. 
The purpose of  the ASLP -IC is to facilitate interstate practice of  audiology and speech -language 
pathology  with the goal of improving public access to services , while preserving the regulatory 
authority of states to protect public health and safety through the current s ystem of state 
licensure.  
 
My name is Melissa Willette . I am the New England  Regional Liaison for the United States 
Department of Defense -State Liaison Office, operating under the direction of Under Secretary of 
Defense for Personnel and Readiness. Each liaison represents  the Department and work s with 
state officials, policy makers, and stakeholders regarding issues that affect military service 
members, veterans and their families .  
 
Licensure issues for both our transitioning military members and their spouses have been a 
priority for the Department for several years . ASLP -IC seeks to eliminate barriers to interstate 
professional audiology and speech -language pathology  practice, improve patient access to 
professional services, enhance public protec tion through a shared interstate licensure data 
system , while simultaneously supporting the spouses of relocating active duty military personnel.  
 
Of additional benefit is the compact’s utilization of a mutual recognition model of interstate 
practice, which enhances opportunities of portable careers for military spouses by providing 
consistent rules which allow licensed members to work in other states through “privilege to 
practice policies”, or more easily transfer their license to a new stat e.  
 

 
 
 
2 To address license portability for military spouses, states have turned to occupational licensure 
interstate compacts, which streamline relicensing between member states of a compact for all 
practitioners in an occupation, and provide specific support f or military spouses of relocating 
active -duty personnel through provisions recognizing unique requirements of military life.  
 
A 2018 study by the Federal Trade Commission, “ Options to Enhance Occupational License 
Portability,”  recognized there are two appr oaches to allevi ating barriers to license portability. 
Namely, mutual recognition, which relates to occupational compacts, and expedited licensure, 
which encompasses exemption -based  approaches.1   
 
Occupational licensure compacts provide consistent rules for licensed members to work in other 
states , such as Maine  residents presently domiciled in other states while accompanying their 
military spouse on active -duty. Common misinformation about compacts is that they either lower 
or raise the standards for the  occupation, when in fact, compact states have the option to issue a 
“compact license” and also a “ State-only license” to maintain their state’s  standards.  
 
Professional  licensure has been an enduring problem for military spouses. Obtaining a license in 
a new State can be both time consuming and expensive, and military spouses often cannot 
adequately anticipate how to prepare for licensure in a new state due to the unpredictable nature 
of military moves. The short duration of military assignments, coupled with lengthy relicensing 
processes, can discourage military spouses from seeking relicensure, causing them to quit an 
occupation or causing military  families to leave the military.  Understanding that military 
spouses need assistance now, and that many States have already committed to a variety of 
approaches, the Department advocates that States should pursue multiple approaches to 
reciprocity simulta neously.  
  
Military spouses are a cross -section of the American population, although a greater percentage of 
them are in licensed occupations than their civilian counterparts,2 and they are significantly more 
mobile.3 States have committed to using inte rstate compacts, which establish common 
understanding of competency and its measurement within the occupation , to resolve the 
interstate issue of license portability.  
 
Compacts can provide seamless reciprocity for military spouses in an occupation. Barrier s to the 
transfer and acceptance of certifications and licenses that occur when state rules differ can have a 
dramatic and negative effect on the financial well -being of military families.  
 
 
 
1 Karen A. Goldman . “Options to Enhance Occupational License Portability .” Federal Trade Commission. 
September 2018. Retrieved from http://www.ftc.gov/policy/reports/policy -reports/commission -and-staff-reports  
2 34 percent  of active duty  spouses self -identified as needing a State  issued license to work  (2017 Survey of Active 
Duty ( Active Component ) Spouses, Tabulations of Responses; Office of People Analytics Report No. 2018 -006, 
May 2018 ), compared to 30 percent of the civilian population (The Hamilton Project, Brookings Institute, 
https://www.hamiltonproject.org/charts/percent_of_occupations_requiring_a_license_by_state )  
3 “Military spouses are 10 times more likely to move across State  lines than their civilian counterparts ,”  
“Supp orting Our Military Families: Best Practices for Streamlining Occupational Licensing Across State Lines,” 
U.S. Department of Treasury and U.S. Department of Defense, February 2012, page 7.  
3 Freque nt moves and cumbersom e licensing and certificati on requirement s limit career options 
for military spouses. Removing these barriers, creat ing reciprocit y in licensing requirements, and 
facilitating placement opportunities can help a military family’s financial stabilit y, speed the 
assimilati on of the family int o its new locat ion, and create a desirable new employe e pool for a 
state.  
The coronavirus pandemic demonstrate d that interstate licensure compacts such as ASLP-I C can 
provide a permanent solution to leverage underutilized medical talent to mee t labor shortages in 
high- need areas. The ASLP- IC will assist Maine audiologist s and speech-language pathologists 
practicing both in and out-of- state, while improving the quality of ca re in the Pine Tree State. 
The Department of Defense is grateful for the effort s Maine has historically made t o support our 
uniformed service members and their families. We appreciate the opportunity to support the 
passage of the policies reflected in L.D. 717 and are especially gra teful to Senator Stewart and 
Senator Brenner for introducing this meaningful piece of legislation.  
Thank you for your time and at tention.  I stand ready to answ er whatever questions you may 
have. 
Sincerely , 
MELISSA WILLETTE  
New England  Region al Liaison  
Defense -State Liaison Office  
