	
	
       	Maine	Mayors	Coalition		Testimony	in	Support	of	LD	2	An	Act	to	End	Chronic	Homelessness	by	Creating	the	Housing	First	Fund			Senator	Pierce,	Representative	Gere	and	distinguished	members	of	the	Joint	Select	Committee	on	Housing,	the	Maine	Mayors	Coalition	writes	in	support	of	Speaker	Talbot	Ross’s	amendment	to	LD	2,	An	Act	to	End	Chronic	Homelessness	by	Creating	the	Housing	First	Fund.			The	Maine	Mayors	Coalition	is	a	nonpartisan	group	representing	the	mayors	of	ten	Maine	communities	–	Auburn,	Augusta,	Biddeford,	Lewiston,	Portland,	Rockland,	Saco,	Sanford,	South	Portland	and	Westbrook	–	and	more	than	260,000	residents.	The	Coalition	advocates	on	behalf	of	our	citizens	and	municipalities	for	policies	that	recognize	the	vital	services	Maine	cities	provide	and	the	positive	impact	Maine	cities	have	on	our	state.	The	Coalition	seeks	to	work	in	partnership	with	state	and	federal	elected	officials	to	meet	the	needs	of	Maine	people.			Maine’s	housing	crisis	directly	impacts	each	of	our	cities,	and	housing	is	top	of	mind	for	all	of	us.	Every	day	we	see	the	human	and	economic	consequences	that	come	from	the	lack	of	housing	supply	and	the	rising	costs	of	homes	and	rents.			Our	cities	are	working	to	find	ways	we	can	help	preserve	existing	affordable	housing	and	develop	new	affordable	housing.	Both	are	critical	for	our	cities	–	and	our	state	–	to	thrive.	In	our	capacity	as	mayors,	we’re	engaging	with	community	members	and	partners	to	foster	ideas	and	advance	solutions	at	the	local	level.			As	you’re	well	aware,	an	unfortunate	consequence	of	our	housing	crisis	is	an	increase	in	homelessness.	Cities	of	all	sizes	are	seeing	their	homeless	populations	increase.	Many	are	at	or	near	capacity.	Though	unhoused	populations	may	be	larger	in	our	cities,	homelessness	is	not	specific	to	us.	Sadly,	communities	all	across	the	state	are	experiencing	it	as	well.			As	mayors,	our	most	immediate	concerns	are	finding	housing	for	people	who	need	it	now	and	providing	them	with	essential	support.	Speaker	Talbot	Ross’s	amendment,	which	will	provide	services	and	shelter	to	individuals	who	have	been	chronically	homeless,	will	help	us	address	these	concerns	for	a	specific	population	of	people	experiencing	homelessness.	It	will	help	alleviate	some	of	the	pressures	now	placed	on	our	staffs	as	well	as	on	our	budgets	for	general	assistance,	first	responders	and	other	critical	services.			The	Maine	Mayors	Coalition	thanks	Speaker	Talbot	Ross	and	the	members	of	this	Committee	for	your	continuing	work	on	this	very	important	issue.		
