 
 
P.O. Box 100, Winthrop, ME 04364          amanda@attorneymeader.com           207- 649-4122
   
    
 
  
 
To:               Joint Housing Commi ttee 
From :         Amanda A. Meader , Esq.  
DATE :          April 4 , 2023 
SUBJECT :   LD 2  
  I write in support of LD 2.  I am a family member who has witnessed firsthand  the value of the 
“Housing First ” model .   
 Born  and r aised in Fairfield, I  put myself through Bates College on scholar ship (Phi Beta Kappa, 
Magna Cum Lau de), went directly to Cornell Law School upon graduat ion, and have been a 
practicing attorney since 2004.  A fter working with one of P ortland’s largest law firms, and then 
a non- profit, I now run my own law firm , specializing in municipal law.   Even now, at the age of 
44, I cannot spea k about my father without crying, thus the writte n testimony in l ieu of an in-
person appearance.  
 My father was a hard -work ing and talented carpenter, a kind- hearted neighbor and friend, and a  
man who deeply loved his wife and three children.  H e also drank to self -medicate  depression , 
anxiety , and the  PTSD of having a violent alcoholic father.  
  I was 9 when I first realized that my D ad was bein g eaten alive by the monster of addiction. By 
age 16, my parents had divorced after 20 years of marriage , his drinking having made our home 
no longer a safe space.  After couch surfing a bit, he  eventually  took to the  streets.  Contact with 
him was sporadic over the next decade, and of decreasing frequency. At one point I had not seen my father in five years. I had not heard from him in three.  
 I discovered he was in Portland when I heard a radio news  story about increasing violence 
against the homeless. I heard a man who went by “Z” speak of being stabbed in the back while sleepin g under the Casco Bay bridge. I knew that my father went by “Z,” but hoped that I had 
misheard or misunderstood. I had not.  
 On March 24, 2005, Avesta Housing and Preble Street Resource Center opened Logan Place, Portland’s first efficiency apartment building dedicated to housing chronically homeless adults. Several months later, my siblings and I partnered with Preble Street  and the miraculous Donna 
Yellen  to move my father off the streets and into his own “house.”  
 Knowing that my father had a place to live meant that in the winter, when the temperatures dipped below zero, I knew he was warm.  
 It meant that I knew where to find him, so I could send him letters and visit.  It meant that he had reliable access to a telephone and could call his children. 
 
 
 
P.O. Box 100, Winthrop, ME 04364          amanda@attorneymeader.com           207- 649-4122
   
 
 
 It meant that he was eating more and walking better.  
 
It meant that he had a bed. And a toilet. And a shower. He had a home to go to, instead of a home that he carried in a knapsack.  
 And it meant that my siblings and I were able to visit, and sometimes, just for a moment, when we laughed at something funny my father had said, we were able to feel young and safe again.  
 We’ve all had, or will have, heavy sorrows in our lives.  One of my heaviest sorrow s is the loss 
of my father to untreated mental illness and alcoholism. Beloved by many and helped by countless, he still lost his battle at age 58.   On July 30, 2011, he died alone in his “home.”   
 And t hen I received the  phone call that I had known for years would be coming. 
 Let us give those among us w ho are struggling a chance at a better life.  Give them the dignity of 
a roof over their heads , rather than stare past and through them as we rush about with our 
“important ” lives.   I urge you to vote in favor of LD 2. 
 Sincerely,  
 
Amanda A. Meader  
     
 

