L:’a ,=LE$§< _‘g, 
‘sz 
AUGUSTA 
HOUSING 
SI 
131 Legislature 
Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Teriiﬂzolgl of Amanda O/:0/2, Exec‘;/z‘z' 1/e Dz' nect01'0fAz/gz/Ira H02/Jirzg A1/zboiiy on April 4, 2023 
2' 
/zfm/or of LD 2. 
Good afternoon Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the joint Select Committee 
on Housing. My name is Amanda Olson and I am the Executive Director of the Augusta Housing 
Authority. I am filled with gratitude today as I have the opportunity to stand before you and speak 
in favor of LD 2. 
\X/hile there has long been a shortage of housing in l\/Iaine, here in Augusta We have Watched that 
shortage grow to crisis levels over the last several years. lVIany in our commuriity have become 
homeless due to drastically increasing rents and no fault evictions. In particular, We have seen an 
increase in highly vulnerable, chronically unhoused individuals who have complex needs and barriers 
to accessing housing through traditional models. \X/hile We often think of chronic homelessness asa 
Portland problem, I’m here to underscore that this is an issue that merits botl1 attention and well» 
directed funding here in Augusta and across all parts our state. Many people right here in our capital 
city need the help and hope offered through LD 2. 
F or the past several months I have been participating in a Working group coordinated by Senator 
Pouliot, that has discussed how at both the tactical and systemic levels, We can better address needs 
of those unhoused in Augusta. We have focused on those most vulnerable; chronically homeless, 
with complex mental health, substance use or other challenges. Site~Based Housing First has been 
brought up at every meeting as an obvious solution here in Augusta. As a successful developer of 
affordable housing, Augusta Housing can ﬁnd a path to construction, but the missing link has been 
funding for the necessary 24~hour onsite services to support long-term stability and prevention of 
returns to homelessness. 
Last month, thanks to the Welcoming spirit of both Preble Street staff and residents, I had the 
opportunity to join many of you in the room today on a tour Huston Commons, a Site-Based 
Housing First Program in Portland. I know I am not alone in sharing What a moving experience it 
was to meet residents there and see first—hand the transformative effect this program model has had. 
We heard from individuals who in some cases had been homeless for decades share how the 24- 
hour on-site staff in combination with services provided by outside partners has allowed them to 
work through the trauma of homelessness, address substance use and ﬁnd support in health, 
relationships and ﬁnancial and employment goals. It is a building overﬂowing with stories of success 
that are nothing short of inspirational. 
LI) 2, if successful, Will help provide this same opportunity for individuals all across Maine. I urge 
you to support this key initiativeas part of a larger effort to address lVlaine’s affordable housing 
crisis. Thank you for your time. 
Augusta Housing Authority - 33 Union Street, Suite 3, Augusta, ME 04330 - (207)626-2357 (p) - (207)626-2359 (f)
