Janet T_ Mills V‘ Maine Department of Health and ‘Hugman Seggrces 
G , . .
, _,,.;§,L_ ‘ _ Commissioner's ice o\ ex not 
ll State House Station
r 
V 
I09 Ca )itol Street . ; * ’\' . J2 ' ' 
. . t.I 
éfl)‘Iillllli§l l()l1(f‘!rﬂbl6“, Pb D Augusta, Maine mm-0011 ' H Tel: (207) 287-3707; Fax: (207) 287-3005 
TTY: Dial 7]! (Maine Relay) 
Testimony of Deputy Commissioner Bethany Hamm 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services 
In Support of LD2 
An Act to End Chronic Homelessness by Creating the Housing First Fund 
Sponsor: Speaker Talbot Ross 
April 4, 2023 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and Members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing: 
My name is Bethany Hamm, and I serve as a Deputy Commissioner of the Department of Health and 
Human Services (DHHS). Thank you for the opportunity to provide our testimony on LD 2, and the 
amendment that would create the Housing First Fund and establish a Housing First Program in Maine. 
The amendment to LD 2 would establish a program that pairs safe, stable housing access with the 
sen/ices, and supports necessary to live safe, healthy, and prosperous lives. This would be accomplished 
jointly by Maine State Housing Authority and the Department of Health and Human Services to serve our 
friends, family, and community members experiencing chronic homelessness and other barriers to 
stability in their lives. 
As Governor Mills stated during the State of the Budget address, we support developing a Housing First 
program. The COVID-19 pandemic shined a glaring light on the housing need in Maine. While the federal 
government, our state agencies, community partners, advocates, and municipalities sprang to action to ﬁll 
the gaps to the best of our collective ability, we know now more than ever that a permanent, holistic 
solution to chronic homelessness is critical. 
This work further leverages a relatively new initiative within MaineCare, Maine’s Medicaid program. The 
HOME Program is a new, Health Home service model under Section 91 that provides whole-person 
comprehensive case management, team-based care coordination, supports, and health promotion, and 
person-centered plans of care with comprehensive transitional care and follow up. Matching up these and 
other needed services with Housing developments will provide a long-term solution for those in chronic 
homelessness. 
DHHS has been engaged in conversations with the Speaker’s Office and other committed Legislators, the 
Maine State Housing Authority, and the Governor ’s Ofﬁce of Policy Innovation and the Future about how 
to best bring this program to life. Ahead of the work session, we expect to have recommendations for the 
Committee and we appreciate your partnership in this work. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on LD 2. The Department of Health and Human 
Services looks forward to continuing work with the Speaker, advocates, and our sister agencies towarda 
Housing First program that can be implemented efficiently and effectively and meet its full potential for 
Maine people. I am happy to take questions and we will gladly participate at the work session.
