Bruce Noddin  
Maine Prisoner Re -Entry Network  
PO Box 7157  
Lewiston, ME 04240  
bruce@re -entrymaine .org 
April 4, 2023  
Testimony in support of LD 2 to the Joint Committee on Housing  
Hello Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and Members of the Joint Committe e on Housing . 
My name is Bruce Noddin. and I am the Executive Director of The Maine Prisoner Re -Entry 
Network or MPRN, a state -wide non -profit focused on providing peer support and coordinat ed 
community resources for hundreds of individuals  returning to Maine communities from prison , 
jail, and treatment courts. I was also appointed to the Sta te Workforce Board  by Governor Mills 
and the Maine Recovery Council by Senator Jackson , in 2022.  
I am writing in support of LD 2 . We do not need to inform the fine folks on th is committee that 
the most pressing  challenge facing nearly all Maine communities is a lack of available, safe, and 
afforda ble housing . The MPRN Team recognizes  “Housing First ” initiatives like LD 2 as an 
excellent ste p in the right direction. In our experience , the establishme nt of stable housing is a 
clear determinant  of success for individuals who live with mental health challenges, are in 
recovery from substance use disorder, and /or releasing from incarceration . Conversely, 
individuals from these groups do not fair well without stable affordable housing, or at least 
accommodations  to better support their needs in unhoused situations.  Due to these challenges, 
many of these individuals end up back in jail and prison where disproportionate  community 
resources are expended and incarceration only serve s to exacerbate  existing mental health and 
substance use conditions.  
 LD 2 supports multiple appr oaches to addressing the needs of the unhoused and supports  people 
who are at risk of being unhous ed. MPRN strongly supports LD  2 and hope the Joint Committee 
on Housing wi ll vote unanimously to send LD 2 out as Ought To Pass.  
 
Sincerely,  
Bruce L. Noddin  
Bruce L. Noddin  

