am Community Housing of Maine 
Board Members 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director, Cumberland County 
Board President 
Chip Newell 
Principal, The NewHeight Group 
Board Treasurer 
Gunner Hubbard 
Principal, Thornton Tomasetti 
Board Secretary 
Davld Blrkhahn 
Vice President, TD Bank 
Elizabeth Boepple 
Partner, Murray, Plumb, & Murray 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing 
Investment Executive 
Luc Nya 
Mental Health Program Coordinator 
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident 
Thomas Ptacek 
Huston Commons Caseworker, 
Preble Street 
Jennifer Putnam 
Executive Director, Waypoint 
Jennifer Rottmann 
Deputy Director/CFO, The Genesis Fund 
John Ryan 
President, Wright-Ryan Construction 
Bill Shanahan 
Co~President, Evernorth 
Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President, NBT Bank 
Staff Contacts 
Cullen Ryan 
Executive Director 
Kyra Walker 
Chief Operating Ofﬁcer 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager 
Mara O‘Shea 
Compliance Manager 
Meredith Smith 
Supportive Housing Manager 
Chris Harmon 
Controller 
Jenny Jimino 
Bookkeeper 
Vickey Merrill 
Advocacy Director 
Bree LaCasse 
Development Director 
Brian Kilgallen 
Development Officer 
Robyn Wardell 
Development Ofﬁcer April 4, 2023 
Re: LD 2, An Act to Address Maine’s Housing Crisis 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, 
my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of Maine or 
CHOM. CHOM’s small staff works collaboratively with 50 service providers across Maine to 
house hundreds of people experiencing homelessness, particularly the longest stayers in 
homelessness, victims of domestic violence, and homeless Veterans — all of whom require 
supportive housing. I also chair the Maine Homeless Policy Committee, the Maine Continuum 
of Care Board of Directors, as well as the ESAC Long Term Stayers Committee. 
My organization is the largest housing provider for chronically homeless populations in 
Maine. CHOM currently houses I83 people who were chronically homeless with a 97% 
success rate, primarily using 4—6-unit dedicated sites, scattered from Sanford to Ellsworth, and 
blended housing models (25-50% of larger multifamily property) which incorporate key 
housing ﬁrst principles such as low barrier access, consumer focused ﬂexibility, and self- 
determination. Very few of these settings involve 24/7 on-site services. Outreach support is 
our primary model, delivered by nearby homeless shelters and community based mental health 
organizations. Support services are often insufficient, and if worded right, this bill would solve 
that for the many organizations that house chronically homeless populations. 
I am testifying in support of LD 2, An Act to Address Maine’s Housing Crisis. For the sake of 
all people experiencing chronic homelessness, I would like to see two language changes. E most certainly need more large single site housing ﬁrst properties in Portland. We also need 
LD 2 to work well in all parts of Maine where chronic homelessness exists; we need other 
models of housing ﬁrst as well. Let’s do both. 
l. Please add “up to” before 24/7. This would make it more feasible to pay for services 
for people experiencing chronic homelessness in a_ll housing ﬁrst settings. Some 
considerations: 
i. Not all chronically homeless people are from Portland or wish to live there. All people 
deserve choice rather than segregation or exclusion from options elsewhere. 
ii. Not all chronically homeless people want to live in, or are successful in, large single site 
housing ﬁrst developments. For at least those reasons, we need LD 2 to support a variety 
of housing ﬁrst approaches that will ﬁt in many communities. 
We won’t setup 30-unit segregated buildings in more than a couple municipalities in 
Maine; the local numbers do not support it. For this to work in smaller service centers, we 
need 10 units that are integrated as part of 40-unit properties, or smaller permanent 
supportive housing using housing ﬁrst principles. 
iii. Not all chronically homeless people require perpetually staffed site-based intervention. 
rv. We need more services across the board. Some current programs have minimal support. 
There is a long way between almost no support — and support every minute of the week. 
Allowing LD 2 to work to provide l0, 20, or 40 hours of support each week to smaller 
housing settings will allow people to thrive and be successful in their local communities, 
and in that form, LD 2 would be the best tool to end chronic homelessness in Maine. This 
will allow large single-purpose sites to have 24/7 support, and smaller versions to have 
less, so the costs are not astronomical, to ensure we have a variety of options. 
v. One size will not fill all, and we want all housing ﬁrst models to work in Maine. 
One City Center, 4"‘ Floor - 
Portland, ME 04101 - 
phone 207.879.0347 - 
fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org
éﬁiah Community Housing of Maine 
2. Please use the nationally recognized deﬁnition of chronically homeless (included below). The current language 
in the bill oddly excludes stays in homeless shelters. This is a population that languishes in homelessness shelters 
and outside. To only count people outside for 12 months will miss most people experiencing chronic homelessness. 
Please let’s count them all and get them housed. 
Housing ﬁrst is a type of permanent supportive housing (PSH). There are many forms of housing ﬁrst, and all have 
proven successful. All forms of housing ﬁrst and PSH are evidence-based practices — all forms work. 
Of the 427 people housed through Portland ’s ESAC Long Term Stayers (LTS) initiative, less than 20% have 
landed in the three site-based housing ﬁrst locations, yet we have between a 90-95% success rate in housing all 
427 of them. The vast majority have been served in scattered site locations. Our success rate would be much better if 
the other 80% of people housed had additional support. The same number of people fell out of their housing as we 
housed in the last three months. Had everyone stayed, we would have a whopping 18 more people housed now than in 
December (that’s more than half of a site-based building). Supportive services matter, and this bill is ultimately about 
supportive services. Having services extend to all housing ﬁrst models would allow us to house and keep housed 
all people experiencing chronic homelessness. 
It makes sense to house this population. The ESAC Long Term Stayers LTS Committee, which includes 20 
participating organizations, has also demonstrated that this population is as many as 29 times more likely to be in 
the hospital and 57 times more likely to be in jail when unhoused vs housed. Housing this population using any 
approach saves us a lot of money and is a game changer for each person. 
Homelessness looks different in different communities; as such, the response must be localized. We don’t want people 
with special needs to have to travel to a major service-center area to have their service and housing needs met. 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment. 
Addendum 
Different Models Work to End Chronic Homelessness: 
There are multiple successful, best-practice models for housing chronically homeless populations. People experience 
success and failures in all of them; no one model is a panacea. They all work collectively together. 
Maine utilizes all forms of housing ﬁrst models with great success: 
0 Large site-based housing ﬁrst models, such as Logan Place, Florence House, and Huston Commons in Portland, 
are dedicated buildings, coupled with project-based rental subsidies and 24/7 support services, with low barriers to 
entry. This model has provided permanent stability for people experiencing chronic homelessness. This model is 
particularl _v well suited to people with active substance use disorder who often run into problems in other forms of 
PSH. Harm reduction principles allow people to use substances while in their housing. There can be lower 
acceptance of behavioral issues in other models. 
0 Smaller PSH with housing ﬁrst principles. These are generally smaller multifamily projects (4-6 units) with 
project-based rental assistance scattered around service center communities across the state. They speciﬁcally 
house chronically homeless populations (Long Term Stayers) and provide dedicated support services for their 
success. This model is particularly well suited to people with serious and persistent mental illness. 
0 Scattered site housing ﬁrst models use the same low-barrier approach as the site-based model, but instead feather 
homeless populations into housing using rental subsidies. Outreach services are provided to ensure people 
maintain stability in their housing. This model has had a success rate in the low to rnid-90% range. Low vacancy 
rates can make housing tough to ﬁnd. This is the most widely used model in Maine, and the primary model in VT. 
0 Blended housing ﬁrst, where multifamily affordable housing welcomes PSH/housing ﬁrst into a percentage of the 
units; outreach support and rental assistance makes this work. MaineHousing is incentivizing this. Used in NYC. 
One City Center, 4"‘ Floor - 
Portland, ME 04101 - 
phone 207.879.0347 - 
fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org
am Community Housing of Maine 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) deﬁnition of Chronicallv Homeless: 
“T he deﬁnition of chronically homeless is." 
0 A homeless individual with a disability as deﬁned in section 401(9) of the McKinney- Vento Assistance Act (42 
US. C. 1l36O(9)), who: 
o Lives in a place not meant for human habitation, a safe haven, or in an emergency shelter, and 
o Has been homeless and living as described for at least 12 months * or on at least 4 separate occasions in the 
last 3 years, as long as the combined occasions equal at least I2 months and each break in homelessness 
separating the occasions included at least 7 consecutive nights of not living as described. 
0 An individual who has been residing in an institutional care facility for less, including jail, substance abuse or 
mental health treatment facility, hospital, or other similar facility, for fewer than 90 days and met all of the 
criteria of this deﬁnition before entering that facility**; or 
¢ A family with an adult head of household (or, if there is no adult in the family, a minor head of householah who 
meets all of the criteria of this deﬁnition, including a family whose composition has ﬂuctuated while the head of 
household has been homeless. 
*A “break” in homeless is considered to be 7 or more nights. 
**An individual residing in an institutional care facility does not constitute a break in homelessness.” 
Source: httpsif/wwwhudexchange.info/homelessness-assistance/coo-esg-virtual-biuders/coc-esg-homeless~ 
eligibiIity/de ﬁnition-of-chronic-homelessness/ 
HUD Deﬁnition/Information on Housing First: 
“Housing First is an approach to quickly and successfully connect individuals and families experiencing homelessness 
to permanent housing without preconditions and barriers to entry, such as sobriety, treatment or service participation 
requirements. Supportive services are oﬂered to maximize housing stability and prevent returns to homelessness as 
opposed to addressingpredetermined treatment goals prior to permanent housing entry.” 
“Housing First is premised on the following principles." 
Homelessness is ﬁrst and foremost a housing crisis and can be addressed through the provision of safe and aﬂordable 
housing. 
0 All people experiencing homelessness, regardless of their housing history and duration of homelessness, can 
achieve housing stability in permanent housing. Some may need very little support for a brief period of time, while 
others may need more intensive and long-term supports. 
0 Everyone is “housing ready. " 
Sobriety, compliance in treatment, or even criminal histories are not necessary to 
succeed in housing. Rather, homelessness programs and housing providers must be “consumer ready.” ~—1Many 
people experience improvenients in quality of life, in the areas of health, mental health, substance use, and 
employment, as a result of achieving housing. 
0 People experiencing homelessness have the right to self-determination and should be treated with dignity and 
respect. 
0 The exact conﬁguration of housing and services depends upon the needs and preferences of the population.” 
Source: https://files.hudexchange.info/resources/documents/Housing-First-Permanent-Sugportive-Housing-Brie ﬁpdf 
Information on Housing First/PSH in other areas of the countl'V_= 
0 Salt Lake City, Utah: PSH, modeled on Site-Based Housing First, has produced a 96% retention rate. 
https://endutahhomelessness.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/housing ﬁrsb l .pdf However, recent legislative audit 
ﬁndings about Salt Lake City’s site-based Housing First models and caution for duplicating 
them: https://www.sltrib.com/news/politics/202l/l l/l6/utahs~housing- ﬁrst-mode|/ From the article: “The 
problem, according to auditors, is that these communities are costly to build and often become long-term homes 
for those who stay there. “Because few residents move on to more independent forms of housing, few new spaces 
are made available in the existing facilities, ” auditors said. “Unless this trend can be reversed through a ‘moving 
on’ strategy, the growing population of chronically homeless will impose an ever-growing burden on Utah’s 
homeless services system.”” 
One City Center, 4"‘ Floor - 
Portland, ME 04101 - 
phone 207.879.0347 ~ 
fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomh0using.org
P/\ Comm 
Florida: Scattered site and blended/inclusive PSH Housing First: One approach to supporting these households is 
Permanent Supportive Housing. Permanent Supportive Housing is a highly eﬁfective strategy that combines 
affordable rental housing with community-based services to help residents maintain a stable home. It is aproven 
model to help people who are not stably housed or who are experiencing homelessness, as weli as persons with 
disabilities who can live independently in the community with supportive services. This type of housing provides 
residents with housing for an indeﬁnite length of stay as long as the tenant complies with lease requirements, and 
it has no limits on the length of tenancy related to the provision or participation in supportive services. Such units 
may be a small portion of a larger general occupancy aﬂordable rental property or may be part of a property that 
specializes in supportive housing. https://www. ﬂoridahousing.org/programs/speciaI-needs-housing-overview 
The Solution the Saves Pilot, Duval, Miami-Dade, and Pinellas Counties: https://abi1ityhousing.org/the-solution- 
that-saves~2/ ’ Scattered-site and blended/inclusive PSH Housing First approach for high utilizers. A study 
conducted on this pilot in Jacksonville (Duval County) demonstrated the efficacy of this approach, with a 90% 
housing stability rate (https://news.wjct.org/iirst-coast/2018-1 1-29liax-study-suQpoitive-housing-helps-low- 
income-homeless-saves-community-money). The study on this pilot program also bore out signiﬁcant system- 
wide cost savings. Once housed in PSH, people who previously had frequent interactions with emergency systems 
were no longer using them at the high rates they had previously. For the population housed in PSH, comparing the 
two years prior to housing with two-years after being housed: There was a 77% reduction ($89,173 cost reduction) 
in costs associated with the criminal justice system; a 65% reduction in costs associated with arrests/bookings 
($48,620 cost reduction); a 57.6% reduction in costs associated with hospital stays ($3.7 million cost reduction) ”.
“ . . .to house individuals and give them wrap around support costs us 30 percent less than to maintain them as 
homeless on our streets," said Shannon Nazwoith, President and CEO of Ability Housing. ” 
Austin, Texas — HousingWorks: Implementing both Site-based and scattered site PSH/Housing First models. The 
City importantly noted the following in its planning processes: “By directing funding to development of a single- 
site (or multiple single-site) Housing First development, the city will create an environment in which a Housing 
First pilot project/development can succeed. Meanwhile, by implementing policies and recommendations included 
in this report related to scattered site PSH, the city will increase the number of chronically homeless who can be 
served in the current rental market (in both traditional private, for-proﬁt and nonproﬁt housing). The city and 
community partners in the endeavor to house the hardest to serve will need to aggressively implement 
recommendations around both strategies in order to address the housing needs of the hardest to serve.” 
https ://Wwwaustintexas. gov/ sitesl defau lt/fi les/ fi les/ Housin gf Reports_and_Publ ications/Com m unity_Reports/ Hard 
esttoServewebFNL High_Res.pdf 
Houston Texas: Using scattered-site PSH to end CH. A project in which $102.4 million was invested over a three- 
year period brought 2,500 units of scattered site PSH housing online throughout the city of Houston (using 
Housing First Approach). This resulted in a 70 percent reduction in chronic homelessness and a 50 percent 
reduction in the overall homeless population. 
https://wwwfacebook.com/UnitedtoEndHomelessness/videos/2104503019864720/ 
Orange County, CA — United to End Homelessness: Scattered Site Permanent Supportive Housing as an Effective 
Solution to End Homelessness (lu‘t_1).s‘.'//2111itedtoendhomelessness. Ofg/Z7l0,§T/9C'c7ll €I‘€(l—Sil(2-])(ZI ‘Il7(l77(2I7l' -.S‘llQ[)()l ‘llV(?- 
l70'l(.$ ‘ll7g-£lS-£tI7- €ﬁ€Cll\’€-.9()l£Iil()l7-l()-(3l7(l —ll()I7I(3l €SS77€SSO.' “One of the many beneﬁts of scattered site housing is 
that formerly homeless tenants have access to neighbors with diverse backgrounds and socioeconomic classes, 
helping them integrate into their new communities — an important factor in their remaining housed. Equally 
important factors include a variety of apartment types and sizes from which prospective tenants can choose 
that best ﬁt their unique needs, along with factors such as close proximity to their employers, families, or places of 
worship. ” importantly, it's noted that scattered site PSH can be implemented much more rapidly than large, site- 
based models. Their USICH Regional Director Helene Schneider noted that site-based is part of the solution but 
“Property owners are the lynchpin that can make this happen quickly and get units online now.” 
New York City: 
o Pathways to Housing: Scattered site and blended/inclusive Housing First model. “Dr. Tsemberisfounded 
Pathways to Housing in New York City in 1992 based on the belief that housing is a basic human right. Based 
on the belief that people experiencing homelessness and struggling with mental illness or addiction should not 
One City Center, 4"" Floor - 
Portland, ME 04101 - 
phone 207.879.0347 ~ 
fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org
éﬁioh Community Housing of Maine 
have to prove they are housing ready. And based on a program philosophy founded on love, respect, and 
creating possibilities. At, Pathways to Housing, T semberis and a team that included program participants and 
advocates for consumer rights and housing rights, developed the model that came to be known as Housing 
First. A program that provides immediate access to permanent housing and person-centered supports to 
people experiencing homelessness and struggling with problems of mental health and addiction. ” Source: 
https:/lwwwpathwayshousing ﬁrstorgl One of the earliest versions of Housing First in the country and has 
informed housing ﬁrst and the ﬁeld of homelessness since its inception. 
o Housing Plus NYC: Uses the Housing First scattered site and blended models. “Our model is based on the 
“housing ﬁrst ” approach, through which we connect women and families to housing without preconditions 
and barriers to entry. We support our tenants through a host of services, including trauma and family 
counseling and on-site employment/education services. ” Source: https://housin gplusnyoorgl housin g- 
supgortive-services/ “HousingPlus is partnering with private developers to create new aﬂordable housing in 
the neighborhoods we serve. Our most recent achievement, a project in partnership with B&B Urban, L+M 
Development Partners, and AJHG Architects, created I 00 new units of aﬂordable housing in East New York 
through the Linwood Park Apartments, which opened in May 2020. HousingPlus provides on-site social 
services and rental assistance to 30 units of family housing in this project that serves formerly homeless 
families and justice-involved women and children. ” Source: https://housingplusnyoorglhistoryl 
“HousingPlus currently holds leases for 150 apartments, from studios to three bedrooms, in scattered sites 
around Brooklyn. Another 100 or so units are under construction. ” Source: 
https://mindsitenews.org/2022/ l l/ l 7/ in-new-yorlohousin g—ﬁl"S'[~3QpI ‘O2lCl1—l1€lpS—Ut1l10US6d —p€0pl€-fll1(l~ 
stabilityl 
o NYC launching a Housing First pilot using the blended/inclusive model (modeled after Houston’s successful 
Housing First strategy). https://wwwsmartcitiesdive.c0m/news/nyc-lannches-housing- ﬁrst-pil0t/ 63 6664/ 
Houston: “Currently, more than 100 partners are collaborating through The Way Home to implementprograms 
that are all based on a Housing First model. This means that people experiencing homelessness are moved into 
permanent housing as quickly as possible then provided with supportive services (like case management, 
healthcare, substance use counseling, income coaching, and more) to help them remain stabilized in housing and 
improve their quality of life. Since 20] 1, overall homelessness has decreased by over 60% in Harris, Fort Bend, 
and Montgomery counties. And since 2012, more than 25, 000 people have been housed with about an 90% success 
rate. ” https://www.homelesshouston.org/thewayhome 
Vermont — Pathways Vermont: https1//www.pathwaysvermont.org/what~we-do/our-programs/housing- ﬁrst/ Uses 
the scattered site Housing First model to house people experiencing homelessnessgpeci ﬁcalhipeople 
experiencing chronic homelessness: “Housing First is an evidence-based, permanent supportive housing program 
that supports individuals to maintain independent housing and lead meaningful lives in their community. The 
program immediately ends homelessness by supporting individuals and families to locate independent apartments 
in the community. Housing First clients are provided long-term, multidiscnilinary community supports, including 
service coordination, drug & alcohol counseling, employment support, psychiatry, nursing care and representative 
payee services. ” “Housing First is recognized by the Department of Housing and Urban Development as the most 
effective intervention for addressing chronic homelessness. Since 2010, the Housing First program has ended the 
cycle of chronic homelessness for over 640 Vermonters. The Housing First program maintains an 87% Housing 
Retention Rate.” 
Chicago — Facing Forward Chicago: PSH using the Housing First approach. “Our most longstandingprogram, 
Permanent Supportive Housing, provides long-term, stable housing with no barriers to entry and no 
predetermined end date. PSH serves neighbors with a history of chronic homelessness and disabling conditions 
and pairs comprehensive case management services and stable housing with no pre-determined end date. We 
work with clients and over 100 communitypartners to build a unique portfolio of supportive services that improve 
mental and physical health and create opportunities for education and employment. ” Source: 
https://www.ffchicago.org/what-we-do/#0ur-programs “Housing First is an effective and long-term solution to 
chronic homelessness. It stems from the fact that individuals must have basic needs, such as food and shelter, met 
before they can address the root causes and intergenerational eﬂects of chronic homelessness. When a home is 
One City Center, 4"“ Floor - 
Portland, ME 04101 - 
phone 207.879.0347 - 
fax 207.879.0348 
www.ch0mhousing.org
P/\ 
paired with skilled and compassionate services, clients can face forward toward emerging dreams and 
possibilities. Housing First: 
-Places individuals in permanent housing as quickly as possible without requiring “housing readiness,” 
allowing us to serve the city ’s most vulnerable populations; 
-Oﬂers completely voluntary wraparound services with a dedicated case manager: e. g. mental, behavioral, 
medical 
-Allows ﬂexibility in meeting clients ’ needs and prioritizes client choice in both housing selection and 
supportive service participation, giving the client the opportunity to lead their journey to self-suﬁiciency.” 
Source: https://wwwffchicago.org/what~we-do/#our-approach 
Homelessness Policy Research Institute 2019 Scattered vs. Single-Site PSH Literature Review 
(https://socialim1ovation.usc.edu/wp-content/uploads/20l 9/O4/Scattered-vs.-Single-Site-PSH-Literature- 
Reviewpdf): This study looks at the efﬁcacy of both scattered and single-site PSH (using a housing first model) 
Importantly, single-site PSH includes smaller projects along with larger single-site projects. Key Takeaways: 
Both single-site and scattered-site PSH prevent a return to homelessness and increase overall quality of life for 
program participants. 
Single-site PSH has a speciﬁc target audience and specialized programs, while scattered-site is implemented 
within affordable housing developments with dispersed programs, resulting in numerous exogenous factors 
affecting outcomes for program participants. 
Research suggests single-site PSH is beneﬁcial for homeless individuals with substance abuse challenges as 
well as those with HIV/AIDS. 
Scattered site PSH has been shown to more positively serve families experiencing homelessness. 
One City Center, 4‘“ Floor ~ 
Portland, ME 04101 ' 
phone 207.879.0347 - 
fax 207.879.0348 
www.ch0mh0using.org
