 
Caring and serving since 1883®  
 
 
Community Health and Counseling Services             
            Home Health, Hospice and Mental Health Services  
 
April 2 , 2023  
 
     Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and distinguished members of the Committee  on 
Housing , my name is Dale Hamilton and I am the executive director of Community Health and 
Counseling Services (CHCS).  I am writing in support of LD 2, A n Act to Address Maine ’s 
Housing Crisis.  CHCS provides a br oad array  of services including services to individuals who 
experience  chronic homelessness.  
 
     Housing stability is influenced by many factors. Our success in confronting this growing 
challenge requires a variety of inte rventions. LD 2 provides important resources to address one 
aspect of this challeng e. Individuals who experiencing chronic homelessness often struggle with 
other issues that interfere  with their housing stability.  Supported housing is a cost e ffective and 
proactive intervention that h elps to maintain housing stability. Penquis is in the process of 
deve loping 41 units in Ban gor. We are in the process of collaborating with Penquis to find  a way 
to bring 24/7 support to the individuals who transition out of homelessness. This type of resource 
would  make it possible to  implement this  project as well as other projects around Maine.  
 
     I truly appreciate the focus that this committee has on addressing our housing challenges. I 
believe that resources provided by LD 2 will have an immediate and positive impact on the 
housing crisis in Maine. I  fully support the need for data collection from any entity who receives 
funding to evaluate the effectivene ss of the model. I also believe that the results will be 
overwhelmingly positive.  
 
     Thank you for considering this opportunity to support individuals who experience chronic 
homel essness.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Dale Hamilton  
Executive Direc tor 
  
PO Box 425  
Bangor, Maine 04402 -0425  
Tel. 207 -947-0366  
TTY 207 -990-4730  
www.chcs -me.org  

