 
 
 
 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
Testimony in Support  of LD 2  – “An Act to End Chronic Homelessness by Creating the Housing First 
Fund”  
April XX, 2023  
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and distinguished members of the Housing Committee. My name is 
Debbie Laurie, Bangor City Manager, and I’m providing testimony on behalf of the Bangor City C ouncil in 
support of LD  2, “An Act to End Chronic Homelessness by Crea ting the Housing First Fund .” 
Chronic homelessness is a critical issue burdening Bangor and  communities all across Maine.   Service 
center communities in particular are faced  with homeless encampments and other challenges brought on 
by those unable to secur e shelter.  These challenges are compounded by the fact that many lacking shelter 
are also struggling with  severe  substance use disorder and/or persistent, untreated mental illness.   
Here in Bangor, with the help of technical assistance from HUD, we are beginning to make slow progress 
toward housing some of our chronically homeless residents.  Unfortunately, securing housing using the 
Housing First model is just the first step in moving these individuals from homelessness to stability. For 
the vast majority of those who have experienced chronic homelessness, long lasting stability comes only 
with the provision of ongoing and often intensive supportive services. The current case management 
model that provides limited  visits  isn’t sufficient to supp ort these high need individuals, and they often 
aren’t prepared to access community -based services.   
Housing First is just as it sounds –  the provision of housing prior to addressing other vital needs such as 
substance use and mental health treatment.  While  the approach works to move people into housing, it 
is less ef fective at keeping them there.  Moving individuals into properties designed for those who have 
experienced chronic homelessness and then providing them with twenty four hour, on -site support is  one 
of the missing piece s of the puzzle.  LD 2 will allow for that level of support and significantly increase the 
chances individuals  who ha ve experienced chronic homelessness  can transition to stable housing and 
make progress toward their  personal and he alth goals.   
LD 2 has added benefits for developers and landlords who build or  manage properties intended for those 
who have experienced chronic homelessness.  It is not unusual for properties inhabited by those coming 
from chronic homelessness to incur substantial damage.  The provision of 24 hour, on -site support will 
significantly limit damage and make renting to this population a more feasible option  for developers and 
landlords alike.    
Chronic homelessness and its impact on our community is a proble m we will continue to grapple with in 
the coming years.  Although I believe we are making progress on the local level, we need assistance from 
the state to support our efforts and those of other communities across Maine.  I strongly believe creating 

 
 
a hous ing first fund is a good first step and, w ith the full support of the Bangor City Council, I urge you to 
pass LD 2 as a means to end chronic homelessness . 
Thank you for your consideration. Please do not hesitate to reach out with questions.  
Deborah Laurie , City Manager, debbie.laurie@bangormaine.gov  
Courtney O’Donnell, Assistant City Manager/ Director of Human Resources, courtney.odonnell@bangormaine.gov   
Richard Fournier, City Council Chair, richard.fournier@bangormaine.gov  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
