 
93 Exchange Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772-2811 chamber@portlandregion.com • 
PortlandRegion.com 
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • 
Portland • Westbrook 
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 2-An Act to Address Maine’s Housing Crisis  
 
Joint Select Committee on Housing  
April 4, 2023 
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Committee on Housing, 
 
My name is Eamonn Dundon, and I am the Director of Advocacy of the Portland Regional 
Chamber of Commerce. We represent 1,300 businesses in our region who employ over 65,000 
Mainers. We are submitting this written testimony today to express our organization's support 
for LD 2.  
 
For decades, the City of Portland has shouldered the largest burden of any municipality in the 
state when it comes to the provision of services for people experiencing homelessness. This 
has come at a massive cost to municipal taxpayers, but as the largest service center in the 
state we have taken on this challenge with often limited support from the state and federal 
government. While asylum seekers have dominated much of the news regarding the challenge 
of sheltering large amounts of unhoused people, Maine-based and other domestic 
homelessness cases have been an equally large challenge to confront, particularly regarding 
the long-term stayers who use shelter resources for an extended period.  
 
We have seen great promise in the housing first model in the handful of projects developed 
in Greater Portland, but it is not enough to confront the numbers we have been seeing over 
the last three years since the onset of the pandemic. Even with the City of Portland’s 
commitment to build a new world-class homeless services center, the numbers in this 
population and the duration of their needs far exceeds what one municipality can sustainably 
provide without long-term solutions in place to move long-term stayers to. As Cullen Ryan of 
Community Housing of Maine has pointed out to you in this committee, and to our members 
 
93 Exchange Street Portland, ME 04101 • (207) 772-2811 chamber@portlandregion.com • 
PortlandRegion.com 
 
Cape Elizabeth • Cumberland • Falmouth • Gorham • Scarborough • South Portland • 
Portland • Westbrook 
 
at an Eggs & Issues discussion on this topic last year1, housing first has the potential to 
dramatically decrease the costs incurred when these folks end up in the criminal justice or 
medical systems, both of which are much more likely to happen when someone lacks the 
security of a place to call home.  
 
Despite the increases to shelter capacity in Portland and around the state in recent years, we 
are still on the precipice of a crisis when it comes to our shelter systems and housing first 
developments are an essential piece to addressing that threat. Right now in Portland there 
exist several rapidly growing tent encampments that are threatening the health, safety and 
cleanliness of our city for residents and visitors alike, and we need a rapid deployment of 
solutions to ensure we do not slip into scenarios seen in cities like San Francisco and 
Portland, Oregon where neglect of social needs in those communities, and the defacto 
sanctioning of unsafe encampment practices, not only threaten the safety and dignity of 
people experiencing homelessness but also the continued viability of our commercial districts 
and downtown areas. Already due to the pandemic many of our members have faced 
challenges with depressed foot traffic and vitality in our downtown cores, and the increased 
presence of individuals experiencing homelessness concentrating in unsafe and unclean 
conditions threatens to undermine that recovery.  
 
We thank you for your time and commitment to all Mainers, and we ask for your expeditious 
approval of this important legislation.  
  
 
1https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LhiWnPslWOE&list=PLHiUaD31mPsdZQ5rmTgGkbt7vVgbbjx4T&index=10
&ab_channel=PortlandRegionalChamberofCommerce   
