MaineHousing -~ MAINE STATE HOUSING AUTHORITY 
Testimony of 
Erik C. jorgensen 
Senior Director of Government Relations & Communications 
Maine State Housing Authority 
Before 
The joint Select Committee on Housing 
In support of 
L.D. 2: An Act to Address Maine’s Housing Crisis 
April 4, 2023 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the joint Select Committee on Housing, I am 
Erik Jorgensen Senior Director of Government Relations and Communications at the Maine State 
Housing Authority (MaineHousing) and I am submitting this testimony in Support of the amended LD 
2, An Act to Addmzr Maine Zr H01/sing Crzkis. 
MaineHousing has been helping Maine people own, rent, repair, and heat their homes since 1969. 
We are an independent state authority (not a state agency) created to address the problems of 
unsafe, unsuitable, overcrowded, and unaffordable housing. We are authorized to issue bonds to 
ﬁnance single family mortgages for ﬁrst time homebuyers and for affordable multi—family housing. 
We are also authorized to administer a number of state and federal programs, including rental 
subsidies, Weatherization, fuel assistance, two housing block grants, the low-income housing tax 
credit program, and homeless grant programs. We receive state general fund revenue for homeless 
programs and receive a dedicated portion of the real estate transfer tax for the Housing 
Opportunities for Maine (HOME) Fund. 
Mai11eHousing has supported the Housing First approach for more than a decade, and we have seen 
repeated evidence, both locally around the country, that it Works. It’s not surprising to learn that 
housing turns out to be the master variable in homelessness. That sounds self-evident, but we have 
seen that, when affordable housing is combined with some basic on-site supports and services, lives 
that have been in crisis can become stable. And when that happens, all sorts of real and measurable 
social beneﬁts begin to accrue - both to the individual residents and the community. 
The challenge of housing ﬁrst has always been the need to identify ongoing service funding for these 
critical services. Getting a building is often the easiest part — where these programs stumble has been 
in the challenge of keeping the services going. That’s Why this bill, which identiﬁes an ongoing
1
funding source in the form of the state portion of the Real Estate Transfer Tax, is so exciting. It’s 
set up so that in the beginning, proceeds can be used to build the infrastructure, and then once the 
construction is done, that same funding stream can be redirected to provide sustainable ongoing 
support to maintain the needed services at those properties. 
Over the past few Weeks, we at MaineHousing have worked with both the governor ’s ofﬁce and 
DHHS to Work through the particulars of how this bill might actually Work. We think that the draft 
amendment before you is a good one. MaineHousing will ﬁnance the construction of these projects, 
and DHHS will support the services. 
Mostly, we would like to go on record as a strong supporter of both housing ﬁrst and this legislative 
proposal.
2
