Episcopal Diocese of Maine, Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, Presbyterian Church (USA), 
Religious Society of Friends, Unitarian Universalist Association, United Church of Christ, United Methodist Church  
 
Testimony before the Committee on Housing 
LD 2: An Act to Address Maine’s Housing Crisis 
April 4, 2023 
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and Members of the Committee: 
 
I am Rev. Jane Field, Executive Director of the Maine Council of Churches. The Council has seven member-
denominations and two associate member congregations who represent 437 local churches in Maine with 
55,000 parishioners. I am testifying on behalf of the Council in support of LD 2.   
 
All of our churches have roots in Hebrew and Christian scripture, where the foundation of morality is love of 
neighbor as self and where covenant with God includes caring for our vulnerable and marginalized neighbors 
while building a society where people nurture and protect one another and ensure that everyone has a safe place 
to dwell.  The biblical moral imperative for justice compels us to go beyond compassion and charity and 
respond to the homelessness crisis by empowering people to move from homelessness to hope. 
 
LD 2 is a way to do just that.  It would provide funding for 24-hour supportive services that make “Site-based 
Housing First” a successful solution for the most vulnerable Mainers who have complex needs and experience 
chronic homelessness in both rural and urban parts communities in our state.   
 
Site-based Housing First is especially effective for highly vulnerable populations, including the chronically 
homeless, people sleeping outside, and people with untreated mental and behavioral health and/or substance use 
disorders because once people are safe and supported by 24-hour onsite social work staff in permanent housing, 
they can stabilize and work toward a more fulfilling and independent future; including addressing substance use 
disorder, focusing on health, education, or employment, and rebuilding relationships with friends and family.   
 
That is the definition of caring for our vulnerable and marginalized neighbors and building a society where 
Mainers nurture and protect one another, ensure that every Mainer has a safe place to dwell, and empower them 
to move from homelessness to hope. 
 
For these reasons, the Maine Council of Churches joins our trusted partner organization, Preble Street, in urging 
you to vote OUGHT TO PASS on LD 2. 

Jane Field
Maine Council of Churches
LD 2
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and Members of the Committee:
I am Rev. Jane Field, Executive Director of the Maine Council of Churches. The 
Council has seven member-denominations and two associate member congregations 
who represent 437 local churches in Maine with 55,000 parishioners. I am testifying 
on behalf of the Council in support of LD 2.  
All of our churches have roots in Hebrew and Christian scripture, where the 
foundation of morality is love of neighbor as self and where covenant with God 
includes caring for our vulnerable and marginalized neighbors while building a 
society where people nurture and protect one another and ensure that everyone has a 
safe place to dwell.  The biblical moral imperative for justice compels us to go 
beyond compassion and charity and respond to the homelessness crisis by 
empowering people to move from homelessness to hope.
LD 2 is a way to do just that.  It would provide funding for 24-hour supportive 
services that make “Site-based Housing First” a successful solution for the most 
vulnerable Mainers who have complex needs and experience chronic homelessness in 
both rural and urban parts communities in our state.  
Site-based Housing First is especially effective for highly vulnerable populations, 
including the chronically homeless, people sleeping outside, and people with 
untreated mental and behavioral health and/or substance use disorders because once 
people are safe and supported by 24-hour onsite social work staff in permanent 
housing, they can stabilize and work toward a more fulfilling and independent future; 
including addressing substance use disorder, focusing on health, education, or 
employment, and rebuilding relationships with friends and family.  
That is the definition of caring for our vulnerable and marginalized neighbors and 
building a society where Mainers nurture and protect one another, ensure that every 
Mainer has a safe place to dwell, and empower them to move from homelessness to 
hope.
For these reasons, the Maine Council of Churches joins our trusted partner 
organization, Preble Street, in urging you to vote OUGHT TO PASS on LD 2.

