			  Maine Unitarian Universalist State Advocacy Network PO Box 8 Augusta, ME  04330 www.muusan.org admin@muusan.org			
	
									April	4,	2023		Senator	Pierce,	Representative	Gere,	and	distinguished	members	of	the	Joint	Select	Committee	on	Housing:		My	 name	 is	 Jane	 Makela,	 and	 I	 am	 a	 resident	 of	 Falmouth.	 	 I	 am	 submitting	 this	 testimony	 in	support	of	LD	2	on	behalf	of	the	Maine	Unitarian	Universalist	State	Advocacy	Network	(MUUSAN).	The	 MUUSAN	 network	 links	 Maine’s	 26	 UU	 congregations	 in	 working	 for	 legislation	 that	recognizes	 the	 inherent	 worth	 and	 dignity	 of	 every	 person	 and	 promotes	 justice,	 equity,	 and	compassion	for	all	with	whom	we	share	this	great	state.	We	are	also	proud	to	be	a	partner	of	the	Maine	 Council	 of	 Churches,	 a	 coalition	 of	 seven	 mainline	 Protestant	 denominations	 with	 437	Maine	congregations,	which	has	also	submitted	testimony	in	support	of	this	bill.  	Before	turning	to	the	moral	agenda	that	calls	us	to	support	this	bill—that	is,	deep	engagement	with	and	commitment	to	the	struggles	of	the	poor	and	dispossessed—we	first	want	to	add	our	voices	 to	 the	 many	 housing	 experts	 and	 community	 service	 providers	 who	 have	 provided	testimony	explaining	how	smart	this	bill	is:				Whereas	 other	 homelessness	 programs	 require	 unhoused	 individuals	 to	 first	 prove	 active	participation	 in	 sobriety	 or	 other	 treatment	 programs,	 gain	 employment	 or	 otherwise	demonstrate	they’ve	made	themselves	“ready”	for	housing,	Housing	First	eliminates	such	entry	barriers.	Instead,	it	recognizes	the	need	of	the	chronically	homeless	to	access	housing	immediately	if	 they	 are	 going	 to	 fully	 benefit	 from	 programs	 that	 address	 some	 of	 the	 root	 causes	 of	 or	contributors	 to	 their	 homelessness.	 	 Once	 in	 safe,	 healthy,	 and	 stable	 housing,	 previously	unhoused	individuals	can	coordinate	with	care	managers	to	identify	needs	and	access	services	that	will	enable	them	to	build	the	skills	and	resources	to	live	successfully	and	independently.			But	 we	 are	 most	 heartened	 at	 what	 the	 Housing	 First	 programs	 offers	 to	 some	 of	 the	 most	vulnerable	people	in	our	communities	as	human	beings:	We	think	particularly	of	those	sleeping	in	the	tents	we	see	on	the	side	of	highways,	those	looking	for	safe	parking	lots	that	allow	all	night	parking	so	they	can	sleep	in	their	cars,	and	those	carrying	their	belongings	around	with	them		each	night	as	they	look	for	a	semi-sheltered	spot	to	bed	down	in	since	their	circumstances	disqualify	them	for	shelter	services	even	if	shelter	beds	were	available.	The	impact	on	them	of	having	one’s	own	space	with	a	door	that	closes	for	privacy	and	a	closet	that	stores	one’s	own	possessions	that	don’t	need	to	be	repacked	into	a	backpack	or	shopping	cart	each	morning,	is	almost	inconceivable			
	to	those	of	us	who	have	never	been	without	a	home.	That	implicit	confirmation	of	one’s	worth	and	dignity	as	a	person	and	not	simply	a	public	nuisance	or	an	unfortunate	diagnostic	category,	must	surely	empower	Housing	First	participants	as	they	do	the	work	to	rebuild	their	lives	to	avoid	returning	to	homelessness.			LD	2	will	provide	this	experience	to	many	more	of	Maine’s	chronically	homeless,	and	we	urge	you	to	vote	for	its	passage.		Thank	you.	  
