 
1 
 LEGAL SERVICES FOR THE ELDERLY, INC. 
5 Wabon Street, Augusta, Maine 04333 
(207) 621-0087    Fax (207) 621-0742    
Offices in Augusta, Bangor, Lewiston, Biddeford and Presque Isle 
   
LSE Helpline 1-800-750-5353 (Voice/TTY) 
www.mainelse.org 
April 4, 2023 
 
Testimony of Leo J. Delicata, Esq., Legal Services for the Elderly, in 
support of the Sponsor’s amendment to L.D. 2 titled An Act to End Chronic 
Homelessness by Creating the Housing First Fund before the Joint Select 
Committee On Housing 
 
Senator  Curry, Representative Roberts and members of the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing  
 
On behalf of Legal Services for the Elderly I would like to offer a few words 
in support of the Sponsor’s amendment to LD 2.  Legal Services for the 
Elderly (LSE) is a nonprofit legal services organization and our mission is to 
provide free legal assistance to Maine’s older adults when their basic human 
needs are at stake. 
 
Speaker Talbot Ross’s amendment describes an intelligent solution for the 
housing needs of chronically homeless adults. By definition they are the   
most “unhoused” members of our communities and by many measures the 
most disadvantaged. The key to this concept is the integration of housing 
and tenant services. This is an idea that finds both policy and financial 
support in the “housing-related activities and services” available through the 
federal Medicaid program. It is a proven model and it will be wonderful to 
see it implemented  It may be useful to more particularly describe what those 
terms of art mean.  
 
The following is taken from a federal Department of Health and Human 
Services Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services Information Bulletin. 
https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/CIB-06-26-
2015.pdf  
 
 
2 
 The purpose of the guidance contained in the bulletin is: “… to assist states 
in designing Medicaid benefits, and to clarify the circumstances under which 
Medicaid reimburses for certain housing-related activities, with the goal of 
promoting community integration for individuals with disabilities, older 
adults needing long term services and supports (LTSS), and those 
experiencing chronic homelessness.”(emphasis added).  
 
The bulletin describes the types of services available using State dollars 
matched with federal Medicaid funding. “Individual Housing Transition 
Services”: and “Individual Housing & Tenancy Sustaining Services” are 
services particularly germane to the projects envisioned in this proposed 
legislation. Using the words in the bulletin this is what those terms mean:  
 
“Individual Housing Transition Services”: 
“• Conducting a tenant screening and housing assessment that identifies the 
participant’s preferences and barriers related to successful tenancy. The 
assessment may include collecting information on potential housing 
transition barriers, and identification of housing retention barriers. 
• Developing an individualized housing support plan based upon the housing 
assessment that addresses identified barriers, includes short and long-term 
measurable goals for each issue, establishes the participant’s approach to 
meeting the goal, and identifies when other providers or services, both 
reimbursed and not reimbursed by Medicaid, may be required to meet the 
goal.  
• Assisting with the housing application process. Assisting with the housing 
search process.  
• Identifying resources to cover expenses such as security deposit, moving 
costs, furnishings, adaptive aids, environmental modifications, moving costs 
and other one-time expenses.  
• Ensuring that the living environment is safe and ready for move-in.  
• Assisting in arranging for and supporting the details of the move.  
• Developing a housing support crisis plan that includes prevention and early 
intervention services when housing is jeopardized.  
 
2. Individual Housing & Tenancy Sustaining Services  
This service is made available to support individuals to maintain tenancy 
once housing is secured. The availability of ongoing housing-related 
services in addition to other long term services and supports promotes 
housing success, fosters community integration and inclusion, and develops 
natural support networks. 
 
3 
  
 These tenancy support services are: 
• Providing early identification and intervention for behaviors that may 
jeopardize housing, such as late rental payment and other lease violations.  
• Education and training on the role, rights and responsibilities of the tenant 
and landlord.  
• Coaching on developing and maintaining key relationships with 
landlords/property managers with a goal of fostering successful tenancy.  
• Assistance in resolving disputes with landlords and/or neighbors to reduce 
risk of eviction or other adverse action.  
• Advocacy and linkage with community resources to prevent eviction when 
housing is or may potentially become jeopardized.  
• Assistance with the housing recertification process.  
• Coordinating with the tenant to review, update and modify their housing 
support and crisis plan on a regular basis to reflect current needs and address 
existing or recurring housing retention barriers.  
• Continuing training in being a good tenant and lease compliance, including 
ongoing support with activities related to household management.  
 
 
Some Section 8 Housing for low income adults has long provided similar 
but less intense services in the form of tenant service coordinators and the 
assistance that these individuals provide has allowed many older tenants 
avoid higher levels of long term care health related services. From our 
experience defending older adults in eviction actions, it’s our judgement that    
the availability of “Individual Housing & Tenancy Sustaining Services ” 
would have made a large percentage of those eviction cases unnecessary and 
prevented homelessness that sometimes results when individuals are evicted.  
 
We strongly support this legislation. Thank you for letting us share our 
thoughts with you and we hope that you vote in favor of passage.     
 
 
 
 
