 
 
Office of CEO  
P.O. Box 2100, Bangor, Maine 04402  
207.992.9200  •  Fax 207.907.7077  
 
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 2  
Submitted April 4, 2023  
 
I write on behalf of Penobscot Community Health Care (PCHC), operator of Hope House Health and Living Center (Hope 
House), a clinically integrated, low barrier homeless shelter and transitional housing complex in Bangor, Maine.  PCHC 
supports funding the H ousing First program laid out in LD 2.  
 
PCHC is a federally qualified health center spanning 3 counties in Maine: Penobscot, Waldo , and Somerset.  It is the 
largest FQHC in Maine, serving approximately 60,000 patients. PCHC serves all individuals, regardless of ability to pay.  
Our mission is to eliminate barriers to accessing high quality healthcare, which means we focus on the whole  person and 
the community conditions preventing them from improving their health.   
 
At PCHC, we know the population that will most benefit from this Housing First bill intimately.  At PCHC, we  
• provide integrated primary care, provided by over 200 medical,  mental health and specialty providers.  
• Offer 20 distinct services to augment our integrated care model (such as obesity treatment, peer navigation, 
women’s health, social work, podiatry, and more), based on patient and community need.  
• Serve over 1200 Ma iners in our recovery programs.   
• Serve providers statewide through an innovative model designed to reduce the prescribing of controlled 
substances.  
• Operate the first of its kind, same day access, low -barrier treatment center for opioid use disorder in th e State.  
• Provide instruction to providers across the state in low barrier OUD treatment through an ongoing ECHO   
Dedicated to value -based care and the healthcare system’s stated “quadruple aim” (improving quality and the patient 
experience, reducing costs  and staff burnout), PCHC participates in all MaineCare home programs, including Behavioral 
Health Homes (BHH), Opioid Health Homes (OHH), Homeless Outreach and Member Engagement (HOME), PC Plus, 
and Community Care Teams (CCT).  Care teams consist of socia l workers, family doctors, NPs/P As, psychotherapists, 
pharmacists, primary care RNs, psychiatric providers, and community health workers, among others. This 
interprofessional, team -based approach allows us to see patients from different angles and treat th em holistically, which 
leads to better outcomes.  
 
Located in Bangor, Hope House is a 56 -bed, low barrier shelter, co -located with an integrated primary care clinic (treating 
medical, mental health, and SUD) and 48 transitional housing units (individual dor m-style rooms coupled with common 
living areas). The only low barrier emergency shelter in our region, Hope House has been the only provider serving this 
highly vulnerable group in the region for several decades. We work daily to support and navigate housi ng needs for these 
individuals.  We understand their needs and we can see the improvement in outcomes that will result from a funded, 
housing first approach in Bangor.  
 
Notably, those defined as chronically homeless make up only about 5% -8% of the total po pulation of unhoused people, 
yet research shows we spend about 80% of our time and resources on this group. Cycling in and out of shelters, 
encampments, jails, and emergency rooms in a system that does not meet their needs, we witness daily the enormous 
human cost and unnecessarily high financial cost to the system. Applying trained navigators and other supports, which 
this bill will fund, will improve outcomes, and reduce overutilization of high -cost services.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Without clear, ongoing funding that al lows for targeted, evidence -based interventions to meet the needs of this vulnerable 
group (current state), we are less successful moving the remaining 95% of people in the homeless response system into 
permanent housing because we lack the capacity to do that work. Lack of a rational strategy to address chronic 
homelessness means Maine will continue to see a clogged, overwhelmed, and inefficient homeless response system.   
The Housing First bill, done right, will provide a rational strategy and be an impor tant part of the solution to the larger, 
systemic challenge.  
 
Permanent Supportive Housing (PSH) in general, and Housing First in particular, have been shown to improve housing 
outcomes for unsheltered individuals, particularly those with tri -morbidity (concurrent substance use, mental health, and 
physical health con cerns), such as those we mostly serve at the Hope House.  PSH combines affordable housing with 
services . Rather than using a “linear model” of housing readiness (where clients must progress through a step -by-step 
progression of services to arrive at perman ent housing), the Housing First model approaches housing as a human right and 
prioritizes client agency in determining what kinds of treatments are attempted.  
Generally, a Housing First approach includes these key features:  
1. The absence of sobriety or trea tment pre -conditions for housing  
2. An emphasis on rapid placement into permanent housing  
3. The assurance of sufficient support services in a community context, understanding that the intensity and duration 
of these services (including potential graduation from  services) depend on both client  need and self -determination . 
Given the high risk to unsheltered homeless in Maine, the ever -rising lethality of fentanyl among street homeless and all 
Mainers, and the growing affordable housing crisis, LD 2 would provide n eeded funding for the support services that are 
essential to the Housing First model. Without supportive services that are available on -site to residents, both individual 
and community housing outcomes typically decline for individuals placed in permanent housing, leading them often back 
to unsheltered homelessness at encampments or other locations. All major urban areas in Maine are struggling to bring 
people choosing encampments into shelter and/or stable housing. To do this successfully requires , first, appropriate  and 
available housing and second, intensive, individualized, client -directed services. Both, together, maximize a person’s 
chance of success in maintaining housing.   
 
LD 2 would provide a consistent funding stream for supportive services in housing. Reliable funding is essential to 
maintain a high -quality level of service and continuity in service providers. It allows service providers to pay an adequate 
living wage, wh ich allows for highly trained, experienced staff and consistency over time (low turnover). This continuity 
is vital to client success, as each service provider builds trust and relationships with clients – the foundation for good 
outcomes.  Conversely, lac k of funding or inconsistent funding streams leads to turnover, disruptions and poor -quality 
services, undermining each client’s ability to be successful.   
 
PCHC broadly supports the spirit and intent of LD2 and wants to ensure that this necessary interve ntion to address 
homelessness is available broadly to housing and social service organizations throughout Maine who support individuals 
as they move into housing.  
 
PCHC recommends as well that the requirement of 24/7 onsite services be broadened to include  on-site services with 
on-call services 24 hours a day. While it is notable that emergencies happen less often between 8am and 5pm, many 
successful Housing First models utilize teams such as street teams and Assertive Community Treatment teams to 
successfu lly support clients at all hours.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Finally, we support using the federal definition of chronic homelessness for the eligible service population, as all 
chronically homeless Mainers should receive the supportive services of Housing First. According t o HUD, chronic 
homelessness means a homeless individual who lives in a place not meant for human habitation, a safe haven, or in an 
emergency shelter. Consistency in our definitions and populations will ensure equity for critically needed Housing First 
interventions.  
 
The housing crisis and specifically those who are unhoused is a humanitarian crisis of proportions never seen before in 
Maine. This bill not only supports an evidence -based approach in Maine to chronic homelessness, but it addresses a moral 
imperative that uplifts entire communities.  We are taking care of people, with lives, histories, families, skills, abilities, 
and potential.  We are helping them meet their potential, which benefits all of us.  This is both a moral imperative and 
good publi c policy.  
 
Thank you for your tireless work on behalf of Maine people.  We strongly encourage your support for this bill.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Lori 
 
 
Lorelle Dwyer  
President and CEO  
Penobscot Community Health Center  
 
 
 
 

