Lynn Chamberlain
Bow NH
LD 2
 My name is Lynn Chamberlain and I live in Bow, New Hampshire and I am 
submitting my testimony in favor of LD2. My younger brother Todd Lemoine spent 
most of his adult life on the streets. He suffered with alcoholism 
 and substance abuse. Although our family tried to help and convince him to change 
his ways, it never really stuck. He spent time in New Hampshire, New Jersey and 
eventually ended up in Portland Maine. All the time on the streets.
  Needless to say I always worried if he was ok, if he was warm and if he was eating. 
He relied on the kindness of strangers for a little money here and there, soup kitchens 
and occasionally shelters at night. I could tell you countless stories of how he defied 
logic and always survived he had a real strong faith is the only way I could explain it. 
In 2019 after working with people at Preble Street and having a case manager he 
finally got into housing. I will never forget the phone call from him telling me he had 
a place to live, he was so very grateful and I was so happy for him. 
  His apartment was at the Huston Commons on Bishop Street in Portland. I can't say 
enough great things about the staff there. They are as much his family as I am. He was
loved by all of them and the care and support he received there meant the world to me
and our whole family. 
 
  The staff worked hard for him to finally receive social security benefits and knowing
they were there for him gave me great comfort as I live two hours away. I remember 
visiting for the first time and being so impressed with his apartment. I could sleep at 
night knowing he was safe. 
 
  My brother Todd passed away on February 25, 2023. He endured being hit by a car 
in December 2021 and survived. A broken hip in October 2022 after a fall and 
survived that. In the end cirrhosis of the liver took him. What I would like to express 
is how forever grateful I am to have had the last few years with him and having a 
place to visit and spend time with him. Other members of the family visited as well. 
We wouldn't have had that opportunity without housing being made available. I'm 
hoping that this bill passes so that other families in this situation will get the 
opportunity to spend time with loved ones who they might not see otherwise.
 Sincerely,
Lynn Chamberlain
  
 
