295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 2 
“An Act to Address Maine's Housing Crisis ” 
Sponsored by Speaker Rachel Talbot -Ross  
April 4, 2023  
 
Good afternoon  Senator Pierce , Representative Gere , and members of the Housing  
Committee .  My name is  Malory Shaughnessy and I am the Executive Director of the 
Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services. The Alliance is the statewide 
association representing the majority of Maine’s community based mental health and 
substance use treatment providers , providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, 
women, and children . The Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound policies 
and evidence -based practices that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of 
our behavioral he alth care system.  
 
On behalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD  2, " An Act to 
Address Maine's Housing Crisis .” Maine  desperately needs more supportive housing . 
This bill  offers the state an opportunity to create a dedic ated revenue  stream  to pay 
for supportive services to help Mainers  remain in stable housing  in our communities. 
Supportive housing can help stabilize people with mental health issues and substance 
use disorders who are experiencing homelessness .  
 
Poverty, unemployment, and lack of affordable housing are commonly recogniz ed 
causes of homelessness. These risk factors can be exacerbated by personal 
vulnerabilities such as  mental and substance use disorders1, trauma and 
violence2, domestic violence3, justice -system involvement, sudden serious illness, 
divorce, death of a partner, and disabilities.  
 
Supportive h ousing programs can help address the root causes  of 
homelessness  through a range of essential  recovery support  services, including mental 
and substance  use disorder treatment, employment  assistance .  
 
Permanent supportive housing offers safe an d stable housing environments with 
voluntary and flexible supports and services to help people manage serious, chronic 
issues such as mental and substance use disorders.  
 
Large -scale studies demonstrating the benefits include the  Collaborative Initiative to 
End Chronic Homelessness 4 and HUD -VA Supportive Housing Program5. 
 
For all these reasons, the Alliance members urge you to vote ought to pass on     
LD 2. I am happy to answer any questions you may have for me.   
                                                           
1 https://www.samhsa.gov/disorders  
2 https://www.samhsa.gov/trauma -violence  
3 https://www.samhsa.gov/homelessness -programs -resources/hpr -resour ces/domestic -violence -
homelessness  
4 https://www.hudexchange.info/resources/documents/CICH_ClientOutcomesReport.pdf  
5 https://www.huduser.gov/portal/publications/HUD -VASH -Exit-Study.html  
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

