Maura McDonald
Cape Elizabeth
LD 2
Dear Senator Pierce, Representative Gere and Honorable Members of the Joint Select 
Committee on Housing:  My name is Maura McDonald, I live in the town of Cape 
Elizabeth and I am submitting this letter in favor of LD 2;  An Act to Address Maine's
Housing Crisis.  My brother, Brian McDonald, has been a resident at Logan Place in 
Portland for the past 4 years.  Prior to that, he spent several homeless years on the 
streets of the city of Portland.  During his period of homelessness, I recall driving the 
streets of Portland at different times of the day and night (particularly in the cold, 
Winter months) to locate him and provide whatever support he would accept. 
Thankfully, I was able to work with the Staff at Milestone Foundation to secure stable
housing for Brian at Logan Place. There he has been supported by on-site staff and we
have rebuilt our relationship.  Unfortunately, Brian's short term memory has been 
compromised by his alcohol use disorder. He is unable to work or sufficiently support
himself.  His housing at Logan Place has stabilized him to the point that we are able 
to walk together most Sundays. I am in regular contact with the Staff at Logan Place 
who assist me to connect with Brian on a weekly basis. We have occasional meals 
together, he has attended my children's sporting events and we have enjoyed the Sea 
Dogs together in the Summer months.  I am grateful for the Logan Place Staff and 
reassured by the supportive and compassionate care they provide to him.  It is 
comforting to know that he has a warm and welcoming place to spend his days. In 
addition, I have developed relationships with other Logan Place residents who, also, 
have befriended Brian.  As I drive the city streets, and see others who are homeless, I 
am personally reminded of Brian's journey.  It is my hope that the Housing 
Committee will look favorably on LD 2 and sufficient housing will be created so that 
others can benefit from an expanded housing infrastructure in the same way that Brian
and I have.  Respectfully submitted, Maura McDonald 23 Cottage Farms Road, Cape 
Elizabeth, ME 04107
