State of Maine \ 131st Legislature  
Joint Select Committee on Housing  
Graduating student of UMaine // Orono 
LD 2: “An Act to End Chronic Homelessness by Creating the Housing First Fund” 
 
 
Dear Members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing,  
  
 My name is Nicole Pateman, and I am  student attending the University of Maine Orono. Being 
in Maine has been something I have dreamed about since being a little girl, and with my college 
career coming to an end it is with a heavy heart to know that living in Maine is just not 
financially attainable. As many students coming out of college, we don’t have a lot of money 
saved to be able to buy a house so most of us tend to rent. With rent in Maine increasing yearly, 
it is hard to find a place to live on the income of our first job out of college.  
 
Graduating from the College of Social Work, homelessness is something that I see almost 
everyday at my internship. Whether it be teenagers, young adults or even elderly, homelessness 
effect everyone and it only seems to be increasing. With the enactment of the Housing First 
Model not only will there be an opportunity for people experiencing homelessness but will also 
come with support with services that the model also provides. Having a place to call your own 
has been proven to improve various health conditions for someone. Mental, emotional, physical, 
socio-economic, and overall well-being are all impacted by someone’s housing situation. The 
Housing First model allows people experiencing homelessness to have a choice and a say in their 
housing selection which correlates to them being more successful in remaining housed as well as 
motivated to continue to better their lives.  
 
With that being said, I strongly support LD2 and feel as though it will help citizens within 
communities and people experiencing homelessness directly as well as indirectly. I want to send 
my appreciate to Speaker Talbot Ross as well for bringing this model and legislation forward.  
 
Sincerely,  
Nicole Pateman  
 
 
 
 
 
