                                                                                                                                      
Testimony In Support of  LD 2 –  An Act to End Chronic Homelessness by Creating 
the Housing First Fund  
 
April 18, 2023  
 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Housing. My name is Ninette Irabaruta, and I am the Director of Public Policy and Advocacy at United 
Way of Southern Maine (UWSM).  I am here today on behalf of U WSM to support  LD 2: An Act to End 
Chronic Homeless by Creating the Housing First Fund.  
 
UWSM is an organization that mobilizes  the caring power  of community by bringing people and resources 
together to address immediate needs and find long- term solutions to the challe nging problems of our 
times. And one of our most challenging problems today is chronic homelessness  across the State of 
Main e. This is not just a Greater Portland issue . 
 
This bill provides  funding to support Housing First, which can be  a successful solution for people 
experiencing chronic homelessness  across the State . 
 Maine has done it before. The first Housing First site to open in the S tate was back in 2005  –  Logan 
Place  on Frederick Street in Portland.1 Housing First is designed t o target individuals and families with 
chronic illness, mental health issues , or substance use disorders  who have experienced either long- term 
or repeated homelessness. Housing First recognizes that stable housing is a prerequisite for effective 
psychiatric and substance use treatment and for improving quality of life.2 Once stably housed, individuals 
are better able to take advantage of wrap -around services –  to help support housing stability, 
employment, and recovery. Without stable housing, attaining these goals becomes much more difficult.3 
 
LD 2 provides a starting point for the State to help stably house approximately more than  400 individuals 
experiencing chronic homelessness. Housing First  can quickly  and permanently house  individuals and 
families experiencing homelessness without preconditions and barriers to entry, such as sobriety, 
treatment, or servic e participation requirements.  UWSM  also understands  that communities save money 
on emergency services like police calls, emergency room visits, medical  transports, jails, and emergency 
shelters  when people are permanently housed.  
 
It will also be important to make sure we support  case management support , health care, income 
supports , employment services, and more that are required to go along with Housing First . Housing First 
is a whole -system orientation, and in some cases, a whole- system re -orientation.4 It is not enough for 
Housing First to simply exist or for these other services /programs to exist – they need to work as part of 
a whole system working together to help people . 
 
In addition, w e request that the Housing Committee amend LD 2 text to include all Housing First models . 
There are multiple successful, best -practice models for housing chronically homeless populations.5 
 
We respectfully encourage you to support LD 2.  
 Thank you for your leadership and service . 
 
1 https://www.pressherald.com/2017/09/09/maine -voices -housing -first-helps -both -the-homeless -and-the-community/   
2 https://nlihc.org/sites/default/files/Housing- First -Research.pdf  
3 https://nlihc.org/sites/default/files/Housing- First -Research.pdf  
4 https://www.usich.gov/news/four -clarifications -about -housing -first/    
5 Evidence -Behind- Appro aches -That -End- Homelessness -Brief -2019.pdf (usich.gov)   
