5 
£3 STATE OF MAINE 
, ,._ HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
%;;z;f SPEAKERS OFFICE 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1300 
RACHEL TALBQT RQSS 
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE 
Tuesday, April 4th, 2023 
Testimony of Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross presenting 
LD 2, An Act to Address Maine's Housing Crisis. 
Before the Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Good afternoon. Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, distinguished members of 
the Joint Select Committee on Housing, I am Representative Rachel Talbot Ross of 
Portland. I have the honor of serving as the Speaker of the House and I am with you 
today to present and ask for your support of LD 2, An Act to Address Maine's Housing 
Crisis. 
While if solving something as pervasive as Maine’s housing crisis could be solved 
with one bill title, I’m certain we would all immediately vote ‘ought-to~pass. ’ The work 
that the Joint Select Committee on Housing has done thus far and will continue to do will 
create lasting and signiﬁcant change to a far—reaching and ongoing crisis with multiple 
initiatives. Today, I offer you one proven initiative for consideration and the opportunity 
to provide safe, affordable, permanent housing and support hundreds of Mainers with an 
amendment to LD 2, An Act to End Chronic Homelessness by Creating the Housing First 
Fund. 
It is my belief that every single human being deserves to be treated with dignity 
and respect, and that means safe shelter and having their basic needs met. For those 
experiencing chronic homelessness, we simply aren’t meeting our obligations. 
Chronic homelessness means a situation in which a person is living in a place not 
meant for human habitation for at least 12 months and for whom homelessness is 
correlated with a condition that makes accessing services and maintaining housing a 
signiﬁcant challenge such as substance use disorder or a behavioral health condition. 
People experiencing chronic homelessness typically have complex and long-tenn 
health conditions, such as mental illness, substance use disorders, physical disabilities, or 
other medical conditions. Once they become homeless ~— regardless of what immediately 
caused them to lose their housing —— it is difficult for them to get back into housing and 
District 118: Portland neighborhoods of Parkside, Baysicle, East Ba}/side, Oakdale and 
the University of Southern Maine Campus
they can face long or repeated episodes of homelessness. Additionally, people who are 
long-term homeless have a life expectancy of over l0 years shorter than the general 
population and in some studies the discrepancy is even higher. The Maine State Housing 
Authority estimates that there are just below 700 such individuals here in Maine. 
Housing First is an approach to quickly and successfully comiect individuals and 
families experiencing homelessness to permanent housing without preconditions and 
barriers to entry, such as sobriety, treatment or service participation requirements. 
Supportive services are offered to maximize housing stability and prevent returns to 
homelessness as opposed to addressing predetermined treatment goals prior to permanent 
housing entry. 
This bill seeks to establish the Housing First Program within the Department of 
Health and Human Services and with support from the Maine State Housing Authority. 
This fund will provide permanent supportive housing, which to be clear pairs a housing 
subsidy with case management and supportive services, and is a proven solution to 
chronic homelessness. It has been shown to not only help people experiencing chronic 
homelessness achieve long-term housing stability, but also improve their health and well- 
being. 
Additionally, this model has also been shown to lower public costs associated with 
the use of crisis services such as shelters, hospitals, jails, and prisons. 
When passed and implemented, this is a model that can be used statewide. Because 
as we all know, homelessness is not just a southern Maine problem, it is a problem that 
must be addressed in communities across the state. Whether it be Lewiston, Augusta, 
Bangor, Waterville or Presque Isle, a Housing First model can be scaled to meet the 
needs of the community. 
And it’s been proven to work here in Maine already. A couple weeks ago I had the 
opportunity to visit Preble Street and learn about their pioneering Housing First work. 
Their programs at Logan Place, Florence House, and Huston Commons have provided 
people who have lived in shelters and on the streets for much of their lives witha 
permanent and safe living situation that supports their stability and independence while 
offering them a chance for a productive and fulﬁlling future. 
I heard about individuals who literally lived on the streets for years now living safe 
digniﬁed lives in their own homes. They shared that over a third of the tenants have 
reconnected with family members, some for the ﬁrst time in over a decade. Folks are
> 
working on their sobriety, are addressing mental health issues, are participating in their 
communities and becoming good neighbors. 
Beyond anecdotal evidence, Preble Street has quantitative and qualitative evidence 
of the individuals served. Over a 5 year period they collected data on residents at Logan 
Place, Florence House and Huston Commons. In sum, 89% of the tenants maintained 
housing, with only 11% retuming to homelessness or incarceration. 
Additionally, they performed an independent cost analysis summary of Logan 
Place. The results are both clear in their impacts of the individuals, but the reduction of 
stress to the entire system. With secure housing, there was a dramatic reduction in 
residents ‘ use of emergency shelters, ambulance services, emergency room services and 
police intervention. 
LD 2 and expansion of the Housing First model is the policy combination we often 
strive to ﬁnd. By providing compassionate care, the greater community beneﬁts 
economically. 
The time is now to expand this life-changing work and give more people the 
dignity and support they deserve. To meet this ﬁrst and most basic need of our fellow 
Mainers. Because an ER waiting room is not a home, nor is a shelter ﬂoor, a jail cell or 
under a highway underpass. Nor can we expect folks who are currently experiencing this 
way of life to ever become their best and highest selves. 
If you agree, I urge you to support this bill and know that LD 2, An Act to End 
Chronic Homelessness by Creating the Housing First Fund, will do more than create 
housing - it will create lasting and transformational change. We can make history here in 
Maine and have the ability to do something that no other state has done by ending chronic 
homelessness. This unique opportunity is now, the resources are available now and the 
time to take action is now. 
Behind me today are people who work every day to provide these wrap-around 
services and can speak to their impacts. I am grateful for their time, their service and the 
profound nature of their work. I am certain they will be happy to provide you with more 
information today and at the work session. Thank you very much.
131 st Maine Legislature 
Proposed Language for Concept Draft LD 2 An Act to Address Maine's Housing Crisis (Speaker Talbot Ross) 
An Act to End Chronic Homelessness by Creating the Housing First Fund 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows: 
Sec. 1. 22 MRSA §20-A is enacted to read: 
§20-A Housing First Program 
1. Program established. The Housing First Program, referred to in this section as "the program." is 
established in the department to facilitate the delivery of support and stabilization services to residents of 
properties established or developed to provide permanent housing to end chronic homelessness in the State. 
Services facilitated under the program must be available on site, 24 hours a day and be designed to build 
independent living skills and connect individuals with community-based sen/ices. The department shall 
ensure that reimbursement under the MaineCare program is available to providers under the program to the 
maximum extent possible. For the purposes of this section, "chronic homelessness"means a situation in 
which a person is living in a place not meant for human habitation for at least 12 months, excluding stays in 
emergency shelters or intermittent brief stays in a place suitable for human habitation, and for whom 
homelessness is correlated with a condition that makes accessing sen/ices and maintaining housing a 
signiﬁcant challenge such as substance use disorder or a behavioral health condition. 
2. Fund established. The Housing First Fund, referred to in this section as "the fund," is established as 
a separate and distinct fund for accounting and budgetary reportingyurposes in order to sugport the program. 
3. Sources of fund. The Treasurer of State shall credit to the fund: 
A All money received by the State in accordance with Title 36, section 4641 -B, subsection 4-B,_paragraph 
E-1 ._i..I. 
B. Money from any other source, whether public or private, designated for deposit into or credited to the 
fund; and 
C. interest earned or other investment income on balances in the fund. 
4. Distribution of funds. The department shall distribute funds to pay those who provide supportive 
sen/ices to residents at properties established or developed to provide permanent housing to persons who 
have been chronically homeless. The department shall also use the fund to establish a permanent full-time 
position in the department to assist providers with providing 24-hour, on-site sugportive services and 
navigating reimbursement under the MaineCare program for those services. Beginning July 1, 2024, the 
department shall annually determine the amount necessary to cover any unpaid services provided under the 
program in the previous year and the anticipated amount needed to pay for services expected to be provided 
at each property in the next ﬁscal year. Funds in excess of those amounts must be transferred to the Nlaine 
State Housing Authority for the purposes of: 
A. Providing technical assistance to housing developers to help with capital and planning issues 
associated with deve|oping__properties consistent with the housing model described by the program; and 
B. Developing affordable housing, including for proiects with a housing model described by the program 
to the extent development is not covered by other resources. 
5. Report. Beginning February 1, 2025 and annually thereafter. the department shall submita report to 
the joint standing committeeof the Legislature having_jurisdiction over housing matters describing the number 
of residents sen/ed by the program and the number of months residents have avoided returning to 
homelessness or maintained stable housing; 
131stMaine Legislature, page1
=> 
131st Maine Legislature 
Proposed Language for Concept Draft LD 2 An Act to Address lVlaine’s Housing Crisis (Speaker Talbot Ross) 
Sec. 2. 36 MRSA §4641-B, sub-§4-B, 1[E, as amended by PL 2021, c. 753, §1, is further amended 
to read: 
E. In fiscal year 2015-16 and each ﬁscal year thereafter prior to ﬁscal year 2024-25, the Treasurer of 
State shall credit the revenues derived from the tax imposed pursuant to section 4641 -A, subsection 1 in 
accordance with this paragraph. 
(1) At the beginning of the ﬁscal year, the Maine State Housing Authority shall certify to the Treasurer 
of State the amount that is necessary and sufficient to meet the authority's obligations relating to 
bonds issued or planned to be issued by the authority under Title 30-A, section 4864. 
(2) On a monthly basis, the Treasurer of State shall apply 50% of the revenues in accordance with 
this subparagraph. The Treasurer of State shall first pay revenues available under this subparagraph 
to the Maine State Housing Authority, which shall deposit the funds in the Maine Energy, Housing 
and Economic Recovery Fund established in Title 30-A, section 4863, until the amount paid equals 
the amount certiﬁed by the Maine State Housing Authority under subparagraph (1), after which the 
Treasurer of State shall credit any remaining revenues available under this subparagraph to the 
General Fund. 
(3) On a monthly basis, the Treasurer of State shall credit 50% of the revenues to the l\/laine State 
Housing Authority, except that, notwithstanding paragraph F, in ﬁscal year 2015-16, the Treasurer of 
State shall ﬁrst credit $6,291,740 of the revenues available under this subparagraph to the General 
Fund and except that, notvvithstanding paragraph F, in ﬁscal year 2016-17, the Treasurer of State 
shall ﬁrst credit $6,090,367 of the revenues available under this subparagraph to the General Fund 
and except that, notwithstanding paragraph F, in ﬁscal years 2017-18 and 2018-19, the Treasurer of 
State shall ﬁrst credit $2,500,000 of the revenues available under this subparagraph to the General 
Fund. The l\/laine State Housing Authority shall deposit the funds received pursuant to this 
subparagraph in the Housing Opportunities for Maine Fund created in Title 30-A, section 4853. 
Beginning July 1, 2023, the Maine State Housing Authority shall use 25% of funds transferred to the 
Housing Opportunities for Maine Fund under this subparagraph to support the creation of new 
housing units, through new construction or adaptive reuse, that are affordable to low-income 
households. 
Sec. 3. as MRSA§4641-B, sub-§4-B, 115-1 is enacted to read: 
E-1. ln ﬁscal year 2024-25 and each ﬁscal year thereafter, the Treasurer of State shall credit the 
revenues derived from the tax imposed pursuant to section 4641-A, subsection 1 in accordance with this 
paragraph. 
( 1) At the beginning of the ﬁscal year, the Maine State Housing Authority shall certify to the Treasurer 
of State the amount that is necessary and sufﬁcient to meet the authority's obligations relating to 
bonds issued or planned to be issued by the authority under Title 30-A, section 4864. 
(2) On a monthly basis, the Treasurer of State shall aggly 50% of the revenues in accordance with 
this subparagraph. The Treasurer of State shall first pay revenues available under this subparagraph 
to the Maine State Housing Authority, which shall deposit the funds in the Maine Energy, Housing_ 
and Economic Recovery Fund established in Title 30-A, section 4863, until the amount paid equals 
the amount certiﬁed by the Maine State Housing Authority under subparagraph (1)_, after which the 
Treasurer of State shall credit half of any remaining revenues available under this subparagraph to 
the General Fund and half of any remaining revenues available under this subparagraph to the 
Housing First Fund created in Title 22, section 265, subsection 2. 
131 stMaine Legislature, page2
131st Maine Legislature 
Proposed Language for Concept Draft LD 2 An Act to Address Maine's Housing Crisis (Speaker Talbot Ross) 
f3) On a monthly basis, the Treasurer of State shall credit 50% of the revenues to the Maine State 
Housing Authority. The Maine State Housing Authority shall deposit the funds received pursuant to 
this subparagraph in the Housing Opportunities for Maine Fund created in Title 30-A, section 4853. 
Beginning July 1, 2024, the Maine State Housing Authority shall use 25% of funds transferred to the 
Housing Ogportunities for Maine Fund under this subparagraph to sugport the creation of new 
housing units, through new construction or adaptive reuse, that are affordable to low-income 
households. 
SU MMARY 
This bill establishes the Housing First Program within the Department of Health and Human Sen/ices to 
facilitate the delivery of stabilization and support services to residents of properties established or developed 
to provide permanent housing to persons who have been chronically homeless and to fund technical 
assistance, administered by the Maine State Housing Authority, for the development of housing consistent 
with the program. The program is funded from the real estate transfer tax by depositing half of the funds that 
would otherwise be deposited into the General Fund into the Housing First Fund created by the bill. 
131stMaine Legislature, page3
