 
 
PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ feedingmaine.org 
April 3, 2023 
Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine testimony to the Committee on Housing in support of LD 2, An Act to 
End Chronic Homelessness by Creating the Housing First Fund  
To Chairperson Pierce, Chairperson Gere, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Housing.  
My name is Rebekah Lane and I am the Community Organizer for Good Shepherd Food Bank of Maine. I am 
here today to express our support, and ask for your support, of LD 2 An Act to End Chronic Homelessness by 
Creating the Housing First Fund.  
The mission of Good Shepherd Food Bank is to eliminate hunger in Maine by improving access to nutritious 
food for people in need, building strong community partnerships, and mobilizing the public in the fight to end 
hunger. Good Shepherd Food Bank works in partnership with nearly 600 organizations to help distribute food 
to community members in need. Our network of partner agencies includes food pantries, meal sites, senior 
centers, school programs, and healthcare facilities. In our work centering equity, we are increasingly working 
with communities of color to address food security in a culturally responsive way.  
We believe there is a solution to the problem of hunger in Maine. Working in partnership with the state 
legislature we can and will help reduce the impact of hunger in our state and make Maine a stronger, better 
place to work and live.  
Hunger often proceeds homelessness because for those faced with the choice of food or shelter, food takes 
understandable priority. Hunger and homelessness is bidirectional, with those experiencing hunger being 
62% more likely to experience homelessness within 5 years, and those who are homeless being 40% more 
likely to experience hunger within the same timeframe. Those who have housing stay fed and those who are 
fed stay housed, which is why Good Shepherd is here today testifying on this housing bill.  
People experiencing food insecurity are disproportionately affected by chronic health conditions like diabetes 
and high blood pressure, which can lead to more doctors visits, sick days, or hospitilzations that can result in 
losing employment, which is the most common primary event that leads to homelessness. And those 
experiencing both homelessness and food insecurity are twice as likely to have diabetes, hypertension, or 
suffer from a heart attack than those housed.  
No matter what starts this loop of being resourced deprived, once someone finds themselves food or housing 
insecure they lose the ability to control their food intake, which results in further health crisis and higher 
support needs.  Often the only hot meals that those who are unhoused have access to are higher in calories, 
sodium, and carbohydrates rather than being nutrient dense, which can make chronic conditions worse. The 
times my family has struggled the most with food insecruity align almost completely with flare ups of my own 
health conditions, conditions that place many limits on the foods I can eat. And yet during those moments I 
have less control over food access, which has resulted in longer flares and more instability. 
 
 
PO Box 1807 ∙ 3121 Hotel Road ∙ Auburn, ME 04211 ∙ Tel: 207-782-3554 ∙ Fax: 207-782-9893 ∙ feedingmaine.org 
Of those who access hunger relief in our state 87% of households include a child, senior, or disabled person. 
My family includes children and people with disabilities, both of which makes maintaining housing a 
significant challenge. Since my oldest was born, in 2010, we have moved 9 times, with housing costs ranging 
from 33% to 75% of our household income at any given time during those years.  As I have shared in previous 
testimonies, I am lucky, my experience with homelessness hasn’t been chronic, like it is for so many others.  
Those who are are chronically resource deprived of food and/or housing need the stability and feeling of 
abundance necessary to tap into their own personal resiliency.  The Housing First Fund will provide that 
stability for those experiencing chronic homelessness, giving them a chance to show themselves and others 
the resiliency that has been used for so long to survive being chronically unhoused.  
We at Good Shepherd support the this bill.  
Thank you for your consideration of our testimony. 
Sincerely, 
Rebekah Lane  
Community Organizer 
rlane@gsfb.org  
207-577-6656 
 
