State of Maine | 131st Legislature 
Joint Select Committee on Housing 
Testimony of Dr. Renee Fay-LeBlanc on behalf of Greater Portland Health 
April 4, 2023 
 
Supporting: 
LD 2, “An Act to End Chronic Homelessness by Creating the Housing First Fund “ 
 
Sponsored by Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross 
Members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, my name is Renee Fay-LeBlanc and I serve as the 
Chief Medical Officer at Greater Portland Health. Greater Portland Health is one of Maine’s 20 
community health centers (CHCs), also known as Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs), and part of 
the largest independent primary care network in the state.  
At Greater Portland Health we provide primary care services, integrated behavioral health, and dental 
services regardless of people’s ability to pay. Our Bayside site is a designated Healthcare for the 
Homeless site by the federal government and over 30% of the 13,000 patients we care for are 
experiencing homelessness.  
I strongly support LD 2 and thank Speaker Talbot Ross for bringing legislation forward to support 
additional housing first locations throughout the state.  
Housing is healthcare.  
I have witnessed firsthand the power of housing and how having a place to call home improves health. 
Patients are better able to store medication, which leads to better adherence. They have a place to 
store and refrigerate food, which can lead to better nutrition. They can access a bathroom which can 
improve personal hygiene, and they are able to get more restful sleep. Patients also have more time to 
focus on other aspects of their lives, including health, when they are not spending their days focused on 
where they will spend the night.  
Housing First not only affords all of these advantages to their clients, but the philosophy of Housing First 
supports people who have experienced homelessness for a long time and helps them succeed in the 
transition from homelessness to housing. For many, this is a difficult transition. Some of the skills that 
are protective on the streets; like hoarding or heightened vigilance, can prove difficult in a traditional 
rental situation. The support staff at Housing First are amazing in their ability to help their clients feel 
safe. 
Housing First is a proven model. It works. On behalf of Greater Portland Health, thank you for 
considering my comments. Please do not hesitate to contact me directly at rfay-
leblanc@greaterportlandhealth.org  with any follow up questions.  
Renee Fay-LeBlanc MD FACP 
 

