Good afternoon, Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Special Committee of 
Housing. My name is Thomas Ptacek. I’m a resident of Portland. I was once homeless, sleeping on a mat 
on the floor at Oxford Street Shelter. I’m also a Veteran, and for the past 12 years I have been working for 
Preble Street. I have worked for Preble Street’s Veteran Housing Services, and today I am a caseworker at 
Huston Commons, one of Portland ’s three site-based Housing First programs. 
I was lucky, being a veteran, I was able to secure a VASH voucher (section 8 for veterans) after being at 
the shelter fora whole year. I was also fortunate enough to not be dealing with addiction or severe mental 
health issues. For those who are, the options can be very limited or even non-existent. Programs that can’t 
or won’t work with you unless you’re clean and sober or free from (mental health symptoms) are simply 
not accessible for so many of om‘ most vulnerable members of society. Asking someone who is homeless, 
sleeping in a shelter or car or on the street, to take on the serious, multi-step process of dealing with 
severe mental health or addiction issues simply isn’t going to work. 
Believe me, I know. When you’re homeless, you’re thinking about being in a specific spot at a specific 
time so you can eat, or do your laundry, or get a mat for the night. You may want to address these issues 
that are making your life so difficult, but without a safe and quiet place to retreat to , you are simply at the 
mercy of your surroundings. Surroundings which don’t seem to want you to get better. 
During this hearing, you will hear about all the great services and supports that are provided by 24-hour 
staff at these site-based housing first programs. There are many, all existing to help the tenants gain 
control of their lives and move towards better health, both mental and physical. For me, the greatest 
benefit to Housing First is simply that it is. It exists. It is there for the tenants to use as an avenue toa 
safer life. 
One of the best examples of this I can think of is a tenant who lived at Florence House, another site-based 
housing first program. She was a fun, well liked person and suffered from a pretty serious alcohol 
addiction. This tenant was often seen in the common spaces, coming and going, and always very 
intoxicated. Aftera few months of intensive staff support, often during late night hours, staff began to 
notice that she wasn’t always intoxicated when they saw her. One day she was asked about the evident 
decrease in her alcohol consumption. Her response: “I have a nice apartment now; I have better things to 
spend my money on.” The difference was having something to invest in, and the availability of staff 
support any time she needed it. It’s easy to feel lost and hopeless when you’re homeless. 
I don’t use the word hopeless lightly. After working in inpatient psychiatry in the Navy, I will admitI 
didn’t fully accept the idea of hopelessness. Sure, stuff can happen, and it makes you sad or question 
yourself. But to be completely without hope? Just didn’t seem real. Six months into my year of 
homelessness, I understood. Hopelessness is real, it is debilitating, and it is scary. 
I was able to access what I needed to get my life back together. Luckily, I just needed to get back into 
housing, I could take it from there. It still took a while to get back, I still struggle. For those who need 
more than I did, site—based Housing First is the only possibility, the only option that will be with them 
throughout their journey. 
Please vote “Ought to pass” on LD2. Thank you.
