 
 
 
1 Marginal Way | FL 2 | Portland, ME 04101 | t. 207.956.7030 | f. 207.805.1679  
www.maineimmigrantrights.org | FB: @MEImmigrantRightsCoalition | T: @MaineRights | IG: @MaineImmigrantRights  Testimony from the Maine Immigrants’ Rights Coalition regarding:  
LD2: “An Act to Address Maine's Housing Crisis ” 
Sponsored By: Representative Rachel Talbot Ross  
Public Hearing: Tuesday, April 4, 2023 at 1:00pm  
 
 
Dear Members of the  Joint Select Committee on Housing : 
My name is Tobin Williamson and I live in  the city of  Lewiston, Maine  in Androscoggin County . I am 
the Advocacy Manager with the Maine Immigrants’ Rights Coalition (MIRC), a statewide network  of 
almost 100 member organizations  all working to enh ance the lives of Maine’s immigrant communities.  
Maine is in the midst  of a housing crisis. You already know this. Affordable housing, l uxury housing, 
single -famil y housing, multi -family housing, Portland, Lewiston, there is a shortage everywhere and 
people are su ffering as a result . People who do not have housing often have other challen ges, involving 
various facets of life such as healthcare, transportation, employment, childcare, language access, or any 
number of topics. But it often comes down to housing first. If you have a stable housing situation, chances 
are you ca n work to address the next levels of needs. That is wh y this proposed  legislation is so important.  
One of MIRC ’s strongest partn ers in both the advocacy and housing sectors is Preble Street. When they 
say the solution to chronic homelessness is site -based housing first, we believe them. With housing first, 
people can then access the wraparound supportive s ervices they need to take the next step. Trained staff 
from  places like P reble Street are able to meet people from vul nerable populations in rural, urban, and 
suburban communities where they are and help them  move forward  in their journey to stability .  
For people from the immigran t communiti es we serve, we have found that moving from shelter to shelter, 
from hotel to hotel, comes at the expense of stability in education enrollment, employment opportunities, 
and healthcare access. Many asylum seekers are unable to gain a foot hold in their new country because 
they never know where they will be sleeping the next night.  If they had a place to call home, it would 
mean the world to them and their family.  
Expanding t he site -based Housin g First model would be a step in the right direction  for addressing 
Maine ’s housing situation . Therefore, we  highly  encourage the passage of LD 2: An Act to  Address 
Maine ’s Housing Crisis . Thank you for your consideration  of this important and ur gent matter . 
 
Tobin Williamson  
Lewiston, ME  
MIRC Advocacy Manager  
 
### 
 
