H.O.M.E. Inc. 
P.O. Box 10, Orland, Maine, 
U.S.A. 04472 
Phone: 207 -469-7961 
Fax: 207-469-1023 Email: executivedirector@homeincme.org  
T
uesday, April 4, 2023Serve First Those Who Suffer Most 
Proud member of Emmaus International  
 Dear  Committee Members , 
T
hank you for the opportunity to testify in support of LD 2  An Act to Addre ss Maine’s 
Housing Crisis. I am Tracey Hair, resident of Bucksport and Executive Director of H.O.M.E. Inc. 
which oversees four Homeless Shelters in Hancock Count y with a 53-bed capacity, a permanent 
housing program for low -income and homeless families, as well as programs to support a 
housebuilding program which has built 53 homes with low- income families.   
H.O.M.E. Inc. has been doing this work since 1970 and I have been with the organization for 
nineteen years.  Over the last three years H.O.M.E. Inc. has seen an increase of 55% of people presenting for 
shelter who are chronically homeless. We serve approximately 202 people each year , and an estimated 20 
who are considered chronically homeless. Additionally for the first time in my nineteen years working in 
Hancock County, we estimate approximately 21 individuals sleeping outside or utilizing warming  centers in 
Orland and Ellsworth. P eople with complex healthcare and mental health needs.  
Chronic homelessness is a serious public health issue that places a strain on healthcare and criminal 
justice systems. Typical housing models place requirements on chronically homeless individuals th at are 
often experienced as insurmountable barriers to housing. Housing First models attempt to reach this population more effectively. Housing is a basic human right, not a reward for clinical success, once the 
chaos of homelessness is eliminated from a p erson’s life, clinical and social stabilization occur faster and are 
more enduring.  
Several  years ago, an elderly man sought shelter with us after he was found lying in the driveway at 
his trailer that was condemned years prior. After his health was stabilized, he entered our shelter. The man 
was in our shelter for more than 180 days and after receiving a voucher, he was housed. Staff quickly 
identified the man would need supports to live independently – supports which were not forthcoming at the 
time. T he man ultimately lost two housing options due to hoarding and kitchen fires. This presents a perfect 
candidate for site-based housing with intensive supports. 
Permanent Supportive Housing combines affordable housing with optional but assertive services 
that focus on keeping vulnerable families stable and housed. This strategy, which is often designed for chronically homeless people, can also benefit families. Although supportive housing programs vary, they 
share core principles:  they aim to keep people housed, the services often involve a range of providers 
including physical and mental health, employment, benefits, and others, and tenants do not risk eviction if 
they refuse services, but providers are persistent in their offers to help.  These ongoing ef forts stand to 
decrease the burden of chronic homelessness for affected individuals, their families, communities and 
society -at-large.  

H
ousing First is associated with reduced utilization of publicly funded services such as shelter, jail, 
and emerg ency rooms, and provides a strong foundation for housing retention in a population that is 
traditionally characterized as unmotivated for and unsuccessful in housing. 
As our state faces one of the most severe affordable housing crises in its history, we must equip 
ourselves with the resources to respond with positive and effective outcomes. As a provider of emergency 
shelter, I understand and appreciate how precious tax dollars are and we take our responsibility to steward 
funding very seriously. We are committed to working to end homelessness in Maine and to deliver the 
strongest network of services for people experiencing homelessness. The front line in that network is 
access to housing as a first response.  
Thank you for taking the time to review this bill and I encourage your support. 
Tracey Hair  
Executive Director 
H.O.M.E., Inc. enhances the quality of life of people who have fallen on challenging times by honoring their dignity, 
attend ing to su ch basic n eeds as food and sh elter, supporting th eir long-t erm health  and development, and fostering a 
vibrant and mutually supportive community. 

