..~~‘l1:._ 
“=; 
t'f;?; 
Troy D. Jackson THE MAINE SENATE 3 State House Station 
President of the Senate 131st Legislature Augusta, Maine 04333 
Testimony in Support of LDZ 
An Act to End Chronic Homelessness by Creating the Housing First Fund 
Presented to the loint Select Committee on Housing 
Tuesday, April 4, 2023 
Senator Pierce, Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on Housing, 
my name is Troy Jackson. I serve as President of the Maine Senate and proudly represent 
Aroostook County in the Legislature. l am here today to testify in support of LD 2, "An Act to 
End Chronic Homelessness by Creating the Housing First Fund." l want to thank House Speaker 
Rachel Talbot Ross for bringing this bill forward. 
Maine is in the midst of a housing crisis. The lack of housing, let alone affordable housing, is 
holding back working families, small businesses and communities in both rural and non-rural 
areas. The situation is dire and worsening daily. The most glaring example of this is the growing 
number of unhoused Mainers all across the state. it's a problem that available shelters and 
transitional housing can't fix alone. 
The proposal before the Housing Committee today would address issues around emergency 
housing through the Housing First Fund —— a model that I believe this Committee is familiar 
with. It's a model that targets access to housing for chronically unhoused populations, including 
those with substance use disorder or behavioral health needs. These are vulnerable populations 
whose health conditions can serve as a barrier to quality, affordable and stable housing. 
The Housing First Fund will support the construction of dedicated apartment buildings financed 
in part by the real estate transfer tax and/or other public or private sources. The program will 
connect individuals and families experiencing homelessness to permanent housing without 
burdening them with preconditions and barriers to entry, such as sobriety, behavioral health 
treatment, or other service participation requirements. Rather the Housing First Program will 
supply 24-hour supportive services through the Department of Health and Human Services in 
order to assure housing stability and reduce the risk of future homelessness. 
Stare House (207) 287-1500 * Cell (207) 436-0763 * Fax (207) 287-5862 * Toll Free 1-800-423-6900 * TTY 711 
Senatonlackson1@gmail.c0m * Web Site." legislature.mai11e.g0v/senate
What is most compelling about this model is its track record of success. There are three site- 
based "Housing First" programs operating in Maine — Logan Place, Florence House and Huston 
Commons} When the first site — Logan Place — opened in 2005, the impact was almost 
immediate. This 30~unit apartment project led to a 10 percent decrease in homelessness in 
Portland and a 5 percent decrease statewide? States like Utah have adopted this approach 
throughout the entire state and have seen a dramatic decline in homelessness — up to 90 
percent? ’ 
The bottom line is that this program will reduce the number of Mainers staying in shelters or on 
the streets and save money. Other benefits include fewer emergency room visits, medical 
transports, police calls, and jail stays. The Community Preventive Services Task Force, an 
independent panel of public health and prevention experts reviewed 26 studies and found that 
for every dollar invested in Housing First there was a $1.44 cost in savings. ‘ This societal cost 
savings came from healthcare, emergency housing, judicial services, welfare and disability 
costs, and benefits from increased employment? 
in closing, Housing First is a win-win. lt is a proven program that addresses the homelessness 
crisis and perpetuates stable housing. 
l want to thank Speaker Talbot Ross for bringing this bill forward, and thank all of you for your 
time and consideration. l hope you will join me in supporting this proposal. Though this is not 
my area of expertise, l’d be happy to answer any questions. 
### 
1 
https://www.preblestreet.0rg/2023/O2/15/maine-needs-more-site-based-housing-first/ 
2 www.oreblestreetorg/2023/O2/15/maine-needs —more-site —based-housing- ﬁrst[ 
3 www.mainepublic.org/politics/2023-O3-24/utah-officiaI~briefs-committee-on-successes-and-challenges-of~housing-first- 
model 
4 nIihc.org/sites/default/files/Housing-First-Research.pdf 
5 nlihc.org/sites/default/files/Housing-First-Research.pdf
