Caitlin Rothe
Gorham - Woodfords Westbrook preschool 
LD 1309
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and honorable members of the Committee 
on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Caitlin Rothe, and I live in Gorham. I 
am speaking today in strong support of LD 1309: An Act to Clarify Requirements for 
Payment of Tuition for Children with Disabilities by the Department of Education's 
Child Development Services System).
My son Jacob is currently in his second year of preschool at Woodfords in 
Westbrook. I am writing to make a heartfelt plea to continue funding for early 
intervention preschool programs. These programs are critical in helping children with 
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) to reach their full potential and live fulfilling lives.
Research has shown that early intervention is essential. An autism diagnosis won’t 
limit a child. But not having access to support services will.
My son has shown tremendous progress during his time at Woodfords. He was 
diagnosed level 3 autism and global communication delay. He barely said 10 single 
words in a day. Today, he is singing nursery rhymes, recites the alphabet, counts to 
20, labels animals and family members. I wasn’t sure I’d ever hear him say “mom” 
after his regression at 13months of age. His teachers worked with him using a 
Christmas card and at school pick up, Jake came out and said “Mommy” after two 
long years and it’s a moment I was never sure I’d have and I’ll never forget. (and 
we’re also thrilled he’s having great success with potty training.)
These preschool programs are critical to families like mine. We cannot do it alone. 
We have been turned away from every other local program. The waitlists are growing,
the demand is high-we need a solution to provide more opportunities for our disabled 
kids and not eliminate the programs they need most.
There is no cure, medicine, anything other than early intervention that has proven to 
help autistic individuals thrive. 
Thank you all for your time and consideration.
Respectfully,
Caitlin Rothe
