State of Maine 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Testimony of Courtney Belolan, Director of Policy and Government Affairs 
Neither For Nor Against L.D. 1309 , 
An Act to Clarify Requirements for Payment of Tuition for Children with Disabilities by the 
Department of Education's Child Development Services System (EMERGENCY) 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Sponsored by: Representative Gattine 
Co-Sponsored by: Senator Pierce and Representatives Brennan, Crafts, Javner, Lanigan, Meyer, 
R. Millett and Murphy 
Date: April 13, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs: 
My name is Courtney Belolan, the Director of Policy and Government Affairs, and I am here 
today representing the Department of Education speaking neither for nor against L.D. 1309,Q Act to Clarify Requirements for Payment of Tuition for Children with Disabilities by the 
Department of Education's Child Development Services System (EMERGENCY); 
The Special Purpose Private Schools that serve three through five-year-olds needing special education 
programming are an integral part of the pre-school landscape in Maine. The Department agrees that 
although Child Development Services (CDS) currently pays educational costs for preschool children 
attendingthese schools, it is appropriate to reexamine this payment structure anddevelop a funding formula 
that ensures a robust continuum of educational programming for our preschool children. It is important to 
note that because the Free Appropriate Public Education (FAPE) obligation is different for ages three 
through five than for school aged children, we cannot use the same tuition funding model that is currently 
being used for school aged children 5 through 22. 
Maine Department of Education is working collaboratively with the sponsor, and we are hopeful we can 
get to language we can both support. The Department would also like to note that additional funds would 
be needed to support tuition reimbursement for Special Purpose Private Preschools. Without additional 
funding, CDS would go into deﬁcit spending as the currentbudget request amount supportsthe continuation 
of current service levels only. 
For these reasons, the Department of Education is neither for nor against L.D. 1309, An Act to 
Clarify Requirements for Payment of Tuition for Children with Disabilities by the Department of 
Education's Child Development Services System (EMIERGENCYL I am happy to answer any 
questions the Committee may have, and we will have someone available to provide more details 
for the work session.
