      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
April 1 3, 2023  
 
Re: LD 13 09, An Act to Clarify Requirements for Payment of Tuition for Children with 
Disabilities by the Department of Education's Child Development Services System  
 
Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan , and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs  
Committee, my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing 
of Maine or CHOM.  I am also the parent of a 26 -year-old son with Intellectual/Developmental 
Disabilities (ID/DD).  I serve as Chair of the Maine Coalition for Housing and Quality 
Services, a coalition of some 4000 people, consisting primarily of parents, that focuses on 
housing and quality services for people with ID/DD.  I also serve as chair of the Maine 
Developmental Services Oversight and Advisory Board (MDSOAB).   
 
I am testifying in support of LD 1309, An Act to Clarify Requirements for Payment of Tuition 
for Children with Disabilities by the Department of Education' s Child Development Services  
(CDS) System .  This bill requires special purpose private schools and private general -purpose 
agencies that provide both educational and behavioral health services to children with disabilities who have not attained 6 years of age receive payments for the educational services they provide from the CDS  System within the Department of Education. The bill requires that 
the CDS  System work with these private schools and general -purpose agencies to establish, 
prior to the beginning of the 2023- 2024 school year, appropriate daily rates for payments for 
the educational component of their services. These daily rates rely on the daily rate 
methodology now used. These daily rates must then be used to calculate payments for 
educational serv ices. 
 
Maine is currently seeing approximately 600 kids being supported in special purpose 
preschools.  The extent to which children are identified and served when they’re young 
directly correlates to better outcomes, including being able to enter kindergarten in the public 
school system  and often a reduction in formal, paid support as they age .  Investing in services 
for children as early  as possible pays dividends down the road.   This is where special purpose 
preschools /pre-k play a large role.   
 
However, special purpose private schools and private general -purpose agencies that provide 
both educational and behavioral health services to children with disabilities under the age of  6 
do not receive payments from CDS.  This lack of funding has led to many of these critically 
important schools closing – a detriment to these children and a shortcoming  of our system.  
 This bill would provide additional funding to CDS to establish an ap propriate daily rate for 
these special purpose preschool/pre -k programs .  This would allow very young children who 
have been on waiting lists for essential services to receive the critical educational support they 
need and deserve.  
 
Please invest in Maine’ s young children with disabilities and support LD 1309.  
 Thank you for the opportunity to comment.   
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
