F.!l]’ . HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Drew Gatﬁne TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
529 Stroudwater Street 
Westbrook, ME 04092 
Home: (207) 409-3477 
Drew.Gattine@legislature.maine.gov 
April 13, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Drew Gattine presenting 
LD 1309, An Act to Clarify Requirements for Payment of Tuition for 
Children with Disabilities by the Department of Education's Child 
Development Services System 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and my distinguished colleagues on the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee, my name is Drew Gattine and I am honored to represent parts of the 
communities of Saco, Scarborough and Westbrook in the Maine House. I am pleased to appear 
before you this afternoon to present LD 1309, An Act to Clarify Requirements for Payment of 
Tuition for Children with Disabilities by the Department of Education's Child Development 
Services System. 
I am very excited to bring this bill to you today because it provides an important opportunity to 
improve and protect the educational opportunities for very young children across our state. It will 
help them out in a way that will beneﬁt them for the rest of their lives and put them on track to 
have the best educational experience possible as they move through our school systems and into 
adulthood. I’m conﬁdent that is a goal that we all share. 
Speciﬁcally, this bill seeks to cure an inequity in the funding for preschool services for children 
with special needs who attend special purpose schools. The inequity exists with respect to 
children who are on MaineCare. For children who are on MaineCare, educational services for 
those in K-12 programs are reimbursed by the school district in which they reside, otherwise 
known as “the sending school.” Therapeutic and other medically necessary services for the same 
students are paid for by MaineCare. However, services for children who receive pre-K in special 
purpose schools do not include any reimbursement for the educational component of the services 
they receive, the providers of services only receive some payment from MaineCare for 
therapeutic and medically necessary services. 
District 126: Parts of Westbrook, Scarborough and Saco
The State is required under federal law to provide educational services for children with 
disabilities beginning at age three and, with respect to children on MaineCare — who comprise a 
large percentage of children receiving services in special purpose schools — it is not currently 
meeting this obligation. 
This funding imbalance is clearly having a negative impact on the availability of these critical 
preschool services for children who need them to get ready for kindergarten and beyond. You 
will hear testimony following me from the Maine Association for Community Service Providers 
(MACSP), an organization whose members include the providers of these preschool programs. 
Last summer, MACSP did a survey of the educational providers of these services. Eleven 
providers responded from across the state representing 24 preschool programs, serving nearly 
600 kids. It was found that 100% of these preschools currently had waitlists for services and 75% 
reported that they had reduced the number of children they were teaching. The funding 
imbalance is having a critical impact because these pre-K programs can’t offer wages that 
compete with K-12 programs that receive greater reimbursement. 
You will also hear testimony today from families and teachers who will describe to you much 
better than I can the importance of these services in the development and well-being of the 
children who need them. 
This bill is pretty straightforvvard in what it seeks to accomplish. It requires the Department of 
Education through Child Development Services (CDS) to make resources available for the 
educational component of the services that these preschool students receive. It directs CDS to 
work with providers to develop appropriate rates for these services in advance of the 2023-24 
school year. 
We need to support the children who desperately need these services and their families and the 
educators who have taken on the tough task of getting these young students ready for 
kindergarten. We can’t afford to allow these programs to close or shrink. It would bea 
tremendous injustice for these children and a huge loss for our state. I hope this will gain your 
support, and I’d be happy to answer any questions. 
Thank you. 
District 126: Parts of Westbrook, Scarborough and Saco
