Elizabeth Cameron
Cape Elizabeth, ME
LD 1309
 
Testimony of Elizabeth Cameron, Psy.D., ABPP, Licensed Psychologist
In Support of LD 1309
An Act to Clarify Requirements for Payment of Tuition for Children with Disabilities 
by the Department of Education's Child Development Services System
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
April 13, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Elizabeth Cameron and I 
work as a psychologist for the Margaret Murphy Centers for Children. I want to thank
you for the opportunity to offer testimony in support of LD 1309. I have worked with 
young children with disabilities for more than twenty years, and also work with 
elementary, middle, and young adults as well; some of whom were not able to benefit 
from high-quality early intervention supports and services. The research is more than 
clear that when early, high-quality, intervention services are provided in the first five 
years of life there is a ripple effect benefit that extends beyond the children 
themselves to their families and home communities. Among the benefits incurred is a 
significant cost savings. The return on investment for high-quality early intervention 
not only makes intuitive sense but is irrefutably documented and yet year after year, 
in the State of Maine, providers have been asked to do more with less for our 
youngest learners. The lack of CDS tuition for children with disabilities has resulted 
in high-quality service providers having to make the difficult decision to decrease 
preschool service censuses. This, while necessary to remain viable for the other 
students we serve, has resulted not only in longer waitlists but also in some programs 
ultimately closing altogether which only further decreases the opportunities for 
high-quality early intervention efforts that could make meaningful changes in the 
lives of so many during those crucial first five years of life. This is unacceptable and 
it doesn’t have to be this way. Therefore, I want to thank Representative Gattine for 
bringing this bill forward and for the committee co-sponsors and other legislators who
have spoken in support of developing an equitable payment for the critical 
educational services that special purpose preschools provide to hundreds of Maine's 
most vulnerable children each year.
Thank you for your time and consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions
you may have.
 
Respectfully Submitted,
Elizabeth Cameron
Elizabeth.cameron@jfmh.org

