TESTIMONY REGARDING 
LD 1309 "An Act to Clarify Requirements for Payment of Tuition for Children with Disabilities 
by the Department of Education's Child Development Services System" 
April 13, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Committee on Education and 
Cultural Affairs, thank you for taking the time to hear testimony on this important bill. 
My name is Hannah Pelletier, and l live in Westbrook. lam speaking today in strong support of 
LD 1309: An Act to Clarify Requirements for Payment of Tuition for Children with Disabilities by 
the Department of Education's Child Development Services System. 
My husband and I have been licensed therapeutic foster parents for 13 years. ln that time we 
have had seven kids graduate from special purpose preschools. Six from Woodfords in 
Westbrook and one from Shooting Stars in Scarborough. Today we have four kids living at 
home, all four have had lEPs at some point in their school careers for multiple different 
diagnoses. 
My oldest biological child is 11 now but when she was at Woodfords she was in their inclusion 
classroom as a typically developing child. l remember being so proud when she was chosen to 
be a ”social skills ambassador" where she would go to other classrooms to help her peers learn 
and practice. l truly believe the compassion and understanding she exhibits today can be traced 
back to her experience with neuro-divergent kids at a young age. 
My nine year old was adopted from foster care. At three years old she was kicked out of 
daycare for biting and eloping from her classroom. We were able to get her into Woodfords 
and as her behaviors escalated as she grew up they were able to support us in getting her 
services and brainstorming ways to manage things at home. Today she is graduating the fourth 
grade and although her behaviors in previous years have caused her to fall slightly behind 
academically she has made huge gains in her ability to participate in school and she is becoming 
an amazing young lady. 
My seven year old was also adopted from foster care. She received speech through CDS at her 
preschool and no longer qualifies for, or needs, services. Those early services allowed her to 
make the progress she needed to enter kindergarten with the ability to communicate her wants 
and needs. 
My foster son came to us as an emergency placement after spending a month in a hotel room 
with a rotation of OCFS caseworkers. Our house was full at the time but we had a kiddo moving 
on to an adoptive home soon so we were able to squeeze him in. He had just turned four and 
come into state custody. He had been placed in two homes that l know of before us that had 
not been able to keep him longer than a few days due to his behaviors. He came to us with an 
autism diagnosis and some evaluations but no services. Only because Woodfords was ableto
take him on as a student were we able to keep him and stabilize him in our home where he has 
stayed for the last five years. 
As a resource parent I'm required to do continuing education hours to keep up my license. lfl 
have to attend another training that stresses the importance of early intervention I'm going to 
scream. We know early intervention works yet it can seem impossible to get for someone like 
me who knows how to navigate this system. l can't imagine what it must be like for a parent 
with a newly diagnosed child attempting to figure everything out while seeing their vision of the 
future change and then being told you'll be waiting months or years to get your child into 
appropriate care. 
In my professional life I've worked inpatient with DD children in crisis. l see the results of not 
getting early intervention and support. Kids and families suffering and struggling to just get 
through the day safely. 
In closing l want to tell you about two separate emergency placements we've had in the last six 
months. Again our home is full and again both of these kids have spent days and nights in 
hotels with OCFS caseworkers. Both had autism diagnoses. Neither was able to attend a typical 
preschool or childcare due to needing 1:1 support. My husband and l both work full time. Both 
these kids stayed with us for weeks, being cared for at the DHHS office during the day and 
coming back to our home in the evening. Had accessible preschool been available to them we 
would have considered keeping them in our home. But it was not, so both these kids have been 
placed out of district, making reunification harder for them and their families of origin. My 
ability to help is limited by the availability of services, services l see work on a daily basis and 
services our children need. 
Thank you
