in Support of LD 1309 
An Act to Clarify Requirements for Payment of Tuition for Children with Disabilities by the Department 
of Educations Child Development Services System 
April 13, 2023 
Good afternoon, and thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony in support of LD 1309. 
My name is Joshua Lapierre. I am the parent of a child attending Dragonfly Academy. 
l want to thank the representatives, the committee cosponsors, and other legislators who have spoken 
in support of developing an equitable payment for the critical educational services that special purpose 
preschools provide to hundreds of Maines most vulnerable each year. 
When my child was diagnosed with autism my wife and I learned quickly there are not a lot of programs 
in this state, especially in rural areas like we live in. We put our child on every waiting list, and did 
everything we could to make sure she got the early intervention that she needed. lt took us 10 months 
to finally get her enrolled in the Dragonfly Academy which is the only Special Purpose Preschool in our 
small community that specializes in teaching children with disabilities. ln the 3 months she has been 
attending this program she has learned so much. She has gone from non verbal to reciting the entire 
alphabet, counting to 28, and many animals names and the sounds they make. She sings songs, has 
learned to point and ask for help, and she's following more safety instructions. She says hello and 
goodbye, and she writes and says her name. All this and so much more in just the three months she's 
been there. These classes are small with just a handful of students, and each class is 3.5 hours long. 
These schools and programs deserve the financial support from the State just like the district schools. 
The more funding they have the more teachers they can employ, which means more students can 
attend. 
There are hundreds of children on the wait list right now that really need these Special Purpose 
Preschools. I feel for those parents right now fighting so hard to get their children a spot in preschools 
like Dragonfly. They know how important it is to get the early intervention, but their hands are tied 
because there's not enough Special Purpose Preschools to support all the children that are in need of 
this program in this state. 
Maine can do better, and it needs to do better for these children and families. The kids are the future. 
Lets ﬁx it where it all begins and support this bill so these preschools can have the appropriate funding 
to support all the families in this State. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Joshua Lapierre 
mrslapierre@yahoo.com
