All/once 
MAINE 
"' 
Officers “' 
Dave McCluskey, President 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1" Vice-President 
Day One 
Bob Descoteaux, 2" Vice- 
President 
laineGeneral Behavioral Heall 
Kara Hay, Secretary 
Penquis CAP lnc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
roostook Mental Health Cents 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 
"' 
Board Members "' 
Adcare Educational institute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, Inc. 
idroscoggin Home & Healthca 
Assistance Plus 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties 
ommunity Caring Collaborativ 
ommunity Health & Counselir 
COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine 
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
Milestone Recovery 
NFI North, Inc. 
Northern Light/Acadia 
’ortland Recovery Community 
Center 
Pathways of Maine 
Rumford Group Homes 
Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities 
Sweetser 
'iCounty Mental Health Servic- 
Wellspring, lnc. 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Services Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
Testimony in Support of LD 1309 
An Act to Clarify Requirements for Payment of Tuition for 
Children with Disabilities by the Department of Education's Child 
Development Services System 
Sponsored by Representative Drew Gattine 
April 13, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. lam Malory Shaughnessy, a 
resident of Westbrook, and the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and 
Mental Health Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the 
majority of Maine's safety net community based mental health and substance use 
treatment providers. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound policies 
and evidence-based practices that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our 
behavioral health care system. 
On behalf of the Alliance, lam here today to speak in support of LD 1309, ”An Act to 
Clarify Requirements for Payment of Tuition for Children with Disabilities by the 
Department of Education's Child Development Services System." 
This bill requires the CDS System within the Department of Education to provide 
payments for special purpose private schools and private general-purpose agencies that 
provide both educational and behavioral health services to children with disabilities who 
have not attained 6 years of age. The bill requires that the CD5 System work with these 
private schools and general-purpose agencies to establish, prior to the beginning of the 
2023-2024 school year, appropriate daily rates for payments for the educational 
component of their services. These daily rates should rely on the current daily rate 
methodology now used. These daily rates must then be used to calculate payments for 
educational services. 
Currently, these special purpose private schools and private general-purpose agencies 
that provide both educational services and medically necessary behavioral health 
services to children with disabilities who have not attained 6 years of age do not have 
access to tuition payments for educational services and are receiving only MaineCare 
payments for medically necessary behavioral health services, even though they also 
perform the educational component. 
This is not equitable, nor is it sustainable. 
This type of specialized, early intervention is vital for these children and families. It gives 
these children the best chance to develop cognitive, physical, social and emotional skills 
to prepare them for future education and life's challenges ahead. Yet, the ongoing lack of 
tuition payments for educational services threatens the continued economic viability of 
these schools and agencies. As Federal Medicaid rules require that the only allowable 
costs for Medicaid are costs related to medically necessary rehabilitation, these critical 
services are at risk. 
Maine must step up and provide the educational costs to stabilize and sustain these 
essential programs. Please vote yes on this legislation for our children's future. 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 '“ Phone 207.621.8118 " Fax 207.621.8362 " theAllianceMaine.org
