7 
i
i 
J 3 The Margaret Murphy Centers for Children 
rWYiCC wwwmargaretmurphycenters.org 
Testimony Provided by Dr. Michelle Hathaway, Senior Director 
The Margaret Murphy Centers for Children, John F. Murphy Homes, Inc. 
I am Testifying In Support of LD 1309 
An Act to Clarify Requirements for Payment of Tuition for Children with Disabilities by the 
Department of Education's Child Development Services System 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
April 13, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs. Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony in support of 
LD 1309. 
My name is Michelle Hathaway, Senior Director of the Margaret Murphy Centers for Children, owned 
and operated by John F. Murphy Homes, lnc. As the founder of MMCC, l have grown our Children's 
Services to include seven special purpose private schools, providing education to children in our Saco, 
Randolph, Auburn and Lewiston locations. Our schools provide intensive educational and clinical 
services to the children in Maine who are considered to have the highest level of need- behaviorally and 
developmentally. Although known for our work with children with autism, our students have a wide 
range of developmental disabilities, emotional and behavioral disorders, and rare genetic disorders. We 
are willing and able to accept the children with the most severe of needs- and our students find great 
success with our highly trained, teachers and clinicians who specialize in providing the highest level of 
educational and clinical services. 
As l speak, we provide services to nearly 250 children in the State of Maine. Unfortunately, at this time, 
only twenty of this children are children with special needs, between the ages of two to ﬁve. This is why 
I am here today, to speak in support of LD 1309. 
Early Intervention has always been a passion of mine. l began working in this field almost 30 years 
ago...and spent many hours working with babies, toddler and pre-schoolers. I opened the Margaret 
Murphy Centers and expanded that work to include students through the age of 22....but l have long 
maintained a deep passion for the youngest of our students. Their first introduction to therapy and 
education must be done well and with developmentally appropriate practices, or we run the risk of 
turning them off to the very education and learning opportunities that may change their lives in so many 
positive, meaningful and measurable ways. Although they may be two when they enter our doors, we 
are planning for their success as adults. 
When working with young children, in the ﬁeld of early intervention, the research is clear that the work 
we do is critical. Brain plasticity and rapid growth allows us to develop new connections and to actually 
change the brain...and allow for connections and growth not as readily made just a few short years later 
in their lives. This time period for intervention and education allows for opportune growth and 
change...skill acquisition, emotional regulation, communication...all necessary and life-long skills. In 
many cases, early intervention in turn reduces the further need for lifelong care and often, intervention 
can be reduced or stopped completely....all due to the work done before the age of six. 
Current lack of early intervention services in the State of Maine is a travesty to children and families. lt is 
a critical issue that will lead to lifelong and negative impact for the many children who are grossly 
Developed 2/7/2023
f 
The Margaret Murphy Centers for Children 
rnmcc www.margaretmurphycenters.org 
underserved or not served at all....with children on wait lists for well over two years...and counting. The 
impact to families, to communities and to our already, over-taxed service system will be felt with 
tremendous impact. We are already receiving frantic calls and pleas for help as these children enroll in 
kindergarten for the Fall. It is with harsh realization, and the recognition of what has already been lost, 
that our School Administrators are now scrambling to provide for children who have not even begun to 
access desperately needed services. l want to be clear today that although the impact of COVlD led to an 
accelerated decimation to our system, we have been breaking for many years. The topic before you 
today has been on the table for nearly a decade...and COVID ﬁnally pushed us off the cliff of a crisis that 
was long looming. 
Why is there now such a critical shortage of early intervention providers in the State of Maine? We 
simply cannot afford to operate within the long antiquated, broken funding system within the birth to 
ﬁve realm. l will attest, as will many others before you, that we have systematically, and with regretful 
intentionality, decreased our classrooms for pre-schoolers with special needs shrunk our enrollment 
sizes, and in many instances, closed early intervention programs altogether. For those of us still in 
operation, holding on to our philosophical beliefs and desire to make life changing impact, we are 
hoarding money away from other programs, short changing staff in pay and benefits, and running fund 
raisers and capital campaigns as a side hustle to foot the loss we experience due to lack of sufficient 
provider payment, and specifically, the absence of tuition. 
Children, with signiﬁcant diagnosis ’ of autism or cerebral palsy or global developmental delay or Rhett's 
Disorder found themselves suddenly without treatment in the last two years, as programs across the 
State had struggled to re-open after COVlD, operated for a few months, and then began to close- 
permanently. Even with months of notice, as providers fell further into debt, families were unable to 
secure other pre-school programs as they frantically searched for alternatives. As a provider, l closed 
our pre-school wait list two years ago, capping at 80 children, because l knew we would never move 
those kids into our system. There wasn't enough time for 20 slots I had reduced our program to. Asa 
provider, this eats away at me, many days and nights. I know what the cost of this will be to families 
and children across the State. 
As a clinician, I know that when a child receives a diagnosis, such as Autism, it is also comes with the 
caveat that a family needs to act quickly. The accepted recommendation, endorsed by years of research 
and tied explicitly to best, long term outcomes, is to access, minimally, 25 hours of intensive educational 
services each week. The sooner, the better. Most parents, while wading through the waves of grief, 
denial, anger and sadness....must try to secure a desperately needed pre-school placement for their 
child. In Maine, and for many years now, those parents have found themselves, and their child, on an 
extensive wait list...a wait list that has in many cases been years long without much movement. Years. 
imagine knowing that your child desperately needs a critical service and knowing that it isn't accessible. 
Although we have many families who frequently call us on our waitlist, one particular mother has called 
once a week, without fail, for two consecutive years— 25 months in fact. Two years. He turns five this 
summer and we told her this week that we can finally enroll him at the end of the Summer. l truly don't 
know if the her tears on the phone were of relief, or despair at the years already lost. I want to be clear 
that we encouraged her to take any spot, anywhere, that came along...and not a single placement has 
opened in two years that has been able and willing to take him in. 
The lifelong impact to this child, for delayed intervention and education, will likely never fully be known. 
I assure you, that any clinician will predict, with certainty, that this delay will lead to different prognosis 
and outcome. The severityjust cannot be fully measured. 
Developed 2/7/2023
-4
Z 
,I 
The Margaret Murphy Centers for Children 
mmcc wwwmargaretmurphycenters.org 
We are here today because there is a solution. The good news is that there are providers still hanging 
on. We, as an agency, are open. We want pre-k students. We maintain a waitlist of pre-k students who 
still are need of placement despite having closed the list two years before. With appropriate 
reimbursement, we are willing to invest in our infrastructure, our staff and our facilities so that we can 
enroll many more students. We are willing to do this with speed and efficiency if we are reimbursed to 
do so. If the structures for k-12 programming reimbursement were in place at the pre-k level, we would 
have a more robust and expansive early intervention system. Tuition dollars would allow this. Tuition 
payments support the necessary costs of Special Ed teachers, materials, equipment, specialty training, 
and in full honesty, electricity and oil. We literally have to keep the lights on to educate children. We are 
asking for the critical funding that would allow us to provide for a population that we are passionate 
about...and for a population of children in our State that desperately need our educational services and 
opportunity. The quality of their lives and the opportunities in their future depend on it. 
With respect and gratitude for your consideration, 
Michelle Hathaway, PsyD., BCBA 
Senior Director of the Margaret Murphy Centers for Children 
Developed 2/7/2023
