   
 
Becket Family of Services – NFI North - Connections for Kids – Community Care – KidsPeace –  
Good Will - Hinckley - Sweetser – Waypoint– Day One  
Wings for Children and Families  – Spurwink  – Pathways of Maine  
  
 
Testimony of Paul L. Dann, PhD , President Child and Family Provider Network  
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the committee on Education and Cultural Affairs, 
I’m writing today to ask for your support of LD 1309, An Act to Clarify Requirements for Payment of Tuition 
for Children with Disabilities by The Depar tment of Education’s Child Development Services (CDS) System .  
    
By way of introduction my name is Paul L. Dann, PhD and I serve as the President of the Child and Family 
Provider Network (CFPN) .  The CFPN is a member organization comprised of 1 2 child and  family serving 
organizations that provide essential services including intensive educational and therapeutic services for 
children with Autism or other developmental disabilities across Maine .   
 
The importance of LD 1309 lies in the challenges that exist w ith the current rate structure for early childhood 
education for preschoolers as they prepare for a successful entry into kindergarten .  Under the current rules CDS 
does not allow reimbursement for educational services if a child has MaineCare . The problem  with this practice 
is that expenses for preschool education are not included in the MaineCare rate .  In fact, the Federal Medicaid 
rules require that the only allowable costs for Medicaid are costs related to rehabilitation when the need is 
medically nece ssary .  Because of the Federal rules, education costs are prohibited from being part of any rate 
for reimbursement.  
  
Given this, CDS’s practice of excluding education costs for preschoolers with MaineCare in effect creates 
stranded costs for the provider o f these essential services .  Said another way, the providers of these critical  
services are on the hook to cover essential costs for the children they serve without any means for receiving 
reimbursement .  Our hope is that LD 1309 will ensure that CDS’s pr actice is addressed in order to ensure that 
an educational reimbursement rate is established and paid by CDS when a child  has MaineCare.   
 
The importance of addressing this flaw in how preschool education is funded cannot be overstated .  The 
research is unequivocal .  Children that experience preschool and have a successful transition into their K -12 
experience are children are more likely to move  successfully into adulthood and become contributing members 
of our society ( Shaw, 2022) .  In addi tion, the current challenges facing preschool providers are well known and 
truly represent an existential threat to our ability to provide these critical preschool services .  Providing a 
coherent and consistent funding that includes all the critical elemen ts of effective early childhood education is 
necessary to ensure the continued delivery of preschool education  (National Academies of Science, 2022).    LD 
1309 represents one important step to ensuring the stability of this these essential services for th e children of 
Maine .  Given this the CFPN membership has voted unanimously  to request your support of LD 1309   
 
 

   
 
Becket Family of Services – NFI North - Connections for Kids – Community Care – KidsPeace –  
Good Will - Hinckley - Sweetser – Waypoint– Day One  
Wings for Children and Families  – Spurwink  – Pathways of Maine  
 Thank you in advance for your support.   
 Respectfully Submitted,   
  
Paul L. Dann, PhD   
President   
Child and Family Provider Network   
  
  
Refere nces  
National Academies of Sciences, E. and M., Health and Medicine Division, Division of Behavioral and Social 
Sciences and Education, Board on Children, Y. and F., Committee on Financing Early Care and Education with 
a Highly Qualified Workforce, Emily P. Backes, & La Rue Allen. (2018).  Transforming the Financing of Early 
Care and Education . National Academies Press.   
SHAW, A. (2022). Preschool in America: What Does the Research Suggest Concerning Preschool Programs 
and Their Impact on Student Performan ce? Education , 142(3), 119 –125.  
 
