.l .":;.:'i=1;:;_ ‘.;'__?? 
I iiiztul 
-V i i“i'!‘l’4,tl 
J l'>l§s§‘ 
nl \l,,mw-: 
Testimony of Scott Tash, Chief Executive Officer 
In Support of LD 1309 
An Act to Clarify Requirements for Payment of Tuition for Children with Disabilities 
by the Department of Education's Chi/d Development Services System 
Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs 
April 13, 2023 
Good afternoon, Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs, 
My name is Scott Tash, and I am the CEO at UCP of Maine. UCP of Maine has been serving individuals 
with a wide range of disabilities since 1954, and those services currently include programs for children 3 
to 5 years old in center-based pre-school settings in the greater-Bangor area. 
l also serve as a Board member for the Maine Association for Community Service Providers as Treasurer, 
and Chair of the Children's Committee and am pleased to offer this testimony in strong support of LD 
1309 on behalf of our membership, our Children's Committee and my organization, UCP of Maine. 
l want to thank Representative Gattine for bringing the bill forward and for the committee co-sponsors 
and legislators who have spoken in support of developing an equitable payment for the critical pre~ 
school educational services that we provide to hundreds of Maine's most vulnerable children each year. 
UCP of Maine has contracted with CDS and has served children in the Pre-K environment for 
approximately 20 years. During that time, we have enjoyed a strong, professional partnership with CDS, 
serving upwards of 50 pre-school children each year in our Bangor and Brewer locations. While we 
receive tuition reimbursement in our K-4 program for children with disabilities from the school districts 
we support, the state, which acts as the sending school for our pre-school program does not provide 
this. For many years, we have been able to overcome this obstacle by adjusting operations, or 
supporting these critical services with a diversified range of services in our organization. However, the 
significant wage pressure and increased costs of other operating expenses over the past several years 
has brought us to an un-sustainable position, and the under-funding has reached a point that is too 
difficult to overcome. 
Additionally, this under-funding has put us at a significant disadvantage in terms of recruitment and 
retention, commonly losing staff for teacher or ed tech positions at public schools with more robust 
compensation packages.
As we have had to diversify services to subsidize pre-school, this has come at the cost of reducing the 
number of pre-school aged children served by 20% year over year. This is disheartening as we currently, 
and consistently, have as many children on our waitlist as we are serving at any one time, last count 
being 50 children waiting to receive services. A critical piece of note is over 30% of these children will be 
turning aged 5 or 6 and may be transitioning to public school without ever having had pre-school 
programming identified as being needed in their IEP plan. They are missing the Early Interventions that 
we all agree are critical and have a significant impact on a child's ability to learn new skills and overcome 
challenges that can increase success in school and life. To emphasize real impacts, I've highlighted some 
recent feedback from parents of children in our pre-schools, which include: 
"Thank you to all who have been a part of my child's care, we would not be where we are today 
without your kindness, patience, compassion, and support. ” 
And from another: 
”0ur son's social and verbal skills have blossomed since beginning the Bridges program at UCP. 
Friends and family can hardly believe how much he has improved. We're confident that he will shine in 
kindergarten. ” 
The last sentence is our goal of the pre-school program, to give kids with various challenges the best 
opportunity to thrive during their next educational steps. 
Providing the educational related payments would support the ability to continue serving existing 
students while supporting the opening of additional classrooms and get many of these waiting children 
the early interventions they need, potentially allowing for less support later on in their educational 
journey. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Scott Tash 
Scott.tash@ucpofmaineorg
