 
 
 
 
 
             ______________________  
              
 
Waypoint  
5 Dunaway Drive Sanford, ME 04073         P: (207) 324 -7955        F: (207) 324 -6050       info@waypointmaine.org      
www.waypointmaine.org    
 
April 5, 2023 
 Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan and members of the committee on Education and Cultural Affairs , 
I’m ask ing for your support of LD 1309 , An Act to Clarify Requirements for Payment of Tuition for Children 
with Disabilities by The Department of Education’s Child Development Services System .  
 My name is Tiffany Haskell and I  am a  special education director and school psychologist ; part of my role at 
Waypoint (formerly known as Waban) is to oversee our Special Pur pose Preschool , located in Sanford, 
Maine . Our program exists along a continuum of educational services for children with special needs; in our 
setting, the children require individualized support and comprehensive educational and therapeutic 
services to address significant learning, behavioral, and communication  deficits. The children we serve 
typically have a diagnosis of Autism or other developmental disability.  These intensive educational and 
therapeutic services provi de children with the o pportunity to prepare for success in Kindergarten and 
beyond. There is no doubt that investing in early intervention  produces better outcomes for children and 
families and decreases needs and costs down the road.  
 
While  it may sound contrary to assumptions , CDS does not reimburse specialized preschool  providers for 
educational services if the child has MaineCare insurance. There is a comprehensive system in place to establish educational costs, known as “tuition”, for students who attend specialized K -12 programs; we are 
requesting  parity and for  this same mechanism be applied to specialized preschool  educational services.  
 CDS continues to share their belief that the educational costs are “bundled” into the MaineCare rate. 
However, it has been and remains clear that education is a prohibited cost under  MaineCare. Chapter 1 of 
the M aineCare Benefits Manual  expressly prohibits  “any services … provided to members that are academic 
or educational in nature ”. 
 
Before the COVID -19 pandemic , our facility was at capacity with over 60 students. At this time,  we are 
serving half that number of children. Due to the workforce crisis in Maine and an inability to offer 
increasingly higher wages in this competitive environment, we have difficulty  increas ing the number of staff 
at a rate needed to provide more children with individualized support. We have only been able to add 3 
students this school year and each has been a K indergarten through Grade 5  student. We simply must 
make efforts to stabilize  our budget with the goal of supporting the 18 pre school  students  we have at this 
time. In York County alone there are a reported 57 children awaiting a specialized placement; we could 
serve 30 of those children if CDS reimbursed for educati on because it would allow us to offer a truly 
competitive living wage to the highly sought -after bachelor’s  level staff required to fulfill these roles.  
 It’s time to address this ; it is indeed an emergency . The very future of specialized preschool  services hangs 
in the balance ; several programs have closed throughout the covid period, and more will be forced to close 
if this bill does not pass. The youngest children with special needs who require this level of service, and the 
specialized preschool programs  that offer it, need your support.   
 
Respectfully,  
Tiffany Haskell, Clinical Director  
thaskell@waypointmaine.org    
