 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 
Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 
*Resident Board Representatives  
**Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
Testimony for LD 168: AN ACT REGARDING CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS 
FOR THE SALE, TRANSFER OR EXCHANGE OF FIREARMS  
 
Thank you to Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury, and the members of 
the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee for the opportunity to share my written 
testimony. My name is Dr. Amy Buczkowski, and I am a hospital -based pediatrician that l ives in 
Freeport, Maine. I represent the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics, and 
thus, represent a large network of pediatricians across the state of Maine. We stand in support 
of LD 168, because expanded legislation to require criminal ba ckground checks for private 
firearm sales allows for improved child and adolescent safety through prevention of suicide and 
firearm violence.  
 
As pediatricians, we care deeply about supporting policies that promote the safety of 
Maine children and communiti es, as this is a n integral part of creating an environment 
conducive to our children growing and developing to reach their full potential. States that requir e 
universal background checks on firearm sales have  reduce d rates of  homicide and suicide by 
firear m. Thus, when implemented, universal background checks can be an important public 
health tool.  
 
As a pediatrician, it is  also  my duty to look at this issue through a youth mental health 
lens. We are experiencing a critical youth mental health crisis in Maine. As a provider who 
practices in the hospital setting, I have seen first -hand the extreme effects of nonlethal brain  
injury in the setting of near -suicide  by firearm. The impact is devasta ting, turning a moment’s  
impulsive  decision into a lifelong path of neurologic and mental health difficulties. In 2021 alone, 
almost 5,000 Ma ine high schoolers attempted suicide1. Firearms are a potent, lethal means by 
which our youth can attempt self -harm  or suicide , and 56% of suicides in Maine used a firearm 
in 20212. Private sales in Maine currently provide a loophole for young people who cannot buy 
firearm s legally through federally licensed dealers . It is important to close this loophole to keep 
our youth from accessing firearms through private transactions  and protect those experiencing 
thoughts of suicide  during their most vulnerable moments. Requiring background checks for 
private firearm sales rea lly does work as a suicide prevention intervention. In states that require 
a background check for private firearm sales, there are 48% fewer firearm suicides as compared 
to states that do not require it, while rates of suicide by other methods are nearly i dentical3. 
 
Maine voters overwhelmingly support universal background checks. In a 2021 Giffords 
Law Center poll, 70% of Maine voters support ed universal background checks, including 63% of 
gun owners. I urge you to join me, Maine pediatricians, and most  Maine voters in support of 
expanding background checks for the  private  sale, transfer, or exchange of firearms in Maine. A 
vote in support is a vote to keep  Maine’s  children safe.  
 
Thank you ! 
   
References  
1. “2021 Maine Integrated Youth Health Survey.” Maine Department of Health and Human 
Services and Maine Department of Education. 
https://www.maine.gov/miyhs/sites/default/files/2021_Reports/Detailed_Reports/HS/MIYHS202
1_Detailed_Reports_HS_State/Maine%20High%20School%20Detailed%20Tables.pdf   
2. “Report to the Legislature, Re: Report pursuant to 22 MRS , Ch. 256 -A §1425.” Maine 
Department of Health and Human Services and Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention. https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/9742  
3. “Universa l Background Checks for Gun Purchases.” American Academy of Pediatrics. 
https://www.aap.org/en/advocacy/state- advocacy/universal -background- checks- for-gun-
purchases/   
  
