  
101 Western Ave.  
P.O. Box 5188  
  Augusta, ME 0433 2-5188  
  207.430.8334  
  
 
 
   
   
                                     Connecting people, c reating frameworks for c hange . 
  mcedv .org  
 
Testimony of Andrea Mancuso , on behalf of the Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence  
In Support of LD 168: “An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale , Transfer 
or Exchange  of Firearms”  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
Monday, April  3, 202 3  
  
Senator  Beebe -Center , Representative  Salisbury , and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on  Criminal Justice and Public Safety , I am writing on behalf of the 
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)1 in support of LD 168, “An Act Regarding 
Criminal Background Checks for the Sale , Transfer or Exchange  of Firearms.”  
 
Over the last 20 years, the majority of perpetrators of domestic abuse homicides in 
Main e used firearms to kill their victims. T he Maine Domestic Abuse Homicide Review Panel 
(Homicide Review Panel) released its 13th Biennial Report last week.2 Of the intimate partner 
homicides reviewed by the panel in its most recent reporting period, 70% were committed 
with a firearm.  Recognizing the importance of keeping firearms out of the hands of those in 
our communities who have committed domestic violenc e, state and federal law (both in 
concert and individually) act to prohibit possession by these individuals. Our laws prohibit 
possession by those defendants who have been convicted by a criminal court of having 
committed domestic violence, sometimes perma nently, and also can temporarily prohibit 
certain defendants who are subject to a civil protection from abuse order for the length of 
time a court has determined to be appropriat e. However, the current gaps that exist in 
Maine’s laws around background chec ks leave hol es that act to make these prohibitions less 
effective.  
 
In its most recent report,  the Homicide Review Panel observed, yet again, that 
removing firearms from dangerous individuals and/or people known to be legally prohibited 
from possessing fi rearms can enhance safety and minimize the risk of both injuries and 
lethality.  LD 168 would work to close some of the current gaps, subjecting important 
firearms sales , transfers and exchanges  to background checks that would flag whether a 
person has rece ntly become prohibited due to domestic violence.  
 
1 MCEDV represents a membership of the eight regional domestic violence resource centers across Maine as 
well as the Immigrant Resource Center of Maine. Last year, our programs provided services to more than 
12,000 survivors of domestic abuse and violence a nd their children in  our state .  
2 The 13th Biennial Report of the Maine Domestic Abuse Homicide Review Panel (April 2021), available at: 
https://www.maine.gov/ag/docs/DAHR P-Report -for-Posting -ACCESSIBLE.pdf .  
MCEDV   Page 2 of 2 
Keeping guns out of the hands of domestic violence perpetrators does more than 
just protect that person’s intimate partner. A recent study of more than 700 mass shootings 
over the past six years found that 60% were either domestic violence attacks or committed 
by men with histories of domestic violence.3 Closing loopholes that allow domestic violence 
perpetrators to continue t o access firearms  when a background check would reveal them as 
a prohibited person not only increases safety for the person who they have been abusing 
but also increases the safety of those in proximity. Background checks for all firearm sales 
are essentia l to ensuring our own statutes around prohibiting firearms from domestic 
violence perpetrators are appropriately enforced.  
 
MCEDV and our member programs are happy to serve as a resource to this 
Committee as you continue to discuss these  important issue s.  
 
 
Contact Information:    
Andrea Mancuso, Esq.    
Public Policy Director   
Maine Coalition to End Domestic Violence (MCEDV)   
Ph: (207) 430 -8334   
Email:  andrea@mcedv.org    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
3 Gu, Jackie, “Deadliest Mass Shootings Are Often Preceded by Violence at Home,” (June 30, 2020).  See also, 
Gold, Liza H., “Domestic Violence, Firearms, and Mass Shootings,” J Am Acad Psychiatry Law (Feb 5 2020).  
