LD 168 “An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer or 
Exchange of Firearms” 
 
 Good afternoon, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and the Committee of Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety. My name is Craig Caffrey of Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my testimony 
opposing LD 168 “An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer or Exchange of 
Firearms.” 
 
As a Veteran with over two decades of service, I am appalled to come home and find more and 
more of our unalienable rights being slowly stripped away through smear campaigns, the use of children 
as propaganda tools and outright lies. Throughout my career, I have seen bureaucrats go above and 
beyond fighting for the industrial military complex, the corporate media, and donors with very deep 
wallets. Yet very few are courageous enough to stand up for the average American. 
 
This bill in particular is very broad and could be used to set up law abiding citizens in “gotcha” 
scenarios. Furthermore, there are already federal laws prohibiting personnel from selling firearms to 
criminals according to Federal Law and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF), 
The Gun Control Act at 18 U.S.C. § 922(d) makes it unlawful to sell or otherwise dispose of firearms or 
ammunition to any person who is prohibited from shipping, transporting, receiving, or possessing 
firearms or ammunition. 
 
I request this committee to vote “ought not to pass” LD 168 “An Act Regarding Criminal 
Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer or Exchange of Firearms.” Start enforcing laws already on the 
books, prosecuting those who break them, and stop harassing law-abiding citizens with needless bills. 
 
Thank you for your time, 
Craig Caffrey 
Bowdoinham 
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.) 
 
 
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
LD 168
LD 168 “An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer or 
Exchange of Firearms”
Good afternoon, Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and the 
Committee of Criminal Justice and Public Safety. My name is Craig Caffrey of 
Bowdoinham, and I am submitting my testimony opposing LD 168 “An Act 
Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer or Exchange of 
Firearms.”
As a Veteran with over two decades of service, I am appalled to come home and find 
more and more of our unalienable rights being slowly stripped away through smear 
campaigns, the use of children as propaganda tools and outright lies. Throughout my 
career, I have seen bureaucrats go above and beyond fighting for the industrial 
military complex, the corporate media, and donors with very deep wallets. Yet very 
few are courageous enough to stand up for the average American.
This bill in particular is very broad and could be used to set up law abiding citizens in 
“gotcha” scenarios. Furthermore, there are already federal laws prohibiting personnel 
from selling firearms to criminals according to Federal Law and the Bureau of 
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF), The Gun Control Act at 18 U.S.C.
§ 922(d) makes it unlawful to sell or otherwise dispose of firearms or ammunition to 
any person who is prohibited from shipping, transporting, receiving, or possessing 
firearms or ammunition. 
I request this committee to vote “ought not to pass” LD 168 “An Act Regarding 
Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer or Exchange of Firearms.” Start 
enforcing laws already on the books, prosecuting those who break them, and stop 
harassing law-abiding citizens with needless bills.
Thank you for your time,
Craig Caffrey
Bowdoinham
Chief Petty Officer USN (Ret.)
