Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, Members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee:
I am Elizabeth Remage-Healey from Peaks Island and I’m here to testify in favor of
LD 168.
Have you ever wondered why photos taken at drug busts usually include a lot of guns ?  One Maine drug bust in December turned up 46 guns. 46 guns !  Why are so many guns are picked up in drug busts ?
Clearly they’re not just supplying neighborhood bad boys.  Clearly they have not been acquired through background checks.
And that’s the point.  In Maine it’s easy to get a gun through  a private sale , no background check required.  In nearby states it’s not.  In Massachusetts and New York, drug dealers can’t pass their states’ universal background checks.  So they come to Maine.  Out of state drug dealers bring drugs to Maine, and in exchange, they take our guns home with them.
In other words, the lack of universal background checks in Maine brings more illegal drugs to Maine  and more gun violence to nearby states.  Our guns for their drugs.  A nasty business.
LD 168 will close down this business.  Your support can make it happen.
Thank you.

Elizabeth  Remage-Healey
Peaks Island
LD 168
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, Memgers of the Criminal Justice and
Public Safety Committee:
I am Elizabeth Remage-Healey from Peaks Island and I'm here to testify in favor of 
LD168.
Have you ever wondered why photos taken at drug busts usually include a lot of 
guns?  One Maine drug bust in December turned up 46 guns.  46 guns !!  Why are so 
many guns picked up in drug busts ?
Clearly they're not just supplying neighborhood bad boys.  Clearly they have not been
acquired through background checks.
That's the point.  It's easy to get a gun in Maine through a private sale, no background 
check required.  In nearby states it's not.  In Massachusetts and New York, drug 
dealers can't pass their states' universal background checks.  So they come to Maine.  
Out of state drug dealers bring their drugs to us and in exchange , they take our guns 
home with them.
In other words, the lack universal background checks in Maine brings more illegal 
drugs to Maine and more gun violence to nearby states.  Our guns for their drugs.  A 
nasty business.
LD 168 will close down this nasty business.  Your support can make it happen.
Thank you.
