April 3, 2023 
1230 Kenduskeag Ave, Bangor 
Good morning, Senator Beebe-Center and Representative Salisbury. My name is 
Geoff Gratwick. I am a retired doctor, live in Bangor, and represented Bangor 
from 2012 t0 2020 in the Senate where I variously chaired HHS and HCIFS. I ama 
member of The Gun Safety Coalition and here to speak in favor of LD 60 and LD 
168. 
I am both comfortable with guns and terrified by them. 
I have two stories. 
First, about being comfortable: Guns have always been a part of my life. I was well 
Instructed in firearm safety when I was young. I had a 22 and other guns — and 
still have several. I taught riflery at a summer camp. I was a fierce instructor, a 
stlckler for safety. Kids lost the chance to shoot for the whole season if they did 
not follow the rules. In college I bought a pistol at a secondhancl store on 
Vlnalhaven; the proprietor was very careful even back then about going over my 
experience and background. I bought a shotgun when I went sailing in the 
Caribbean on my honeymoon. My bride ancl I slept with it beside us in the bow 
bunk. My point: I am not anti-gun. 
Then terror: I did some of my medical training at Harlem Hospital in NYC. This was 
in the mid '70s. Drugs, crime, poverty, and racism were all explosively mixed 
together. The ER was a war zone on Saturday night. One Saturday on a hot 
summer night I was the senior doc in the ER when all hell broke loose. Screaming 
ambulances brought in 3 cops who had been ambushed and killed with large 
caliber weapons, two with gun shot wounds to the head and one to the chest. 
Young guys, 20s and 30s, my age, I still have the picture in my minds eye of an 
absent half skull, brains all over, on the towels, on my hands, brains. When I have 
bad dreams, perhaps every several months, 60 years later, these guys are still 
there, etched in my brain. My point: I know what guns can clo to people. I have 
reason for my terror. It is long lasting and deep seated.
To step back: We live in a society that imposes conditions and limits of many of 
our activities. Cars, like guns, are very powerful. They help us but also can kill us 
We require a level of maturity and a license to be able to use them. You cannot 
buy alcohol before a certain age. Same for cigarettes. Same reasons. Same for 
most medicines. When I was practicing medicine, l had the power to give my 
patients powerful medicines but there were restraints on my actions. I too 
needed a license, a lot of training, time. 
l strongly urge you to pass LD 60 and LD 168. These bills do not deprive any 
reasonable person of the right to purchase, own and use a gun for legitimate 
purposes. These laws may save a life. These laws have no realistic downsides. 
Thank you.
