Testimony to the Maine Legislature in support of LD 168 4/3/2023 
Senator Beebe-Center, Rep. Salisbury, and members of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Committee. 
My name is Jan Chapman and l live in Cape Elizabeth. 
Others today will speak about data and statistics that indicate passage of this bill will 
save lives. l want to tell you about my husband’s best friend who took his own life with 
a firearm. My husband’s best friend from college days was a talented, well-educated 
individual who over time developed a substance use disorder and mental health issues. 
Sadly, he did not get the treatment he needed. He would have periods of sobriety but 
also periods when he succumbed to substance misuse and was arrested on various 
charges and jailed numerous times. He became a convicted felon when, after a bitter 
dispute with his neighbors, he broke the windows of his neighbor's house. His anger 
and hostility alienated all his friends and family except for my husband who was loyal 
and supportive and tried to help him get housing, legal help and the medical care he 
needed despite his hostile and often threatening behaviors. 
Being a convicted felon, he was not permitted to have a firearm but was able to obtain 
one easily from Uncle Henry’s where a background check was not required. We were 
both concerned he would harm himself because he had threatened suicide, loaded gun 
in hand, on several occasions. But l was terrified he would accidentally shoot my 
husband when he was on substances, in pain, desperate and out of control. 
After years of spiraling downward, he took his own life with a firearm which should not 
have been in his possession. My husband discovered his body and is haunted by the 
thoughts of what more he could have done to help his friend. This tragic and painful 
experience has made us passionate about gun safety. We need laws to prevent people 
who are convicted felons from obtaining firearms so easily. I urge your support of LD 
168, An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer or Exchange 
of Firearms. lt will save the lives of Maine people. 
Thank you.
