Opposifion to LD 168 and LD 60 
 
 To the honorable Senator Anne Beebe-Center, Suzanne Salisbury, and the Joint Standing 
Commiftee on Criminal Jusfice and Public Safety, 
 
 
My name is Joe Osgood Jr. I reside in the Plantafion of Carroll, Maine.  I am the owner/operator of the 
FBM Maine Outdoor Journal YouTube Channel. Please consider the following concerns that I have if LD 
168 and LD 60 were to be enacted into law.  I greatly appreciate your fime and eﬀorts. 
 
1. BURDENSOME - Federally licensed ﬁrearms retailers will be burdened with having to perform a 
governmental funcfion (background check on private party transfers). Many proposals mandate 
that the dealer perform background checks on private party transfers, but cap the fee a dealer 
can charge a. The fime and eﬀort necessary to perform the check at government set fee is 
inadequate to cover the retailers cost. Must maintain A&D records for life of the business and 
Form 4473 for 20 years. b. FFL status can be jeopardized by mandatory record keeping 
requirements imposed by Federal (and State) laws. A retailer could have their FFL revoked for a 
record-keeping error in the paperwork for a gun they didn’t sell.  
2. LIABILITY EXPOSURE - Federally licensed ﬁrearms retailers will have liability exposure, e.g., 
product liability claims arising from an accident involving a ﬁrearm they didn’t sell, and for which 
they may thus have no insurance coverage; a property damage claim (“you damaged the gun.”)  
3. NICS DELAYS - Firearms retailers are very concerned that “universal background checks” will 
result in very lengthy delays in conducfing NICS checks when they sell a ﬁrearm from their 
inventory. Proponents of “universal background checks” claim 40% of gun transfers are not 
subject to a background check. A 40% increase in NICS checks will cause the NICS system to 
crash. The system simply can’t handle such an increase in volume; delays are growing 
unacceptably long now even without “private party transfers.”  
4. REGISTRATION - According to the Nafional Insfitute of Jusfice, “universal background checks” are 
only eﬀecfive if there is nafional registrafion of all guns and all private party transfers. 
5. Fix NICS - The current background check system is broken. The background checks that are 
currently done are not as accurate and complete as they should be. This is because both the 
Federal government and about half the States have failed to put into the NICS system all 
appropriate records pertaining to prohibited persons, such as mental health records. “Universal 
background checks” will simply produce more inaccurate and incomplete checks. Before we talk 
about requiring background checks on private party transfers, we should Fix NICS.” Members of 
the ﬁrearms industry, through the NSSF, are funding a grassroots campaign called FixNICS to 
encourage the reporfing of records of prohibited persons. 
6. FAILURE TO PROSECUTE - Both the Federal and State governments are not prosecufing those 
who fail a background check when illegally aftempfing to purchase ﬁrearms now. Why would we 
think the government is any more likely to prosecute criminals who try to illegally obtain a 
ﬁrearm through a private party transfer if they are unwilling to prosecute those who fail checks 
performed by licensed retailers?  
7. “DEMAND LETTERS” - ATF could further abuse its “demand lefter” authority by sending a 
“demand lefter” to all dealers requiring them to submit to ATF a copy of records pertaining to 
private party transfers (checks) that they are required to maintain. This has happened already to 
certain dealers.  
 
 
 
 
Sincerely,  
Joseph Osgood Jr  
FBM Maine Outdoor Journal  
