 
Executive Committee  
President  
Laura Blaisdell, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 
Vice President  
Brian Youth, MD, FAAP  
 
Treasurer  
Christopher Motyl, DO, FAAP  
 Secretary  
Genevieve Whiting, MD, FAAP  
 
Immediate Past President  
Deborah Q. Hagler, MD, MPH, FAAP  
 Board of Directors  
 
Mahmuda Ahmed, MD, FAAP  
Joseph Anderson, DO, FAAP  
Amy Buczkowski, MD, FAAP  
Melissa Burch, MD, FAAP  
Adrienne Carmack, MD, FAAP  
Gabriel Civiello, MD, FAAP  
Anne Coates, MD, FAAP  
Dan Hale, MD, FAAP  
Riley Heroux**  
Jennifer Jewell, MD, MS, FAAP  
Stephanie Joy, MD, FAAP  
Emily Keller, MD, FAAP  
Alton Kremer, MD, PhD, FAAP  
Michele Labotz, MD, FAAP  
Maria Libertin, MD*  
Lawrence Losey, MD, FAAP  
Valerie O’Hara, DO, FAAP  
Gita Rao, MD, FAAP  
Sydney Sewall MD, MPH, FAAP  
Austin Wheeler Steward ** 
Jeffrey Stone, DO, FAAP  
Mary Tedesco -Schneck, PhD, NP  
Andrea Tracy, MD, FAAP  
Aaron Wallace, MD*  
 *Resident Board Representatives  
**
Medical Student Representatives  
 Staff  
 
Dee Kerry, BS  Ed 
Executive Director  
 
Emily Belanger, RN, BSN  
Admin & Project Coordinator  
 
30 Association Drive, Box 190  
Manchester, ME  04351  
office: 207 -480-4185  
 
www.maineaap.org   
Senator Beebe- Center , Representative Salisbury , and distinguis hed members of the 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety , my name is Joe Anderson.  I am a 
resident of Portland, a hospital- based pediatrician, and I sit on the Board of the Maine 
Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics.  I am writing today  to express our 
support for  LD 168, An Act Regarding C riminal Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer, 
or Exchange of Firearms . 
As individuals in positions of leadership or influence in our communities, I’m sure you ’ve 
been asked the question “What keeps you up at night?”  As a pediatrician, that issue is 
gun violence.  I have cared for children and teenagers who have suffered life -altering 
injuries or death as a result of firearms far more often than I care to admit .  Their injuries 
are seared into my memory and serve as a constant reminder of how unbelievably easy it 
is in this country for children and teenagers to have their lives interrupted by firearms, 
made possible by weak policies regarding gun safety.  
Gun vio lence is a public health crisis in the US, where deaths by firearms have outpaced 
motor vehicle accidents as the leading cause of death for children and teens aged 1 to 19 
in the United States.1  There are significant opportunities to improve these statist ics with 
gun safety policies that are supported by a majority of  Americans, and in many cases by 
most  gun owners  as well.    
LD 168 closes the gun show loophole and requires background checks for the sale, 
transfer, or exchange of firearms at gun shows or between private parties while allowing exemptions for transfers between f amily members.  We know that 30% of guns involved 
in criminal trafficking are connected to gun shows, where background checks aren’t required.  The trafficking of firearms involves a highly efficient, organized, and profitable underground industry that mov es guns from legal manufacture to dealers to criminals 
and others who are prohibited from purchasing guns through traditional means.  Research has shown that background checks save lives .  In states that require a 
background check for private handgun sales , there are 48% fewer firearm suicides, while 
the rates of suicide by other methods are nearly identical.  Jo hns Hopkins University 
researchers found that the 2007 repeal of Mis souri’s background check requirement was 
associated with a 25% increase in the gun homicide rate.  We also know that these 
policies have broad support: 88% of those surveyed in the US, including 85% of gun owners, favor universal background checks on sales of all weapons.
 1    
The American Academy of Pediatrics is committed to protec ting children from firearm -
related injury and violence.  We support specific measures to reduce the destructive 
effects of guns in the lives of children and adolescents.  We urge each of you to consider 
the potential lives you could save as a result of passing LD 168.  
 Respectfully,    
 
Joe Anderson, DO, FAAP , Co-Chair, Advocacy Committee  
  
1 American Academy of Pediatrics. Universal Background Checks for Gun Purchases. 2023 
(https://www.aap.org/en/advocacy/state -advocacy/universal -background-checks -for-gun-purchases/ ). 
   

