Thank you Senator Beebe~Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee for allowing me to speak today. Thank you Madam Speaker 
for presenting this bill. I am Judi Richardson of South Portland, mother of Darien Richardson. 
I am here with my husband Wayne to speak for our daughter and the other victims of gun 
violence who are unable to speak for themselves. My husband is an avid hunter and we are gun 
owners. I am here to testify in favor of LD 168, “An Act Regarding Criminal Background 
Checks for the Sale, Transfer or Exchange of Firearms ”. 
Currently, Maine has no law requiring a criminal background check on the purchaser of a firearm 
when the seller is not a licensed dealer. Maine does not require private sellers (sellers who are 
not licensed dealers) to initiate a background check when transferring a ﬁrearm. We know all too 
well that Mainers are not immune to the harms of gun violence. We must open our eyes and our 
minds to the reality of this public heath epidemic and ask are we doing enough to protect our 
children and all our citizens from preventable death and life altering injury. Gun violence is now 
the leading cause of death of children and teens in the US. The easy access to guns and lack of 
accountability is causing a heartache in this country that is impossible to put into words. 
Our Darien was beautiful inside and out, with a bright smile that drew people to her. Her life was 
marked by compassion and generosity. Born, raised and educated in Maine she chose to stay and 
build a life and career in Maine — isn’t that we what we all want for our children? She wasa 
2006 graduate of Bowdoin College who valued education. She was a kind, honest and productive 
member of society. She was also a social butterﬂy who loved music and loved to dance. Darien 
left the world and those she encountered better in her wake. She is loved and sorely missed. 
Over 13 years ago January 8, 2010, at 1:30 am our beloved 25-year-old daughter, Darien’s home 
was invaded by armed intruders, who burst into her bedroom and started shooting then ran away. 
Her entire life was turned upside down in a matter of seconds. One bullet hit her left hand, 
shredding her thumb and then as she tried to roll off her bed, another bullet entered her right leg 
at the knee traveled the length of her thigh and lodged in her hip —~ her pain physically and 
psychologically was unimaginable. That night, she survived — a miracle by any standard. She 
spent weeks in Maine Medical Center critical care, and faced a grueling future of physical and 
emotional pain ahead of her. Tragically, that never happened. On February 28, 2010 Darien died 
from complications of her gunshot wounds. Darien’s death devastated me, our family, friends 
and community. 
To compound this tragedy, Darien’s homicide has never been solved. This is due, in part, toa 
dangerous loophole in the law that those who purchase a firearm through an unlicensed private 
sale do not need to pass a criminal background check. Darien was murdered with a .45 caliber 
semi-automatic handgun. We know because that gun was later recovered, at the scene of another 
murder on February 11, 2010. The bullet from Darien’s hip after her death was turned over to the 
police and ballistics conﬁrmed it came from that gun. The gun was traced to a Maine resident 
who bought the gun at a retail establishment, where he was required to undergo a background 
check. But soon thereafter, he sold it in a private sale at a gun show to someone he didn’t know. 
Just an exchange of cash for a gun. The seller asked no questions, kept no records and states he 
can’t remember who he sold the weapon to or when he sold it, thereby preventing any further
tracing of the weapon which may identify our daughter ’s killer. Thirteen years have passed and 
the identity of our daughter ’s killer identify remains unknown. We believe that holding private 
sellers to the same standard as gun shops and licensed dealers for background checks and records 
keeping would make it possible to track a gun from one owner to another — which would have 
been crucial in solving our daughter ’s homicide. I don’t know if the person who killed my daughter would have passed a background, he never had to. I do know that person is getting 
away with murder. That is a public safety issue concern as there is an unidenti ﬁed killer out 
there. We are re-victimized by not knowing who did this and never having the opportunity to get 
justice for Darien. 
Background check authorities regularly stop prohibited purchases from making illegal gun 
purchases in Maine, yet we have not closed the unlicensed private sale loophole. That means 
criminals, domestic abusers and other prohibited people prohibited from owing guns can and 
routine do take advantage of a thriving market for unlicensed sales. In fact, criminals and drug 
dealers from states with strict gun laws do come to Maine to buy guns via private sale. In 2015 
Maine passed a reckless permit-less carry law that enables residents to carry loaded, concealed 
handguns in public without a permit or background check. Maine’s lack of basic gun safety laws 
puts its residents at grave risk and our lawmakers owe it to their communities to stand up to this 
public health crisis. We must recognize the many people who are wounded by guns and bullets 
and have life-long physical and psychological complications. Let’s not forget about the ﬁnancial 
cost. Gun deaths and injuries cost Maine $2.3 billion each year, of which $17.3 million is paid 
by taxpayers. 
Contrary to what you may hear from the gun lobby, requiring criminal background checks- 
already done by licensed sellers - does not affect law~abiding citizens in any way and does not 
violate the Second Amendment. We can save lives, reduce harm and reduce crime without 
infringing on the constitutional right to own a gun. 
Our state and our nation is shocked and saddened with the shootings in schools, theaters, malls, 
churches and our streets — but my family has known for 13 years that you are not even safe in 
your own bedroom. Once a bullet is ﬁred there is nothing you can do to stop it, you can’t take it 
back. Gun homicides, suicides, unintentional shootings of children, unsecured “accidents ” police 
shootings, domestic gun violence shootings all leave the behind the same pain as the mass 
shootings that are more likely to make the news. Every signal shooting and death by gun is the 
most devastating to the victim and their family. 
Maya Angelo once said “Do the best you can until you know better. Then when you know better, 
do better.” That time is now. It may be too late for us, we can't have Darien back, but it's not too 
late to prevent more tragedies. Please support the LD 168 and vote “Ought to Pass” . You can 
make a positive change. 
Thank you. 
Judi & Wayne Richardson 
184 Fellows Street 
South Portland, ME 04106 
www.rememberingdarienorg
