-‘ 
. .2.‘ »» ., "‘s~ <' 2- . -~.—. 
;~- ‘i!:»’.l.&~ :\!l ii .»‘=:;.=..-= ;.‘-.-£1’.-; .~. -»:&.11' . 
lusrrrurn FOR LEGISLATIVE ACTION 
1 12 50 WAPLES MILL ROAD 
FAIRFAX, VIRGINIA 22030 
April 3, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Dear Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and Honorable Members of the Committee: 
I am writing to you regarding Legislative Document I68 (LD 168), an act regarding criminal 
background checks for the sale, transfer or exchange of ﬁrearms. On behalf of the National Rifle 
Association, I would like to express our strong opposition to this bill. Maine voters recently rejected 
a similar “universal background check law” through a 2016 initiative. 
LD 168 requires background checks for all private sales of ﬁrearms, including those at gun shows or 
resulting from advertising, with very limited exceptions. It applies to a private sale between two 
parties - including friends, neighbors, and coworkers, regardless of where the sale takes place. All 
such transfers, even if the seller knows the recipient is not a prohibited person, would have to be 
conducted through a federal ﬁrearm licensed dealer (F FL), with extensive federal paperwork, 
payment of an undetermined fee, and approval from the U.S. government. Federal law already 
requires background checks to be done for any transfer by a dealer or other licensee, regardless of 
where the sale occurs or the way it is initiated. 
Universal background check measures target law-abiding citizens. Criminals will violate these laws. 
According to federal studies done by the Department of Justice of how prison inmates acquired 
ﬁrearms, less than 1% reported acquiring them at gun shows, and the vast majority acquired ﬁrearms 
on the black market, by straw purchase, or by theft. In addition, ATF has reported that nearly all 
illegally trafﬁcked ﬁrearms originate through straw purchasers. 
Expanded background checks are unenforceable without a ﬁrearms registration scheme. A 2013 
internal U.S. Department of Justice memo summarizing violence prevention strategies during the 
Obama/Biden administration stated that the effectiveness of background checks depends on 
“requiring gun registration, ” which is prohibited under Maine law. 
On behalf of the thousands of NRA members in Maine, I respectfully urge the committee to oppose 
this legislation. Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have additional questions or concems. 
Sincerely, 
Justin E. Davis 
State Director, NRA~ILA 
\/S ww. n raila .0rg
