 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 168 (NFNA)   
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 168, An Act Regarding Criminal Background  checks for the Sale, Transfer or Exchange  
of Fire arms  
 
DA: April 3 , 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in neither for nor against LD 168.   Without taking a position on the polic y regarding 
background checks, CLAC notes that t he bill presents signif icant drafting issues.    Among  them:  
 
 1) “Buyer ” and “Seller ” are defin ed in such a way t hat the obligation to coordinate with a 
federally licensed firearms de aler to conduct a background check does not attach until after the 
transaction i s completed.     2) There is no need to include “unless the context otherwise indicates ” 
in the definitions introduction, as the definitions apply only to the proposed section , and it is not 
clear w hat other context is being referenced.    3) “Sell” and “transfer” are defin ed in 17 -A M.R.S.  
§ 554-A and § 554-B, governing the transfer of firearms and handguns to minors.  The Legislature 
may wish to consul t those definiti ons to d etermine if the definitions in th e proposed legislation 
should be consistent  with existing terms applicable to firearms transactions .  4) The definitions of 
the terms describing  transfers do not include a requirement of consideration —is the bill meant to 
apply to transfers without consideration ?  5) The “Requirement ” in proposed sub -section 2 applies 
to persons who are not licensed dealers, but the “Limitations ” section  references licensed de alers 
transferring  firearms.  6) In proposed sub -section 5, “Violations, ” there is no time limit on the look -
back for priors.   This may require a reference  to 17-A M.R.S. § 9-A. 7)  In proposed paragraph 
(5)(B), the language concerning  prior offense s should refer to both convict ions and adjudications ( to 
capture prior  civil violations), a nd to convictions or adjudications “for conduct substantially similar 
to that contained in this section in another jurisdiction .”    
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practition er with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislatur e’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
