Testimony in support of LD 168 April 3, 202; 
Senator Beebe—Center and Representative Salisbury: 
Thanks to you and to the members of the Joint Committee for the opportunity to join with 
others in support of LD 168. l’m Mark Segar, resident of Freeport, a retired educator and 
school administrator. 
This bill is clear, balanced, and good for Maine. The well-being of our society, and its children, 
depends on a vital link, proclaimed by our nation’s founding documents. A link between: 
Rights - and responsibilities 
individual freedom - and public safety 
Self-reliance - and duty to others 
Autonomy - and community 
Liberty - and justice. 
Each balances the other. When out of balance, as they are today, dangers develop. This 
legislation addresses that danger. 
The statistics are overwhelming. Gun violence is the leading cause of death for children in our 
country. No other developed nation even comes close. 
The damage is lasting also for those who survive, children who carry the burden of trauma fora 
lifetime. 
The harm done to children is irrefutable. As is the proof, that more inclusive background 
checks can save children ’s lives. Can help prevent one unregulated act in Maine from leading, 
however unintentionally, to injury, assault, or death, whether here, in another state or in 
Canada. 
You may know the old Paul Simon song’? “Slow down, you're moving too fast. You've got to 
make the morning last." 
Childhood is the morning of a person’s life. The time, as the song says, to be looking for fun. 
Not hiding from gun fire._ 
The morning of childhood should be lasting. We live our lives as adults but we carry our 
childhoods with us through all our days. The rights of young people should be preserved, that 
all may share in the pursuit of happiness. Especially before the obligations of adulthood 
accumulate. 
This straightforward legislation has the power to prevent tragedy, without infringing upon rights. 
In a state that maintains regulations for other safety concerns, the least we can do is to enact 
this legislative proposal, to protect our children ’s rights as well as our communities ’ , to keep 
our state from being exploited as an invisible market for criminal intent. 
Many other states do so. Maine should, too. Thank you for your consideration. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Mark W. Segar, Freeport
