1315‘ Maine Legislature 
LD 168 An Act Regarding Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer or Exchange of Firearms 
Ladies and Gentlemen of the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee, I'm here to testify in 
opposition to LD 168, yet another universal background check and de facto gun registration bill virtually 
identical to the one that was defeated in a referendum vote in 2016, and has been defeated in the 
legislature several times. l’ll keep this part brief since all the reasons that that white supremacist 
Michael B|oomberg's law has been has been shot down in the past still apply. This bill criminalizes a 
normal, everyday act that Mainers have performed since they could be called Mainers. Like LD 60, its 
only purpose is to make gun ownership inconvenient and legally precarious. lfail to see how the State 
sending armed men to my home to arrest me for an arbitrary crime keeps me or my family safe. l am 
also confused as to why a legislator who has passionately supported police reform would submit a bill 
that facilitates violent interactions between the police and the public. 
What I really came here to emphasize is that, whether or not this bill passes, it is already irrelevant given 
the nature of 3d printed firearms today. My contribution to them has been slight, but l am very proud of 
groups like Black Lotus Coalition, DEFCAD, Ctrl+Pew, and others for making any attempt to restrict our 
right to keep and bear arms irrelevant. Homemade guns have become exceptionally viable, and every 
person here has the ability to make them in little time for very little money and only a little skill. You can 
even manufacture your own ammunition now. The gun control debate is over. Gun control is dead and 
people like me killed it. I implore you vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS and end this relic of slavery in the state 
that played a decisive role in defeating the Confederacy. lf you refuse to listen to your constituents this 
time, well, 3d printer go brrrr. 
Mark Coitrone 
Auburn, ME
