 
 
 
 
1 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
Ought  Not to Pass  
 
LD 22, An Act to Impede the Transfer of Firearms to Prohibited Persons  
 
LD 168, An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale,  
Transfer or Exchange of Firearms  
 
LD 582, An Act to Enhance Certain Penalties  
for Possession of Firearms by Prohibited Persons  
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CRIMINAL JUSTICE & PUBLIC SAFETY  
 
April  3, 202 3 
 
     Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety, good morning. My name is 
Michael Kebede, and I am the Policy Counsel at the ACLU of Maine, a statewide organization 
committed to advancing and preserving civil rights and civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine 
and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, oppose LDs 22, 168 and 582 insofar as they  
would create over half -a-dozen new Class D , C, and B crimes, strengthening a failed method of 
problem -solving.  If these bills were amended to remove criminal penalties  as the enforcement 
mechanism,  we would remove  our opposition.  
 The right to own and use guns is not absolute nor free from govern ment regulation . 
Firearms are inherently dangerous instrumentalities and their use, unlike other activities 
protected by the Bill of Rights, can and does inflict serious bodily injury or death. Therefore, 
firearms are subject to reasonable regulation in th e interests of public safety, crime prevention, 
maintaining the peace, environmental protection, and public health.  We recognize that gun 
violence is increasing, reaching levels not seen in the past twenty years.1 Black people and young 
people age 18 to 2 4 are the most frequent victims of gun violence.2 And, we recognize that this 
committee is tasked with creating public policy that promotes public safety in our state. We ask 
 
1 See Ed Pilkington, Gun deaths in US rise to highest level in 20 years, data shows , THE GUARDIAN, Dec. 13, 
2018, available at https://www.theguardian.com/us -news/2018/dec/13/us -gun-deaths -levels -cdc2017  
2 Firearm Violence, 1993 -2011 , Bureau of Justice Statistics, available at  https://bjs.ojp.gov/press -release/firearm -
violence -1993 -2011 . 
  
 
that as you deliberate over these bills  other bills like them , that you look for solutions that do the 
most good while preventing the most harm, and consider in your weighing process whether 
creating new crimes is the best way to change behavior.  
Every three seconds a person is arrested in this country. More than th ree fourths of Maine’s 
arrests every year are for misdemeanors. Moreover , the system disproportionately arrests people 
of color as compared to white people, so that while 1.6 percent of Maine’s population is Black, 
Black people make up 5 percent of all arr ests and more than 10 percent of those in Maine’s prisons.  
It does not have to be this way. One bill scheduled for a public hearing this afternoon, LD 
60, attempts to curb gun violence without creating a new crime. That bill creates new civil 
infractions with a $200 to $500 fine for the first violation and a $500 to $1,000 fine for a 
subsequent violation.  That approach  is less harmful than new crimes.  
We can shrink our outsized and misused criminal justice system and commit our 
resources to things that mak e communities healthier and safer: education, housing, safe 
communal spaces, and health care. We lock up more people in this country than any country in 
the history of the world and ou r incarceration rate in Maine is higher than most NATO member 
states. A better world begins with making the commitment to stop turning to the criminal justice 
system to solve society’s problems. We urge you to forge a new path by remov ing the criminal 
penalties from LDs 22, 168, and 582. 
 
Thank you for your time and attention.  
 
 
