.,1"5'4 
rci , =’— 
..,1 
O""§~'x iii‘ 
SAM-ILA - 
SAM-ILA 
205 Church Hill Road, Suite 3, Augusta, ME 04330 
David Trahan, Executive Director 
david@samofrnalne.org 
wwvv.sami|a.org 
Testimony in Opposition 
LD 168, An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer or 
_ Exchange of Firearms 
Before the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee 
Presented by Mike Shaw on behalf of David Trahan, Executive Director of the 
Sportsman ’s Alliance of Maine - Institute for Legislative Action (SAM-ILA) 
Monday, April 3, 2023 
The Honorable Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, members of the Criminal 
Justice and Public Safety Committee, my name is Mike Shaw, I am presenting this testimony on 
behalf of David Trahan, Executive Director of the Sportsman ’s Alliance of Maine-Institute for 
Legislative Action, testifying in opposition to LD 168, An Act Regarding Criminal Background 
Checks for the Sale, Transfer or Exchange of Firearms 
For decades, gun control advocates have tried to expand the NICS background check system to 
private, (non-ATF licensed sales and transfers) and every year the efforts fail for very similar 
reasons. In 2016, Maine Question 3, formally An Act to Require Background Checks for Gun 
Sales, was a citizen-initiated referendum question that appeared on the Maine November 8, 2016, 
statewide ballot. It sought to require a background check for virtually all gun transfers in Maine, 
again, like past Legislatures, Maine people rejected it. 
There are consequences to expanding background checks to private sales. In order to be 
effective, Maine would have to create a mechanism like a ﬁrearm registry and collect private
ﬁrearm ownership information necessary to ensure compliance. Firearm owner registry is just 
one step away from outlawing certain types of ﬁrearms and ﬁrearm components. We see 
legislation every year to ban certain types of ﬁrearms and ﬁrearm components and according to 
studies of ﬁrearm bans, the reason they fail is because the government did not require them to be 
conﬁscated or turned in under a buyback program. Given that these types of ﬁrearm-ban policies 
are at the top of some national and state elected 1eader’s agendas, gun owner’s concerns are 
warranted. 
Firearm background checks for commercial sales is a well-established policy; in addition, many 
licensed commercial ﬁrearm dealers offer to conduct background checks for private sales, and 
we support these efforts. For years, there was an education campaign that encouraged voluntary 
background checks in private sale, and it was very effective, I know because as a licensed dealer, 
our organization conducted many as a service to our members. 
We cannot support an expansion of the background check system as we feel it is impossible to 
enforce without a registry and furthermore, we understand gun control advocates will never stop 
until they achieve all their goals.
