Testimony in Opposition to LD 168 / Gould / Page 1 of 2
April 3, 2023
Testimony in Opposition to LD 168
An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer or Exchange of
Firearms 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety :
My name is Nathan Gould. I am from Winterport. I am giving this testimony in 
opposition to LD 168, “An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, 
Transfer or Exchange of Firearms.”
Regrettably, this is yet another bill that assumes law abiding citizens are guilty 
until proven innocent. Our natural rights are given by God, as the Founders of our 
Country and our State understood, not by men, and the right of an individual to protect
themselves and their families is an intrinsic one.
It is a sad state of affairs when it is a government's policy to view the citizens with
distrust, to place restrictions on rights that government was instituted to defend, not 
grant. This will be repeated numerous times today, but considering the amount of 
legislation averse to the Second Amendment that has come before you just in the 131st 
Legislature, just at this public hearing, the following reminder is needed: the Second 
Amendment to the Constitution of the United States of America states “A well 
regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people 
to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.”  Article I, Section 16 of the Constitution 
of the State of Maine states “Every citizen has a right to keep and bear arms and this 
right shall never be questioned.”
Testimony in Opposition to LD 168 / Gould / Page 2 of 2
It is made clear in these fundamental documents, and it is further clarified by the
Supreme Court’s decision on District of Columbia v. Heller  in 2008.
I ask the distinguished members of the Committee to uphold their oaths to our 
Federal and State Constitutions. I ask the Committee to vote Ought Not to Pass, and I 
thank you for your time.
Respectfully,
Nathan C Gould
Winterport
