Nicholas Sevos
Searsport
LD 168
My name is Nicholas Sevos, and I am a resident of Searsport, Maine. I am a 
somewhat recent transplant to Maine, having moved up from Rhode Island in 2021 to 
escape the draconian laws imposed upon the people of that state by their so-called 
representatives; I was drawn to Maine by the spirit of independence, common sense, 
and appreciation of liberty that I had experienced on every visit and seen in Maine 
natives that I served alongside as an active duty US Army Infantryman for six years 
with two tours in Iraq. I have only recently become aware of several gun control 
proposals making their way through committee, and I would like to speak on these 
proposals; additionally for the sake of simplicity you will notice this preamble in each
piece of written testimony I submit so apologize for the partially duplicitous nature of 
my comments. 
I find this proposal to be a severe, acrimonious, and unwarranted intrusion into the 
personal lives of the citizens of this state. The first question that comes to mind is 
"Who in the hell are any of you to mandate how I deal with my property?" It's a fair 
question and the underlying theme is that a free people are not beholden to anyone 
when it comes to their own possessions. You are literally forcing people to pay a fee 
to sell their own property since you are requiring a third party. You are also ostensibly
creating a means to further interfere in a private agreement between two free men by 
creating a record of their sale and then a means to tax it. Leave we the people alone or
we the people will send you to the unemployment line. No law proposed, here or 
elsewhere, would have prevented any tragedy in this nations recent history; you are 
either making knee jerk reactions to address a serious issue or you are deliberately 
misrepresenting your desires in order to pass an agenda. Either way, this intrusion is 
disgusting and the very idea is shameful. Stop intruding in peoples lives and do what 
you were elected to do; the purpose of every elected government should be to protect 
the LIBERTY of its citizens, not dictate the minutia of our lives. 
