Peggy McGehee 
Falmoutlr, Maine 
Good afternoon, Chairs Beebe-Center and Salisbury and Members of the Committee: 
I am Peggy McGehee, a resident of the Town of Fahrrouth, and I speak in support of L.D. 168. I support 
universal background cheeks as someone who comes from a gun-owning, military family. Our son is a U.S. 
Marine captain who has served active duty in Iraq. My danghter ’s son, my grandson, lives in rural Maine and is 
learning to shoot and hunt. We, and all the law-abiding and responsible gun owners here today, lose nothing if 
this bill, and all of today’s gun safety bills, pass. Our gun ownership will not be curtailed in any way. 
None of us here today want our children or our grandchildren to risk their being exposed to gun shootings and 
mishaps because we made it so easy, here in Maine, for non-law abiding and irresponsible people to get 
guns-~witlr no required permit, no background check, no waiting period, no prohibition on selling guns to 
criminals. 
If these bills pass the Legislature this time, unlike the same or similar failed bills in prior legislative sessions, 
then we all-- law by law-- will have done what we can to stop the sale of crime guns. I have two points about 
this particular bill: 
l. First, it in no way affects our 2d Amendment right to bear arms. Justice Clarence Thomas himself said in 
last year’s U.S. Supreme Court decision in Bruen, that the Second Amendment protects only “law-abiding 
and responsible ” persons. Non-law abiding and irresponsible persons have no Second Amendment rights. 
That is why there is no question that federally licensed gun sellers can lawfully require background checks. 
We just need to extend that requirement, as so many other states have, to private gun sellers. 
2. We need our private gun sellers to run background checks to stop Maine from being a gun-source state for 
criminals from other states. Massachusetts requires universal background cheeks. S0 criminals in 
Massachusetts come to Maine to buy the guns they can’t buy in their own state. (And, incidentally, they use 
those guns to bring dangerous drugs back to Maine, drugs that kill our kids.) In Canada’s worst mass 
shooting, in 2020, when a man killed 22 people --- he traveled to Maine to get his guns at a private sale ata 
gun show, because Canada required private sale-background checks and Maine did not. 
A school shooting in Missouri a few months ago, provides us a cautionary tale. A young man went into the 
school with a gun and killed a teacher and a student and injured seven other students. He had bought the 
gun from a private seller who did not run a background check on him, after he had been turned away bya 
licensed gun dealer for failing his background check. If Missouri had had a law requiring private sellers to 
run background checks, the shooter could not have bought the gun that killed the teacher and the student. If 
this Legislature passes this bill you may have stopped a future shooting in Maine the same way. 
A 2021 survey of hundreds of Maine voters found that 70% of Mainers support universal background checks, 
including 63% of gun owners---and that the majority of both Democrats and Republicans believe that 
background checks should be required any time a gun is sold or transferred to a new person. So Maine is asking 
you to pass this bill——and not to wait until it’s too late. 
Thank you for your consideration of this testimony. 
Peggy MeGehee
