April 3, 2023 
Peter Fromuth, Yarmouth 
Chairs Beebe Center and Salisbury, Members of the Committee, I testify 
today in support of LD 168, strengthening criminal background checks 
of gun purchasers. 
The DEA reports that Maine has become a destination state where 
criminals come to make private gun purchases. Given the Maine 
statutes speciﬁcally designed to keep gun from criminals, the DEA 
ﬁnding is a stark example of a public policy goal defeated. 
These prohibited purchasers include at least a half dozen groups: 
Criminal fugitives. 
Convicted felons. 
Individuals deemed dangerous to themselves or others. 
Persons convicted of violent misdemeanors. 
Individuals convicted of domestic abuse, and 
People subject to a restraining order. 
We ban purchases by all these groups, yet here they come to get their 
guns. Unlike Massachusetts and other states that require private sale 
purchasers to pass background checks, Maine does not. By not requiring 
private gun buyers to submit to background checks, Maine allows many 
of them to hide the very records that should disqualify them. It seems an 
unintended contradiction: on one hand we prohibit dangerous persons 
from buying guns, while with the other hand we withhold a key tool to 
enforce that prohibition. 
Gun crime statistics about male-on-female violence are one example of 
this policy’s result. As a state Maine has the 9*“ highest number of cases
of men murdering women; ﬁfteen percent of Maine women report 
intimate partner violence; and 50% of all homicides here are in fact the 
result of domestic violence. We’re part of a national story: 2/3 of 
domestic partner homicides country-wide involved a gun, indeed a gun’s 
presence caused a five-fold increase in homicide risk. 
When we know about other - - often smaller - - degrees of risk, we act. 
We buy ﬁre insurance and car insurance, sometimes ﬂood insurance, the 
government monitors wildﬁre risk, it employs meteorologists to warn 
about extreme weather and reduce potential harm. 
Yet when a felon or fugitive or abuser buys a gun privately, we choose 
not to know. This is like laying off the weatherman before hurricane 
season. The ﬁrst step to stopping danger is choosing to know where it 
exists. 
Let’s choose to know when the wrong person tries to buy a gun. Please 
pass LD 168.
