Peter Lewis 
T and K Tactical 
229 Water Street 
Augusta, ME 04330 
Maine State Legislature 
Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
April 3, 2023 
RE: LD 168, LD 60 and LD22 
To the members of the Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety. I arn Peter Lewis. l live 
in Bowdoinham, Maine. l own and operate T and K Tactical, a firearms manufacturer and 
retailer located on Water Street in Augusta, Maine. l am here today to testify AGAINST LD 168, 
LD 60 and LD 22. 
LD 168 - An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer or Exchange of 
Firearms. This bill isjust another version of the Universal Background check bill that has been 
submitted and defeated, repeatedly over the recent years. This bill will not have any impact on 
dealers as federal law already requires dealers to complete a background check using the 
National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) and await approval before 
transferring a firearm to a non-licensed individual. Additionally, requiring non-licensed 
individuals to utilize a licensed dealer to complete a background check prior to transferring a 
firearm to another non-licensed individual places undue burden and expense on both the 
recipient and the transferor of the firearm. This bill would prevent women and others, seeking 
to protect themselves against domestic violence or any other criminal activity from obtaining 
the necessary tools to protect themselves in an emergency situation. 
LD 60 - An Act to Require a 72-hour Waiting Period After the Sale of a Firearm. This bill will do 
nothing to prevent gun crime. The language of the bill leaves interpretation of the criteria of 
the start of the 72-hour period completely open to interpretation and misuse. In accordance 
with verbal contracts, there is virtually no way to enforce this bill as there is no means to 
determine the point in time an agreement is made between the purchaser and seller. This bill 
would place undue burden and cost on non-licensed sellers and non-licensed purchasers by 
requiring multiple meetings to complete a transfer. Additionally, this bill would prevent women 
and others, seeking to protect themselves against domestic violence or any other criminal 
activity from obtaining the necessary tools to protect themselves in an emergency situation. 
LD 22 - An Act to Impede the Transfer of Firearms to Prohibited Persons. Federal law already 
prohibits the transfer of firearms to prohibited persons. This prohibition is already in effect and 
applies to both licensed and non-licensed individuals. What this legislature should focus on is 
ensuring the laws that currently exist are enforced by both law enforcement and District 
Attorneys responsible for prosecuting criminals.
In the two years I have operated my business on Water Street in Augusta, Maine, The NICS 
system has failed to prohibit the transfer of firearms to at least 3 prohibited persons. In these 
three instances, local and federal law enforcement has been notified. Law enforcement took 
action in only one of these cases, only to see the Ken nebec County District Attorney refuse to 
prosecute the individual because ”it was too much work to do the research on the prohibiting 
crime that took place in another state" . I repeat, existing laws were broken, and ourjustice 
system determined "it was too much work to do the research on the prohibiting crime that 
took place in another state” . As a dealer in, and manufacturer of, firearms, I would hate for 
firearms l sell or manufacture to end up in the hands an individuals intending harm to others. 
What we need are tougher requirements, and fewer opportunities for discretion by members 
of the justice system, regarding the enforcement of existing laws.
