STATE OF MAINE 
.' 
_ HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 6 5 
SPEAKERS OFFICE 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
r " ' 
1 (207) 227-1300 ~*~' "W 
RACHEL TALBOT ROSS 
SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE 
Monday, April 3rd, 2023 
Testimony of Speaker Rachel Talbot Ross presenting 
LD 168, An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, 
Transfer or Exchange of Firearms 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice & Public Safety 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and esteemed members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, I am Rachel Talbot 
Ross. I represent House District 118 which is the Portland neighborhoods of Parkside, 
Bayside, East Bayside, Oakland and the University of Southern Maine Campus and I also 
have the distinct honor of serving as the Maine Speaker of the House. I am here today to 
present LD 168, An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, 
Transfer or Exchange of Firearms. 
LD I68, as amended, is written, and intended to protect the public safety and 
welfare of Maine people and others who are the victims of gun violence or other criminal 
activity that involves ﬁrearms, and those, often our youngest residents, who are suffering 
and contemplating suicide. Guns purchased through private sales in Maine, without 
background checks of any kind that could disqualify a person from purchasing that 
weapon from a federally licensed dealer, decrease our public safety and wreak havoc in 
our communities as well as in other states and countries. LD I68 can change that. 
Regardless of where one gets their news, from watching television, listening to the 
radio, in print, or online, rarely a day goes by that we do not learn about senseless gun 
violence, the use of guns in the commission of crimes, or another mass shooting. Just this 
past Friday, the Kennebec Journal published an article about the deadliest mass shooting 
that ever occurred in Canada. The shooting took place in Nova Scotia on April 19, 2020. 
Gabriel Wortman killed 22 people and injured three others before he was shot and killed 
by police. Why am I talking about that case? Because Mr. Wortman obtained three of the 
guns used in those shootings in Maine before illegally bringing them across the United 
States/Canadian border in Houlton. One of the guns, a Colt Carbine semi-automatic 
weapon, was purchased through a private sale at a gun show in Houlton. Two others were 
obtained through a private transfer from a friend who resided in Maine. All those 
District 118: Portland neighborhoods of Parkside, Bayside, East Bayside, Oakdale and 
the University of Southern Maine Campus
weapons were obtained and transferred without a single background check. All the 
transfers to Mr. Wortman were illegal as he was not a United States resident. A simple 
background check would have prevented those sales and transfers but were not required 
under Maine law. 
While LD 168 will not eradicate gun violence or suicide by ﬁrearm, it will 
decrease the number of deadly weapons being placed in the hands of people with 
extensive criminal records or serious mental health issues through unchecked private 
sales or transfers. Licensed dealers are not permitted to make those sales or facilitate 
those transfers without conducting background checks. LD 168 closes the gaping 
loophole that exempts private sales and transfers of ﬁrearms from a parallel requirement 
to conduct background checks. 
LD 168 will help stop people from out-of-state buying crime guns in Maine and 
then transporting them to other states, often states with laws mandating universal 
background checks for all private sales and transfers. For example, Massachusetts, with 
limited exceptions, requires universal background checks. Because Maine does not, we 
are an attractive source for persons from Massachusetts, and other states with universal 
background checks, to purchase ﬁrearms that they otherwise could not purchase in their 
home state due to their criminal history or other disqualifying factors. 
According to the Giffords organization, which is led by former Congresswoman 
Gabrielle Giffords who was a victim of gun violence, roughly 80% of guns used in 
criminal activity are obtained from private sellers in states like Maine that do not require 
background checks. From 2017 through 2021, 4,594 crime guns were bought in Maine, 
65% of which were found in other states. Those weapons were obtained through private 
sales and sometimes through online purchases. 
To date, 21 other states have enacted some variation of commonsense laws 
requiring universal background checks to increase public safety. A 2021 poll conducted 
by the Giffords Legal Center found that 70% of Mainers support universal background 
checks, including 63% of gun owners. A majority of Democrats, Republicans, and gun 
owners believe background checks should be required any time a gun is sold or 
transferred to a new owner. However, as other states enact these laws, states without 
them, like Maine, remain outliers and will only become greater source states for crime 
guns. LD 168 can help us follow the will of Maine voters and stop Maine from beinga 
destination for the procurement of ﬁrearms used to harm others through criminal activity. 
You have already received written testimony from Dr. Amy Buczkowski on behalf 
of the Maine Chapter of the American Academy of Pediatrics. Dr. Buczkowski describes
the tragic connection between the absence of background checks for the private sale and 
transfer of ﬁrearms and suicide in Maine. She reports that almost 5,000 Maine high 
school students attempted suicide in 2021 and that 56% of all suicides in Maine that year 
involved the use of a ﬁrearm. Dr. Buczkowski noted that private sales unaccompanied by 
a required background check provide a loophole for young people who could not buy 
ﬁrearms from dealers who are federally licensed. LD 168 can close that loophole and 
save the lives of people in distress. Passing LD 168 can also help prevent the tragedy of 
suicide and protect families from having to grieve the loss of loved ones. 
LD 168, as amended, does not burden gun dealers with the requirement to conduct 
a federal background check on their own. Rather, it provides an option for the buyer 
to obtain a background check from a local law enforcement agency instead ofa 
federally licensed ﬁrearm dealer when purchasing the firearm from a private seller. 
Earlier iterations of this bill in prior legislative sessions did not include this option. The 
bill also provides an exception when the buyer and seller are family members and 
exempts certain transactions set out in Section 4. Those exemptions include the sale and 
transfer of curio, relic, and antique ﬁrearms as deﬁned in the Code of Federal 
Regulations, and in instances when the buyer or seller is a state or federal law 
enforcement ofﬁcer, corrections ofﬁcer, military personnel, or a licensed security guard. 
LD 168, as amended, also does not create a new crime, as violations are civil in 
nature with a maximum ﬁne of $1,000.00. 
Lastly, you may hear testimony today from persons claiming that LD 168, if 
enacted, would violate both the Second and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States 
Constitution. That is simply not true. As the United States Supreme Court has repeatedly 
stated, most recently in its 2022 decision in Bruen, those amendments protect the rights 
of law-abiding responsible adult citizens. Background checks do not violate those rights. 
Background checks are already required for ﬁrearm transactions conducted by federally 
licensed dealers and are constitutional. LD 168 simply extends that requirement to 
persons who transact or facilitate private unlicensed transactions of ﬁrearms. If enacted, 
LD 168 will withstand a constitutional challenge. 
I urge you to support LD 168. Thank you very much for your time and attention 
this afternoon and I am happy to answer any questions you have.
131st Maine Legislature 
An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer or Exchange of Firearms 
L.D. 
An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer or 
Exchange of Firearms 
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Maine as follows: 
Sec. 1. 15 MRSA §394 is enacted to read: 
§394. Criminal background checks of firearms buyers 
1. Definitions. As used in this section. unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have 
the following meanings. 
A. Buyer" means a person that, after a sale. transfer or exchange, is the owner of the firearm subiect to 
the sale, transfer or exchange. 
B. Family member‘ means a spouse, domestic pannerJarent, stegparent, foster parent. child, 
stepchild. foster child or any other person related by consanguinity up to the 2nd degree. For purposes 
of this paragraph, "domestic partner" has the same meaning as in Title 1, section 72, subsection 2-C. 
C. "Federallv licensed firearms dealer" or "dealer" means a person who is licensed or is required to be 
licensed as a dealer under 18 United States Code, Section 923. 
D. "Firearm" has the same meaning as in Title 17-A, section 2, subsection 12-A. 
E. "Seller means a person that, after a sale, transfer or exchange, is no longer the owner of the firearm 
subiect to the sale, transfer or exchange. 
F. Sell, transfer or exchange" or "sale, transfer or exchange means any transaction in which ownership 
of a firearm changes. 
2. Requirement. If neither the seller nor buyer of a firearm is a federally licensed firearms dealer, the 
transaction must be facilitated by such a dealer. 
.Adealerhoagrees 
to facilitate a firearm sale, transfer or exchange pursuant togthis section shall comply with all requirements of 
State and federal law and shall, unless otherwise expressly provided in this section, conduct the sale, transfer 
or exchange in the same manner as the dealer would if selling the firearm from their own inventory, but shaﬂ 
not be considered a vendor. 
The option shall permit a buyerto obtain a bgackground check from a law enforcement agency rather than 
a federally licensed firearms dealer when purchasing the firearm from a private seller instead of a dealer. 
LRO008, item 1 - 131 st Maine Legislature, page1n
131st Maine Legislature 
An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer or Exchange of Firearms 
L.D. 
I ' » ' -""" ' ' » - --'- 
4. Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to a sale, transfer or exchange of a firearm 
between persons who are not federally licensed firearms dealers if: 
A. The firearm is a curio or relic, as defined in 27 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 478.11 as in 
effect on November 19, 2019, and the sale, transfer or exchange is between collectors of firearms as 
curios or relics, as defined by 18 United States Code, Section 921(a)j13) as in effect on June 25, 2022, 
who both have in their possession a valid collector of curios and relics license issued by the United States 
Department of Justice, Bureau of Alcohol. Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives; 
B. The sale, transfer or exchange is of an antique firearm. as defined in 18 United States Code, Section 
921 (a)j16) as in effect on June 25, 2022; 
C. The buyer or seller is a law enforcement agency or the Department of Corrections; 
D. To the extent the buyer or seller is acting within the course of that person's employment or ofﬁcial 
duties, the person is: 
§1l A law enforcement officer as defined by Title 17-A, section 2, subsection 17; 
§2) A corrections officer as defined by Title 25, section 2801-A, subsection 2; 
13) A member of the United States Armed Forces", 
§4) A member of the National Guard; 
_(5) A member of the Reserves of the United States Armed Forces", 
f6) A federal law enforcement officer; or 
f7) A person licensed as a security guard under Title 32, chapter 93 or employed by a contract 
security company or proprietary security organization under Title 32, chapter 93; or 
E. The buyer and seller are family members. 
5. Violations. A person who knowingly sells, transfers or exchanges a firearm in violation of this section 
commits: 
A. For a sale, transfer or exchange of one or more firearms of this 
section, a civil violation for which a fine of not more than $1,000 may be imposed; and 
SUMMARY 
This bill requires criminal background checks of buyers of firearms for private sales, transfers or 
exchanges 
The bill provides that the first offense for knowingly selling, transferring or 
exchanging a firearm in violation of the criminal background check required by this bill is a civil violation for 
which the penalty is a ﬁne of up to $1,000. 
LRO008, item 1 - 131st Maine Legislature, page2
