Good afternoon members of the Judiciary Committee. 
My name is Stephen Brough from Bangor and I must rise in opposition to LD168. 
I ask the bill sponsors: why are you here AGAIN wasting the Legislatures ’ time? 
Question 3 was resoundingly defeated by a popular vote of Mainers in 2016. Our 
Governor weighed in the next year and flatly stated "The people of Maine have 
spoken" . Background checks for purchases have increased every year since, 
giving credence to the fact Maine citizens like their firearms. The bill's sponsors 
are so tone deaf they refuse to listen to the people of Maine and its Governor. 
I'm disgusted to see members of the Legislature engage in the underhanded 
parlor trick of going around the will of the people and attempting to pass 
legislation in much more confined environments friendly to your cause. 
I and many others see this action for what it is and the most accurate way to 
describe it would require words not fit in this committee room. 
I've asked the Gifford's Law Center directly to provide the number of firearms 
sold in Maine used in crimes and what percentage that is of the total firearms 
sales yearly. I get stumbles, and bumbles as they can point out only a few 
instances spread out over several years that, when looked at as a percentage of 
sales, is a statistically insignificant number. In 2022, there were 114,090 FBI 
background checks completed for Maine gun dealers and I would comfortably 
say thousands of private sales yearly. Those combined total sales vs. a few 
instances spread over a few years make this a non-issue. 
Of those sa|es,~it cannot be said for certainty whether those firearms were last 
sold in Maine or only originally so. Any subsequent sale could have taken place 
in New Hampshire, Vermont or Massachusetts and it could have been decades 
ago. A firearm purchased in Maine in the 50's and gifted to a family member out 
of state also makes using the original purchase state unreliable and should not 
be used by those thinking that this will help one bit. No statistics show if those 
crime-related firearms went through a straw purchase or were subsequently 
stolen and sold out of state on the black market.
By definition criminals don't follow laws so to think that this law will do anything 
to curtail firearms related crimes is foolish and nai' ve. lt can't be proven that it 
would even prevent 1 death. The FBl’s own data shows over 300 MILLION 
checks since 1998 with a success rate of .5%. 34 years of data; one half percent. 
That's it. Based on DENIALS only; nobody can say that each one of those sales 
would have resulted in a death. They happen with mistaken identities, common 
names shared with a criminal, or a felony bank fraud conviction from 40 years 
ago even after never having demonstrated any propensity towards violence. 
Maine ranks as the safest state in the nation, with firearms related deaths 
typically well under 20 per year; one half a percent is 20 is .1 people. 
With all the deceptive practices and lack of listening on the part of the bill's 
sponsors, l urge you to vote OUGHT NOT TO PASS.
