A CALL TO ACTION TO MAINE'S FAITH COMMUNITIES 
SEEKING GUN SAFETY LAWS IN MAINE 
All of us want the people of Maine, young and old, to be safe from gun violence. Yet, there is 
steady growth in death by guns in Maine. Most alarming, suicide by guns in Maine grew by 45% 
from 2012 to 2021. This is not what we want for ourselves, our veterans, our children, or our 
grandchildren. 
Today in Maine, anyone can buy any gun, including semi-automatic weapons and large capacity 
magazines, in a private sale, without a permit, without safe gun use training, without a 
background check. 
Maine is a source state for criminals who come here to buy guns that they can't buy in their own 
states that have universal background checks. The shooter last year in Canada who killed 22 
people bought his guns in Maine. And there is little in the way of safeguards to protect Mainers 
from becoming the targets of such violence. 
As people of faith, we afﬁrm that life is sacred. We are called to love and protect one another, 
and to be peacemakers — shalom makers: wholeness of life and joy of wellbeing in heart, mind, 
body, and soul. 
We are encouraged and hopeful that the Maine legislature is considering gun safety 
measures in the spring of 2023. 
As people of faith, let us call for the 1315‘ Maine State Legislature to pass these three common 
sense gun safety laws: 
1. A bill to require criminal background checks of buyers of ﬁrearms for private sales, transfers 
or exchanges at gun shows or private sales, transfers or exchanges resulting from advertising or 
marketing subject to certain exceptions; (L.D. 168) 
2. A 72 hour waiting period before a gun is delivered from a seller to a buyer; (L.D. 60) 
3. A "red-ﬂag" law so family or friends of a person threatening gun violence to themselves or 
others can get a gun-confiscation court order; (no L.D. yet assigned) 
Delegates to the 2013 Annual Meeting of the Maine Conference UCC passed a resolution 
entitled An Urgent Call for the Prevention of Gun Violence. It resolved to “require universal 
background checks and safety courses for all sales of guns, including sales at gun shows and 
between private individuals. ” The Social Action Committee of the Maine Conference endorses
these proposed laws, asking and praying that our churches and members will support these 
measures to keep our neighbors, ourselves, and our families safe. 
Submitted by, 
Stephen L. Hastings & Kathy Woodside 
Co-Chairs, Social Action Committee 
On behalf of the Maine Conference UCC
