Testimony for the 131th Session of the Maine State Legislature 
Joint Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety 
Public Hearing April 4, 2023 
 LDs 22, 60 and168:   OUGHT TO PASS 
Chairpersons Senator Anne Beebe- Center and Representative Suzanne 
Salisbury and members of the Committee, my name is Suzanne 
Rudalevige; I am retired and living in Cape Elizabeth. 
I am encouraged that these proposals are before you today. 
 I am very much in favor or trying to prevent firearms being in the hands of 
those who should not be permitted to use them. LD 22 
I am particularly in favor of LD 168 which requires criminal background 
checks of buyers of firearms for private sales, transfers or exchanges at 
gun shows or private sales, transfers or exchanges  through advertising or 
marketing, subject to certain exceptions. We must require background 
checks on ALL potential gun buyers.  
The 72 hour delay under LD 60 would be much strengthened if it also used 
that time for a background check - as well as giving time for anger to cool 
when the gun is intended for harming another.  
 I must admit that having been raised in the UK, even after 57 years in the 
USA, I cannot understand this country’s obsession with firearms.  It seems 
totally irrational to allow military style weapons to be in the hands of the 
public.   
 However, it is what it is, leaving the prevention of these guns falling into 
the wrong hands being our major tool for saving us from the senseless 
carnage we see across the land.  (How many mass killings have there 
been already this year?) 
Limitation on gun ownership has, in my mind, nothing to do with owning a 
firearm for hunting- it is NOT a slippery slope. We are not talking about 
hunting rifles, but guns which are manufactured ONLY for killing other 
people. The focus is on keeping these guns out of the hands of those who 
are a risk of killing other people.   
 Please recommend for passage each of these bills or a combination bill,  
so that we do the best we can to have every gun owner checked and 
everyone responsible for not passing on a gun to someone who is a risk for 
irresponsible use.  
 
 Thank you.         
