i 
3 MOM S Emma; 
DEMAND 
ACTION FDR GUN SENSE IN AMERICA 
Testimony before the Criminal Justice and Public Safety Committee in support of 
L. D. 168 “An Act Regarding Criminal Background Checks for the Sale, Transfer or Exchange of Firearms" 
April 3, 2023 
Senator Beebe-(Zenter, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Criminal 
justice and Public Safety Committee, my name is Tara Williams and i am a resident of 
Cumberland and a mom of two children. l am also a volunteer with the Maine chapter of Moms 
Demand Action for Gun Sense in America, working towards public safety measures that can 
protect people from gun violence. 
l support LD 168, because it ﬁlls a gap in Maine's laws. Under federal law, background checks 
are only required if a person is purchasing a gun from a federally licensed ﬁrearm dealer. This 
has left a loophole, allowing individuals to buy guns from unlicensed sellers- —including sellers 
they meet online or at gun shows—with no background check and no questions asked. This gap 
in our laws makes it far too easy for people with dangerous histories-who would faila 
background check if they tried to purchase a ﬁrearm from a licensed gun dealer—to get their 
hands on a gun by purchasing it from an unlicensed seller. 
This matters. This matters in Maine. The types of gun violence and gun deaths we experience 
here will be reduced by a background check law. When I read our state data (some of which is 
listed here in my written testimony), l am struck by how important it is for us to address rates of 
gun death caused by homicide and suicide. 
o The majority of suicides (55%) and homicides (63%) in Maine involve a gun. 
o The rate of gun deaths has increased 41% from 2012 to 2021 in Maine, compared toa 
39% increase nationwide. This means that in 2021 there were 48 more gun deaths than 
in 2012. 
o in Maine, the rate of gun suicide increased 45% from 2012 to 2021, compared to a 19% 
0 change nationwide. 
o The presence of a gun in a domestic violence situation increases the risk that the woman 
will be killed ﬁvefold. 
o Access to a gun doubles the risk of death by homicide and triples the risk of death by 
suicide. 
l want to look at this data next year and see that more Mainers lived, because we did what we 
could to support gun safety. States that go beyond federal law and require background checks 
for unlicensed sales are associated with a 10 percent lower homicide rate, as well as lower rates 
of ﬁrearm suicide and gun trafficking. Maine is not yet one of those states.
1
I
l
l 
i I haven't been directly impacted by gun violence. Yet I feel its indirect impacts all the time. Asa 
mom and former elementary school teacher, I feel the impact of gun violence in schools the 
most. I have this small pit of fear that sits in the background, usually quiet, but sometimes on 
high alert, like when I hear sirens go down route 1 in the middle of a school day...scared that the 
next news story will be about my kicl's school. Over 10 years ago, Sandy Hook left me ina 
puddle, crying on the couch, pregnant with my second child, my toddler napping as l watched 
the news. After Uvalde, I mostly felt anger, resentment, frustration at how many years have 
gone by without enough focus on gun safety. After Nashville last week, l feel a type of despair 
that is hard to describe. How can we be a country that cares so little about our children? How 
are these policies not already in place? I can't believe that I live in a country where I can name 
multiple mass shootings where children under 10 were killed. 
This is why I am here today. You have the power to help create the change we need. This bill. 
These types of policy changes are common-sense, bipartisan, and most importantly, proven to 
work. l don't want to hear about one more drill in my kids’ classrooms; one more time where 
they are trained to barricade doors and throw things to distract a shooter; one more school 
expense for active shooter training, bullet proof windows, and extra secure locks on doors. My 
children need to go to a school, not a bunker. They need you to enact these policy changes that 
maize their community and our state a safer place to live. 
Please vote ought to pass on L.D. 168 for all of Maine's children. 
Data Sources: 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. WONDER Online Database, Underlying Cause 
of Death. Ayearly average was developed using four years of the most recent available data: 2018 to 2021. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. WONDER Online Database, Underlying Cause 
of Death. Rates are age—adjusted. A percentage change was developed using 2012 and 2021 data. 
Andrew Anglemyer, Tara Horvath, and George Rutherford, "The Accessibility of Firearms and Risk for Suicide and Homicide 
Victimization Among Household Members: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis," Annals of lntemal Medicine 160, no.2 
(2014): 101--10, httos://doiorg/10.7326/l ’\/l 13;13Ol. 
Jacquelyn C. Campbell et al., “Risk Factors for Femicide in Abusive Relationships: Results from a Muftisite Case Control Study," 
American Journal of Public Health 93, no. 7 (July 2003): 1089-97, httos://doi.org/18.2105/AJPH93.7.1089. 
Michael Siegel and Claire Boine, What Are the Most Effective Policies in Reducing Gun Homicides? Albany, NY: Rockefeller 
Institute of Govemment, March 2019. httgszl,/bitlyj2YPAz'7P. 
Eric VII. Fleegler, Lois K. Lee, Michael C. Monutea ux, David Hemenway, and Rebekah Mannix, “Firearm Legislation and 
Fireami-Related Fatalities in the United States,“ JAMA Internal Medicine 173,no. 9 (2013): 732-740. 
Daniel W. Webster, Jon S. Vernick, and Maria T. Bulzacchelli, "Effects of State-Level Firearm Seller Accountability Policies on 
Firearm Trafficking, ” Journal of Urban Health 86, no. 4 (July 2009): 525-537. Federal law bars felons from having ﬁrearms but 
do-es not bar misdemeanors outside the domestic violence context. Daniel W. Webster, Jon S. Vernick, Emma Beth McGinty, and 
Ted Alcorn, "Preventing the Diversion of Guns to Criminals Through Effective Firearm Sales Laws,” in Reducing Gun Violence 
in America: Informing Policy with Evidence and Analysis, 109-121. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013.
