 
 
JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH COVERAGE,  
INSURANCE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES  
 
Testimony in support of  
 
LD 1400  “An Act to Allow Social Workers to Diagnose Organic Mental Disorders ” 
 
April 6, 2023  
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Financial Se rvices:  
 
As a clinical social worker  in Maine and a pa rt-time faculty member of the University of Maine’s Graduate 
School of Social Work where I teach child and adult psychopathology, I urge you to support LD 1400 – An Act 
to Allow Social Workers to Diagnose Organic Mental Disorders .  
 
Support o f this legislation  will eliminate  an outd ated Maine statute restricting social workers from 
diagnosing “organic mental illness ” which include s disorders of childhood  such as Attention Deficit 
Hyperactivity Disorder,  Autism Spectrum Disorder, Intellectual Disabilities and Global Developmental Delay . 
 
The term “organic mental illness ” bifurcates mental diseases into organic versus non -organic categories . This  
distinction is outdated and no longer supported  in the field of psychiatry —it was officially removed from the 
psychiatr ic nosology in the Diagnostic  and Statistical Manual of Mental Di sorders  in 1994.   
 
Support o f this legislation  will reduce delays in providing necessary psychological care to Maine youth and 
disabled adults . At present, s ocial work providers who evaluate and treat Maine youth in school systems and 
pediatric behavioral health programs are delayed in  providing thera peutic services to children in need  because 
they are not permitted to diagnose a common subset of disorders . In the adult world, because Medicare does 
not currently provide reimbursement for Professional Counselors, Clinical Social Workers are often sought to 
provide care to vulnerable adult populations with intellectual disab ilities. The inability to diagnose these 
individuals  leads to delays in care. So that we can treat a client, we must first be able to diagnose them. If we 
are not able to diagnose them, we must delay treatment until such a diagnosis can be ma de by a qualified 
provider .  
 
Support o f this legislation  will align Maine’s statute s with  the nationally  recognized professional scope of 
practice of clinical  social workers  and eliminate  inequities in scope of practice that exist  with comparabl y 
licensed pro viders including prof essional counselors  and marital and family therapists . The scope of practice 
of licensed clinical social workers is nationally recognized  to include  the diagnosis o f mental, emotional, 
behavioral, addictive and developmental  disorders and disabilities and of the psychosocial aspects of illness, 
injury, disability and impairment . While licensed professional counselors and licensed marital and family 
therapists  practicing  in Maine  are comparably educated and trained, no such restrictions on their practice 
exist.  
 
For all of these reasons,  I urge the committee to vote in favor of LD 1400.  
 
