 
 
    Joint Committee on Health C overage, I nsurance and Financial Services                     April 11, 2023  
    100 State House Station  
    Augusta, ME 04333  
c/o Ed na Cay ford, Committee Clerk  
 
Testimony re: LD 1400: “An Act to Allow Social Workers to Diagnose Organic Mental Illness ” – OUGHT TO 
PASS  
 
Dear Senator Bailey , Representative Perry , and honorable members of the Joint Committee on Health Coverage, 
Insurance and Fi nancial Services : 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comment on LD 1400: “An Act to Allow Social Workers to Diagnose 
Organic Mental Illness ”. As the  leadership of the Maine Chapter of the National Association of Social Workers  
(NASW ),  we represent over 2 2 years (Chris) and 30 years (Julie) of experience providing behavioral health 
services to children and families across a variety of treatment settings . First and foremost, we want to thank 
Representative Lydia Crafts on her efforts to bring this legislation forward. Chris has serve d on the Maine Board 
of Social  Work Licensure . We both  want to personally acknowledge the  good  work that the Board of Social 
Work Licensure does for social workers and members of the public each and every day.  
 
Since 1985, the  Maine law has stated, “No social workers at any level may diagn ose organic mental illness or 
treat any illness by organic therapy” (Title 32, Chapter 83, Subchapter 3, 7053 -A).  However, the official 
definition of “organic mental illness” has changed several times over the last 35+ years .  In October , 2022 , newly 
updated rules governing Maine social workers went into effect.  At that time, the definition of “organic mental 
illness” (Chapter 10 ) was updated to reflect  “any neurocognitive disorder or neurodevelopmental disorder as 
described in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders  (DSM -5)”.  
 
We believe  there are unintended consequences of this definition change. The DSM -5 includes in their list of 
neurodevelopment disorders Attention -Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), Autism Spectrum Disorder, 
Motor Disorders, and Tic Disorders  and n eurocognitive disorders  such as Delirium and Alzheimer’s Disease . 
The current definition of “organic mental illness” combined with the current language of Title 32, Chapter 83, 
Subchapter 3, 7 053-A essentially forbids clinical social workers from providing any of  these all -too-common 
mental health diagnoses for clients  they are serving .   
 
As you are aware , social workers practice across a wide variety of clinical settings including  schools, jails, 
hospitals, primary care offices, and community -based mental health agencies.  Julie and her colleagues in 
integrated primary care practices spend coun tless hours diagnosing or cont ributing to the diagnoses of the above 
conditions.  Any prohibition on the ability of social workers to render clinically sound diagnoses of their clients 
can significantly impact access to behavioral health care and the ability of organization s to best serve individuals  
living  in their commu nities. In order to deliver the highest quality of services and support, clinical social workers 
must be able to fully practice within the scope of their license , without exception.   
 
Clinical s ocial workers  complete master ’s level  training at programs of higher education through  a combination 
of well -established course work , as defined by  the Council on Social Work Education  (CSWE ) and required 
internships and practicums  under the c linical supervision of qualified licensed clinical social workers . To provide 
clinical care, n ew social work  graduates  must first pass an exam to obtain a conditional cl inical lice nse (LMSW -
CC), then  work  under the supervision of approved clinical supervisors for a minimum of two years  to obtain 
their independen t clinical social work license (LCSW) . This is the highest level of licensure in the State of 
Maine , with the mast ers in social work  considered to be the “terminal degree”  for practic al world clinical social  
work. The ability to conduct  a thorough psychosocial evaluation and  subsequently, a diagnostic formulation , is a 
proficiency  that all LMSW -CC and LCSW li censees must have  in order to advance in their career.  
 
Clinical social workers in Maine  must be allowed to perform all aspects of their role without semantic limitations 
and shifting definitions of key terms within the ir professional rules.  According to  the NASW Code of Ethics, 
social workers must “practice within the scope of their license, have competence in the provision of their 
services, demonstrate integrity, and seek furth er education when the need arises to advance their skills in areas 
that might be unfamiliar to the social worker. ” 
 
The diagno stic dilemma addressed  by LD 1400 is not only an issue of behavioral health access , but one of 
provider equity . According to  the State of Maine’s Professional and Financial Regulation staff, social workers 
are the only behavioral health profession licensed and re gulated in the State of Maine to have this sort of 
prohibition on their ability to diagnosis any category of mental health disorders found in the DSM -5.  LD 1400 
will modernize social work practice across Maine and ensure  that citizens have access to  behavior al health 
services  from  providers who are speci fically  trained and qualified to de liver that care.  
 
NASW  urges you to vote LD 1400 as “ought to pass”  and want to  thank you for your work on this important 
issue . Please do not hesitate to reach out to NASW Maine  for any support we can offer  on this  bill, including in 
any future work sessions for LD 1400. 
 
Thank you again,  
                                                                                             
    Chris McLaughlin, MSW, LCSW     Julie Schirmer, LCSW, ACSW  
Executive Director       President of the Board  
Maine Chapter – NASW      Maine Chapter - NASW  
 
References:  
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fifth Edition), American Psychiatric Association 
(Washington , D.C. 2013)  
 
Code of Ethi cs, National Association of Social Workers . (Washi ngton, D.C., 2023) 
https://www.socialworkers.org/About/Ethics/Code -of-Ethics/Code -of-Ethics -English  
 

