 
 Testimony of Kate Marble, LCSW  
For LD 1400 An Act to Allow Social Workers to Diagnose Organi c Mental Illness  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on HealthCare, Insurance & Financial Service s 
April 13, 2023  
Good afternoon,  Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and distinguished members of the Joint Standing 
Committee  on Health  Coverage , Insurance and Financial Service s. I am Kate Marble, a resident  of 
Auburn and a Licensed  Clinical Social Worker. I am a Program Director at Health Affiliates Maine, a 
large statewide behavioral health agency which provides  community -based behavioral health services . 
Health Affiliates Maine has ove r four hundred  licens ed professionals who  provide diagnosis and 
treatment  for behavioral  health disorders —with most of  these professionals  being Licensed Clinical 
Social Workers .  The need for this bill is simple —to remove the unintended cons equences  of an 
outdated law .  
Advances in  neuro biology are helping us understand the origins of many behavioral challenges.  As 
more is known about the origins, the  more likely a diagnosis  is likely to be recategorized  as having 
organic  causes . The new est edition o f the Diagnostic  and Statistical Manual  of Mental Health 
Disorders * (known as the D SM-5TR) is used by many behavioral health pr ofessionals, incl uding licensed 
clinical social workers , to provide  the criteria for adequate diagnosis after  a thorough psychosocial  
assessment  session with  an individual. T he manual recently changed autism spec trum disorders ( ASDs) 
and Attention -Deficit Disorder  (ADHD) as having  organ ic origins . The indicators and symptoms of these 
diagnoses did not change . The process by which a clinical social worker would reach a diagnosis  did not 
change .  
For all clinical social wor kers, t he licensing  board  in the state the y practice determines which diagnos es 
are within the scope of practice . Additionally,  our code of e thics requires that as clinical social workers,  
we stay within our sc ope of practice  (meaning we cannot diagnosis anything w e are not qualified  to 
diagn ose). Unfortunately,  because  of this additional  restriction in Maine law  that states  social workers 
cannot diagnosis organic  illnesses , when the recent DSM  updated i ts categor ies, clinical social wo rkers 
became prohibited  from  diagnos ing common behavioral disorders  (ADHD and ASDs)  due to their 
organic origin s.  
This change has created  an unnecessary burde n on individuals (children and adults) trying to get 
adequate treatment started , usually after having been on long wait lists in the first place . To bill  
insur ance, a clinical social work er needs to provide a diagnosis b efore starting treatmen t. With the way 
the current law is, a licensed clinical social worker  would  put an individual through a two-hour  
assessment only to realize they  need  refer the  person to an other assessment if ASDs or A DHD is the 
 appropriate diagnosis.  It is hard to imagine the conversation o ur social workers are hav ing with these 
individuals  who have already wait ed so long for services . In some areas of Maine , it takes over a  year 
to get into these services and then if they need to go to an other professional, this may add signi ficant 
wait time. In the meantime, individuals and families are trying to function without the mu ch-needed  
support. In ad dition, it overburdens medical professionals  when their preference is to refer  clients with 
indications of these diso rders  to a licensed clinical social wo rker. 
The burden to our system  is not occurring  because  licensed clinical social workers who treat AD HD and 
ASD’s are not qualified  to do so , it is because  of this unintended  error  of an o utdated law. We do not 
want to keep coming back to the legislature each time a revision occurs . We all want people to receive 
diagnosis  and treatment by a qualified professional at the point of contact . I trust licens ed clinical 
social workers will follow their board rules and code of ethics. Therefore,  this bill  ought to  pass.  Thank 
you for your time .  
 
* American Psychiatric Association. (2022).  Diagnostic and statistical manual of m ental disorder s (5th ed., text 
rev.).  https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425787  
