1 
  
Janet T. Mills 
                Governor 
 
 STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL 
AND FINANCIAL REGULATION 
OFFICE OF PROFESSIONAL AND OCCUPATIONAL 
REGULATION 
35 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 
04333-0035 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anne L. Head 
Commissioner, DPFR 
Director, OPOR 
 
 
 
April 13, 2023 
 
Senator Donna Bailey, Chair  
Representative Anne Perry, Chair  
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME  04333-0100  
 
Re: LD 1400, An Act to Allow Social Workers to Diagnose Organic Mental Illnesses. 
 
Dear Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services: 
My name is Kristina Halvorsen, and I am a Regulatory Board Manager for 9 health boards 
within the Office of Professional and Occupational Regulation (OPOR) including the Board of 
Social Worker Licensure. 
I offer the following comments neither for nor against LD1400, An Act to allow Social Workers 
to Diagnose Organic Mental Illnesses. 
Section 1 and 3 propose changes to a social worker’s scope of practice.  Section 1 of the bill 
removes the statutory requirement for a social worker to obtain a physician’s opinion in forming 
a psychological evaluation and treatment plan for mental illness or emotional disorder (Sec 1. 32 
MRSA § 7001A, sub-§10) and Section 3 removes the prohibition on  social workers diagnosing 
organic mental illness and treating any illness by organic therapy.  32 M.R.S. §7053-A.  The 
Office does not take a position on scope of practice unless there is a clear public health or safety 
concern.  We note that the term "organic mental illness" is no longer in common usage and it is 
outside the social worker’s scope of practice to prescribe or recommend medications or conduct 
any medical procedures.  
Section 2 of the bill eliminates the Volunteer Social Workers Project was initially established in 
the 116th Legislature to create a state-wide clearinghouse of volunteer social workers and 
connect them with clients on a pro-bono basis.  This project has not been implemented due to 
lack of resources needed to administer the project.  We support eliminating reference to this 
project.  
There are currently many avenues available for social workers or any other behavioral health 
professional, to volunteer their services.  Some examples are:  The National Alliance on Mental 
 
 
 
P H O N E: ( 2 0 7 ) 6 2 4 - 8 4 2 0 ( VO I C E)   
OFFICES: GARDINER ANNEX, 76 NORTHERN AVENUE, GARDINER, MAINE 
 
TTY users:  call Maine Relay 711  
 
 
F A X: ( 2 0 7 ) 6 2 4 - 8 5 9 5  
  
  
 
  
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage,  
Insurance and Financial Services 
LD1400  
April 13, 2023 - Page 2 of 2 
 
 
2 
 Illness (NAMI)-Maine, The Alzheimer’s Association of Maine, The American Cancer Society-
Maine Chapter, The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention-Maine, The United Way of 
Maine and many other well-established organizations.  There are also services available that 
connect volunteers with those organizations, such as:  VolunteerMatch.org, VolunteerME State 
of Maine through United Way of Maine and others.  These organizations are better suited as 
clearinghouses for volunteer opportunities in Maine and around the country.  
Thank you for your consideration of these comments and I would be happy to answer any 
questions at the work session. 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Kristina M. Halvorsen 
Regulatory Board Manager 
Office of Professional & Occupational Regulation 

