northernlighthealth.org
This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
 
 
 
Northern Light Health
Government Relations
43 Whiting Hill Road
Brewer, Maine 04412
Office207.861.3282
Fax207.861.3044
Northern Light Health
Acadia Hospital
A.R. Gould Hospital
Beacon Health
Blue Hill Hospital
C.A. Dean Hospital
Eastern Maine Medical Center
Home Care & Hospice
Inland Hospital
Maine Coast Hospital
Mayo Hospital
Mercy Hospital
Northern Light Health Foundation
Northern Light Laboratory
Northern Light Pharmacy
Sebasticook Valley HospitalLD 1400 An Act to Allow Social Workers to Diagnose Organic Mental Illnesses 
 
Testimony in Support 
April 13, 2023 
 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and members of the Health Coverage, Insurance 
and Financial Services Committee, my name Lisa Harvey-McPherson RN.  I am here 
today providing testimony on behalf of Northern Light Health and our member 
organizations speaking in support of  this bill.  Northern Light Health member 
organizations include 10 hospitals located in southern, central, eastern and northern 
Maine, 8 nursing facilities, air and ground ambulance, behavioral health, addiction 
treatment, pharmacy, primary and specialty care practices and a state-wide home care 
and hospice program.  Ninety three percent of Maine’s population lives in the Northern 
Light Health service area.  Northern Light Health is also proud to be one of Maine’s 
largest employers with more than 10,000 employees statewide. 
 
This bill removes from Maine statue outdated language that restricts social workers 
from diagnosing “organic mental illness”.   An organic mental disorder is a previously 
used term to describe a dysfunction of the brain that was meant to exclude psychiatric 
disorders. It describes reduced brain function due to illnesses that are not psychiatric in 
nature. Examples include delirium, dementia, Alzheimer’s disease and amnesia.  
Clinically organic mental disorders were removed from the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders in 1994.  
 
Nationally the scope of practice for licensed clinical social workers includes the diagnosis 
of mental, emotional, behavioral, addictive and developmental disorders and disabilities 
and of the psychosocial aspects of illness, injury, disability and impairment.  This bill will 
allow social workers to practice at the level of their professional peers in other states 
and nationally.  
 
This committee has received testimony on other bill regarding the behavioral health 
challenged in Maine, demand for service far exceeds current capacity.  Amending the 
law to authorize social workers to practice at the level for which they have been 
academically prepared will support the statewide need to increase both the capacity of 
services and the efficiency in accessing behavioral health services, 
 
We ask that you support this important legislation.  Thank you. 
 
 
