Alliance 
IYAINK 
"' 
Officers “' 
Dave McCluskey, President 
Community Care 
Greg Bowers, 1“ Vice-President 
Day One 
Bob Descoteaux, 2" Vice- 
President 
laineGeneral Behavioral Heali 
Kara Hay, Secretary 
Penquis CAP Inc. 
Ellen Bemis, Treasurer 
roostook Mental Health Cent: 
Eric Meyer, Past President 
Spurwink 
" Board Members "' 
Adcare Educational institute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital 
Alternative Services, NE, inc. 
idroscoggin Home & Healthca 
Assistance Plus 
Catholic Charities, Maine 
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine 
Christopher Aaron Center 
Common Ties 
ommunity Caring Collaborativ 
ommunity Health & Counselir 
COR Health 
Crisis & Counseling Centers 
Crossroads Maine 
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry 
Kennebec Behavioral Health 
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization 
Maine Behavioral Healthcare 
Milestone Recovery 
NFI North, inc. 
Northern Light/Acadia 
°ortland Recovery Community 
Center 
Pathways of Maine 
Rumford Group Homes 
Brighter Heights Maine 
Sunrise Opportunities 
Sweetser 
'iCounty Mental Health Servic: 
Wellspring, Inc. 
Wings for Children & Families 
Woodfords Family Services Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine 
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers 
Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director 
Testimony in Support of LD 1400 
”An Act to Allow Social Workers to Diagnose Organic 
Mental lllnesses" 
Sponsored by Representative Lydia Crafts 
April 13, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and esteemed members of 
the Health Coverage, insurance and Financial Services. My name is Malory 
Shaughnessy and I am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and 
Mental Health Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the 
majority of Maine's community based mental health and substance use 
treatment providers, providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and 
children. The Alliance advocates for the implementation of sound policies and 
evidence-based practices that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of 
our behavioral health care system. 
On behalf of the Alliance, lam here today to speak in support of LD 1400, ”An Act 
to Allow Social Workers to Diagnose Organic Mental illnesses." As you've already 
heard today, this bill is basically a technical ﬁx. it is not expanding on social 
worker's scope of practice but instead allowing them to continue practicing ina 
way that they are already licensed. The need for this fix was created by changes in 
mental illness categories in the DSM-5. 
As you heard from Julie Schirmer of the National Association of Social Workers- 
Maine describe, clinical social workers complete master's level training at 
programs of higher education through a combination of well-established course 
work, as defined by the Council on Social Work Education (CSWE) and required 
internships and practicums under the clinical supervision of qualified licensed 
clinical social workers. To provide clinical care, new social work graduates must 
first pass an exam to obtain a conditional clinical license (LMSW-CC), then work 
under the supervision of approved clinical supervisors for a minimum of two 
years to obtain their independent clinical social work license (LCSW). This is the 
highest level of licensure in the State of Maine, with the masters in social work 
considered to be the ”terminal degree" for practical world clinical social work. 
The ability to conduct a thorough psychosocial evaluation and subsequently, a 
diagnostic formulation, is a proficiency that all LMSW-CC and LCSW licensees 
must have in order to advance in their careers. 
We need these behavioral health professionals to be able to practice the way in 
which they were trained. Social Workers practice in a myriad of different settings 
across our state serving individuals across the lifespan. it is for these reasons that 
I urge committee members to vote ought to pass on this important proposal. I'd 
be pleased to answer any questions you have for me. Thank you. 
295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 '“ Phone 207.621.8118 '“ Fax 207.621.8362 "‘ theAllianceMaine.org
