Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Transportation Committee: 
 
Our names are Liz Blackwell-Moore and Alexis Guy and we are testifying to offer information on behalf 
of the Cumberland County Public Health Department (CCPHD) neither for nor against LD 209, LD 404, 
and LD 1450. Respectively, these bills would allow the Maine Department of Transportation to permit an 
interim bicycle and pedestrian trail on 26.5 miles of the inactive Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor, while 
preserving the corridor for future rail, allow the Mountain Division corridor to become a trail, and 
provide funding for the construction of this trail.   
At CCPHD, we envision a Cumberland County where communities are thriving; residents, organizations, 
and local governments connect and invest in collaborative actions; and every person has an equitable 
opportunity to live a healthy life. Part of our work is to provide the latest public health research to 
decision makers as they work to create policies and practices that impact the health of the state, the 
county, our communities and ultimately, individuals. Last year, we completed a 4-year Cumberland 
County Community Health Improvement Plan that provides a vision for improving the health of people 
and communities in Cumberland County and reducing health inequities. The plan used an intensely 
collaborative process, resulting in prioritized strategies that address health at the individual and 
community level. Improving transportation access was identified as a key goal.  
Lack of transportation was named as a barrier that disproportionately impacts those in certain 
communities, including rural populations, older adults, immigrants, and people with low-income. For 
people who cannot drive or cannot afford a vehicle, safe routes for alternative transportation are 
essential for accessing opportunities and services, including healthcare, employment, education, child 
care, and recreation. Shared use trails are important component of this, connecting people to cities, 
towns, businesses, and outdoor spaces. Accessing unused state corridors for rail trails is a means of 
developing such infrastructure while leveraging existing resources.   
Rail trails, and the increased opportunities for walking, biking, and wheeling they offer, are also 
important tools for reducing the environmental impact of the transportation system and increasing 
levels of physical activity. Physical activity can reduce risk of chronic diseases including heart disease, 
Type 2 Diabetes, obesity, and some cancers, support management of chronic conditions, and prevent 
premature death.1 The federal Center of Disease Control and Prevention states “access to safe places to 
play and walk, such as parks, safe streets, trails, and greenways… helps increase physical activity and can 
provide better places to live.”2 
State policies and practices are valuable tools for advancing public health priorities, including health 
equity and transportation access. Thank you for considering the impact of trail corridors on these 
priorities identified by communities across Cumberland County and our state.   
Sincerely,  
Liz Blackwell-Moore, MPH     Alexis Guy, MPH, RD 
Director      Healthy Eating, Active Living Team Lead 
 
1 https://www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/about-physical-activity/index.html 
2 https://www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/community-strategies/activity-friendly-routes-to-everyday-
destinations.html 
