Andrea Berry
Town of North Yarmouth
LD 209
Statement of Support for LD 209 submitted by the Town of North Yarmouth
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Transportation 
Committee:
The Town of North Yarmouth respectfully submits this testimony in support of LD 
209 the “Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to Implement the 
Recommendation of the Portland to Auburn Rail Use Advisory Council”.  
The proposed Casco Bay Rail Trail that will run from Portland to Auburn will pass 
directly through our community. On September 7, 2021 the North Yarmouth Select 
Board unanimously passed a resolution in favor of the creation of the Casco Bay Rail 
Trail. The Select Board continues to see the opportunity in having such a trail travel 
through our town. 
Our townspeople are united in our passion for the vibrant and accessible parks, trails, 
and open spaces throughout our community. In our most recent Comprehensive Plan 
community surveys showed that residents identified scenic views, the Royal River 
Corridor/greenway, public access to open space, and Royal River access as important.
We know that the addition of the Casco Bay Rail Trail will add to the connectivity of 
these community assets and will open up an additional outdoor opportunity for 
residents and visitors alike. 
Being a rural town easily accessible to Portland, our roads are frequently used by 
bicyclists for both recreation and commuting. It is not uncommon during the summer 
months to see groups of bikers passing through our village center. Those bikers often 
stop and frequent local businesses for food and other amenities. Increased bike traffic 
will only act to increase customers at the small businesses that call North Yarmouth 
home. 
We do not have accessible public transportation in North Yarmouth. The addition of 
the Casco Bay Rail Trail will likely act to improve the desirability of our town both 
for existing and new residents, adding in a new, safe way to access Portland and 
Auburn. We see this as a benefit to our climate strategy in relation to the Maine 
Won’t Wait initiative, striving to increase bicycling as a strategy to decrease 
greenhouse gas emissions. 
In summation, the Town of North Yarmouth supports LD 209 and the creation of the 
Casco Bay Rail Trail and encourages the Transportation Committee to vote in favor 
of this initiative. 
Submitted by Select Board Member Andrea Berry on behalf of the Town of North 
Yarmouth, ME
