4 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
0* 2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Anne Graham TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
97 Farms Edge Road 
North Yarmouth, ME 04097 
Cell Phone: 846-0049 
An_13_e G1"aham@legislature.maine.gov 
May 18, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Anne Graham in support of 
LD 209, An Act to Authorize an Interim Use Trail on the Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and esteemed members of the Transportation 
Committee, I am Rep. Anne Graham and I serve the communities of North Yarmouth and Gray 
in House District 105. I am here to testify in strong Support of LD 209, An Act to Authorize an 
Interim Use Trail on the Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor. 
Please allow me to tell you a bit of the story of my family when we moved to North Yarmouth 
30 years ago. We were fortunate to buy a piece of land and build a house at the end of a small 
road next to the Royal River. My husband and I and two young sons moved in and made North 
Yarmouth our home. Our road crossed railroad tracks just after the intersection of North Road 
and we were excited to learn that the “Ski Train” would travel on it to Sunday River. Alas, we 
never saw that train and the tracks have been unused and in disrepair ever since. The crossing 
was made of wood and tore up our tires as we crossed. Sometimes people would walk on the 
tracks (but not me with my fear of twisting Weak ankles). I often thought of how cool it would be 
if you could walk or bike on the tracks. This bill will give my family and many others the 
opportunity to walk, ride bikes or cross country ski on a quiet and beautiful trail. 
My son, Hunter, has gotten into the habit of riding his bicycle long distances. He rides along 
North Road towards RT 1, into Portland and then to Cape Elizabeth (around 37 milesl). He 
usually doesn’t tell me when he rides because he knows I will worry about his safety on those 
high traffic roads. You see, North Road extends from Yarmouth, cormects with Mill Road and 
then connects to RT 115 into Gray. It is heavily traveled by commuters and large trucks who use 
it as a pass-through from the Maine Turnpike and RT 26 to RT 1 and I-295. I can honestly say 
that one takes their life in their hands when they take their children or their dog for a walk. The 
speed limit is 45 miles per hour, so people are often traveling 55 miles per hour or faster. If the 
tracks were converted to a trail, families could walk and ride safely, and this mom would breathe 
a little easier about her bicycling Son. 
Please know that this is a proposal to use this unused rail until rail becomes a real possibility. I 
have deep respect and appreciation for the role that rail has played in building our country. If not 
for the rail that extended from Boston to Bangor, I would not be here. My Dad traveled by train 
District l05: North Yarmouth and Gray
from his residency in Boston to his residency in Bangor. He met my Mom, married, becamea 
well-respected physician and they had ﬁve children. I believe rail is an important part of our 
transportation past and future. For now, let°s use this unused rail line for the health and Wellbeing 
of our communities today. 
You will surely hear NIMBY testimony. I think one way to assuage concerns is to limit access to 
the proposed trail to only pedestrians, bicyclers and skiers; activities that speciﬁcally promote 
health and wellness should be the priority. 
I am an unabashed YIMBY and I am conﬁdent that I speak for the majority of my constituents in 
that regard. I, and those coming behind me, greatly appreciate your time and attention to this 
wonderful idea which further exempliﬁes our unofﬁcial motto: Maine the Way Life Should Be. 
Thank you and I’m happy to answer any questions you may have. 
District I05: North Yarmouth and Gray
