""’ -.@' 
_ 2 STATE HOUSE sf/mom‘ - 
AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Arthur L. Bell MAINE RELAY 711 HOUSE OE REPRESENTATIVES 
All lhur_Bcl l -‘ti-legi.~.l;it11|'c.mninc.5o\ 
Coll: (207;-H5-l ﬁl? 
RC.\lCit ‘l‘lCt1 (Bil?) <\‘-16-(l|~l$ 
Good afternoon Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members 
of the Transportation Committee. l am Art Bell, and l represent House 
District #103 in Yarmouth. l come before you today to introduce LD 209, 
“An Act to Authorize an Interim Use Trail on the Berlin Subdivision 
Rail Corridor ”. 
l have attached to my testimony the proposed Amendment to replace the 
concept draft originally submitted for LD 209. As you can see, the 
Amendment exactly parallels the language of the bill you will be 
considering later today for the Mountain Division Trail LD 404. 
As we have seen across America, there has been a craving for local 
community that has lead to a reawakening for outdoor recreation, in 
particular bike and pedestrian trail usage. l am thrilled that Maine DOT has 
recently published its first “Active Transportation ” plan, which will maintain, 
improve and expand safe active transportation statewide. As the 
MaineDOT AT plan states: “implementing this plan will improve pedestrian 
and bike safety, expand mobility, support economic development, reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions, and enhance community vibrancy, quality of life 
and public health for Maine.” 
Maine, just like the rest of our country, has miles of abandoned rail 
corridors. Legislation passed in the 130"‘ directed the DOT to establish a 
Rail Use Advisory Council to facilitate discussion, gather information and 
provide advice to the Commissioner regarding future use. These 
recommendations include benefits & costs of potential uses of the rail 
corridors, including both rail & trail uses, with the understanding that any 
non-rail use would be considered interim in nature, as outlined in the Maine 
Rail Presen/ation Act. 
To date, two rail corridors have completed the RUAC process. LD 404 will 
be addressing the results of the Mountain Division rail corridor, and this bill 
LD 209 is focused on the Berlin Subdivison rail corridor. 
District I03 Yarmouth and Ya1'rn0utl1 
liml d uni t\tl cl 1
Public engagement was an important part of the Berlin Subdivision Rail 
Corridor Study process. Comments were solicited in a variety of channels 
between April 2022 and January 2023, including five virtual RUAC g 
meetings, three in-person RUAC meetings, one public meeting and through 
email comments, via direct email to MaineDOT and submissions through 
the MaineDOT website. 
Over 700 public comments were received in an eight-month period from 
May 2022 through December 14, 2022. Approximately 86% of the public 
comments received indicated support for a trail. This included comments 
specifying desire for “trail until rail” and/or support for the development of 
the Casco Bay Trail Loop and connection with the Eastern Trail. 
Development of the Berlin Subdivision Rail corridor to trail usage was cited 
as having: 
0 A strong baseline of potential trail users based upon socio-economic 
metrics, area population density, and demand for walking & biking 
facilities; 
o Potential for increased consumer activity by trail users could lead to 
$3.5 to $5.3 million annual spending; 
o Presence of a recreation trail has the potential so show a positive fiscal 
impact to residential property values along the corridor; and 
o Offering expanded recreational facilities will encourage more active 
lifestyles that can lead to reduced health care costs. 
The majority of Rail Use Advisory Council members recommended Interim 
Trail until Rail (multi-use trail using the existing rail bed). This alternative 
includes removal of the existing tracks and ties and developing a multi-use 
trail on the former track bed. My community of Yarmouth is very 
excited for this trail to be realized, as our communities along the 
corridor from Portland to Auburn. 
lbelieve this is an ideal public policy initiative. Re-envisioning 
abandoned State-owned assets and returning them to public use, while 
also encouraging healthy recreation and economic spending. A robust 
Active Transportation trail system statewide will support the Maine Climate 
Action Plan and the 2020-29 Maine" Economic Development Strategy and 
enhance the vibrancy of Maine’s cities, quintessential villages, and rural 
areas.~ 
I urge you to support LD 209 and help realize MaineDOT ’s Active 
Transportation Plan.
Draft Updates to LD 209 
Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to Implement the 
Recommendation of the Portland to Auburn Rail Use Advisory Council 
Preamble. Whereas, the State Railroad Preservation and Assistance Act requires 
the Department of Transportation to seek legislative approval for any conversion of 
a state-owned rail corridor in which the department controls the right-of-way toa 
nonrail recreational or nonrecreational transportation use; and 
Whereas the Portland to Auburn Rail Use Advisory Council was fonned in April 
2022 pursuant to Maine Revised Statutes, Title 23, section 75, to review the section 
of the St. Lawrence and Atlantic rail corridor from mile post 0.0 in Portland to mile 
post 26.5 in Auburn, referred to as the Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor, for 
potential nonrail use; andA 
Whereas, the Portland to Auburn Rail Use Advisory council convened and met for 
nine months from April 2022 through January 2023; and 
Whereas, of the 13 members of the Portland to Auburn Rail Use Advisory Council 
to cast a vote, a majority of members voted to recommend the conversion of 26 .5 
miles of the inactive Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor to an interim bicycle and 
pedestrian trail; andy 
Whereas, any conversion to nomail use is considered interim in nature and rail 
corridors are to be preserved for future rail use as provided under the State 
Railroad Preservation and Assistance Act; now, therefore be it: 
Section l. Trail construction on Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor. Resolved: That, 
based on the recommendation of the Poitland to Auburn Rail use Advisory 
Council, the Department of Transportation may permit the conversion of 26.5 
miles of the Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor to an interim bicycle and pedestrian 
trail. 
SUMMARY 
This resolve allows the Department of Transportation to permit an interim bicycle 
and pedestrian trail on 26.5 miles of the inactive Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor, 
while preserving the corridor for future rail use.i
