Betsy Cyr
North Yarmouth, Maine
LD 209
Dear Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Transportation 
Committee:
My name is Betsy Cyr, and I am a resident of North Yarmouth, ME. I am writing to 
testify in strong support of Rep. Bell’s proposed amendment to LD 209, “Resolve, to 
Direct the Department of Transportation to Implement the Recommendation of the 
Portland to Auburn Rail Use Advisory Council.”
My neighborhood is directly across the street from the proposed trail. My husband, 
two children and I are very active walkers, joggers, bikers, and cross country skiers. 
While our small, dead end street offers a safe area for these activities, we live directly 
off of North Road in a 45 mph speed zone, which in my opinion is the minimum 
speed cars travel along this through way. Occasionally my husband and I walk or jog 
along North Road, but we would never consider letting our children use this road for 
recreation or fitness. We would absolutely love and take full advantage of the 
proposed trail. Our neighbors, who we often see walking similar routes, would also 
take full advantage. It would be an asset to our community for a variety of reasons, 
most of which includes a safe way to  be active outdoors for people of all ages and 
abilities. 
My family and I would also use it as a safe way to bike to and from the nearby town 
of Yarmouth. We do not feel safe using our bikes along the main road because of the 
speed of traffic, but this would open all sorts of possibilities to reduce our carbon 
emissions and stay active. As a modest estimate, we would use this trail 3-5 times per 
week all year.
In addition to living nearby the proposed trail, I am also a physical therapist. I am a 
big advocate for inclusive outdoor recreation for all ages and abilities. Having this 
resource will provide many citizens with the needed access to safely be active 
outdoors. Those who have difficulties finding nearby accessible, level trails will have 
the opportunity to participate in meaningful recreation more frequently, which is so 
important for their physical, mental, and social well being. 
Thank you so much for reading my testimony.
