David Ashenden
Harrington
LD 209
These comments concern the railroad tracks between Westbrook and the New 
Hampshire State Line formerly a portion of what was known as the Mountain 
Division of the Maine Central Railroad.
I am opposed to the removal of the rails at this time under the pressure of various 
trail organizations desirous of using the right of way for trail purposes. The rails 
should be removed, if at all, only after serious considerations of all the issues 
involved. Once the rails are removed there is very little probability that they would 
ever be replaced even if there were the potential and need for rail service. I trust those
charged with making this decision are aware of the broader importance of these 
tracks; they represent more than a local rail route for which as of this time there seems
to be no use
Although at present there may be little call for rail service on the portion of the 
Mountain Division in the segment between Westbrook and the New Hampshire state 
line those responsible for making the decision must consider the future. The section 
under question is not a little used branch line for local service but is  part of a through 
line between Portland and St. Johnsbury, Vermont where it connects with tracks from 
southern New England to Canada. To the best of my knowledge all portions of this 
line in New Hampshire and Vermont still remain extant and unbroken with a part in 
New Hampshire being used for rail service of various sorts.
As long as the line remains unbroken the potential remains for an alternative though
rail route from Portland to points west and north. At this time when emphasis is being 
placed on energy efficient modes of transportation these are considerations that 
should be seriously studied with thoughts for the future and not rushed. The removal 
of the rails for trail purposes which would essential sever a portion of a through route 
can wait whereas once the rails are removed the action is final and the possibility of 
future use is eliminated.
Therefore I urge postponement of any decision to lift the rails at this time until a 
final judgement can be reached.
David D. Ashenden
P.O. Box 114
333 Oak Point Road
Harrington, Maine 04643

