Testimony in support of LD 209: Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to Implement 
the Recommendation of the Portland to Auburn Rail Use Advisory Council 
 
18 May 2023 
Derek M. Strout 
122 Wolcott Street 
Portland, Maine 04102 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Transportation Committee: 
My name is Derek Strout and I am a resident of Portland and a staff member at Rails-to-Trails 
Conservancy. I am writing to testify in strong support of Rep. Bell’s proposed amendment to LD 209, 
“Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to Implement the Recommendation of the 
Portland to Auburn Rail Use Advisory Council.”  
Originally from Bar Harbor, I’ve lived in Maine most of my life and one of the main reasons my wife and I 
have chosen to raise our family here is the quality of life that comes with the state’s commitment and 
investment in parks and trails. We use local and regional trails all year round for recreation, stress-relief, 
adventure, education and getting to local destinations like the Portland Children’s Museum safely and 
enjoyably. We agree with the Rail Use Advisory Council (RUAC) and communities along the route that 
the best current use of this corridor is a wide, flat trail, accessible to people of all ages and abilities.  
Though we live in Portland, we have friends whose property abuts the corridor further north who could 
not be more excited about the option of a trail passing right behind them. If given a safe option like this 
rail-trail to see friends or go to lunch in Yarmouth or New Gloucester without driving, we would use it all 
the time.  
This Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor offers a once-in-a-generation opportunity to improve the lives of 
residents and visitors between Portland and Auburn and is a critical element of the state’s recently 
released Maine State Active Transportation Plan, which states that, “A robust AT system statewide will 
support the Maine Climate Action Plan and the Maine Economic Development Strategy 2020-2029 and 
enhance the vibrancy of Maine’s cities, quintessential villages, and rural areas.” 
The health benefits alone of trails has been well documented, as has the economic impacts, including 
that of similar projects like the Eastern Trail, which has been found to inject over $44 million annually to 
the region. 
While there are often questions about the legality and safety of new rail-trails, I would like to suggest 
that many of these concerns can be alleviated by looking at the successes and techniques from any of 
the over 2,000 rail-trails already being used by millions across the country. While the Casco Bay Trail is a 
unique project in many ways, the process of improving rights-of-way like this is not new, and countless 
studies have shown that many of the fears surrounding privacy and safety simply do not reflect the 
reality of how trails are used. The Belfast Rail Trail and Mountain Division Trail are two other success 
stories from right here in Maine that demonstrate how safe and valuable these trails can be. 
As you know, the Rail Use Advisory Council’s recommendation also honors the state’s Rail Preservation 
Act, which requires rail-trail conversions be considered an interim use of the corridor. I would suggest 
that the main reason train service isn’t often restored in conversions like these is that rather than being 
a sort of neglected temporary fix, the rail-trails have become beloved, well-used, economic drivers in 
those communities. And that is exactly what I believe this corridor would become. 
You have an incredible opportunity with this bill and I hope we can pass it to realize the enormous 
benefits offered by the Casco Bay Trail and create a transformational active transportation and 
recreational pathway for current and future generations of Mainers and visitors.  
Thank you, 
Derek M. Strout 
Portland 
