O5/17/2023 
Douglas Moore, 37 Fleetwood St., Portland, ME 04102 
1 207 253 9827; Douglas@HouseOfMoore.us 
Good afternoon, Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Transportation Committee: 
My name is Douglas Moore and l reside in Portland, Maine. 
I support Rep. Bell's proposed amendment to LD 209 (to implement the recommendation ofthe Portland to Auburn, ‘Rail 
Use Advisory Council’) that would authorize an interim, ‘Trail until Rail’ on the unused rail corridor between Portland and 
Auburn. 
I support the ‘Trail until Rail’ (aka ‘Rail-Trail ’) for the following reasons: 
MDOT owns this rail corridor including the rail-bed, so it has already been bought and paid for by Maine residents. 
The ‘Trail until Rail’ is the least-cost use (of the rail corridor). That is, the least cost to build and the least cost to 
operate. There are 3 potential uses of the rail corridor. 
1st use: The ‘Trail until Rail’ 
0 The trail would be on top of the existing rail bed. 
0 This is the recommendation (of the Advisory Council) and the most economical. 
2"“ use: The ‘Rail-with-Trail ’ 
0 The trail would be adjacent to the rail bed. 
v This could require additional costs (e.g., for new rights-of~way and environmental impact studies) with 
little or no value added. 
3"’ use: ‘Rail Use’ 
0 This is the re-establishment of rail operations. 
0 Rail Use would be the most expensive option. 
The ‘Trail until Rail’ is the most economical way to help to get people outside and into our clean air to see and enjoy 
all our sights and wildlife. Folks will be enjoying this trail safely while getting ﬁt, looking good, and living longer, 
healthier lives. With our work becoming more sedentary, this is increasingly becoming more important. 
The ‘Trail until Rail’ is safe for all human-powered activities. 
This Rail-Trail would be a place for people of all ages, families including kids, strollers, walkers, wheelchairs, bikes, 
pedestrians, skaters, and pets to participate in human-powered activities without the fear of getting run-over bya 
motorized vehicle. 
For the ‘Trail until Rail‘ , all the heavy lifting is already done. This includes the rights-of-way procurement, the 
environmental impact studies, the design, and the construction of the trail-bed. 
This Rail-Trail is a win-win choice. 
0 Users will be able to use the Rail-Trail after the construction. 
~ MDOT will have the ‘interim option’ in their back pocket so they will maintain control of the usage of the 
corridor forever. 
Thank you for your time and thank you for listening.
