LD 209  Ought not to Pause  
An Act to Authorize an Interim Use Trail on the Berlin Subdivision Rail 
Corridor  
My name is Ed Benjamin . I am a South Portland  resident .   I am testifying 
absolutely  opposed to this bill LD 209 .  I am not in support of the State converting 
railroads into tr ails.  The state  is giving serious consideration to demands by bike 
groups to tear up the railroad  tracks abutting my Portland property  for trails.    
 
That this is even being considered right now when we have a serious problem  with 
homeless people living  on trails in the City is ridiculous .  These folks and more to 
follow will certainly be using the trail as a place to camp. This will not be a trail it 
will be a crime belt.  
 
I understand the need these people have.  I wish I could help them.  But the best I 
can do is own and operate my commercial property, create jobs and pay taxes.  I 
cannot have my property and property values threatened by a problem that is not 
being solved.   
 
I have been involved with developers that want to use my land here in Portland as 
a train  station location .  There is  a very realistic  plan for operating a passenger 
train on this railroad between Portland and Lewiston  and all the towns in between.  
My land is large, at 14 acres a nd can be a train station, par king lot, business center 
and have homes.  
 
Do not allow this property  to become a trail.  Voter NO on LD 209.   
 
DO NOT RIP UP THESE RAILROA DS FOR TRAILS.   
Use them for trains instead.  
 
 
Ed Benjamin
Portland
LD 209
LD 209 Ought not to Pause
An Act to Authorize an Interim Use Trail on the Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor
My name is Ed Benjamin. I am a South Portland resident.   I am testifying absolutely 
opposed to this bill LD 209.  I am not in support of the State converting railroads into 
trails.  The state is giving serious consideration to demands by bike groups to tear up 
the railroad tracks abutting my Portland property for trails.  
That this is even being considered right now when we have a serious problem with 
homeless people living on trails in the City is ridiculous.  These folks and more to 
follow will certainly be using the trail as a place to camp. This will not be a trail it 
will be a crime belt. 
I understand the need these people have.  I wish I could help them.  But the best I can 
do is own and operate my commercial property, create jobs and pay taxes.  I cannot 
have my property and property values threatened by a problem that is not being 
solved.  
I have been involved with developers that want to use my land here in Portland as a 
train station location.  There is a very realistic plan for operating a passenger train on 
this railroad between Portland and Lewiston and all the towns in between.  My land is
large, at 14 acres and can be a train station, parking lot, business center and have 
homes.
Do not allow this property to become a trail.  Voter NO on LD 209.  
DO NOT RIP UP THESE RAILROADS FOR TRAILS.  
Use them for trains instead.

