Edward Suslovic
Portland
LD 209
Chairs and Members of the Transportation Committee. 
My name is Ed Suslovic and am a resident of Portland and urge your support of the 
proposed amendment to LD209 empowering the MDOT to create a multipurpose trail
between Portland and Lewiston-Auburn.
 I am a former legislator and Mayor and City Councilor. I am a Past President of the 
Greater Portland Council of Governments(GPCOG) and currently represent Portland 
on the Downeaster Station Committee. I also chaired the Portland Jetport Master 
Planning Committee and have been a member of the Greater Portland Transit 
District(METRO) for over 12 years and was President during the BREEZ Service 
expansion to Yarmouth, Freeport and Brunswick as well as the Husky Line expansion
through Westbrook to Gorham. When I first joined the METRO Board there were 
only two member communities,Portland and Westbrook. Since then, Falmouth, 
Yarmouth, Freeport, and Brunswick have joined and Gorham will be the next town to 
officially become a member. METRO is on the move!
I am also a founding member of the Casco Bay Trail Alliance which is the only 
organization that I am speaking on behalf today. I listed some of my public service 
positions from the past 25 years to show that I have an extensive background in 
regional transportation planning and am morally agnostic. Planes, trains, automobiles,
and trails ALL have a role to play in serving the residents and visitors to our region 
and state. Your role as stewards of our public resources is to determine the most 
appropriate AND cost effective solutions to our transportation challenges. 
I urge you to support the proposed amendment to LD209 for the following reasons. 
First, demand for trails has exploded nationally as well as here in Maine even before 
the pandemic but especially over the past 3 years. People of all ages, abilities, and 
incomes want to be able to SAFELY walk, bike, ski, snowshoe rollerblade, etc. away 
fro speeding cars on roads that frequently have no sidewalks or even shoulders. Trails 
are more than just recreation venues, they are critical links in our active transportation
network and are used as commuting routes year round.
Second, the currently abandoned St Lawrence & Atlantic corridor is a public asset 
currently serving no public purpose. You might hear from some abutters who would 
like to keep it that way but trails have proven that they are good neighbors. Just ask 
any town officials from throughout Maine who have trails in their towns. They will 
tell you that there are very few complaints from landowners alongside trails except 
those abutters often want to gain access once the trails are built! A multi use trail on 
this corridor ensures that the public values this important public asset.
Finally, there is no other viable use for this corridor. Many studies have been done 
over the years analyzing the potential rail use of this corridor and they all come to the 
same conclusion as you have recently heard from MDOT. Current and future transit 
needs along this route are best served by bus as a far more cost effective and flexible 
solution. In the unlikely and far distant scenario where the population density has 
grown explosively to the point that passenger rail service makes sense, service could 
easily be accomplished on the lightly used CSX line between Portland, LA, 
Waterville, and Bangor or even Montreal just as the current Downeaster service 
operates on the Brunswick to Haverhill portion of the line to Boston. CSX has proven 
to be a very good partner for NNEPRA.
It is for these reasons that I urge you to join the majority of the RUAC that was 
established by MDOT per state law in supporting the proposed amendment to LD 209
that allows the Commissioner of MDOT to transform this moldering public asset into 
a high performing link in our regional transportation network.
Thank you for your time and service.
