Erika Kranz
Cumberland, ME
LD 209
I write in strong support of LD 209. The corridor connecting Portland to Auburn is a 
perfect venue to meet pent-up demand for safe-off-street cycling, both for recreation 
and transportation.
I anticipate being a frequent user of the trail, if approved, for cycling on the weekend 
with my family and for commuting to the Old Port in Portland on weekdays. The 
towns north of Portland have a dearth of sidewalks and other facilities where children 
(and adults!) can safely ride away from car traffic. For this reason, I occasionally 
drive with my family to the Eastern Trail in Scarborough. If the Berlin Subdivision 
Trail is approved, we would presumably be able to access the trail by bike (assuming 
there is some access in the town of Cumberland), thus avoiding the emissions and 
congestion caused by our trips to Scarborough. We would absolutely welcome the 
chance to ride with our young child on a smooth path, safely away from car traffic, 
close to home. I expect that we would use the corridor in winter for cross-country 
skiing as well, if allowed. 
I have seen concerns of property owners near the now-unused public corridor that 
interim trail use will bring crime and unhoused people's encampments to their back 
doors. These concerns appear unfounded. Experts who have studied this issue have 
concluded, time and time again, that rail-trails do not drive crime. See, e.g., 
https://safety.fhwa.dot.gov/ped_bike/docs/rt_safecomm.pdf ; 
http://www.brucefreemanrailtrail.org/pdf/Pinellas_chap3.pdf ; 
http://www.brucefreemanrailtrail.org/pdf/Indiana_Trails_2001.pdf ; 
https://www.railstotrails.org/resourcehandler.ashx?name=rail-with-trails-best-practice
s-and-lessons-learned&id=26482&fileName=Rails-Trails-Layout_06_17_21_508.pdf 
. And it is difficult to imagine why turning an unused rail corridor into a recreational 
trail would encourage unhoused people to congregate in the largely rural areas this 
trail would cross. 
Adjacent landowners who have enjoyed the quiet of discontinued rail use along the 
public corridor may indeed see a change with interim trail use. But as any property 
owner knows, your neighbor's use of their own property (and indeed, this is a 
state-owned corridor) is their own choice (within legal limits, of course). That 
adjacent landowners have long been able to privately enjoy the discontinued rail 
service along this public corridor does not entitle them to continuation of the status 
quo. Rather, the public corridor should be used for its best--interim--use: a public 
trail.
And importantly, interim trail use is interim. I have not seen studies that suggest that 
demand for rail use along this corridor is high enough to justify the costs of returning 
the corridor to active rail service in the near term. In contrast, the demand for trail use 
is high now, and will continue with the lack of any similar facilities in the nearby 
area. The best use of this corridor now is trail use, at least until demand for rail 
service along this corridor is strong enough to justify a change to that use. 

