Erinn Tardiff
North Yarmouth
LD 209
I am writing in opposition of this bill and to express my concerns over this rail trail 
proposal. I'm an abutter to the tracks and this will drastically change the quiet and 
peaceful setting of my property to have people walking, biking, and hiking all day.
 I am very concerned about the extremely steep drop offs that are on our section of the
tracks. Long stretches have 50ft drop offs with rocky cliffs and jagged trees. This 
poses a major medical safety issue to someone that may fall down. There is also NO 
cell reception along this stretch so if someone does fall down, they quite literally will 
not be able to call for help. How does the committee plan to make this safe for all 
users? Does a biker just lay there until someone else comes along and hears them 
calling out? Has the committee actually walked the entire stretch from Yarmouth to 
Pineland and seen these drop offs? 
I am also concerned for my neighbors that have their back yard on the tracks and have
small children. How are they to feel safe and allow their children to play outside with 
a sudden presence of people on their property?  Will homeowners that have property 
lines on the track be provided privacy fencing? 
How does the committee plan to patrol this trail for dirt bikes, ATVs, and 
snowmobiles? A sign does not deter anyone these days. This will  potentially create a 
significate noise increase in our neighborhood. Will this trail have cameras posted to 
catch people that abuse it or will it be on the homeowner to constantly call the police?
I chose to build my house in a wooded and quiet setting. I did not choose to have a 
trail system in my line of site. I don't want to see people out my window all day long. 
I want to keep my privacy.  I don't want to worry about who may be using the trail, 
who may be lurking around the neighborhood or be surprised when I go outside and 
someone is standing there. I want to feel safe on my property, I want my neighbors 
with small children to feel safe when they get off the bus. I do not think this is a good 
idea for our town. Those in favor do not have the rail in their yard and it's not 
affecting their personal space. 
