Gary Goslin 
Yarmouth
LD 209
Gary Goslin
37 Kindred Way
Yarmouth, ME 04096
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Transportation 
Committee,
 
My name is Gary Goslin and I am a resident of Yarmouth. I’m writing to offer my 
strong support of the proposed amendment to LD 209, “Resolve, to Direct the 
Department of Transportation to Implement the Recommendation of the Portland to 
Auburn Rail Use Advisory Council.”
 
This trail would be an incredible resource for me and my community. I’m an avid 
bicyclist and I often bike 20+ miles a day as a way to relax, exercise, and clear my 
mind, even in the colder months. This trail would allow me to commute to work from 
Yarmouth to L.L.Bean in Freeport via bicycle, a valuable multi-tasking of exercise 
and transportation for those of us who work full time, have families, and lots of 
activities on the schedule. I have two young daughters, and we love to bike places as a
family. We would definitely use the trail to go on local adventures on the weekends 
up to towns north of us to check out local restaurants and businesses, and down to 
Portland and the connecting trails there.
 
I recognize that building this trail is a significant financial investment. But it’s one 
that will improve the quality of life of so many residents in the area (and visitors to 
Maine). Just in the last few years, a sidewalk was built connecting my neighborhood 
to downtown Yarmouth Village. This sidewalk has made an incredible difference in 
my life; where my family once exclusively drove to get to games, events, restaurants, 
the library, town hall, etc., we now regularly walk or bike. My daughter and I bike to 
her elementary school every day until temperatures dip below freezing and we are 
back out cycling to school as soon as spring hits. The sidewalk transformed this street.
People use it every day to exercise, walk dogs, and get to and from town.
 
I know that this trail will provide huge benefits to Mainers and be well worth the 
investment.
 
Thank you for your consideration.
 
Gary Goslin
