 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 18, 2023  
  
Testimony in Support of   
LD 209 “ An Act to Authorize an Interim Use Trail on the Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor ”   
 
Greetings Chairs Chipman and Williams, and disting uished members of the Transportation 
Committee. I am Jean Sideris, Executive Director for the Bicycle Coalition of Maine.   On behalf of 
our more than 20,000 members and supporters, I am submitting testimony in support of LD 209 
“An Act to Authorize an Inte rim Use Trail on the Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor ”. 
  
The Bicycle Coalition of Maine supports this bill, which directs the MaineDOT to follow the 
recommendation of its legislatively formulated Rail Use Advisory Council (RUAC) Process 
outlined in Title 23, Chapter 3, §75. Rail Use Advisory Councils are formed to assess the various 
possible uses of fallow railroad corridors, including restoring rail or creating multi -use trails.    
 
The RUAC working on the Berlin Subdivision conducted a thorough assessmen t of the unused rail 
line with input from stakeholders, towns along the corridor, and public input. Its final 
recommendation issued a majority report in favor of an interim trail. The BCM supports immediate 
action to begin conversion to an interim trail as  the best and most beneficial use of this public 
resource. A 26.5 mile trail along this corridor would provide a safe, off -road option for recreation 
and transportation for many of Maine’s largest cities and towns.The conversion of rail corridors to 
interi m trail use is generally the least expensive option available to the state with enormous public 
health and active transportation benefits. The creation of multi -use paths is a proven economic and 
tourism driver, as demonstrated by the Eastern Trail and Dow neast Sunrise Trail.  
 
Building these trails would not only create miles of new recreational opportunities, it is a vital 
connector in Maine for active transportation. It would allow thousands of people to be able to safely 
choose biking or walking as mean s of transportation and spur additional investments in bicycle and 
pedestrian infrastruc ture. In particular, the section from Portland to Yarmouth should be prioritized 
because, according to the study conducted for the RUAC, the rail conditions on the Port land end are 
especially challenging to convert to quality passenger rail and this section is likely to support the 
largest number of commuter and active transportation users.   
 
We urge the committee to honor the RUAC process, and to support the majority finding of the 
Berlin Subdivision RUAC by issuing an Ought to Pass report.   Thank you for the opportunity to 
offer testimony in support of LD 209.  
  
Jean Sideris  
 
 
 
Executive Direc tor 
 

