May 17, 2023 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Transportation Committee: 
 
I am writing to testify in strong support of Rep. Bell’s proposed amendment to LD 209, “Resolve, to 
Direct the Department of Transportation to Implement the Recommendation of the Portland to 
Auburn Rail Use Advisory Council.” 
 
Having this rail trail through my community would be an incredible resource for me, my family, and 
my community. In particular this rail trail would provide important connectivity with a proposed new 
Public Land project at the end of Woodman Road in New Gloucester. 
 
The proposed trail would cross Rt 231 in New Gloucester about 2 miles from the current Big Falls 
Preserve that is currently owned by Royal River Conservation Trust. My husband and I also own 
property at the end of Woodman Road that abuts the Big Falls Preserve that we are currently 
negotiating with the Bureau of Public Lands to buy and create a new Talking Brook Public Land. This 
would be combined with the Big Falls Preserve to create a new 200 acre public land unit in southern 
Maine. For more information see the Trust for Public Land  and Royal River Conservation Trust 
websites.   
Located just 10 miles from Lewiston-Auburn and 25 miles from Portland, the Talking Brook property 
is home to a 6 mile family-friendly trail network that is and will continue to be open to the public and 
winds through shaded mixed hard and soft woods across scenic brooks and waterfalls.     
The proposed rail/trail that you are considering would provide a way for pedestrians and cyclists to 
connect with the new Talking Brook Public Land. This new Public Land addresses regional 
conservation needs and creates a close-to-home destination that supports health and wellness and 
expands opportunities for outdoor recreation in southern Maine. It also will support the local 
economy of New Gloucester while maintaining its rural character.  
By creating a trail on the unused corridor connecting Portland to Lewiston people would be able to 
access the new Talking Brook Public Land without creating excess motor vehicle traffic on the 
Woodman Road, a dirt road, that leads to this public land.  
The creation of the trail corridor and its access to the new Talking Brook Public Land is a win-win for 
the residents of New Gloucester and southern Maine. 
Thank you very much, 
 
Julie Fralich 
20 Gloucester Hill Road and 
402 Woodman Road 
New Gloucester 
Maine 
