Kathleen Follett
Cumberland
LD 209
Kathleen Follet
371 Main Street
Cumberland, Maine
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Transportation 
Committee:
My name is Kathleen Follett and I am a resident of Cumberland. I am writing to 
testify in STRONG support of Rep. Bell’s proposed amendment to LD 209, “Resolve,
to Direct the Department of Transportation to Implement the Recommendation of the 
Portland to Auburn Rail Use Advisory Council.”
Having this rail trail through my community would be an incredible resource for me, 
my family, and my community.
My family and friends would use this trail often for exercise, relaxing social time 
(walking) and commuting to Portland. We, as a family bike daily from 
April-December (weather dependent) and having the ability to safely bike on trails 
would be an incredible advantage.We also have friends who commute to Portland and
this would be an advantage for them as well. Along with biking, we also roller ski 
when we can, but unfortunately it is not easy to find safe roads to roller ski on. 
Having a bike path would be a huge benefit for this activity. We often drive to 
Brunswick to use the short trail they have, but it is not long nor ideal.
I can see myself using these trails many times in a week (if not daily), especially in 
the summer. I would be able to bike to Portland for errands more easily, bike or run, 
and would also use it for walks with friends.
We have traveled around the world with our bikes, and bike trails are a huge draw for 
us when choosing where we will travel. The Rail trails in Quebec Canada are a great 
example of how beneficial and popular rail trails are for all activities: biking, roller 
skiing, roller blading, walking or running to name a few. We find whenever we are on
rail trails the people who use them are friendly, happy and respectful. They often are 
families with small children or older folks looking for a safe space to walk. It 
provides a safe space for activities for all levels, and often brings communities 
together. Please keep the benefits to the many communities in mind as you debate this
amendment.
Thank you.
Kathleen Follett
