Testimony of Kim Anderson True, Freeport, in Support of LD 209 
 
Sen. Chipman, Rep. Williams and distinguished Transportation Committee members: 
 
My name is Kim Anderson True, from Freeport, and I offer this written testimony in support of LD 209, 
“An Act to Authorize Interim Use Trail on Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor.” I have been involved with 
bicycle tourism, both as a traveler and as a provider, for more than 30 years.  I was the Bicycle Coalition 
of Maine’s founding BikeMaine Ride Director, charged with developing and managing a weeklong on-
road bicycle tour for 450 bicyclists to promote bicycle tourism throughout the state.  I co-led efforts to 
create the signed 211-mile, on-road Bold Coast Scenic Bikeway in Washington and Hancock Counties, 
which was completed in 2020.  I was on the board of the national Bicycle Tourism Network, which put 
on an annual conference.  I have seen first-hand how bicycle tourism has improved the economies, 
vitality and quality of life of rural communities throughout world.  
 
Maine is a popular destination for bicyclists.  People love its exquisite natural beauty, strong cultural 
identity, opportunities for unique and authentic experiences, and ruggedness of land and people.  
BikeMaine attracted people from across the country and around the world primarily because the first 
several 300-mile tours included at least one marquee community, such as Bar Harbor, Boothbay Harbor 
or Bethel.  BikeMaine riders came back in subsequent years, bringing new riders with them, to discover 
what communities not well known outside the state, towns like Fort Kent, Lubec, Bridgton, Waterville 
and Kittery, also had to offer.  They were not disappointed, and they spent money wherever they went. 
 
In every community where BikeMaine lunched or stayed overnight, residents assisting with the event 
commented on how much fun the bicyclists appeared to be having.  They were encouraged to join in 
riding the event, but in almost every case the residents said they would not ride a bicycle on state roads.  
They felt that they did not have the skill or confidence to ride on roads shared with fast moving vehicles.  
It was disheartening that so many Maine residents believed they couldn’t be bicycle tourists in their own 
state.  
 
I have biked extensively throughout Maine, the United States and in other parts of the world. While 
most of my biking has been done on roads, I have felt more vulnerable riding in traffic in recent years 
due to driver inattention and my advancing age.  I have grandchildren now, and I want safe places to 
introduce them to the joys of bicycle tourism.  I have become an advocate for the creation of off-road 
multiuse paths to revitalize rural communities, support local businesses, promote health and fitness, 
provide safe, carbon-free options to motorized travel, and elevate the human spirit.  I am involved with 
Freeport’s efforts to build multiuse pathways that will allow vulnerable users to travel safely to points 
throughout the town and into neighboring communities. 
 
By your granting permission for the currently inactive Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor to be used as part 
of the 72-mile Casco Bay Trail Loop, the people of Maine will have a safe place to bike and perhaps hone 
their long-distance riding skills. People from Maine and away will welcome the opportunity to explore 
the communities along the trail, stopping to take advantage of the many cultural, historic and natural 
points of interest, as well as to patronize local businesses.   The Casco Bay Trail Loop has the potential to 
be every bit as successful as looped multiuse trails in other parts of the country, such as the 89-mile 
Raccoon River Valley Trail  in central Iowa, which attracts more than 350,000 users a year.   
 
Please join me in supporting LD 209.   Thank you.  
 
