 
 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Transportation:  
 
My name is Kristine Keeney, of Greenwood, Maine, and I am the Northern New England Manager 
for the East Coast Greenway Alliance, which leads the development of a connected biking and 
walking route from Calais, Maine to Key West, Florida, designed to transf orm the communities it 
connects through by offering people a safe place to commute, exercise, engage with their 
neighbors, and visit new places. I am testifying on behalf of our 3,000 members and as part of the 
leadership of the Maine Trails Coalition to u rge you to support LD 290.  
 
During the difficult days of the pandemic, the Greenway and other trails were and continue to be 
sanctuaries of sanity and havens of health for Mainers, with usage of the Back Cove Trail in 
Portland tripling and the Loon Echo L and Trust recording a 40% growth in trail use on their 
property in Bridgton from 2019 to 2020.  
 
The Alliance is a strong supporter of LD 290 for several reasons:  
 
First, because it is a key step towards creating a complete and connected transportation sy stem, 
comprised of both rail and trail corridors, that both reduce emissions and increase mobility 
options. The Maine Active Transportation Arterials  vision calls for “connecting all of Maine’s 25 
largest municipalities and over 2/3rds of Maine’s population” with multi -use trails for active 
transportation that increase safety and access to existing and future transit options, 
employment centers, and  key community destinations.  
 
Second, interim use of the Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor as the Casco Bay Trail, will still allow the 
future option of restoring freight or passenger service if it is economically viable. The  
aforementioned Maine Active Tr ansportation Arterials vision also includes the continuing 
preservation of a separate and active rail corridor that can be used for future passenger rail 
from Boston through Maine's largest population centers. The plan shows that this connected 
network doe s not require a choice between trains and trails; there are alternate routes that 
allow for both.  
 
Third , 86% of Mainers favor creating “trail until rail” corridors, if the trails could be converted back 
to rail use if needed, according to a statistically significant statewide Critical Insights on Maine  
Survey  in November 2019. Support was consistently betwe en 83 and 88% across regions and 
political parties, making it clear  that the majority of Mainers support “trail until rail.”  
 
Fourth , the economic impact from these corridors will be meaningful for the communities they 
run through. The potential economic i mpact of multi -use trails in Maine is well documented in 
analyses of existing infrastructure. According to a 2021 study commissioned by Southern Maine 
Planning and Development Commission (SMPDC), total annual economic activity supported by 
use of the Easte rn Trail is $44.6 million, including $32.1 million in sales, $12.5 million in 
earnings, over $1 million in incremental tax revenue, and 364 jobs supported in the region.  
 
 
 
 
The outdoor recreation industry has long been key to the state’s economy; generating $3 billion 
annually, ranking the Maine 5th in the country in terms of percentage of GDP created by the 
sector. This industry is also an employment driver in the state - supporting more than 30,000 
jobs, accounting for 4.9% of employment, $460 million in dir ect spending, and generating $548 
million in state/local tax revenue annually.  
 
Multi -use trail infrastructure boosts the economy by attracting new retailers and service 
providers, drawing more people to existing businesses, retaining and recruiting workf orce, 
creating transportation options to housing and employment centers, and enticing bicycle 
tourism. The creation and marketing of a world -class trail network, seamlessly connecting 
Maine’s most populous cities, towns, and communities, would be game -chan ging for Maine’s 
economic future.  
 
Fifth , it would allow a long planned multi -trail project in the region that has significant public 
support to move forward on a rail corridor that has not had a train run on it in years (last freight 
service in 20 15, and prior to termination, the sole rail customer was the B&M Baked Beans 
factory; there has never been passenger service on this corridor. By using the federal 
railbanking process, we can put this public asset to work as an interim trail, while also 
preserving  and investing in rail infrastructure (including bridges, rail beds , crossings, etc) for 
future use.  
 
Sixth , the proposed interim rail trail use takes into account the fact that an alternative rail -with -
trail design makes the construction cost of the proj ect prohibitable and introduces potential 
environmental complications  through the Royal River watershed.  
 
A rail -with -trail design with significant financial and environmental costs is unnecessary because 
there is another still -active  parallel  rail corridor that makes perfect sense to prioritize for  train 
use between Portland and Lewiston -Auburn. Thus, the best way to achieve all transportation 
system goals is to prioritize  the active Amtrak & CSX tracks for trains and to prioritize  the 
unused Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor as an interim rail trail.  
 
Lastly, 54% of Maine’s greenhouse gas emissions come from transportation; active transportation 
can provide zero -emission options, particularly along major commuting corridors. With the 
emergence  of electric bicycles or e -bikes, active transportation is an even more viable 
alternative. A regional multi -use trail network is complementary to expanding transit by 
providing critical first/last mile connections from where people live to transit, which will bolster 
ridership on existing lines and increase the potential service area for future rail expansion.  
 
For these reasons, we urge the committee to support LD 290 and vote for an “ought to pass”  
Committee Report.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to te stify today.  
 
