Kristen Knupp
Falmouth
LD 209
Kristen Knupp
327 Foreside Road
Falmouth
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Transportation 
Committee:
My name is Kristen Knupp and I am a resident of Falmouth. I am writing to testify in 
strong support of Rep. Bell’s proposed amendment to LD 209, “Resolve, to Direct the
Department of Transportation to Implement the Recommendation of the Portland to 
Auburn Rail Use Advisory Council.”
Having this rail trail through my community would be an incredible resource for me, 
my family, and my community.
My family and I would use the rail trail to enjoy nature in our community, get 
much-needed exercise, and to visit other communities by bicycle. We have teenage 
children who would love to bicycle more, but cycling on the roads is risky. They 
would enjoy the possibility of discovering new areas on a safe path, away from road 
traffic. 
We would use the rail trail year-round, on weekends as well as during the week, 
because we are retired. We would also love to take our guests, many of whom enjoy 
nature and staying healthy, to show them another side of our community beyond the 
usual tourist sights. 
In addition, in my opinion, it is very important to have access to nature as it benefits 
our overall health and mental well-being. After being locked down for many parts of 
the last three years, I think we have all realized the importance of being connected to 
nature and of active fitness for our mental and physical well-being. This would 
benefit our community in addressing these needs. 
Furthermore, this would help us to break our dependence on cars. It would be so nice 
to have access to nature and an active leisure activity without needing to use the car. 
We live in a beautiful area, but we usually have to drive somewhere for our 
recreation, and this trail would provide access to nature without needing a car. 
We would love to explore our area as well as nearby communities by bike. I could see
us cycling to Portland, Yarmouth, Freeport or beyond for a coffee or lunch, and as 
such, it would benefit surrounding communities as well as our own. The rail trail 
would provide a wonderful resource that is currently lacking in our community. 
Thank you.
Kristen Knupp
