Lacey  Lee
Portland, ME
LD 209
LD 209 Testimony
Lacey Lee
5 Poe St.
Portland, ME 04102
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Transportation 
Committee:
My name is Lacey and I am a resident of Portland. I am writing to testify in strong 
support of Rep. Bell’s proposed amendment to LD 209, “Resolve, to Direct the 
Department of Transportation to Implement the Recommendation of the Portland to 
Auburn Rail Use Advisory Council.”
Having this rail trail through my community would be an incredible resource for me, 
my family, and my community. My family and I would use the trail to enjoy all the 
beauty that Maine has to offer. It would also provide a low stress way for citizens like
ourselves to get out and support the economic prosperity of the region. We would ride
to more locations in the city and near the trail if it was put into place. We could also 
do longer rides more safely and in a more protected environment. We worry about 
each other going out on the road with cars. 
We would use the trail as often as possible during good weather. I am also 
considering commuting to my workplace and hope to utilize the trail for this purpose. 
My fiance has used roadways to consistently bike to his job for the past several years; 
unlike my fiance however, I am a less experienced cyclist and become crippled with 
fear when I consider what could happen to us out on the roads. So it would really be a
boon to us and encourage us to use active transit even more frequently and to be able 
to do that together more often. I teach, so during summer months, cycling around 
Portland and the surrounding areas is my major form of exercise during time off.
Organizations and city legislatures continue to introduce on-road, with car solutions 
to entice or convince current or potential biking populations that the city is safe for 
them to ride. However, those who have ridden bicycles in cities and on roads cannot 
be deceived; we know that until cyclists have space away from cars we cannot count 
on safety. The community benefits of trails are well known and well documented if 
the research is consulted; in cities across the globe where areas have transitioned 
away from car-emphasized areas to cycle or pedestrian emphasis, economic growth of
those areas has increased.The health of citizens improves, the quality of life improves,
and the city benefits! These are the reasons why I am firmly in support of the trail. 
Thank you,
Lacey Lee
