My name is Linda Healey;  I am a resident of Yarmouth, ME. I am writing 
this testimony in strong support of Rep. Bell’s proposed amendment to LD 
209, “Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to Implement the 
Recommendation of the Portland to Auburn Rail Use Advisory Council.” 
 
Having this rail trail through my community would be an incredible 
resource for me and my community. It would not usurp the other (active) 
rail corridor. 
I am an active senior, who walks and cycles for several miles most days. I 
know conversion of the rail corridor to a safe rail trail path would 
benefit everyone, particularly other senior men and women who want to stay 
active, but find the public roadways unsafe for their biking and walking 
activities. We would all use it to walk our dogs and grandkids. 
My family would be so excited to be able to ride from Portland to Falmouth 
and Yarmouth and beyond. I believe bike commuters would use it, too. It 
would be used in spring, summer and fall. 
I would expect it to draw active tourists.  I have personally sought out 
and used rail trails in many locations across the States and found them an 
excellent way to see the country and meet like-minded locals. Often small 
businesses, ice cream and sandwich shops thrive at trail junctions. 
 
Thank you for your attention! 
 
Linda Healey 
Linda Healey
Yarmouth
LD 209
My name is Linda Healey;  I am a resident of Yarmouth, ME. I am writing this 
testimony in strong support of Rep. Bell’s proposed amendment to LD 209, “Resolve,
to Direct the Department of Transportation to Implement the Recommendation of the 
Portland to Auburn Rail Use Advisory Council.”
Having this rail trail through my community would be an incredible resource for me 
and my community. It would not usurp the other (active) rail corridor.
I am an active senior, who walks and cycles for several miles most days. I know 
conversion of the rail corridor to a safe rail trail path would benefit everyone, 
particularly other senior men and women who want to stay active, but find the public 
roadways unsafe for their biking and walking activities. We would all use it to walk 
our dogs and grandkids. 
My family would be so excited to be able to ride from Portland to Falmouth and 
Yarmouth and beyond. I believe bike commuters would use it, too. It would be used 
in spring, summer and fall. 
I would expect it to draw active tourists.  I have personally sought out and used rail 
trails in many locations across the States and found them an excellent way to see the 
country and meet like-minded locals. Often small businesses, ice cream and sandwich
shops thrive at trail junctions. 
Thank you for your attention!
Linda Healey
