Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Committee on Transportation: 
My name is Martha Leggat and I live in North Yarmouth. In light of the incredible written, 
zoomed and spoken testimony shared (and to be sharedl), I’ve pared the many reasons I’m 
supportive of and advocating for the Casco Bay Trail, into 5 Cs: Connectivity, Community, 
Conservation, Commercial and Collaboration. 
Connectivity: The Casco Bay Trail will be a comiector of the two largest population centers in 
Maine, and all the towns in between. As a North Yarmouth resident, I would love to be able to so 
easily bike to neighboring communities. 
Community: Our rural road in North Yarmouth fosters community because people are able to 
comfortably walk and bike. Because we see each other on a regular basis outside of our cars, 
wonderful relationships are fostered. The Casco Bay Trail would create the same connections. 
Whether providing a space to meet a friend for a walk or bike ride, or a place to connect with 
familiar faces on a personal run, trails build community in ways big and small. 
Conservation: The Casco Bay Trail would provide an ideal opportunity to get away from our 
cars. Whether we use our automobiles to access recreational spaces or for commuting purposes, a 
trail provides an eco-friendly transportation alternative. 
Commercial: Businesses along the Casco Bay Trail will beneﬁt from locals spending an 
afternoon outdoors and looking for a place to take a break, or from travelers who come to Maine 
to take advantage of the trail and Maine’s other incredible natural resources. 
Collaboration: While the planning and development of the Casco Bay Trail will be a signiﬁcant 
undertaking, the collaborative opportunities in its creation have the potential to foster 
relationships, liaisons and partnerships among our town leaders, state representatives and 
supportive volunteers. This will be positive for southern Maine. 
This project provides an EXCITING vision for Maine’s future. Let’s make it happen! 
Martha Leggat 
263 Mountfort Road 
North Yarmouth, ME
