Q STATE or MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION 
16 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0010
' 
Janet T. Mills Bruce A. Van Note 
GQVERNCH COMMISSIONER fir. 
May 18, 2023 
Testimony of Meghan Russo 
Maine Department of Transportation 
Before the 131“ Legislature, Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
In Opposition to LD 209 
An Act to Authorize an Interim Use Trail on the Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Transportation, I am Meghan Russo, Manager of Legislative and Constituent Services for 
MaineDOT. MaineDOT respectfully opposes LD 209. 
LD 209 circumvents the process that was established by this committee during the 130th 
Legislature with the passage of LD 1133, currently found in 23 MRSA §75. This process 
established the Rail Use Advisory Council and guidelines for the review of non-rail recreational 
or nomecreational transportation use of state-owned inactive rail. 
Advisory Councils are established for individual segments of rail line and are charged with 
making recommendations to the Commissioner of MaineDOT, and at that time, based on the 
council’s recommendation, the Commissioner may choose to submit legislation. The purpose of 
this council is to facilitate discussion, gather information, and provide advice to the 
commissioner regarding the future use of a rail corridor identiﬁed in the petition. These 
recommendations will include the beneﬁts and costs of potential uses of the rail corridor, 
including rail and trail use, with the understanding that any non-rail use of the corridor is 
considered interim in nature. 
The ﬁnal Portland to Auburn Rail Use Advisoiy Council meeting was held on January 26, 2023. 
At this time the council has voted 7 in favor of an interim trail until rail use, 5 in favor of rail 
with trail, 1 in favor of a rail only use, and two members of the council abstained from voting. 
Commissioner Van Note is reviewing the report and recommendations and has not determined 
whether he will bring forward a resolve to this committee, at this time. 
Thank you for your consideration. As always, we are more than happy to answer any questions 
you may have. 
THE l\l/\lNE DEPARTMENT OE ’l‘R/\I\‘Sl‘OR'I‘ATl()N IS AN /\FFlRMA'I ‘l\’E ACTION - EQUAL ()PPOR'l ‘UNlT\' EMPLO\ER 
PHONE: (207) 624~IH)00 TTY USERS CALL MAINE RELAY 711 F1\X:(Z07)624-3001
