Sean Curran
Falmouth ME
LD 209
My name is Sean Curran and I live in Falmouth on Middle Rd (near the Presumpscot 
bridge) and I wanted to voice my support for the Casco Bay Trail. 
Reason's why I am for the Casco Bay Trail:
1) I am an avid cyclist that loves riding for recreation. I find our roads friendly and 
generally with enough shoulder. But, being comfortable riding with cars at speed 
should not be the minimum barrier to entry for the great fitness and health benefits of 
riding (or walking/jogging). The proposed trail would allow people to comfortably 
and safely get exercise.
2) I am an avid cyclist that loves riding in place of car trips. I am close enough to 
Portland to ride in for a cup of coffee, stop by a book store, or grab some lunch. These
trips are all short and easy and I would love to see more folks doing them on bikes. 
Having a trail that connects Portland to Yarmouth and beyond would allow for more 
people to be able to make these trips. Potentially reducing the number of cars in 
Portland.
3) I am a new father & I am very very excited about the chance to ride with my 
daughter. But living on Middle Road, I would need to take her in the car to a location 
where she would be able to ride safely. Having a sprawling trail in the neighborhood 
would allow me to give her a place to ride (or push bike) without concerns over her 
safety.
4) I just got my first electric bike, and have seen a huge uptick in usage of e-bikes 
looking out my window onto Middle Rd. I believe it lowers the barrier for getting on 
a bike fitness-wise, but all the safety concerns are the same. The trail in combination 
with increased ebike access will only increase trail usage in years to come.
5) It would bring people to Falmouth & the entire trail corridor -- I have a friend with 
a 9yo recently move to Freeport & they were asking where they should ride – I only 
felt comfortable recommending the Androscoggin bike path in Brunswick & the 
Scarborough Marsh. It would be great to have closer access. Additionally, it would be
a great opportunity for businesses in the neighborhoods that the trail passes to see 
more customers. 
5) If maintained in winter, this corridor would be very useful for winter commuting 
when roads are narrowed by snow and made slippery by ice. 
Thanks for the time reading this, I am really excited to see it come to life.
