 
Testimony  in Support of LD 209  
 
 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the 
Transportation Committee ,  
 My name is Silvia Cassano . I am speaking today on behalf of the M aine Trails Coal ition, a state -
wide, all volunteer organization  formed in 2019 to champion the establishment, use, and 
stewardship of trails in Maine.  We have supporters all over the state and are part of a growing 
movement dedicated to advancing the trails movement  in Maine .  
 
MTC supports LD 209 which will  permit an interim bicycle and pedestrian trail on 26.5 miles of 
the inactive Berlin Subdivision Rail Corridor, while preserving the corridor for future rail.  
 
Trails connect communities, bring innumerable health, economic, social, and environmental 
benefits, and provide critical access to the outdoors and alternative transportation route s and 
methods.  In recent polling availabl e on our website , 86 percent of Mainers support the idea of 
“trail -until-rail” – using currently idle railroad beds for trail use, until such time as rail use 
proves viable. This support holds true regardless of age, geography, or political affiliation.  
 
Too often, trails and trains have been at loggerheads on projects like this. The Maine Trails 
Coalition believes that dynamic is unnecessary. We have made it a point to support restoration of 
rail service in places where it makes sense, and to encourage a trail -until-rail approach in places 
where that is not realistic. Over time,  multi- use trails and bikeways will preserve these corridors 
for potential future rail use – and in the meantime, they will bring untold benefi ts to the 
communities they connect.  
 
Well -planned, well -maintained, connected, off -road, multi -use trail corridors have made a 
difference in Maine already, and have tremendous impact in other states where they exist. Let’s make it happen here in Maine ! 
 
Please reach out to us if you would like to learn more.  
 Thank you all for your time  and for the opportunity to comment today.  
 Silvia Cassano  
Project Coordinator  
Maine T rails Coalition  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Thank you for your support and consideration.  
 Sincerely,  
      
 
Carrie Kinne and Gabe Perkins  
Co-Coordinators, Maine Trails Coalition  

