May 13, 2023 
 
Dear Maine Legislature Transportation Committee 
 
I write in support of LD209, which would authorize a rail trail on the 
unused corridor connecting Portland, Falmouth, Cumberland, Yarmouth, North 
Yarmouth, Pownal, New Gloucester, and Auburn. 
 
I am a Portland resident. We recently moved back to Portland from many 
years away, and I have been disappointed in the provision of safe cycling 
routes in and around the city. I used to cycle daily and now do so only 
occasionally. That means more driving and less personal fitness. 
 
Portland is the largest city in the state, yet lacks non-automotive 
access. The harbor defines one side, and then two Interstates and active 
railway lines sever many connections into and out of the city. One can 
only fault the city so much for its failure to create safe cycling routes 
when there are so few options available within its control. 
 
LD209 would help greatly in providing self-powered access into and out of 
Portland, and in addition provide links to may surrounding communities. 
Please support this bill. 
 
Many thanks 
Stephen Patriquen 
694 Allen Ave. 
Portland, ME 04103 
 
207 329-7301 
Stephen Patriquen
PORTLAND
LD 209
May 13, 2023
Dear Maine Legislature Transportation Committee
I write in support of LD209, which would authorize a rail trail on the unused corridor 
connecting Portland, Falmouth, Cumberland, Yarmouth, North Yarmouth, Pownal, 
New Gloucester, and Auburn.
I am a Portland resident. We recently moved back to Portland from many years away, 
and I have been disappointed in the provision of safe cycling routes in and around the 
city. I used to cycle daily and now do so only occasionally. That means more driving 
and less personal fitness.
Portland is the largest city in the state, yet lacks non-automotive access. The harbor 
defines one side, and then two Interstates and active railway lines sever many 
connections into and out of the city. One can only fault the city so much for its failure 
to create safe cycling routes when there are so few options available within its control.
LD209 would help greatly in providing self-powered access into and out of Portland, 
and in addition provide links to may surrounding communities. Please support this 
bill.
Many thanks
Stephen Patriquen
694 Allen Ave.
Portland, ME 04103
207 329-7301
