TRANSPORTATION RESOURCE FLEXIBILITY FOR THE FUTURE 
In Opposition To LD 209 
Sylvanus Doughty, Portland, Maine 
18 May 2023 
FUTURE VISION 
Although a proposal placed before a hypothetical 
15 member legislative committee could result in 
a minority vote of 7 ought to pass, it would likely 
not reach the ﬂoor for consideration. 
The split decision in the RUAC Berlin Subdivision Recommendation may reﬂect the 
uncertainty that surrounds this proposal. It is not yet known whether society can 
continue to rely solely or substantially on individual units of movement. The transition 
to electriﬁcation will require massive amounts of clean power and natural resources 
from throughout the world. It is currently problematic that it can be accomplished in 
the compressed time frames proposed or mandated. 
Because of this uncertainty, and the mandate to combat climate change, the ability to 
provide transportation in the future will likely require diverse options. Twenty year 
planning, as put fon/vard by the Transportation Department, should include a focus on 
being able to provide, or at the very least preserve the option for high volume 
transportation wherever available. 
With the anticipated constrained availability of government funding going forward, low 
volume recreational uses should not be prioritized in transportation funding. Or at 
least those uses should be put in places * that do not jeopardize the ready availability 
of rail infrastructure in the medium to long term, unburdened by costs imposed by 
prior trail construction. The above could be within the scope of a Twenty Year Plan. 
In 1982, if I were asked if Amtrak would ever 
operate in Maine, I would have regarded that 
as irrational thinking. Yet, just less than 
twenty years later, Amtrak did just that. 
The need for alternative transportation methods might come sooner that currently 
anticipated. And decision making, legal barriers, land use conﬂicts and construction 
inertia in the political and economic system slowing electriﬁcation may force 
transportation decisions different to those currently contemplated.
The report focusses solely on the 
portion of the Berlin Subdivision 
from Auburn to Portland. 
Keeping the above in mind, it should be pointed out for the record that the existing 
combined and in place rail network north and east of Portland surrounded bya 
growing population base provides a route directly to within walking distance of the 
business district and waterfront of Portland, which continues to grow as the major 
commercial hub of southern Maine. 
The upgraded Brunswick branch through Freeport connects with the Berlin Subdivision 
track from Auburn and Lewiston at Yarmouth Junction in Yarmouth, which then runs 
through Yarmouth, Cumberland and Falmouth. These lines combined form a Y shaped 
rail system. The RUAC summary does not recognize this linkaqg. 
Thus, rail infrastructure running from both Brunswick and Lewiston, through 
Yarmouth, Cumberland and Falmouth to the city center and waterfront of Portland can 
serve economic growth in the Greater Portland area. Commuter trains could operate 
from both Brunswick and Lewiston, or further from Augusta and Rockland if future 
conditions demand and possibly limited by commute times. The Berlin Sub track also 
passes near Pineland, and the proposed Roux Institute site in Portland is a short 
walking distance from the line. The RUAC summary does not recognize these linkages. 
While not deemed a direct part of the corridor study, increased parking demand on the 
Portland peninsula is already problematic and without the ready possibility of 
alternative transportation will likely affect future development. The RUAC summang 
does not recoqnize this. 
Thank you for your consideration of these comments. 
NOTES 
Track status: From Brunswick to Yarmouth Junction is active rail (Downeaster & freight). From Yarmouth to 
East Deering was active until 2015. Along the peninsula to the waterfront was active until 1984, but is now 
used by the Portland Narrow Gauge. The Brunswick branch line to the CSX mainline from Auburn runs 
through Portland, but does not give direct access to the city center and relies on local transit for the link. 
* About potential uses for any proposed trail to include marathon races, there is already an alternative in 
southern Maine that could allow 26 mile marathon races, should those trail advocates entertain such 
use. The Eastern Trail from South Berwick to South Portland has substantial portions already in place and 
will, when completed, extend over 60 miles.
