Tom Miller
Yarmouth
LD 209
I am writing to testify in strong support of Rep. Bell’s proposed amendment to LD 
209, “Resolve, to Direct the Department of Transportation to Implement the 
Recommendation of the Portland to Auburn Rail Use Advisory Council.” As a 
resident of Yarmouth, parent of 3 school-aged children, and someone who commutes 
to Portland and Scarborough daily, it's difficult to express how excited I am for the 
prospect of a traffic-separated trail connecting Portland to Auburn. One of the reasons
we chose to move to Yarmouth after returning to the region was the number of 
traffic-separated trails connecting the town that allow us to enjoy biking/walking to 
the grocery store, school, soccer, little league, etc. I strongly support a trail-until-rail 
option that would enhance the options we already have in Yarmouth and extend for 
additional commuting distances. I also bike commute to Portland (although not as 
frequently as I would like) and have bike commuted in different cities throughout my 
life (including Portland, Boston, Salt Lake City); when I try to convert others to that 
option explaining that it's the most impactful activity I do for my mental health, one 
of the biggest barriers is fear of cars on roads with variable shoulders. For me it's all 
about removing barriers to chip away at active transportation and recreation and a trail
corridor would do that. A trail corridor would enhance options for short distances 
with around town trips for kids and adults, as well as further distances for both 
recreation and non-recreation purposes. I therefore am writing in strong support of the
recommendations of the Portland to Auburn Rail use Advisory Council, and to 
advocate for the DOT to permit the conversion of 26.5 miles of the Berlin Subdivision
Rail Corridor to an interim bicycle and pedestrian trail. I've had the opportunity to sit 
on councils addressing trail development, and my understanding from the research 
I've been exposed to is that trail development always adds value to communities that 
invest. A bicycle and pedestrian trail will be a timely and crucial investment for our 
communities, our environment, and our health. Sincerely, Tom Miller, Yarmouth, ME
