




















Tony Donovan
Maine Rail Transit Caoltion
LD 209
Included with testimony are comments submitted to Berlin RUAC
To:Maine Legislature Transportation Committee
From:Maine Rail Transit Coalition
Tony Donovan, Director
Date: May 17, 2023
Re:LD 209 to Implement the Recommendations of the Mountain Division Rail Use 
Advisory Council– OUGHT NOT TO PASS
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and members of the Transportation 
Committee, 
My name is Tony Donovan.  I live in Portland, and I was a member of the Berlin Rail 
Use Advisory Council.  This RUAC was a case study in good intention gone bad.  
While the MeDOT thought they had come up with a system of determining the 
highest and bets use of the state-owned railway corridors, what actually happened was
a process hijacked by a special interest group with significant national funding and 
organizational skills.
I could list the many problems with this process, beginning with a legislative act that 
allowed trail advocates to dominate the council, while allowing only 2 rail interests.  
Then a consulting firm hired by the state was seriously compromised in that they also 
worked for the Eastern Trails, designing trails.  This same consulting firm had 
completed a rail to trails plan for PACTS and this same firm was hired by MeDOT 
too, among other items in their scope of services is to consider conversion of the state 
railroads to trails.
The information provided by the consulting team was not just weighted in favor of 
rails, but it was basically a rehash of work already done by trails groups, using 
economic impacts figures that were vetted against themselves.  This was true of all 
their data collection, including referring to their own previous studies that said among
other things that these corridors cannot be used for train service.
It was a mess.  When questioned on their data, the responses often came from 
MeDOT, responses that did not correct mistakes, or answer questions.  When asked 
how a trail use can generate more spending by a user than a rail, they did not even 
bother to answer.  This process was all about trails. 
As you are experiencing right now, this national organization is well versed in 
organizing support, and lots of emails.  Usually based on incomplete or incorrect 
information, and always getting as many people to support their position as possible, 
providing the email bullets that were repeated over and over again in the comments.  
 
The most egregious of the issues in the Berlin RUAVC Final report is the claim that 
the vote of seven (7) of fifteen (15) members is considered a majority.   Seven (7) IS 
NOT a Majority. 
Two (2) members of the council abstained, because the information and process were 
too confusing to make a decision for their towns.  Five of the RUAC Members, 
including representatives of the Cities at either end of the corridor voted, in a 
compromise with the trails folks for a Rail with Trail Recommendation.  The only rail
operator on the Council voted to leave the rail no trail. 
Those who voted to remove the railroad infrastructure for a recreational trail included 
the Maine Trails Alliance, the Bicycle Coalition of Maine and the regional 
transportation authority PACTS, an organization that had already commissioned a rail
to trail study – by this same consultant.  The two towns that voted to remove the rail 
for a trail were both less than 12 miles from the City of Portland, a distance identified 
as how far is convenient for biking.  Nothing was going to change their minds and 
they were not about to compromise.  
NO.  No, do not allow the state department of transportation to accept the 
recommendation of this special interest minority vote from a RUAC process which 
was a failure.
NO.  LD 209 must be voted “OUGHT NOT TO PASS”
Meantime, the Maine Department of Transportation should act to restore these 
railroads for passenger train services, in the name of the Climate and in the name of 
the future generations of this state.
--
Anthony J. Donovan, Director
 Maine Rail Transit Coalition
84 Middle St.  Portland, Me. 04101
(207) 329-6732 Mobile
Mailto: MElikesRail@Gmail.com
 
Train Time
