May 18, 2023 William H. Dunn, Jr. Testimony 
 
L.D. 209 1 
 TESTIMONY OF WILLIAM H. DUNN, JR. 
BEFORE THE TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE 
LEGISLATIVE DOCUMENT (LD) 209 
MAY 18, 2023 
 
Thank you Senator Chipman, Representative Williams, and Members of the Transportation 
Committee.  My name is Bill Dunn.  I live at 10 Sunset Point Road in Yarmouth. 
 
I am testifying today and submitting written testimony in strong support of Representative 
Art Bell’s proposed amendment to LD 209, “Resolve, to Direct the Department of 
Transportation to Implement the Recommendation of the Portland to Auburn Rail Use Advisory 
Council.”  I have two strong reason to support this amendment. 
 
The first reason is that I have been both a financial and significant sweat equity supporter of the 
construction of the West Side Trail (WST) in Yarmouth since construction started in July 2011.  
There are two phases to the WST.  Phase 1 is a primitive trail that runs over 8 miles from the 
Tyler Technologies parking lot on the east side of Route 1 to the power plant on Cousins Island.  
It is suitable for activities such as walking, running, mountain biking, and snowshoeing.  The 
total length of Phase 1, including parallel and side trails, is over 10 miles. 
 
Phase 2 runs from the other side of Route 1, in the Exit 15 Park & Ride of I-295, almost to the 
North Yarmouth town line.  It is being built to Universal Access (UA) standards and once The 
Last Mile is completed, hopefully later this year, will total about 2½ miles of UA trail, the 
longest in the region.  Being built to UA standards means it is also suitable for use by people 
using mobility devices (crutches, walkers, wheelchairs, etc.). 
 
The Casco Bay Trail will run alongside the Exit 15 Park & Ride and connect with the WST at 
that location.  As a result, the 75% of Yarmouth residents who have easy access to the WST will, 
via the WST, have easy access to the Casco Bay Trail, and vice versa. 
 
My second reason has to do with the fact that I am on the Board of the Royal River Conservation 
Trust (RRCT).  The Casco Bay Trail will pass close to, adjacent to or through many properties 
which RRCT either owns or on which it holds a conservation easement.  As such, the Casco Bay 
Trail will provide more of the public with safe, off-road access to these properties. 
 
For these reasons, I urge the Committee to vote ought to pass on LD 209. 
 
I am happy to answer any questions you might have or provide additional information.  My 
contact details are: 
 
William H. Dunn, Jr. 
wdunn@sunsetpoint.biz  
(207) 847-9342 
