A R Natural Resources Council of Maine 
3 Wade Street ~ Augusta, Maine 04330 ~ (207) 622-3101 ~ Fax: (207) 622-4343 ~ www.nrcm.org 
Testimony in Support of LD 846, 
An Act to Require Direct Wine Shippers 
to Comply with Maine Beverage Law 
Sarah K. Nichols, NRCM Sustainable Maine Director, March 15, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs, my name is Sarah Nichols, and I am the Sustainable Maine Director 
for the Natural Resources Council of Maine (NRCM).l I appreciate this opportunity to testify in 
support of LD 846, because the current exemption for direct-to-consumer wine from the bottle 
bill is imposing unfair costs on the system and leading to inefﬁciencies in the program. 
NRCM is a dedicated advocate of extended producer responsibility (EPR) programs, Where 
producers are responsible for the post-consumer recovery of the waste product created by their 
businesses rather than local governments" or taxpayers. Maine has nine successful EPR laws on 
the books, and the oldest and arguably most successful oneof those is the bottle bill.‘ In general 
We do not support exemptions for any of these programs because it inequitably allows so-called 
“free-riders ” to push costs of their Waste onto others, and threatens the effectiveness of the laws. 
The problem with excluding some wines from the bottle redemption program is that the 
manufacturers of these Wines did not register with the state and initiate a deposit of 15 cents; and 
consumers of wine did not pay the deposit on these bottles. Some consumers may recognize that 
they did not pay a deposit on the wine and elect to send the empty bottle through the municipal 
recycling system, where it imposes costs on the local taxpayer. (It’s especially important to keep 
glass out of municipal recycling systems and into the bottle bill where it is best managed.)2 More 
often, the consumer puts the empty wine bottle in with their other returnables, which leads to 
several undesirable scenarios: 
> If the redemption center m recognize that a Wine bottle is not eligible for a deposit, 
then it’s sent home to the frustration of the consumer where it ends up in municipal waste 
streams and costs taxpayer money. 
> If the redemption center does not recognize that it’s not a part of the program, then they
’ 
pay a 15-cent deposit back to a consumer that never paid in. Then, the redemption center 
11 Maine's EPR programs include those for: Beverage containers, Mercury-containing thermostats, auto-switches, 
and lighting, electronic waste, cell phones, architectural paint, unused pharmaceutical drugs, and packaging. 
2 Glass packaging is a sustainable source of packaging because it is far less toxic than plastic and is highly reusable 
and recyclable, but it’s value as a recyclable commodity is often overshadowed by the cost of collection and 
transportation to recycling facility, which can be a significant expense for municipal taxpayers. The deposit—return 
system provides for the glass to be collected for recyclingvand sorted by color, and provides the funding and 
mandate needed to get it to market. The glass that goes through municipal recycling systems, however, is lower 
quality and has a higherlikelihood of being used for low-end applications such as road base or landfill cover. It's 
also important to keep glass separate from the rest of the waste stream because the breakage can contaminate 
the other recycling streams.
may or may not be reimbursed by the participating wine manufacturers upon pick up of 
the containers.V 
o If a participating wine manufacturer doesn’t take back the unregistered container, 
then the redemption center is out 15 cents and has to deal with managing the 
abandoned wine bottles;'
- 
o If a participating wine manufacturer does take it back for processing, then it is out 
a 4.5-cent handling fee plus 15 cent deposit reimbursement paid to redemption 
centers, and all costs associated with pick-up and processing the glass. 
It’s also worth noting that the direct-to-consumer wines that are currently exempt from the bottle 
bill may very well be captured by the new EPR for Packaging law that will be implemented in 
the next few years. Under that law, they will report to a new packaging stewardship organization 
each yearon the amount of glass sold into the state and pay a corresponding fee to help 
municipalities manage the material. Also of note, both the bottle bill and the EPR for Packaging 
laws have exemptions for small producers, so some of the direct-to-consumer wines may end up 
remaining to be exempt by virtue of being small. Vi
- 
We urge the Committee to vote Ought to Pass on LD 846 because the most environmentally 
responsible, fair, and effective way to manage empty wine bottles is through Maine’s bottle bill 
program. I am happy to answer any questions. _
