 
Richard A. Bennett                                                                                                        3 State House Station  
Senator, District 18                                                                                                  Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Fax: (207) 287-1527 *  TTY (207) 287-1583  *  Message Service 1-800-423-6900  *  Web Site: legislature.maine.gov/senate 
 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
LD 1192, “An Act Regarding the Composition of the Judiciary” 
3 April 2023 
 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on the Judiciary.  I am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and I have the honor of 
serving the people of 14 communities in Western Maine in the State Senate.  I am here to 
introduce LD 1192, “An Act Regarding the Composition of the Judiciary.” 
 
We are all aware of the legal maxim: “justice delayed is justice denied”.  The backlog of cases in 
our court system is denying justice to many Mainers.  According to testimony jointly heard 
before this committee and the Appropriations Committee on which I serve, under the best of 
circumstances it will be 2028 before the backlog in our district and superior courts might be 
eliminated.  It has been proposed that new judgeships and other judicial department positions be 
created.  While these proposals should be considered, at the same time we should ask the 
question about whether the current composition is fit for purpose.   
 
One place to look for reform and rebalancing of resources is the composition of the Supreme 
Judicial Court.  There are currently seven members of the Law Court, including the chief justice 
and six associate justices.  The bill before you proposes over time to reduce the number of 
associate justices to four, bringing the size of the Law Court to five, and to shift those judgeships 
to the Superior Court and the District Court.  With two law clerks assigned to each Law Court 
justice, the bill over time would also shift those four positions to the lower courts as well. 
 
There are 15 states that have five members on their supreme courts or equivalent, including our 
neighboring states of New Hampshire, Vermont and Rhode Island.  This is not an unusual 
composition.   
 
Furthermore, the Law Court has much discretion in quantity of cases for which it issues written 
opinions (as opposed to memoranda of decision).  Over the past few years the numbers of written 
opinions have varied widely.  Over the past eleven years this number has averaged 147.2 per 
year, and ranged from a high of 234 (2017) to lows of 65 and 63 (2021 and 2022, respectively).  
Even maintaining this average, a Law Court of five justices, each with two law clerks, would be 
producing fewer than 30 opinions per year per justice. 
 
As we look this year to help Maine people find justice in our court system, I hope you will 
consider the reforms proposed in this bill while we look at funding issues and urge the Governor 
to fill vacancies existing as well.  I would be pleased to address any questions you may have. 
Thank you. 
 
