/\ A Maine State Bar A S S D C I A T I 0N Cllrmer U4] ﬁt I Sill 
April 3, 2023 
Sen. Anne Carney, Chair 
Rep. Matt Moonen, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary 
Maine State Legislature 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Re: Comments of MSBA regarding LD 1192, Composition of the Judiciary 
Dear Sen. Rotundo, Rep. Sachs, and Members of the Appropriations and Financial Affairs Committee; 
Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen, and Members of the Judiciary Committee: 
On behalf of the Board of Governors of the Maine State Bar Association, we are pleased to provide 
comments in opposition to LD 1192, An Act Regarding the Composition of the Judiciary. We agree 
with the spirit of the bill which seeks to add more trial judges, but we believe this goal should be 
accomplished without removing justices from the Maine Law Court as proposed in LD 1192. 
Additionally, we believe that the Judicial Branch needs more than the two new trial judges proposed 
in this bill. 
About us. The Maine State Bar Association is a statewide trade association chartered in 1891 by the 
Maine Legislature. The Association currently represents approximately 3,000 attomeys in the State in 
both public service and private practice. The Association maintains 28 separate sections covering nearly 
every ﬁeld of law practiced in Maine, from Administrative Law to Workers’ Compensation Law. Access 
to justice is a key element of our mission, hence our strong and longstanding interest ir1 issues pertaining 
to the Judicial Branch. 
Discussion. LD 1192 proposes to add a single justice to the Superior Court and add a single judge to the 
District Court, and to accomplish such additions in a revenue neutral manner, LD 1192 would reduce the 
number of Associate Justices on the Maine Supreme Judicial Court from six to four. We support the 
addition of new trial judges, but we oppose the removal of two justices on the Law Court. 
With regard to reducing the number of justices on the Law Court, we believe this would be detrimental to 
justice in Maine. Maine’s current Law Court is comprised of seven (7) members, which allows for 
members of diverse backgrounds to review cases of great signiﬁcance to the people of Maine. Having 
seven (2) members is also important to provide a buffer in the event one or more justices need to recuse 
themselves from participating in any given matter before the Court either because of prior relationships to 
attorneys or parties (which is common in a small state like Maine), or because they participated ina 
matter at the trial court level. If the Court were reduced to ﬁve (5) members, decisions would be made by 
only three justices. If two members were to recuse themselves, a decision could be made by just two 
members. 
Turning to the issue of adding more trial judges, we support the addition of more such judges — but not at 
the expense of removing Law Court Justices. Moreover, we believe more than two new trial judges are 
needed. In this regard, we think a better direction than LD 1192 is the proposal in the Govemor’s original
MSBA Comments re LD 1192 
April 3, 2023 
Page2 
Biennial Budget, which our Association supported. That proposal recommended the addition of four new 
district court judges to assist in reducing the backlog of dockets that were brought to the forefront during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. These additional judges will help our courts work through the current backlog 
of dockets and ensure that the doors to Maine courts remain open to all Mainers on a timely basis. 
Conclusion. Thank you for the opportunity to provide these comments on LD 1192. If you have 
questions or need additional information, please do not hesitate to let us know. 
Sincerely 
Stacy O. Stitham 
President, Board of Governors 
cc: Angela Armstrong, Executive Director 
Rachel Okun, Chair, MSBA Legislative Committee 
James I. Cohen, Verrill Dana, LLP 
Clara McConnell, Maine Street Solutions
