S HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
j AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Amy Roeder TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
46 Blackstone Street 
Bangor, ME 04401 
Residence: 207-370-5517 
Amy.Roeder@legisla_ture.maine.gov 
May 9, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Amy Roeder Presenting 
LD 1368, An Act to Ensure Fairness in Unemployment Beneﬁts by Clarifying Laws 
Regarding Labor Organizations 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and Housing 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on Labor and 
Housing. My name is Amy Roeder, and I represent House District 23 which includes a portion of Bangor. 
Thank you for the opportunity to introduce LD 1368, An Act to Ensure Fairness in Unemployment 
Benefits by Clarifying Laws Regarding Labor Organizations. 
This bill is about creating fairness among our workers. 
LD 1368 establishes that a claimant for unemployment beneﬁts who is a member of a labor union is 
considered to meet the requirement to actively seek work to maintain eligibility for unemployment 
beneﬁts if that claimant uses and complies with the placement services of the union hiring hall in seeking 
employment. 
Unions like IBEW Local 104 have reemployment services available to their workers that help facilitate 
their continued work. Workers utilize these services every now and again when they are searching for 
another employment opportunity, which I believe should count as a work Search as currently required 
under our Unemployment Insurance system. 
Further, LD 1368 adds consideration of whether fringe beneﬁts are substantially less favorable than those 
prevailing for similar work in the locality in determining whether work is suitable for purposes of the 
unemployment insurance program. Finally, the bill provides that work is unsuitable for a claimant if 
acceptance of that Work would prevent that claimant from maintaining membership within their labor 
organization. 
Thank you for your consideration. I am happy to answer any questions you may have, although there will 
be labor experts who testify after me who may be able to better answer your questions. 
District 23: Part of Bangor
