Maine Forest Products Council  
The voice of Maine’s forest economy 
       
535 Civic Center Dr ive, Augusta ME  04330  207- 622- 9288   www.maineforest.org  
 
Testimony in Opposition to  LDs 1471 , 1508 and LD 1564 
 
“An Act to Amend Provisions of the Maine Metallic Mineral Mining 
Act” 
 
“An Act to Ensure a Strategic Approach to Maine’s Energy Transition 
by Imposing a Moratorium on Lithium Mining ” 
 
“An Act to Eliminate Metallic Mineral Mining Activities Without a 
Permit”  
 
April 13, 2023 
Patrick Strauch, Executive Director  
 
Hello  Senator Brenner , Representative Gramlich  and members of the Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources . I am Patrick Strauch from Exeter, Maine, and the 
Executive Director of the Maine Forest Products Council (MFPC). I am submitting 
testimony  today in opposition to the second block of mining bills up for consideration, 
LDs 1471, 1508 and LD 1564. 
 
The Council opposes LD 1471, “An Act to Amend Provisions of the Maine Metallic Mineral Mining Act” for one simple reason, we feel that this bill is duplicative of the efforts made by this committee during the  passage  of the Maine Metallic Mineral 
Mining A ct. For this reason , we would prefer that the committee use a vehicle from the 
first block of bills , such as LD 1363, to advance the issue. 
 The Council opposes LD 1508, “An Act to Ensure a Strategic Approach to Maine’s Energy Transition by Imposing a Moratorium on Lithium Mining.”  We oppose this bill 
because lithium mining does not pose the water quality risks associated wi th other 
metallic mining . The  extraction process for lithium is more similar to rock quarries that 
are used throughout Maine , which are regulated differently due to their low er risk 
factors. These open pit mines should continue to be allowed under the rock quarry laws.  
 The Council also opposes LD 1564, “An Act to Eliminate Metallic Mining Activities Without a Permit.”  We oppose this bill because the current rules differentiate between 
exploration  and advanced exploration  in recognition of the site disturbance created by 
the various methods. “Exploration” activities have minimal environmental impact, so there is no reason to erect  roadblocks for landowners who are looking for more in- depth 
information about the resources t hey own on their lands. 
 
Please vote ‘Ought not to pass’ on LDs 1471, 1508 and 1564. Thank you for your consideration. 
 
