TESTIMONY for Maine’s Legislative Committee on  the  Environment & Natural Resources 
From Ralph Chapman, Bucksport 
Date April 13, 2023 
Re LD 1564 An Act to Eliminate Metallic Mineral Minin g Activities Without a Permit 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and other  members of the Joint Standing Committee on the 
Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Ralph  Chapman from the Hancock County town of 
Bucksport.  I am a retired research scientist (Appl ied Physics), educator, and Maine legislator (eight  years 
during the 125 th , 126 th , 127 th , and 128 th  legislatures).  At that time, during the most rece nt legislative review 
of Maine’s mining laws until now, I represented the  only House District that has had commercial metal 
mining in the past century.  I am familiar with man y issues that were considered during the six year 
legislative processes that resulted in the current Metallic Mineral Mining Act. 
  
The bill before you, LD 1564 An Act to Eliminate Me tallic Mineral Mining Activities Without a Permit, is 
intended to correct two serious problems involving unregulated mining activities, and untimely baselin e 
monitoring.  Because of a drafting error, for which  I take full responsibility, I am requesting the ad dition of 
two words on line 22 of the draft text before you: insert, between the words “...sampling,” and “advan ced...”, 
the words “exploratory activity”, to read “...inclu des the bulk sampling, exploratory activity, advanc ed 
exploration, extraction...”  Adding these two words  would remove potential ambiguity which otherwise 
might come only from context.  It is my understandi ng that the primary bill sponsor, Rep. Milliken, ha s no 
objection to this alteration. 
  
The enabling legislation for the current mining reg ulations directed the Department of Environmental 
Protection to develop major substantive rules (now about a hundred pages).  In their wisdom, they chos e to 
separate mining into four categories or phases, eac h with its own set of requirements and constraints:
exploratory, advanced exploration tier one, advance d exploration tier two, and mining. 
  
Unfortunately, the result leaves exploration withou t regulation or oversight, and requires baseline 
environmental monitoring only in the middle (advanc ed exploration tier two) section rather than at the
beginning.  (Though hard to imagine in practice, th is actually creates an incentive for an applicant t o 
intentionally alter the mine site prior to the base line monitoring to relieve them of adhering to what  might 
have been a more stringent background condition.) 
  
  
Baseline monitoring should happen at the beginning of mining activities, and all 
mining activities should be regulated with governme ntal oversight for the reasons 
given below.  Passage of LD 1564 would accommodate this viewpoint. 
  
  
The mining industry business model is to generate a  revenue stream from sales of the valuable commodit ies 
extracted from below the earth’s surface.  Expenses  related to protecting human health, water quality,  or the 
environment do not contribute to the revenue stream , and therefore, come entirely from profits.  The i ndustry 
cannot regulate itself because it has a fiduciary r esponsibility to generate profits to provide a retu rn to its 
investors, and that represents an irreconcilable co nflict of interest with society’s interest in prote cting health 
and the environment.  Therefore, it is necessary fo r the government to regulate the industry.  That th ere is 
such a tremendous financial incentive for the minin g industry to do the absolute least required in pro tecting 
health and the environment is why the industry suff ers a world-wide reputation as a major polluter. 
  
There may be opposing views related to onerous burd ens upon the industry created by the permit applica tion 
processes, which you will have to weigh in relation  to the needs for a clean environment, not only for
Maine’s largest industry, tourism & hospitality, bu t also Maine’s important agricultural and fishing 
industries that not only rely on non-contaminated w ater, but the public perception of non-contaminated
water. 
Ralph Chapman’s Testimony LD 1564 April 13, 2023 page   2  of  2 
  
Finally, correction of the problems noted above by passage of LD 1564, dos not address many dozens of 
other technical and policy problems in current mini ng law.  Nor would correction of all of those other
problems create an effective regulatory environment  for the mining industry, because Maine’s regulator y 
framework is based on punishing non-compliance, an ineffective method for any industry that can do mor e 
harm than it can afford. 
  
An advantage to assembling a regulatory framework b ased on preventing harm, rather than punishing harm , 
is that the legislature would not be put repeatedly  in the position of trying to catch-up (unsuccessfu lly) to the 
continual changes in circumstances, complex scienti fic understanding, or technological developments 
inherent with mining. 
  
I offer my help, should the legislature choose to m ove in the direction of correcting the regulatory 
framework for the mining industry.  I note the uniq ueness of Maine in having, already in hand, two of what I 
believe are the three necessary ingredients to do s o. 
  
Thank you for your attention, I am happy to answer any questions (now or at any time). 
Ralph Chapman 
