 
1 
  
Janet T. Mills 
                Governor 
 
 STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF PROFESSIONAL 
AND FINANCIAL REGULATION 
OFFICE OF PROFESSIONAL AND OCCUPATIONAL 
REGULATION 
35 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 
04333-0035 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anne L. Head 
Commissioner, DPFR 
Director, OPOR 
 
 
 
March 30, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Chair 
Representative Meyers, Chair 
Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME  04333-0100 
 
RE: LD 536, An Act to Provide Natural Organic Reduction Facilities for Maine Residents for the 
Conversion of Human Remains to Soil; LD 584, An Act to Permit the Conduct of Open-Air 
Cremation at Designated Sites; LD 762, An Act to Authorize Burials with Biodegradable 
Containers, Including Tree Pods 
 
Dear Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyers and Honorable Members of the HHS Committee: 
 
The Department of Professional and Financial Regulation’s Office of Professional and 
Occupational Regulation (“OPOR”) is neither for nor against expanding opportunities for 
cremations or alternative cremations as an option for disposition of human remains.   
 
However, OPOR is opposed to placing regulatory oversight over any form of cremation or 
alternative cremation within the Board of Funeral Service.  
 
The Board of Funeral Service does not regulate crematoria, burial grounds, mausoleum, or 
cemeteries.  In addition, no licensee of the Board of Funeral Practice may be employed by any 
cemetery, cemetery association or cemetery corporation.  The “practice of funeral service” 
specifically excludes “the ownership or operation of a cemetery, crematorium, mausoleum or 
columbarium or any other facility used for burial of human remains.”  (32 M.R.S. § 1400(5))  
 
Regulatory oversight for crematoria, cemeteries, and burial grounds currently, and appropriately, 
resides in another department which has the technical staff to monitor public health issues, 
including those that relate to water, soil, and air quality.   
 
If regulatory oversight were added to the Board’s statutory jurisdiction, there would be a significant 
fiscal note since this would be an expansion into a new area of regulation for the Board.  Expenses 
would include additional staff including inspectors and staff with expertise in water, soil, and air 
quality.  Staff and expertise would also be required to develop and provide the required training 
  
  
  
PHONE: (207)624-8624 (VOICE)    
GARDINER ANNEX, 76 NORTHERN AVENUE, GARDINER, MAINE  
  
 
TTY users:  call Maine Relay 711    
  
  
FAX: (207) 624-8637  
   
 
2 
 programs.  In addition, if these bills pass and jurisdiction continues to reside outside of the Board of 
Funeral service, the Board will not need any rulemaking direction as it may only need to 
promulgate rules to update some terminology.  The Board already has general statutory authority to 
update its rules. 
  
Each of the bills would have differing fiscal impact – and the impact depends on the degree to 
which each bill transfers responsibility to the Board of Funeral Service.  Costs for APA 
rulemaking alone could be absorbed and funded with existing resources.  Costs for additional 
staff, contracts, and legal support are estimated to increase the Board budget by about $250,000 
annually.  The Board does not have sufficient resources to support these additional costs and fees 
for newly regulated entities would need to cover these costs. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to share our opposition to transferring responsibility for crematoria to 
the Board of Funeral Service.  We would be happy to answer any questions at the work session. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Anne L. Head 
Commissioner, DPFR 
Director, OPOR 
