April 21st, 2023 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1181 
“An Act to Allow for the Recall of an Elected Municipal Official for Any Reason” 
 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover, and the distinguished members of the Committee on State and 
Local Government, my name is John Andrews and I represent House District 79 in western Maine. I am 
here to present my bill LD 1181, “An Act to Allow for the Recall of an Elected Municipal Official for Any 
Reason.”  
 
Currently, if a town does not have a charter or a recall ordinance an elected official can only be recalled 
if they commit a crime like OUI, domestic violence or embezzlement. The way that the law is currently 
written an elected school board member or select board member can break all of their campaign 
promises and still serve out a full term. Their constituents have no avenue for a real time redress of 
grievances with their elected official. They are stuck with them and bad actors know this and will do as 
much damage as they can while they hold their seat for a full term.  
 
A municipality must have a specific charter or ordinance to allow for a recall for any reason. Creating a 
legal document and having the entire legislative body of a town vote on it costs time and money.  If an 
elected official does something worthy of recall the voters would have to go through exhaustive legal 
steps that take months if not a year to gain the ability to recall an elected official with a charter or 
ordinance.  
 
Voters should be able to determine who they want to represent them locally at all times.  
 
This bill removes those barriers to direct recall elections for every municipality in the state. LD 1181 
streamlines the recall process so that the voters of a town do not need to have a legal background or 
hire an expensive lawyer to begin the long arduous process of drafting and implementing either a town 
charter or recall ordinance. Voters would simply have to go to their town office and file a petition that 
clearly states the reason for the recall election.  The petitioner would then need to collect 10% of the 
municipality’s turn out in the last gubernatorial election in signatures of registered voters.  
 
Getting the signatures of 10% of the turn out of the last gubernatorial election is a built-in check and 
balance against frivolous recall petitions.  It is a much more reasonable threshold for the average citizen 
to meet to recall an elected official instead of creating, vetting, voting and implementing a town charter 
or ordinance.  That is cost prohibitive and difficult for citizens without a law degree.  Getting 10% of 
signatures only costs time and hard work.  That is much more democratic than having to jump over 
bureaucratic hurdles to recall an elected official. 
 
I ask you to please support the ability of the people to have a no cost and real time redress of grievances 
with local elected officials who break their word or do not act in the best interest of their communities.  
 
Thank you for your time and commitment to public service.  
Rep. John Andrews 
