§”é‘l;'$'i>i 49 Community Drive, Augusta, ME 04330 
BOARDS Telephone: (207) 622-3473 Fax: (207) 626-2968 
Pueuc EDUCATION Aovoc/\TES Webs“ “’“’“"m*""”Web-com "‘ 
MalneSchoulSnperinlendenlslmiodulion 
TESTIMONY IN OPPOSITION TO 
L.D. 1 181 
AN ACT TO ALLOW FOR THE RECALL OF AN ELECTED 
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL FOR ANY REASON 
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and members of the State and Local Government Committee. I am Steven 
Bailey, executive director of Maine School Management Association, testifying on behalf of the legislative 
committees of the Maine School Boards Association and Maine School Superintendents Association, in opposition 
to L.D. 1181. 
First and foremost, L.D. 1181 would repeal Title 30-A, §2505, sub-§9, which states: “Limitation of Recall. An 
elected ofﬁcial may be the subject of a recall petition under this section only if the ofﬁcial is convicted of a crime, 
the conduct of which occurred during the off1cial ’s term of ofﬁce and the victim of which is the municipality. ” The 
statute was passed in 2011 and has been on the books without change since that time. Based on the deﬁnition 
found in §2604, sub-§2 and §2604, sub-§3, L.D. 1181 would impact recall of school board members. This 
testimony will mirror the testimony of these two associations provided for L.D. 1102, An Act to Authorize a 
Recall Election for a School Board Member, where both associations opposed that bill. 
By eliminating the condition, by repealing the limitation of recall, once again, similar to L.D. 1102, municipal 
ofﬁcials including school board members would be subject to recall for any reason. Within this proposed bill there 
is no threshold noted as to the level of participation needed by a municipality to determine the result of the recall 
election. The majority could be as low as 1-0 “if a majority of voters vote to remove the ofﬁcial, the recall takes 
effect on the date and election results are recorded pursuant to this subsection. ” (Title 30-A, §2505, sub-§8). 
Another issue is that this bill defers to individual towns to decide what can trigger a recall. Yet, it too, like L.D. 
1102, provides a poorly deﬁned standard for recall and would seem to permit a town to adopt a very low threshold 
for recall. Where education is a state function — public education - and there are many school units that are 
comprised of several municipalities where it seems to make more sense to have a single, standardized method for 
recall. 
This bill is bad for municipal entities. There should be some protection for the municipality should an elected 
ofﬁcial commit a crime against the municipality or otherwise be untrue in their actions to the oath of office or the 
code of conduct and ethics of the municipal body. However, to allow this action “for any reason” will create a void 
in citizens being willing to take out papers to run for office. Municipal positions are difﬁcult enough as it is, trying 
to please all within a community to provide desired and expected services at a tax rate that will not exceed 
capabilities of the town. 
This bill, allowing for recall of an elected municipal ofﬁcial for any reason should not pass. MSSA and MSBA 
both oppose and urge the State and Local Government Committee to vote Ought Not to Pass. 
Steven W. Bailey Eileen E. King 
MSBA Executive Director MSSA Executive Director
