Corrine Cavanaugh
Augusta
LD 1761
My name is Corrine Cavanaugh, live in central Maine and work for Riverview 
Psychiatric Center. I’ve worked for RPC for a little over a year and on the ‘good’ days
I see patients thriving in a safe environment, making meaningful relationships with 
staff and peers, and cruising along the road of recovery. As with any job there are of 
course ‘bad’ days, however these types of days for a Mental Health Worker (MHW) 
often come along with extreme situations that can, and have, ended in hospital trips 
for staff. As MHW’s, we are the front line for the hospital. If there is an unsafe 
situation with a patient, we are the ones de-escalating, or at times going hands-on 
when there is an assaultive or otherwise aggressive patient. Although we all know 
what we signed up to do, it is an incredibly physically and emotionally taxing job. 
Being verbally assaulted for up to 12 hours per shift, seeing co-workers be harassed or
assaulted or injured, or literally standing between/in front of violent patients are all 
things I have personally witnessed or have happened to me. As with many other 
places of work we are short staffed, but that can be unsafe for those working the floor.
Another side-effect of being short staffed is having to potentially be mandated which I
have personally experienced. Getting a call at the end of a long 12 hour shift only to 
hear that I’m required to stay for another 4 hours is certainly not ideal. As MHW’s we
all do our best to provide and maintain a safe environment for unsafe patients to 
recover in, but ultimately this job comes with risk and at times extreme physical 
and/or emotional risks. While we all do our best to minimize these events, to stay 
positive, and to leave work feelings at work, I know we all take some of these feelings
home with us, or bring them into work the next day. I find myself unable to sleep after
harder shifts, sometimes kept awake by anxiety and adrenaline, sometimes by pulled 
muscles and bruised limbs, sometimes even by my worry for coworkers who were 
punched, kicked, scratched or bitten during shift. While we enjoy what we do, this job
takes a huge toll on all of us in every way imaginable. Thank you for your time. 
