Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and member s of the Labor and Housing committee, I submit 
this testimony in support of LD 1761 - An Act to Include Certain Mental Health Workers Under the 1998 
Special Plan for Retirement.   My name is James Bailey, a licensed social worker employed at Dorothea 
Dix Ps ychiatric Center in Bangor.    
A number of professionals who work in high -stress and high -risk public safety roles are eligible for the 
1998 Special Retirement Plan, and this commonsense bill proposes to add those who work with some of 
the most acutely ment ally ill patients in the State.   At both State hospitals, Riverview Psychiatric Center 
and Dorothea Dix Psychiatric Center, direct care staff everyday work with those that courts have 
deemed individuals at imminent risk of harm to themselves or others, una ble to care from themselves, 
incompetent to stand trial, and not criminally responsible by reason of insanity.   These are mental 
health workers, nurses, social workers, occupational and recreational therapists, housekeeping, ward 
clerks, psychiatrists, psy chologists, and more.    
These are also individuals who are trained and must always remain aware of their surroundings to 
ensure the safety of the patients in their care and their own personal safety – aggression and assaults 
from patients can be sudden, sw ift, and severe. The staff are also subject to daily vicarious trauma of 
helping to support patients who have experienced unbelievable levels of neglect, exploitation, and 
abuse imaginable – and in some cases, staff must also provide unbiased, professional  support and care 
to those that neglect, exploit, and abuse others.    
The US Bureau of Labor Statistics1 reported that the incidence rate of intentional injury to staff by 
another person in psychiatric and substance abuse hospitals was six times that of a nursing care facility, 
ten times that of a medical hospital, and twelve times that of all healthcare and social assistance, and an 
astounding sixty times that of all industry.   The State of Maine Market Study Report2, published 
November 20, 2020, reports a  15% pay gap of state workers compared to regional market rates – so not 
only are staff at much greater risk of violence, but they are underpaid to do so.  
I would recommend a friendly amendment that strikes the exclusion of case management from the 
bill.  Intensive Case Managers, or ICMs, provide direct contact care with patients as a routine part of 
their job descriptions and often times 1:1 in the community where there is even greater risk due to lack 
of back up staffing or institutional safeguards (e.g.,  walkie -talkies, panic buttons).  
Thank you for the consideration of this bill and extending to a segment of Maine’s public workforce the 
opportunity to work in a demanding and sometimes dangerous job and benefit from eligibility for the 
1998 Special Retire ment Plan.   I will be happy to answer any questions and can be contacted at 
jrt.bailey@gmail.com  
  
  
  
1. https://www.bls.gov/iif/factsheets/workplace -violence -healthcare -2018.htm  
2. https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/5615   
