To whom it may concern,  
My name is Joshua Abraham, I live in Burnham, Maine and I work at Riverview Psychiatric 
Center. I have been working here for 5 years and it has been a very rewarding career. That said with 
every up there is a down and often I am left wondering is it worth it. Over the last five years I have seen 
great people who are passionate about helping those who need it the most quit, get hurt, and even die. 
There are a handful of stories I can tell you that are horrible but let me explain who I am so you 
can truly understand. I am an ex-wrestler; college football player and I stand 6’4 weighing in at 375 lbs. I 
am one of if not the largest staff at this hospital. I have been in very violent situations my whole life, and 
this is a small idea of how rugged I really am. At RPC we are at a true disadvantage to a long career.  
 The first time I was around violence was my first hour off orientation. A patient who stood 6’2 
weighing 275 pounds became assaultive. It took 5 of us to even come close to restraining him. In that 
moment a doctor got punch in the testicles, and a Mental Health Worker got his nose broke. This same 
patient had also broken my finger later on in my career.  We do not use tasers, riot shields, pepper spray 
or any aid at all. Our saving grace comes down to our words, and the fact that we throw bodies at the 
this. When you see these horror stories on the news, of someone killing their parents, spouse, or 
random person they almost always end up here.  I have seen a peer’s leg get snapped, a nurse gets her 
protective glasses smashed into her eyes with a tray, and I have seen the few that have made it all 30 
years hobble around, one foot in the grave one foot in the hospital when they should have been able to 
retire years prior.  
We are having a very hard time finding people who want to work in this environment, and who 
can blame them. They walk the halls and see their future, and its not hard to see that there are only 2 
big men who made it through the full 30 years and still can’t retire out of the hundreds that tried, got 
hurt and either quit or were forced to leave due to injury. Not to mention the fact that if you get hurt 
doing your job here, it gets taken from an employee’s earned time. There is no safety net at all, but what 
would help tremendously is being able to retire in either 25 years or at 55 years of age. Whatever may 
come first. It used to mean something working for the state of Maine, it meant you gave your life for a 
better future, you gave your service to the society of Maine, and you were rewarded with good life 
insurance, a fair wage and fair retirement. Unfortunately, a lot of us would no longer be here if it were 
not for our compassion to this population.   
We are the gate keepers of the sickest population in the state of Maine, we are your brothers, 
sisters, mothers, fathers, sons and daughters. Please help us the way we help Maine.  
It is a great honor to address this panel and all of us at RPC believe in you and are thankful to 
have you as our officials.  
 
Sincerely  
Joshua A. Abraham 
 
Joshua Abraham
Burnham
LD 1761
To whom it may concern, 
My name is Joshua Abraham, I live in Burnham, Maine and I work at Riverview 
Psychiatric Center. I have been working here for 5 years and it has been a very 
rewarding career. That said with every up there is a down and often I am left 
wondering is it worth it. Over the last five years I have seen great people who are 
passionate about helping those who need it the most quit, get hurt, and even die.
There are a handful of stories I can tell you that are horrible but let me explain who I 
am so you can truly understand. I am an ex-wrestler; college football player and I 
stand 6’4 weighing in at 375 lbs. I am one of if not the largest staff at this hospital. I 
have been in very violent situations my whole life, and this is a small idea of how 
rugged I really am. At RPC we are at a true disadvantage to a long career. 
 The first time I was around violence was my first hour off orientation. A patient who 
stood 6’2 weighing 275 pounds became assaultive. It took 5 of us to even come close 
to restraining him. In that moment a doctor got punch in the testicles, and a Mental 
Health Worker got his nose broke. This same patient had also broken my finger later 
on in my career.  We do not use tasers, riot shields, pepper spray or any aid at all. Our
saving grace comes down to our words, and the fact that we throw bodies at the this. 
When you see these horror stories on the news, of someone killing their parents, 
spouse, or random person they almost always end up here.  I have seen a peer’s leg 
get snapped, a nurse gets her protective glasses smashed into her eyes with a tray, and
I have seen the few that have made it all 30 years hobble around, one foot in the grave
one foot in the hospital when they should have been able to retire years prior. 
We are having a very hard time finding people who want to work in this environment,
and who can blame them. They walk the halls and see their future, and its not hard to 
see that there are only 2 big men who made it through the full 30 years and still can’t 
retire out of the hundreds that tried, got hurt and either quit or were forced to leave 
due to injury. Not to mention the fact that if you get hurt doing your job here, it gets 
taken from an employee’s earned time. There is no safety net at all, but what would 
help tremendously is being able to retire in either 25 years or at 55 years of age. 
Whatever may come first. It used to mean something working for the state of Maine, 
it meant you gave your life for a better future, you gave your service to the society of 
Maine, and you were rewarded with good life insurance, a fair wage and fair 
retirement. Unfortunately, a lot of us would no longer be here if it were not for our 
compassion to this population.  
We are the gate keepers of the sickest population in the state of Maine, we are your 
brothers, sisters, mothers, fathers, sons and daughters. Please help us the way we help 
Maine. 
It is a great honor to address this panel and all of us at RPC believe in you and are 
thankful to have you as our officials. 
Sincerely 
Joshua A. Abraham

