I have been employed as a registered nurse at DDPC (Dorothea Dix Psychiatric  Center)  for almost 25 
years and I`m in the hopes that LD 1761 will pass.  My employment has been rewarding all these years 
and I care deeply for my patients however  during this time frame I have been exposed to things that 
many  people do not have to encounter and yet I have to (at this time) stay  for 35 y ears in order to avoid 
huge deductions in my retirement before I can leave due to my age. I am 52 years old, I have had my 
knee totally replaced,  my age for retirement to avoid penalty is 62 (losing  6% each year before you reach 
your retirement age fo r example if I was to leave 2 years earlier at age 60, I  lose 12% off my 
pension) .  I`ve been nursing for  approximately 30 years already and at my current place of employment 
(DDPC ) I have been thrown to the floor,  punched in the face,  kicked,  bitten,  spit on, choked also exposed 
to verbal assaults (life threatened, threats to my family etc) during  my years here at DDPC, while 
working 12 hr night shifts and every other weekend.  I realize that you can encounter these things in my 
type of empl oyment but after years of enduring them (as they can happen at any time) there  comes a 
time when you can`t keep going and you look forward to a time when you can do something else in your 
life safely while you still can, being mentally / physically able  to so. Our environment of work can be 
stressful and has caused PTSD for some and we have also lost staff permanently (being injured by 
patients) while  we are trying to provide a safe and therapeutic atmosphere for them to stabilize and go 
back to thei r daily lives even though it  takes this toll on ours. I feel we should be able to retire just like 
correctional staff,  police officers,  fire department etc who fall under shorter working terms and  are able 
to enjoy their retirement without huge costs financially,  physically and mentally (we all encounter the 
same people who need our help ). We have an important job to do and the community needs us but staff 
are getting burned out, we are having trouble retaining staff and keeping staff due to the na ture of our 
job and what we have to encounter.  If you have a pension plan/ retirement in  place that supports staff`s 
overall well being , taking into consideration what I have mentioned by providing an exit plan like LD 
1761 then it will be a win/win outc ome for everyone giving people the incentive to want to do what we 
do and know they can still retire in a way that allows you to enjoy it. It will bring people in to a field that 
scares people to be honest and as you know it is a crucial job we do, pleas e assist us in any way for this 
to pass,  we need this!!!!!   
 
 
Thank you,   
 
Scott Lockhart RN  
Dorothea Dix Psychiatric Center         
 
 
