Tara Enman
Jay
LD 1761
To whom it may concern,
   Hello, my name is Tara Enman, I live in Jay and have been an employee at 
Riverview Psychiatric Center for over 5 years. I thank you all for this opportunity to 
testify and for our voices to be heard. 
 During my years at this facility, I have been involved in 2 assaults one in which my 
hair was pulled out of my head as a patient entangled their hand in my braided hair as 
well as being grabbed by the neck of my shirt as a patient swung on me. Thankfully 
both of these incidents took place at a time that we had enough staff to assist, and I 
was not seriously injured. I have also witnessed several of my co-workers be seriously
injured and have to leave in an ambulance. Some of these people were not able to 
return to work for several months, even more than a year, others were not able to 
return due to their injuries. The verbal abuse we endure on a regular basis can be just 
as debilitating and causes emotional stress which can also lead to several 
health-related issues. 
  The physical and mental toll this career takes on us is extremely difficult as we get 
older and our bodies change, even for the healthiest and physically fit, it is a proven 
fact that after 50, muscle, ligaments and tendons change. As a result of these changes 
(which include increased dehydration and brittleness), adults over 50 experience 
increased healing time. Not to mention reaction time decreases with age as well. 
Therefore, as we get older, we are at a higher risk especially for those that are still 
working at this facility after having previous work-related injuries/trauma due to 
being assaulted by patients. 
  All of us here at Riverview work together with the utmost compassion and empathy 
for our patients as we also are putting ourselves and lives on the line every day that 
we arrive to work. I am in high hopes that we too as employees of Riverview 
Psychiatric Center can get the support and compassion we deserve after dedicating 
our lives to one of the sickest populations in the state.  Thank you again for hearing 
my testimony and please support this legislature. 
                  Sincerely,
                  Tara Enman
 
