 
 
 
Testimony before the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  
in opposition to L .D. 1775, 
An Act to Establish a Clean Hydrogen Pilot Program  
 
May 2, 2023 
 
Senator Lawrence, Representative Zeigler , and members of the Committee on Energy, Utilities 
and Technology, my name is Emily Green  and I am a senior attorney with Conservation Law 
Foundation (CLF). I appreciate this opportunity to testify regarding L .D. 1775, An Act to 
Establish a Clean Hydrogen Pilot Program.  
 
CLF, founded in 1966, is a public interest advocacy group that works to solve the environmental challenges threatening the people, natural resources and communities in Maine and across New England. In Maine for almost four decades, CLF is a  member -supported organization that works 
to ensure that laws and policies are developed, implemented and enforced that protect and restore our natural resources; are good for Maine’s economy and environment; and equitably address the climate crisis.  
 While CLF recognizes green hydrogen as a promising  decarbonization strategy  for certain 
applications, there are many reasons to tread carefully when it comes to investment in this technology. CLF does not question the good intentions of L .D. 1775. However, we are 
concern ed that it may  encourage investment in hydrogen and natural gas to the de triment of 
Maine’s mandatory carbon reduction levels , contrary to its intention. Therefore, we oppose the 
bill as written.  
 
We urge Committee members not to support L.D. 1775 without  careful parameters to avoid 
greenwashing. Initially , the bill need s a more restrictive definition of clean  hydrogen. The 
lifecycle emissions associated with hydrogen use  turns  largely on its  source. Ninety -nine percent  
of hydrogen produced in this country is sourced from fossil fuels. To avoiding incenting non-
green hydrogen, it is critical that L.D. 1775 define  clean  hydrogen as that produced using 
electrolysis from zero -carbon renewable energy . Moreover, any facilities selected for a pilot 
must  be fueled by electricity generated by (1) new renewable sources  or renewable sources with 
excess power that are (2) producing at the same time the hydrogen facility is using power  and (3) 
produced near the hydrogen facility.  
 
L.D. 1775’s  proposed definition, allowing 4 kilograms of CO 2e per kilogram of hydrogen, would 
likely encompass  blue hydrogen—that created  through a steam methane reforming process and 
paired with carbon capture and storage. But blue hydrogen is not a climate solution . A recent 
study found the greenhouse gas footprint of blue hydrogen is 20 percent greater than burning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  -2-  natural gas or coal for heat and 60 percent greater than burning diesel oil for heat.1 The authors 
assumed captured carbon dioxide could be stored inde finitely without any leakage, a charitable 
and unproven assumption. Though blue hydrogen reduces direct carbon dioxide emissions, it  
increases fugitive emissions of methane, a more potent greenhouse gas. D ue to this methane 
leakage, total carbon dioxide equivalent emissions from blue hydrogen were only 9- 12 percent 
lower than gray hydrogen (that produced through a steam methane reformin g process, but 
without carbon capture) . The authors found blue hydrogen to be a losing strategy even assuming 
a low methane leakage rate, and even in a scenario  assuming the  hydrogen was produced using a 
combination of natural gas and zero emissions renewable energy.  
 
To avoid supporting technology that could actually increase Maine’s carbon emissions, it is also 
critical that the Committee impose strict limitations on the end use of  any hydrogen produced 
through a pilot program. Potential c arbon emission benefits of hydrogen use  must be c ompared 
to other reasonable alternatives . In most circumstances, electrification is more efficient, cost-
effective, safe and viable. However, there are some limited applications for which the use of 
green hydrogen may  prove ap propriate—such as high- heat industrial processes  where direct 
electrification isn’t feasible . The Committee must ensure that any hydrogen produced through a 
pilot goes only toward those limited applications. Where direct electrification is cheaper  and 
readily available, such as for heating residential and commercial buildings and the vast majority 
of transportation use cases, Maine must not pursue hydrogen.  
 
In addition to prescribing  acceptable end uses for hydrogen produced through a pilot, this 
Committee should question how the hydrogen will get to its final destination . Transportation, 
storage, and delivery of hydrogen can represent significant costs and energy inefficiencies due to 
hydrogen’ s relatively low volumetric energy density. This Committee should disallow any 
expansion of , or investment in natural gas infrastructure to support  hydrogen transport  under 
L.D. 1775.  
 
This Committee  should protect ratepayers from the fiscal implications o f the pilots under L.D. 
1775. Given unprecedented availability of federal funding for these projects, ratepayers should 
not be tapped for funding. CLF also question s the need for exemptions from distribution and 
delivery charges , effectively a ratepayer subsidy for hydrogen.  
 
As noted above , gas utilities  must not be permitted to justify long- term infrastructure  investments 
premised on the concept  of blending hydrogen into gas pipelines. This approach  runs  counter to 
Maine’s significant and ongoing investment in building electrification, the Climate Action Plan, 
and the statutory decarbonization targets . Moreover, it has additional implications for gas 
ratepayers. The Legislature (and the Public Utilities Commission) should regard all proposed ga s 
system infrastructure investments as likely to become stranded assets  burdening the dwindling 
 
1 Howarth & Jacobson, How green is blue hydrogen? Energy Sci. & Eng’r (July 2021).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  -3-  gas system rate base.  This Committee should prohibit any such investments under the auspices of 
a hydrogen pilot.  
 
Further, we note that the three pilots L.D. 1775 envisions is too large. We urge Committee 
members to restrain the pilot to only one  and to  restrict any further pilots until results are in and 
considered . 
 
CLF also opposes the exemptions  from portfolio requirements  and from en ergy efficiency 
procurement charges.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testi mony  regarding L .D. 1775.  
