 
  
1 
RE: LD 1775 An Act to Establish a Clean Hydrogen Pilot Program  
 
 
May 2,  2022  
 
To the Committee on Energy, Utilities and Technology  (EUT)  
 
RE: LD 1775 An Act to Establish a Clean Hydrogen Pilot Program  
 
Dear EUT Committee : 
 
The purpose of this letter is to provide testimony in support of LD1775 , An Act to Establish a Clean Hydrogen 
Pilot Program under consideration by the EUT committee on May 2nd in public hearing.  I am unfortunately 
unable  to attend this public hearing because I am currently  speaking on a panel discussing energy infrastructure 
constraints in New England .  
 
I am the principal  of Newline Energy  – a consulting and development Company.  I grew up in Portland, ME 
and reside in Kennebunk, ME.  My career after six (6) year s of military service has been dedicated to the Energy 
Industry.   I started Newline Energy to provide development  services to u tilities, industrial, and energy 
consumers in Maine and New England  – with a focus on natural  gas infrastructure  and Energy Transition 
projects  to include hydroge n and renewable natural gas.  
 
The Clean Hydrogen Pilot Program  provides key benefits in the following areas:  
 
Diversity of Local and Reliable Energy Supply :  Maine and New England are at an energy crossroads  – a 
transition point from legacy resources to future applications of new resources.   During this transition, we must 
maintain affordability and reliability. It will be critically important to continue to invest in and maintain our 
existing energy infrast ructure while simultaneously investing  in innovation for renewable and low carbon 
energy solutions .   We would be wise to  do both.     
 
There has been important growth and integration of Variable Renewable Energy (VRE) solutions such as wind 
and solar.  However, these VRE resources are intermittent and will require further end use applications  (such 
as hydrogen production)  to maximize the benefits of these resources. T he Clean  Hydrogen Pilot Program will 
create opportunities to optimize Maine’s renewable resources and provide diverse, local, and reliable energy 
supply solutions within  the State.    
 
Innovation and Cost Competitive Solutions:   Hydrogen is emerging as a n important  component of the Energy 
Transition.  I am c urrently involved in several hydrogen applications , but there is general agreement that wide 
scale use of Hydrogen as a decarbonization pathway will require further innovation, scalability,  and reduction  
in cost.  
 
As an active industry participant, I would be interested in supporting this  pilot program to assemble industry 
experts, deploy innovative solutions, and identify opportunities to drive down cost, increase reliability and 
generate  diversity of o ur energy supply chain.  
 
There is an appetite for Hydrogen, but we will need to solve various challenges – and a pilot program is an 
important first step.  
 
  
2 
RE: LD 1775 An Act to Establish a Clean Hydrogen Pilot Program  
 
 
 
I find it important to restate that I am both a natural gas advocate AND  a renewable energy advoc ate.  The key 
will be pioneering solutions  that optimize our existing energy infrastructure while investing in innovative 
solutions to maintain  a diverse, local, and reliable energy supply chain.  We can do both.  
 
Based on my experience providing consulting  and development services to the energy  industry in Maine a nd 
New England, I support the Clean Hydrogen Pilot Program.  Thank you for considering these  comments in 
support of this decision . 
 
        
Sincerely,        
Jeff Tounge  
 
 
              
        
By: _________________________________  
              Jeff G. Tounge    
       Principal, Newline Energy  
       jtounge@newline -energy.com      
 

