April 20, 2023  
Chairman Baldacci, Chairwoman Meyer, Distinguished  Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services:  
My name is Alan Cobo -Lewis. I live in Orono. I am the parent of two young adult sons, one of 
whom has autism and who is non verbal and who is supported by the Section 21 Home and 
Community Based Services (HCBS) waiver. I am testifying FOR LD 1037 , “An Act to Fund 
Competitive Wages for Direct Support Professionals for Persons with Disabilities ”. 
My sons are delightful and charming, and people like them both. But my son with autism 
nevertheless has challenging behaviors and significant support needs —so significant that he 
qualified for the Section 21 comprehensive waiver immediately upon turning 21. He never spen t 
a day on t he Section 21 wait list.  
And yet he went fully seven months without a single hour of HCBS -funded direct support , even 
though this large ongoing unmet need was raised at person -centered planning meetings, at the 
Legislature, and in the Governor’s office.  
Thank goodness my employer’s health insurance plan provided for autism treatment without 
age limit, as that was the only direct support he received at that time.  
How? Because the private insurance was reimbursing at a rate sufficient to pay behavior 
technici ans $20/hour (157% of the then -current minimum wage) at a time that the state was 
congratulating itself for reimbursing at a rate sufficient to pay direct support professionals only 
$15.94/hour (125% of the then -current minimum wage).  
Because of the state’ s utter and ongoing failure, we ultimately had to step in with a significant 
investment of private family resources: we purchased another home, so my son could receive 
shared living support from an extra -familial resource.  
There was much celebration when t he Legislature finally passed direct care worker 
compensation at 125% of minimum wage . But I  warned at the time that that was a pre -
pandemic recommendation. And indeed, it has proven uncompetitive in today’s  labor market.  
Most Americans do not live in a co mmand economy. The labor market is a free market. Please 
stop expecting people with disabilities to live with in the constraints of the historically 
discredited command economy.  
I understand that the Department is engaging in market rate studies, but it unc lear to me that 
such studies adequately account for conditions in the labor  market. If they pay enough to 
engage community service agencies —but don’t pay enough to fully staff the programming of 
people with disabilities who are served by those agencies —then they’re not meeting people’s  
needs.  
Throw the command economy on the ash heap of history where it belongs. Pay market rates. 
Pay 157% of minimum wage so that people with disabilities with significant support needs can 
finally get those needs met.  
