I\/I H CA Maine Health Care Association 
Testimony of Angela Cole Westhoff, President and CEO 
Maine Health Care Association 
To the Joint Standing Committee on Health & Human Services 
April 20, 2023, at 1:00 PM 
In Support of LD 1037 
An Act to Fund Competitive Wages for Direct Support Professionals for Persons with Disabilities 
Good afternoon Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and distinguished members of the 
Health and Human Services Committee. My name is Angela Westhoff, and I serve as the 
President & CEO for the Maine Health Care Association. We represent approximately 200 
nursing homes, assisted living, and residential care facilities (also known as Private Non-Medical 
Institutions or PNMls) across the state. Our mission is to empower members to ensure the 
integrity, quality, and sustainability of long term care in Maine. 
I am here to testify in support of LD 1037, An Act to Fund Competitive Wages for Direct Support 
Professionals for Persons with Disabilities. This bill, as drafted, amends the law governing 
essential support worker reimbursement under MaineCare or state-funded home and 
community-based services and residential services by increasing the rate for the labor portion 
of reimbursement to 157% of the minimum wage as well as reimbursement for taxes and 
benefits directly related to the labor portion. 
Long term care facilities are facing a staffing crisis. In fact, workforce levels in our sector are the 
lowest in 13 years. Data published in January 2023 by the American Health Care Association 
(AHCA) indicates that nursing homes nationwide have lost over 210,000 jobs since the 
beginning of the pandemic. While other health care sectors have started to rebound or are 
approaching pre-pandemic staffing levels, long term care is still struggling. Specifically, nursing
homes and assisting living facilities are the worst impacted for staffing compared to other 
health care sectors for the period of February 2020 - December 2022, according to the Bureau 
of Labor Statistics. 
Our caregivers should be commended for their incredible service to Maine's aging population. 
We have embraced increased wages and benefits, recruitment and retention bonuses, and 
other measures to improve employee retention. However, our funding is limited, so we can 
only raise wages so much. Furthermore, wage compression is a serious concern. This occurs 
when newly-hired, less-experienced employees earn close to what current employees make. 
Increasing the reimbursement rate for labor to 157% of the minimum wage would help address 
this problem. While we know wages alone is not the only factor in successful recruitment and 
retention of workers. However, higher pay can help long term care providers compete with 
other industries to address work force challenges. Based on numerous studies that indicate 
higher pay leads to higher retention and performance, we believe that this bill would 
meaningfully help improve our workforce challenges. 
Thank you for the time to testify. l'd be happy to answer any questions.
