      
 
One City Center , 4th Floor  · Portland, ME 04101 · phone 207.879.0347 · fax 207.879.0348 
www.chomhousing.org  
April 20, 2023  
 
Re: LD 1037, An Act to Fund Competitive Wages for Direct Support Professionals for Persons 
with Disabilities  
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, my name is Cullen Ryan, and I am the Executive Director of Community Housing of 
Maine or CHOM.  I am also the parent of a 26 -year-old son with Intellectual/Deve lopmental 
Disabilities (ID/DD).  I serve as Chair of the Maine Coalition for Housing and Quality Services, a 
coalition of some 4000 people, consisting primarily of parents, that focuses on housing and quality 
services for people with ID/DD.  I also serve a s chair of the Maine Developmental Services 
Oversight and Advisory Board (MDSOAB).   
 
I am testifying in strong support of LD 1037, An Act to Fund Competitive Wages for Direct 
Support Professionals for Persons with Disabilities .  This bill amends the law g overning essential 
support worker reimbursement under MaineCare or state -funded home and community- based 
services and residential services by increasing the rate for the labor portion of reimbursement to 
157% of the minimum wage as well as reimbursement fo r taxes and benefits directly related to the 
labor portion. As in current law, the reimbursement is tied to any increase in the minimum wage, which includes an annual cost -of-living increase, and the same cost -of-living increase is applied to 
reimbursement  for related taxes and benefits.  
 
I urge the Committee to support any bills which would increase the rates for HCBS, specifically 
rates for direct support professionals (DSPs).  
 
The reduced rates over the past decade have made it progressively harder for providers to hire and 
retain direc t care staff, or DSPs, the people who work with my son and others with ID/DD.  These 
essential support workers are the very nexus of the system of care  for people with disabilities .  
These positions  need and deserve to be paid sufficiently – enough to want  to work in the field to 
begin with, and to stay in the field once they’ve begun their careers.   
 
When agencies can’t hire anyone, when agencies can’t retain anyone, people like my son won’t 
receive services.  Providers have had extreme difficulty hiring and retaining staff for quite some 
time.  Moreover, hiring and retaining essential support service staff has become substantially  more 
difficult recently as starting hourly wages have increased
 dramatically amid the workforce crisis .  
Starting wages at pla ces like McDonalds and Walmart  have increased to more than $16/hour – 
more in some areas of the state.  These positions require far less training/credentials than DSPs, 
have increased.  Essential support workers such as DSPs ought to be paid a professional  salary 
commensurate with the work expected and the training required.  
 
And providers need to be able to keep their doors open while paying a wage high enough to 
accomplish this.  The current rates, though improved in recent years thanks to investments by the 
Legislature and the Department, are not yet sustainable for providers to succeed in hiring and 
retaining staff, which has worsened amid the current workforce crisis.  This ultimately hurts the 
recipients of needed services.  The situation has become di re for providers across the state.  
 
LD 1037, and other bills before this Committee during this Legislative Session, would increase  
DSP rates so providers can compensate staff equitably which will drastically help agencies attain 
and retain dedicated direct  support professional staff, ensuring that people in Maine with ID/DD 
have access to quality, continuous, essential support services.    
 Thank you for the opportunity to comment.   
Board Members  
 
Aaron Shapiro 
Retired Community Development 
Director , Cumberland County  
Board President  
 
Chip Newell   
Principal , The NewHeight Group  
Board Treasurer  
 
Gunnar Hubbard  
Principal , Thornton Tomasetti  
Board Secretary  
 
David Birkhahn  
Vice President , TD Bank  
 
Elizabeth Boepple  
Partner , Murray, Plumb, & Murray  
 
Jan McCormick 
Retired Affordable Housing  
Investment Executive  
 
Luc Nya  
Mental Health Program Coordinator  
OCFS/Corrections Liaison, Maine DHHS  
 
Angela Perkins 
Westbrook Resident  
 
Thomas Ptacek  
Huston Commons Caseworker ,  
Preble Street  
 
Jennifer Putnam  
Executive Director , Waypoint  
 
Jennifer Rottmann  
Deputy Director/CFO , The Genesis Fund  
 John Ryan  
President , Wright -Ryan Construction  
 
Bill Shanahan 
Co-President , Evernorth  
 Kimberly Twitchell 
Maine Regional President , NBT Bank  
 
Staff Contacts  
 
Cullen Ryan  
Executive Director  
 
Kyra Walker  
Chief Operating Officer  
 
Sarah Gaba 
Occupancy Manager  
 
Mara O'Shea  
Compliance Manager  
 
Meredith Smith  
Supportive Housing Manager  
 
Chris Harmon 
Controller  
 
Jenn y Jimino  
Bookkeeper  
 
Vickey Merrill  
Advocacy Director  
 
Bree LaCasse  
Development Director  
 
Brian Kilgallen  
Development Officer  
 
Robyn Wardell  
Development Officer
