Darla Chafin
Augusta
LD 1037
LD 1037 An Act to Fund Competitive Wages for Direct Support                     
Professionals for Persons with Disabilities
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Health and Human Services Committee: 
My name is Darla Stimpson Chafin and I live in Augusta.  I am the parent and 
guardian of a 55-year-old woman with special needs.  She has lived at home, in a 
facility in El Paso,Texas, Pineland Center, and several group homes. I am testifying 
for LD 1037. 
I have watched Direct Support Professionals since the Pineland days.  I believe in 
those days, their pay was more livable than it is now. The improvement is only in the 
title and the struggle for agencies to provide needed training beyond pill dispensing.  
A few have seen great changes as a result, but it has been a fragile growth. A bit over 
a year ago, I was chatting with a DSP who had just graduated from high school. She 
was excited about and liked her job, but when she told her peers where she was 
working, they laughed at her and told her she was too smart to be doing that. They 
offered to help find her a better job.  Another excellent DSP resigned because the 
urgent overtime was taking more time than it should and she missed her new baby. 
Since then she has returned to school on a flexible schedule and makes up the 
financial loss by offering house cleaning services on her own schedule.  
Mr. Saucier and Ms.Probert are correct in stating they have made improvements in 
reimbursement for direct support workers, but this is simply an acknowledgement of 
how low the salaries were.  Other than a quick phone call to find care for their 
children and to say good night, DSPs have never indicated any resentmentwith long 
ER stays. When we could leave sometimes well into the night, they carefully made 
sure Cathy and I had back up before leaving. The additional funds sound most 
impressive, and they should be commended, but we also must realize that the reduced 
staffing means more stress on those who remain, less activities for those who need 
added care in public, and those who are on waiting lists.
Evaluations of needs and careful understanding of this amazingly diverse population 
are needed.  But having a knowledgeable and adequate workforce is critical. And if 
something isn’t done now, we will be back to tucking away the families on waiting 
lists and the “difficult cases” (For years, I was told my daughter was “just spoiled” 
even after she was in 24 hour care). I know we can do better, but we first must 
recognize our needs.  
Thank you for your consideration of this matter.

