Testimony of Jess Maurer on Behalf of 
the Maine Council on Aging to the Committee on 
Health and Human Services 
B U U N B I |_ In Favor of LD 1037 - An Act to Fund Competitive 
, __ , t _ t _ _ Wages for Direct Support Professionals for Persons 
U N I N G with Disabilities 
Delivered in person on April 20, 2023 
M00! > IGIIIG TIE WIY IT Sllﬂlllﬂ BE 
Greetings, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and the members of the Joint Standing Committee 
on Health and Human Sen/ices. 
My name is Jess Maurer, and I am the Executive Director at the Maine Council on Aging (MCOA). The 
MCOA is a broad, multidisciplinary network of 135 organizations, businesses, municipalities, and older 
community members working to ensure we can all live healthy, engaged and secure lives with choices 
and opportunities as we age at home and in community settings. I am testifying in favor of LD 1037. 
For nearly a decade, legislators have struggled to ﬁnd solutions to Maine’s severe and pervasive 
essential support and care workforce shortage. You have created commissions, raised wages, 
established COLAs, reduced waitlists, and created a marketing campaign and an oversight committee. 
The Departments of Health & Human Services (DHHS) and Labor have done so much to grow this 
workforce too, from training and job fairs, sign-on and retention bonuses, to career ladders and 
navigation, they’ve done it all and much more. 
While we have made real progress in valuing this workforce, a recent report from DHHS demonstrates 
that all of these efforts have only stabilized this workforce, not addressed the growing gap in care that 
goes undelivered to thousands of vulnerable people who are entitled to receive this care.1 
We are at a critical point in trying to solve this workforce shortage. We need to invest more resources to 
grow and sustain a larger workforce. LD 1037 proposes to do just that. However, we don’t know how 
many workers we need to attract to these jobs to ﬁll the care gap, nor what we’ll need to pay them to 
compete with other industries. ls 157% above minimum wage the right place to set the labor portion of 
the MaineCare rates? We don’t know. 
Without more data, we continue to guess at what kind of investment is needed to grow this workforce. 
Without understanding the number of workers needed to ﬁll the hours of approved care and the waitlists, 
we will not know how much money to allocate to the problem. 
If the Legislature is prepared to appropriate sufﬁcient funds to enact LD 1037, we are fully in favor. 
However, we offer this support knowing we might need to come back again, when we have the data we 
need to fully understand what solutions are needed, to ask for additional funding. 
Thank you. 
1 
https:[/www.maine.gov/dhhs/sites/maine.gov.dhhs/files/inline-files/AAAA-Annual-Report-February-2023.pdf
