14 Maine Center for 
1 Economic Policy 
Testimony in support of LD 1521, An Act to Support the Essential Support Workforce by 
Promoting Enhanced Reimbursement and Benefits and Encouraging Information Sharing 
Josie Phillips, Policy Fellow 
4/20/2023 
Good afternoon, chairpersons Baldacci and Meyer, and all members of the Health and Human 
Services Committee. My name is Josie Phillips, and I am representing Maine Center for 
Economic Policy. l am testifying in favor of LD 1521 because it would increase efficiency and 
stability throughout Maine’s direct care economy, particularly for the workers who currently 
receive inadequate compensation for the difficult and necessary services that they provide. 
Bolstering Maine’s direct care workforce is critical from the perspectives of fairness, public 
health, and statewide economic prosperity. It is a matter of fairness because direct care workers 
are currently undervalued and inadequately compensated for the indispensable work they do in 
caring for our loved ones, even when accounting for recent pay increases. For instance, by law, 
the average wage for direct care workers must be at least 125% of the state minimum wage, 
which amounts to $17.25 per hour in 2023.‘ However, this is only 72 cents more than the living 
wage for a single person with no children in Maine ($16.53 per hour in 2023) and is far less than 
the living wage for a person with one dependent spouse ($25.90 per hour) or a single parent of 
one child ($34.84 per hour)." These low wages are then compounded by limited access to job 
benefits like paid leave or employer-sponsored health insurance. “‘ The inadequate 
compensation for direct care workers also contributes to racial and gender economic injustice 
across our state, as direct care workers are overwhelmingly women and disproportionately 
immigrants and people of color." LD 1521 would help to mitigate these issues by ensuring that 
direct care workers are not paying for their mileage — a necessary part of their job — out of 
their own pocket and by directing the Department of Health and Human Services to explore the 
feasibility of state-provided health insurance for these workers. These efforts, while likely still 
insufficient to meet the needs of Maine’s direct care workforce, would provide these workers 
with some of the stability they need to provide for themselves while caring for our loved ones. 
Supporting the direct care workforce through increased compensation is also critical froma 
public health perspective because the ongoing worker shortage has serious ramifications for the 
people who rely on the care these workers provide. A shortage of staffing means that too many 
Mainers are unable to receive care at all. When people who need this type of care cannot 
receive it, they are at risk for poor health, hospitalization, and even homelessness. “ Those who 
are fortunate enough to receive care may not receive the level of care that they need to remain 
healthy, as workers are stretched too thin among too many patients, limiting the amount of time 
and energy they can spend on each patient. When workers are fairly compensated, though, 
client health outcomes improve, especially in home care settings where the relationship 
between worker and client is an integral part of care.“ 
Finally, ensuring adequate compensation for direct care workers is critical for statewide 
economic prosperity. When people in need of care services cannot receive them professionally, 
it often falls upon family members to fill this vacuum. When these family members attempt to 
balance the sometimes intensive needs of their loved one along with the responsibilities of their 
job, their workplace productivity can understandably suffer. If the loved one requires a 
significant level of attention, then the family caregiver may reduce hours at work or drop out of 
Board of Directors 
Lee Webb, Ph.D., Chair Sandra Butler Stacy Mitchell 
Barbara Burt, Vice-chair Maulian Dana Matt Schlobohm 
Pamela Cox, Treasurer Marcus HLl'lChll1S luty \/an Hook 
Ben Chin, Secretary Jessica l\/laurel
the labor force entirely. This incurs costs to employers, in the form of increased employee 
turnover, and to the broader economy, in the form of lost productivity. A soon-to-be-released 
report from MECEP finds that elder care responsibilities are costing Maine employers $9 million 
per year in turnover costs and the Maine economy over $1 billion in lost productivity. These 
statistics are almost certainly an undercalculation because it only accounts for people who have 
dropped out of the labor force entirely, and is limited to dropouts and turnover due to elder care 
responsibilities. When factoring in people who reduce hours, or those whose labor force 
participation is diminished due to caring for loved ones with behavioral health challenges or 
disabilities, the economic costs of the direct care workforce shortage are almost certainly 
significantly higher. 
When we fail to provide direct care workers the compensation they deserve in return for the 
support they provide to our loved ones and economy, we all suffer for it. LD 1521 would provide 
some of this compensation to direct care workers while reducing costs and adding efficiencies 
for direct care employers. Because this bill builds upon previous efforts to strengthen and 
adequately compensate Maine’s direct care workforce, which in turn safeguards public health 
and prosperity, we encourage this committee to vote yes on LD 1521. 
‘Maine Department of Labor, "Upcoming Labor Law Changes in 2023.” 
https://www.maine.gov/labor/news_events/article.shtml?id=9811145 
" 
MIT Living Wage Calculator. https://livingwage.mit.edu/states/23 
"‘ 
National Conference of State Legislatures, "Supporting Direct Care Workers: Recruitment and Retention 
Strategies. ” https://www.ncsl.org/health/supporting-direct-care-workers-recruitment-and-retention-strategies 
‘V 
PHI, "State Profile — Maine." https://www.phinational.org/state/maine/ 
V 
Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University, "When family can't care for older adults during COVID-19, 
who will?" https://www.jchs.harvard.edu/blog/when-family-cant-care-for-older-adults-during-covid-19-who-will 
V‘ 
Economic Policy Institute, "All states must set higher wage benchmarks for home health care workers. ” 
https://www.epi.org/publication/state-home-health-care-wages/
