Serving the Maine autism community since 1976    
 
 
 
April 19, 2023 
 
Representative Osher, Senator Tipping, and members of the Health and Human Services Committee, I am 
Lisa Morgan, consultant and advocate for crisis supports for autistic people. I am a consultant, Life 
Coach, and trainer of suicide prevention resources for autistic people. I’m writing on behalf of the Autism 
Society of Maine as a member of the Board of Directors. 
 
I support LD 1037 - An Act to Fund Competitive Wages for Direct Support Professionals for Persons 
with Disabilities. 
 
We, as a state, need to create a competitive job environment for essential support workers who are 
reimbursed under MaineCare or state-funded home and community- based services and residential 
services.  
 
These individuals are providing important services for a vulnerable population here in Maine and 
providing appropriate compensation will attract experienced, trained professionals to care for and support 
them.  
 
The wages for professionals directly providing these services need to reflect the idea of a career, instead 
of a job. 
 
In my own experience of needing a behavioral health provider for a member of my family, we were 
unintentionally harmed due to the age, training, and lack of professionalism of the provider, which was 
directly reflective of the amount of money they were being compensated for their services.  
First, that aspect got them hired at a young age, with little training. Secondly, the effort they put into 
providing services for my family member corresponded to the amount of money they were making, which 
was not much. My family member was not supported in the way they needed and deserved. I believe with 
more training, and the opportunity to compete in a competitive career market would have produced a 
service provider who could have truly helped my family member, but a competitive career market cannot 
happen without proper compensation. 
 
I urge you to support this bill to increase the rate for the labor portion of reimbursement to 157% of the 
minimum wage.  
 
Sincerely, 
Lisa Morgan M.Ed., CAS 
lisamorganconsulting@gmail.com 
 
72B Main Street, Winthrop, ME 04364
Phone: 207.377.9603 or 
1.800.273.5200
Fax: 207.377.9434
Email: asm@asmonline.org
Web: www.asmonline.org
