 
 
 
97 Main Street, Belfast, ME  04915                       207.338.6575                      mainefarmlandtrust.org 
 
 
Testimony of Shelley Megquier, Policy and Research Director, Maine Farmland Trust, before 
the 131th Legislature’s Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
 
May 1, 2023 
 
Good morning Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry. My name is Shelley Megquier and I am 
testifying today on behalf of Maine Farmland Trust (MFT) in support of the LD 1767 – An Act to 
Develop and Provide Technical Assistance for Meat Slaughtering and Processing. 
 
MFT is a member-powered statewide organization that works to protect farmland, support farmers, 
and advance the future of farming. Since our founding in 1999, MFT has helped to permanently 
protect more than 330 farms and keep nearly 60,000 acres of farmland in farming. Our Farm 
Network includes over 500 farms and, in 2022, 2,250+ individuals demonstrated their commitment 
to the future of Maine agriculture through an MFT membership. In 2022, MFT supported 48 farm 
businesses with workshops, technical assistance, and grants – delivering over 680 hours of technical 
assistance and $309,000 in business and seed grants to help businesses grow their profitability. Our 
main program areas are Farmland Protection, Farmland Access, Stewardship, Farm Business 
Planning, PFAS Support, Climate Resilience, and Policy and Research. 
  
Maine’s rural economic development depends on the economic viability of farm businesses and the 
strength of our local food system. Over the years, MFT has collaborated with farmers, food 
businesses, and economic development organizations to establish enterprises and deliver a range of 
programs and services focused on establishing a vibrant and resilient agricultural sector and food 
system in Maine. We work directly with farmers of all experience levels, including many meat and 
poultry producers, as they develop markets and grow successful businesses. In our work we have 
seen how Maine farmers are constrained by the limited capacity of meat and poultry slaughter and 
processing infrastructure. Some farmers would like to expand their operations and raise more 
livestock or poultry for local sale, but aren’t confident they will be able to access facilities to get the 
animals slaughtered and processed dependably and efficiently. Innovative solutions are needed to 
grow the supply of Maine-raised meat products available to diverse consumers and to create new 
and expanded market opportunities for local farms.  
 
There is enormous growth potential for the food sector in Maine and the sectors that support it like 
farming. In fact, Governor Mills’ 10-year economic development strategy identifies the food sector 
in Maine as one of the four areas most ripe for economic development because of the state’s 
current strengths, the growing global demand, and the potential for job creation in that sector.1 
Investment in food processing infrastructure, including for the processing and marketing of meat 
and poultry within the state, is necessary to growing this important segment of Maine’s economy. 
Improving local capacity for meat and poultry slaughter and processing also helps advance the 
state’s climate action plan strategy of “increase[ing] the amount of food consumed in Maine from 
 
1 Maine Economic Development Strategy (2020-2029): A Focus on Talent and Innovation (2019) at 14, available at: 
https://www.maine.gov/decd/sites/maine.gov.decd/files/inline-files/DECD_120919_sm.pdf   
 2 state food producers from 10 percent to 20 percent by 2025 and 30 percent by 2030 through local 
food system development.”2 This strategy recognizes the importance of growing our local food 
sector to ensure food security for the state given the supply chain disruptions that are anticipated 
to result from climate change in the future.   
  
LD 1767 builds upon the 2022 Report on Findings and Recommendations for Supporting Meat 
Slaughtering and Processing in Maine Pursuant to L.D. 493 to support meat slaughtering and 
processing in three ways3:  
1. Expanding technical assistance to processors through the University of Maine Cooperative 
Extension;  
2. Creating a Committee to explore and make recommendations on workforce training 
strategies; 
3. Funding a feasibility study that assesses the barriers to meat and poultry slaughter and 
processing in the State, identifies useful information for decision-making, and outlines 
standards for producing halal, kosher, and other religiously and culturally important meat 
products.  
 
MFT supports LD 1767 as an important contribution to addressing infrastructure needs in Maine. 
Increased technical support, better talent development and workforce strengthening, and a 
stronger understanding of feasibility for new or expanding slaughter and poultry processing 
businesses will all contribute to a broader and more reliable supply of Maine-raised meat products 
available to diverse consumers. We also recognize that as Maine’s population changes so too do 
consumer needs. Better identifying State standards for halal, kosher and other religiously and 
culturally important meat products will advance access to local meat for Maine’s diverse 
population, including its growing refugee and immigrant population. Lastly, we support LD 1767 due 
to the support it will indirectly provide to creating new and expanded market opportunities for local 
poultry and livestock farmers.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today to share our support of LD 1767. I’m happy to answer 
any questions you may have.  
 
 
2 Maine Climate Council, Maine Won’t Wait, A Four-Year Plan for Climate Action (Dec. 2020) at 13, available at 
https://www.maine.gov/climateplan/   
3 Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation & Forestry, Findings and Recommendations for Supporting Meat Slaughtering 
and Processing in Maine Pursuant to L.D. 493 (Jan. 2022) available at https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/8021   
