i 
Testimony in Support of LD 1049 April 24, 2023 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee of 
inland Fisheries and Wildlife: 
My name is Eric Ward. I'm a life-long resident of Greenville, former Piscataquis County Commissioner, 
Registered Master Maine guide and avid angler. I am here today, to testify in support of LD 1049. 
Over the years I've served on several lF8tW Fisheries Committees, including the Steering Committee 
for the current lF8tW Fisheries and Hatcheries Strategic Management Plan. I am also a member of the 
Moosehead Lake Fishery Focus Group. 
l call your attention to Volume 1, page 4 and paragraph 1 of the current lF8tW Fisheries and 
Hatcheries Strategic Management Plan. In reference to the sentence, "Prevention is the ﬁrst line of 
defense." l believe keeping the current fish barricades in place will do exactly this. 
It's no secret that bass and white perch were illegally introduced into Moosehead Lake from waters 
located 25-30 miles away. This would be approximately the same distance any new invasives would 
have if the barriers for passage are allowed to be removed. it would not be wise to create another 
source for ”bucket biologists" to move fish around in this area. 
By removing these barriers, the spread of invasive fish, such as Northern Pike, would be ever closer to 
the Moosehead Lake watershed and the many native fish species in it. These native fish are not only 
important for the enjoyment of folks but have a significant economic benefit to the area. People travel 
to this region to ﬁsh these native species that are found only here. 
The amount of shad and alewife habitat upstream of these dams is very small and insignificant 
compared to the available habitat in the drainage. 
Protection of our coldwater fisheries should be the only priority in northwestern Maine. 
We need the legislature to step in and protect our wild and native fisheries. 
Join me in advocating for our native fish. l urge you to support LD1049. 
Thank you for allowing me to testify today. 
Ciymi 
Eric Ward 
PO Box 194 
Greenville Jct. ME 04442 
207-280-0891
MANAGING MAINFS INLAND HSHERIES 
*' at _- 
, :i,~;¢' _=;.=,.;,. ‘_::-:5,- ,.\ -. . 
R5... 1 ._.;,.~..»'=~ ,1.-1 --_
I 
.' 
1 ~ 
1‘ ‘.1’ ‘:1 ;‘,‘.'* .
_ =.- . 1.» .‘1 , _; p 1 .- ,» * i‘ --I" 
B R 0 o |< T R 0 u T' 
1 -Z' 
- "I ' 
_' f §“:3 
LANDLOCKED ATLANTIC SALMON 
Maine’s native trout and salmon evolved in the absence of competing warmwater ﬁsh and 
continue to be threatened by newly introduced nonnative ﬁsh, as well as some native species. 
When new, unauthorized species are introduced, we are challenged to consider available 
resources, costs, and potential beneﬁts of any corresponding management action. With each 
invasion, the Division assesses the risks to the affected ecosystem, the conservation values 
of the native inhabitants, the values to the local community, and logistical considerations 
including the Divisi0n ’ s capacity and the cost to monitor, suppress and/ or eradicate the threat. 
Prevention is always the ﬁrst line of defense, and Maine has made signiﬁcant investments in 
regulatory, outreach, and surveillance strategies; but unlike most states, we also manage an 
active reclamation program to, when feasible, eradicate invasive species. 
It is illegal to import live baitﬁsh into Maine, dump baitﬁsh in any water, or use live baitﬁsh in 
the majority of North Zone waters. Deliberate illegal ﬁsh stocking carries a stiff penalty, and 
“Trouble by the Bucketful" signs have been posted around the state at angler access points. 
Unfortunately, introductions still occur, and early detection of new occurrences provides 
the best opportunity for early response and potential eradication. To collect information on 
new occurrences, we have integrated surveillance into a variety of ﬁeld sampling, survey, and 
monitoring efforts. These efforts include winter retail baitﬁsh inspections; routine population 
status monitoring; development, with the University of Maine, of new environmental DNA 
detection methods; and stream electroﬁshing. The Division ’s efforts to reduce new species 
invasions include the issuance of licenses and permits, adoption of restrictive ﬁshing regula- 
tions, and development of public outreach and education materials. The state also regulates 
the use, transport, and possession of live ﬁsh through a network of existing laws, rules, and 
policies. Since unauthorized introductions represent one of the greatest threats facing the 
conservation of Maine' s native coldwater ﬁsheries, additional dedicated capacity to coordinate 
and manage related Division operations would be beneﬁcial. 
Anglers’ growing afﬁnity for nonnative ﬁsheries, and their desire for the Department to 
actively manage and enhance these new opportunities, can conﬂict with the Division's respon- 
sibility to conserve what is native and unique to Maine. These new social pressures, which will 
undoubtedly increase with time, have complicated efforts to conserve Maine' s native coldwater 
ﬁsheries. 
This management challenge has resulted in a more complex statewide management system, 
which is somewhat reflected in the demarcation of North and South Fisheries Regulation 
Zones. For example, smallmouth and largemouth bass are well established in the densely 
populated South Zone, and represent the second and third most popular sport ﬁsh in Maine 
(brook trout are #1), with the Division actively managing the species as a recreational ﬁshery 
in this region of the state. 
INLAND FISHERIES AND HATCHERIES STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT PLAN 2021-2035 . VOLUMEI
