MAINE 
AUDUBON 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
% Legislative Information Office 
100 State House Station 
Augusta, ME 04333 
April 24, 2023 
RE: LD 1049, A n Act to Protect Maine ’s Inland Fzklaerzcrfrom In varive Fir/0 
Dear Chair LaFountain, Chair Landry, and Members of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife Committee: 
My name is Francesca Gundrum and I am Maine Audubon’s Policy Advocate. Maine 
Audubon is a wildlife conservation non-proﬁt — we fulﬁll our mission to “conserve Maine’s wildlife 
and wildlife habitat” by engaging people of all ages in nature through a science-based approach to 
education, conservation, and advocacy. On behalf of Maine Audubon and our 30,000 members, 
supporters, and volunteers, thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in opposition to LD 
1049, A n Act to Protect Maz' nc's I nland Fz'r/aerzcifrom In vnrivc Fish. 
Maine currently has the last remaining Wild population of Atlantic Salmon in the U.S. Because 
of the dramatic decline in this iconic species, it is currently listed as ‘Endangered ’ under the 
Endangered Species Act (ESA). Efforts are underway to reverse this negative trend. Maine Audubon 
opposes this bill because we believe it could interfere with those efforts. 
Addressing the threats that invasive species have on Atlantic Salmon, the aquatic environment, 
other wildlife species, and more is of great importance to Maine Audubon. While we appreciate 
concerns that this bill raises regarding the movement invasive ﬁsh we have two primary concerns: 
0 The proposed actions — the barring of any future ﬁshways at the Medway Dam in Medway and 
the Brown Mills Dam in Dover-Foxcroft - are atypical and may circumvent existing and future 
collaboration amongst NGOs, state and federal agencies, the Penobscot Nation, and others 
regarding the planning and management of aquatic invasive species. 
I The proposed bill has implications that also signiﬁcantly impact ﬁsh passage and restoration of 
native migratory ﬁsh species, such as ESA listed Atlantic Salmon, including setting a precedent 
that could have statewide implications. 
20 Gilsland Farm Road, Falmouth. Maine 04105 ° (207) 78142330 ' maineaudubonorg
MAINE 
AUDON Collaborative, statewide efforts to evaluate and address invasive ﬁsh species are well underway. 
It is important that we let our state agencies and key stakeholders continue their work on both 
connectivity and ﬁsh passage restoration and invasive species management without interference. We 
urge the Committee to oppose this bill. Thank you for your time. 
Sincerely, 
%WM0&»1>» 
Francesca “Ches” Gundrum 
Policy Advocate 
Z0 Gilsland Farm Road, Falmouth, Maine 04105 ° 
(Z07) 7812330 ° nlaineaudubonorg
