THE FIN & FEATHER CLUB OF MAINEWE ARE THE ACCESS PEOPLE
THE CLUB THAT BELIEVES THE FAMILY THAT PRAY & PLAY TOGETHER, STAYS TOGETHERP.O Box 123 Millinocket, Maine 04462-0123
finfeatherclub@email.com - Follow us on Facebook
April 25, 2003
Committee Chairperson and Committee Members
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
RE: An Act to Protect Maine's Inland Fisheries from Invasive Fish
LD 1049
The Fin & Feather Club of Maine has been a Sportsman’s club dedicated to preserving traditional out-
door recreation and access for over 50 years. We want to express our strong support for LD 1049 ( An Act
to Protect Maine's Inland Fisheries from Invasive Fish) . We are very concerned about invasive species
having access to the upper West branch of the Penobscot and tributaries because of the removal of several
dams and lack of a barrier at the West Enfield Dam.
We have followed the issue of Northern Pike for over 10 years, when water levels drop at the Howland
by-pass it is easy for Northern Pike to maneuver up the river up the Piscataquis River. Howland controls
access to the Piscataquis River and West Enfield on the Penobscot. If they have been found in the Pe-
nobscot the next logical step would be both further up the Penobscot. and Piscataquis Rivers. Invasive spe-
cies like Northern Pike would have access to the Medway dam and beyond, if a fish ladder is installed
there. The Northern Pike has a veracious appetite for anything It is imperative we stop this and other inva-
sive species from pristine fishing areas. We know from trapnets at Pushaw Pond this has and will continue
to be an issue. The destructiveness of the Northern Pike would be immeasurable on all species.
We must stop them now!
We are also concerned about the comments from the department of Marine Resources stocking Alewife
above the Medway dam. All this would have a severe and negative impact to our last remaining native
brook trout and world class salmon fisheries.
We ask that you please support LD 1049 to save our important fisheries.
Respectfully,
Mr. Bryant Davis
President Fin & Feather Club of Maine
Cc: Bryant Davis
Jim Busque
bfl
