Atlantic Saimon Federation Fédération cits Saumcn Atiantique 
Testimony of the Atlantic Salmon Federation on 
LD 1049: An Act to Protect Maine's Inland Fisheries from Invasive Fish 
April 24, 2023 
Senator La Fountain, Representative Landry, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife: 
My name is John Burrows, and I am the Executive Director of U.S. Operations for the Atlantic 
Salmon Federation (ASF), an international non-proﬁt conservation organization dedicated to the 
conservation and restoration of wild Atlantic salmon and their environment. I represent more 
than 2,500 members and volunteers with ASF, our Maine Council, and a dozen local afﬁliates 
working on river and ﬁsheries conservation and restoration across Maine. 
ASF is providing testimony in opposition to LD 1049 because it places in statute an approach to 
preventing the introduction of invasive ﬁsh species that has not been effective elsewhere; has not 
been thoroughly reviewed by state ﬁsheries agencies as part of a comprehensive risk analysis of 
the threats from invasive ﬁsh in Piscataquis River and how to best reduce them; conﬂicts with 
several federal laws; and will have signiﬁcant negative consequences for endangered Atlantic 
salmon and other native ﬁsh in the Piscataquis River. 
ASF’s opposition to LD 1049, however, should in no way be construed that we are unconcerned 
with the issue of invasive ﬁsh and their impacts on Maine’s native ﬁsh species and aquatic 
ecosystems. Non-native ﬁsh are one of the greatest threats to aquatic biodiversity and aquatic 
ecosystems across the globe and ASF has consistently advocated over the years for improved and 
consistent policies and regulation around this issue in Maine and in Atlantic Canada. We have 
also put resources into educational campaigns and active efforts to suppress newly discovered 
populations of illegally introduced non-native northern pike in the Penobscot River watershed. In 
Canada, We have spent more than a decade and several million dollars in a massive effort to 
eradicate non-native smallmouth bass from the Miramichi River watershed in New Brunswick 
and we supported similar efforts in Nova Scotia. As leaders in the conservation and protection of 
native coldwater ﬁsh in eastern North America, we take this issue incredibly seriously. 
The Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife has a well-thought-out, strategic approach for 
how to prevent, contain, and make conditions less favorable for invasive non-native ﬁsh. This is 
outlined in the Department ’s recently completed Strategic Management Plan for Fisheries: 
A rule of thumb for limiting the success of non-native introductions is, put simply, to 
make conditions more suitable for the desirable resource and less suitable for the invader. 
Hence, response strategies often involve habitat alterations that support contairmrent or 
suppression. Examples include construction of ﬁsh passage barriers to contain an 
invasive species, removal of barriers to return an impounded system back to more natural 
Fort Andross, Suite 202A l4 Maine Street Brunswick, ME 04011-2030 
(207) 725-2833 | vvww_._asf.ca.i' rrjr2tirre
or free-ﬂowing riverine condition, flow alterations to optimize and minimize habitat 
suitability, and construction or removal of physical habitat features to favor the desired 
resource. All of these habitat actions require a firm understanding, often gained 
through a comprehensive risk analysis, of the life history and habitat requirements 
of all species within the project area and the potential positive and negative impacts 
on them. This helps us to identify likely outcomes and respond with a course of action. 
For highly valued native species, especially highly mobile riverine species such as 
brook trout, a primary conservation strategy is to expand and reconnect river 
networks through ﬁsh passage enhancement or barrier removal; however, this 
action may expand the range (and, therefore, the potential threats) of introduced 
fish. Thus, these actions require thorough planning and consideration of unintended 
consequences. ‘ 
ASF believes that this is a far better way of addressing this issue than what is proposed within 
LD 1049, and we have offered our assistance in such an effort to both the Department of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife and the Department of Marine Resources. 
Passage of LD 1049 would create signiﬁcant conﬂicts with a number of federal laws, particularly 
the Clean Water Act, Federal Power Act, and Endangered Species Act (ESA). By mandating “a 
vertical barrier at least 4 feet tall” in the frshway of the Brown's Mill Dam on the Piscataquis 
River, several species of native sea-run ﬁsh that have been the focus of a decades’ long 
restoration effort by the State of Maine, Penobscot Indian Nation, federal agencies, and the 
conservation community would be substantially impacted. American shad and river herring 
would be completely precluded from passing upstream of Brown’s Mill and most endangered 
Atlantic salmon would also be unable to pass. This would put the owner of the dam in violation 
of the ESA by not providing safe, timely, and effective passage for Atlantic salmon at the site. 
This would also severely impact our ability to achieve the recovery goals (both quantity of 
accessible habitat and number of returning adults) necessary for downlisting and eventually 
delisting Atlantic salmon from the Endangered Species List. 
LD 1049 provides no ﬂexibility to state resource managers as to the size, type, or location of the 
barrier. This precludes deliberate plamiing and analysis, which is the best approach for 
determining the most appropriate and effective options to prevent or minimize the spread of non- 
native ﬁsh species. It also mandates a method that has been completely ineffectual at preventing 
invasive ﬁsh introductions in Maine; largemouth and smallmouth bass, northern pike, black 
crappie, and other non-native ﬁsh can be found above impassable dams all over the State. 
There are several ways to address the spread of non-native ﬁsh species, ranging from regulation 
to education to active eradication efforts to maintaining barriers in key places. With respect to 
physical barriers, a deliberate and thorough assessment of the risks and options needs to be 
completed at a watershed or subwatershed level. This work needs to detail what resources are at 
risk and where they are located, the habitat requirements and other characteristics of the non- 
native species that poses the risk, an assessment of the locations and types of barriers that may 
‘ httpsI//www.maine.g0v/ifw/ ﬁsl1—wildlife/ ﬁsheries/strategic-management-plans.html. Volume 2, page 39. 
Fort Andross, Suite 202A l4 Maine Street Brunswick, ME 04011-2030 
(207)725-2833 | www.asf.ca/maine
prevent non-natives from accessing new areas of a watershed, and the negative impacts of 
barriers on other species. LD 1049 does not do any of this. 
Such an analysis might very well determine that the Brown’s Mill Dam is an appropriate long- 
term site for a barrier that prevents invasive ﬁsh from accessing upstream habitat. However, it is 
also very possible that there are other, more effective options. An up-to-date comprehensive risk 
analysis could reveal, for example, that maintaining other barriers to protect certain lakes or 
stream segments elsewhere in the watershed might be just as effective and would have less 
negative impact on Atlantic salmon and other species. It is also likely that a careful, 
comprehensive analysis would demonstrate that a barrier substantially less than 4 feet in height 
at Brown’s Mill may be just as effective at precluding passage of invasives, while also causing 
less harm to native ﬁsh species. Or the analysis may find that a completely different technology 
or method than a vertical barrier would be the best altemative. 
The issue of invasive fish needs to be addressed in a thoughtful and strategical manner that is 
both effective for dealing with the threat but also minimizes the impact on native aquatic species 
and their ecosystems. LD 1049 does not take such an approach and would have substantial 
negative consequences. We urge the Committee to vote ought not to pass on this legislation. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Sincerely, 
~%e\1\1\, <7D\)J\;\g\>-6 
John R.J. Burrows 
Executive Director, U.S. Operations 
Atlantic Salmon Federation 
Fort Andross, Suite 202A l4 Maine Street Brunswick, ME 04011-2030 
(207) 725-2833 | www.asf.ca/maine
