April 24, 2023 
Th€Natur€q 
Kaitlyn Nuzzo, Government Relations Director 
Conservan C The Nature Conservancy in Maine Y igaj§iyn.nuzzo5é$tnc.org Mame 
éoint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
RE: LD1049 An Act to Protect Maine 's Inland Fisheries from Invasive Fish 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Inland I-‘ 
isneries 
and Wildlife, my name is Kaitlyn Nuzzo and I am the Government Relations Director for The Nature Conservancy 
gt in Maine. I appreciate this opportunity to testify in opposition to LD 1049 An Act to Protect Maine's Inland 
Fisheries from Invasive Fish. 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) is a nonprofit conservation organization dedicated to conserving the lands and 
waters on which all life depends. Guided by science, we create innovative, on-the-ground solutions to our 
world's toughest challenges so that nature and people can thrive together. We use a collaborative approach that 
engages local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners. The Nature Conservancy has 
been leading conservation in Maine for more than 60 years and is the 12th largest landowner in the state, owning 
and managing roughly 300,000 acres. We also work across Maine to restore rivers and streams, partner with 
fishermen in the Gulf of Maine to rebuild groundfish populations and develop innovative solutions to address our 
changing climate. TNC works closely with state agencies — including the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries 
and Wildlife (DIFW) and the Maine Department of Marine Resources (DMR) — on a variety of levels to ensure 
Maine's fisheries and the communities that rely on them are sustained and supported into the future. 
The proposed bill commits into statute a specific method of managing aquatic invasive fish species, specifically 
“an invasive fish species known to be present downstream" , by way of a 4ft. vertical jump exclusion at the 
Medway Dam, in Medway, and at Browns Mills Dam, in Dover—Foxcroft. At present, Medway Dam only allows 
the upstream passage of native, American eel, therefore invasive fish species referenced in the bill are already 
prevented from moving upriver of the dam facility. in Dover-Foxcroft, there is an active MOU between DIFW& 
DMR in place, signed in 2009, specifically addressing the necessary prevention of aquatic invasive species 
movement and the maintenance of an existing vertical barrier on the Piscataquis River at the Browns Mills Dam. 
Given the barriers already in place at these locations preventing invasive fish movement, our main concern with 
this legislation is that the proposed actions circumvent any collaborative management for the prevention of 
aquatic invasive species by state and federal agencies, and the Penobscot Nation. The proposed bill also has 
implications that significantly impact fish passage and restoration of native migratory fishn species, including ESA 
listed Atlantic salmon. The bill does not allow for adaptive management of new site conditions or incorporation 
of new data regarding aquatic invasive species in the future and would stymie the use of any alternative 
approaches, or management strategies as a means of aquatic invasive species exclusion at these locations. 
ln addition, the actions proposed in the bill put the referenced dams in direct conflict with specific regulatory 
requirements and management procedures. We believe this bill would supersede or conflict with the Federal 
Clean Water Act, FERC regulatory standards for fish passage and ESA species, Maine DEP water quality 
standards for fish passage, EPA Federal Tribal Standards, and the Maine Tribal-State Collaboration Act. 
We understand that DIFW and DMR are collaborating on a process for statewide evaluation of management of 
invasive fish species as it relates to connectivity and fish passage restoration for native fish species. We applaud 
these collaborative efforts and see development of this strategy as a critical next step in addressing concerns 
and management of aquatic invasive species including invasive fish in the Penobscot River Watershed. TNC 
stands ready to assist in this process in whatever manner the agencies see fit.V 
Thank you for the opportunity to weigh in on LD 1049. l'm happy to answer questions at any time. 
14 Maine St., Suite 401 ' 
Brunswick, Maine 04011 nature.org[i 33_a_~_i3§
