LD 1049 Testimony April 24, 2023 
Nels Kramer 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, Members of the Joint Standing Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee: 
Good morning. My name is Nels Kramer and I am here to testify in favor of LD 1049.I 
had the extraordinary pleasure of working as a Inland Fisheries Fisheries Biologist in the 
Penobscot Region for 36 years. That region covers all lakes, ponds, rivers and streams 
from Old Town to north of Patten and from the western edge of Baxter State Park to the 
Canadian Border at East Grand Lake! I am now retired. 
Invasive fish species have been a particular concern to me for a very long time. WhenI 
started working with the founding fisheries biologists of Maine, the one topic that was 
always a very sore subject to all was the spread of invasive fish species throughout 
Maine. This state has long been known for the incredible fishing opportunities for native 
landlocked salmon, brook trout, Arctic chair, lake trout and whiteﬁsh. Maine has built 
an outstanding reputation for the awesome fishing opportunities for these iconic fish 
species that contribute over $330 million annually to Maine's economy! 
Even in the relatively short time that I have been around, non-native and invasive fish 
species have made their way throughout much of Maine. Smallmouth bass, largemouth 
bass, muskellunge, Northem pike, black crappie, white catfish fish and other invasive 
fish species are turning up most everywhere imaginable! Almost seems like a daily 
occurrence that a there is a report of a non-native that is found in a lake or pond 
throughout the state. 
In 2003, I received a call at the Penobscot Regional Office in Enﬁeld from a campowner 
on Pushaw Lake that someone in his family had caught what at first glance appeared to 
be a very large chain pickerel. However, after taking a second look they became 
suspicious that what they were looking at was not a pickerel, but in fact a Northern pike! 
They had dispatched the suspected pike and send me a picture. It was in fact a pike 
which started an investigation into the origin of that pike, and initiated a now 20 year 
effort to limit and remove Northern pike from Pushaw Lake before they could escape 
into the entire Penobscot Drainage. We knew going in that it would be almost 
impossible, but we had no choice but put every effort at our disposal to try to eradicate 
them from the system. 
We trapnetted spawning pike in late winter/early spring throughout the greater Pushaw 
sub-drainage including Pushaw Lake, Little Pushaw Pond and Pushaw Stream. While 
we did capture and kill hundreds of spawning pike, it was certainly an uphill battle. We 
initiated control measures at all upriver dams with fishways to attempt to prevent
passage above. We worked with Dept. of Marine Resources (DMR) and Brookfield 
Power to monitor and prevent passage of pike through any and all dams with fishways 
where invasive fish species could be intercepted and removed from the river. While we 
were somewhat successful in possibly temporarily limiting their expansion throughout 
the Penobscot Drainage, nothing is for sure, and with dam removal it is now possible 
that pike could be distributed throughout the system eventually! 
On September 1, 2009 the Commissioners of Inland Fish & Wildlife and Marine 
Resources signed an MOU to maintain barriers in fishways on the Penobscot and 
Piscataquis Rivers to prevent any upstream movement of invasive species or until such 
time that invasive species are identified upstream of those barriers, or Phase 3 alewife 
restoration has begun. 
The threat of invasive pike getting upriver into some of our most cherished landlocked 
salmon, brook trout, lake trout and Whitefish waters prompted Sen. Paul Davis to 
introduce LD 134 i11 2011 to block invasive species passage at Sebec Lake and at Sebec 
River in Milo. Sen. Davis followed that effort in 2012 with LD 1849 to prevent passage 
at dams at Schoodic Lake and Seboeis Lake. That bill was also enacted by the 
Legislature and has greatly enhanced efforts at preventing the expansion of non-native 
invasive species up through the Piscataquis Watershed!1 
The Howland Bypass was constructed in 2015 and became operational in 2016, then 
allowing invasive species, including Northern pike, free swim to the Piscataquis River. 
And as part of the MOU signed in 2009 there needed to be a Risk Assessment completed 
for the entire Penobscot River upstream from West Enfield, which has never been done! 
The barrier at West Enfield was removed in violation of that agreement, and 
consequently Northern pike and other invasive species can pass freely upriver at that 
facility! Because of the installation of the bypass at the Howland Dam and the removal 
of the of the barrier at West Enfield Dam, the risk has increased exponentially to both 
the Piscataquis and Penobscot Rivers! 
I was alerted last year that FERC is in the process of relicensing a number of dams on 
the West Branch Penobscot, including East Millinocket Dam, Dolby Dam, Millinocket 
Dam, North Twin and Ripogenus Dam. Some of the topics discussed have included 
providing passage for alewives through these dams or removal of said dams to allow 
alewives to pass upstream. If that were to occur, then the only existing blockage to 
Northern pike, white catfish, and other invasives is at the Medway Dam. 
Simply put, if sometime in the future fish passage is provided at the Medway Dam the 
entire West Branch of the Penobscot River would be at risk for invasion by Northern 
pike! Take a quick look at a map and try to comprehend just what the impact would be if 
this were to occur. Some of the best fishing for landlocked salmon in the State of Maine
occurs in the West Branch Penobscot, and all the lakes associated with that storied 
drainage, including Pemadumcook Lake, North and South Twin Lakes, Nahinakanta 
Lake, Ambajejus Lake, Millinocket Lake, ls‘ Debsconeag Lake, and all the JoMary 
Lakes. Notice that Baxter State Park is also located within the West Branch of the 
Penobscot River watershed! Imagine the consequences if pike should ever find their way 
into Baxter? 
The planned removal of a dam in Guilford on the Piscataquis River would put that entire 
system upstream at risk for invasive species unless action is taken to maintain and 
enhance barriers at Browns Mill Dam. And if all barriers are removed on the Piscataquis 
River in Dover and Guilford, invasive species will decimate the Wild native brook trout 
populations in the upper Piscataquis River and will have free run to within a couple 
miles of Moosehead Lake! 
Native fish species are an essential reason that anglers travel to fish the watersheds 
above the Medway and Browns Mill Dam! It is difficult to determine exactly the 
economic impact if the watersheds at risk were to ever be invaded by invasive fish 
species, but what portion of that $330 million statewide fisheries income would be lost 
to those local communities, including Millinocket, East Millinocket, Medway, Patten, 
Mt. Chase, Dover, Greenville, Rockwood, and Baxter State Park? It would enormous! 
In 2014 the Legislature mandated the adoption of the Maine Heritage Waters List to 
limit what and where Inland Fisheries and Wildlife could stock brook trout and allow the 
use of live fish as bait by anglers! The logic behind this initiative was to limit the spread 
of invasive fish species throughout Maine, especially in the areas under discussion 
today! Why should Maine anglers be prohibited from using live bait in a particular 
geographic area, but dam and barrier removal is occurring under the guise of 
“restoration ” without any apparent concern by the same state and nat.ional agencies? 
Doesn't make sense to me! 
With the distinct possibility of both these events happening, it is imperative that serious 
steps be taken now to stop the upstream expansion of all invasive species, most notably 
Northern pike. This bill, LD 1049, would provide a level of protection that cannot be 
overstated! Please pass this as soon as possible and protect our cherished native fish 
populations ! 
Thank you Senator Black for introducing and supporting this bill! It is greatly 
appreciated ! 
Nels Kramer 
180 Abbott Dr. 
Enfield, Maine 04493 
290-0850
