Testimony in Support of LD 1049 April 24, 2023 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, Members of the Joint Standing inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife Committee: 
Good afternoon. My name is Paul Johnson. I am a resident of Oakland. Before retiring in 2005 
I was the Regional Fishery Biologist in the Moosehead Lake Region, a region that encompasses 
many of the waters that will be protected by this legislation. 
Some history behind this legislation. You will note in Section 1, Commissioners ’ authority, that 
the dams on the outlet of Sebec Lake and on the Sebec River in Milo, and the dams at the 
outlets of Schoodic and Seboeis lakes, are listed before the dams which are under consideration 
today. in 2011, legislation was proposed and adopted to protect Sebec Lake, with an outlet 
flowing into the Piscataquis River. That was followed in 2012 by legislation which afforded 
protection for both Schoodic and Seboeis lakes, with outlets also flowing into the Piscataquis 
River. The legislation responded to public and professional concern that the Penobscot River 
Restoration Project's plans for a bypass around the Howland Dam would allow Northern Pike 
access into the Piscataquis River, and on into the three lakes. 
At that time Memoranda of Agreement required that vertical barriers be maintained in the 
Penobscot River's West Enfield Dam's ﬁshway, and the Piscataquis River's Brown's Mill Dam's 
fishway. Those MOAs were intended to prevent access for invasive species, especially Northern 
Pike, further upstream in the Penobscot and Piscataquis rivers. Those MOAs were the reason 
both dams under consideration today were not included in the previous legislation. lt appears 
that the MOA for the fishway in the West Enfield Dam has been abandoned, l might add with 
no public review or notice, and the barrier in the Brown's Mill Dam fishway is now in jeopardy. 
LD 1049 addresses current concerns that fish passage is being considered for the Medway Dam 
on the West Branch ofthe Penobscot River, along with removal of the vertical barrier in the 
Brown's Mill Dam fishway on the Piscataquis River. This legislation réiquires that there will be 
no changes in these 2 dams allowing invasive species access over either dam. its adoption 
incurs no immediate financial cost. it will, however, prevent significant and irreversible 
environmental costs by helping to prevent invasive species from gaining access into the 
headwaters of two major watersheds where inland fishery management prioritizes protection 
for native, wild salmonid populations. 
You have heard what stands to be lost in the Penobscot River's West Branch watershed if 
Northern Pike gain access to it. At stake in the Piscataquis River watershed above Dover- 
Foxcroft are: 
0 21 miies of the main stem of the Piscataquis River 
0 26 miles of the Piscataquis River's East and West Branches 
I 17 miles of Kingsbury Stream 
0 More than 60 miles oftheir small tributaries with essential spawning and nursery 
habitats and summer refugia from warmer temperatures in the main stems. 
All are important to ongoing Atlantic salmon restoration efforts. All are important to 
maintaining native, wild brook trout populations.
Testimony in Support of LD 1049 April 24, 2023 
The Piscataquis River and small ponds in its watershed above the Brown's Mill Dam have very 
little suitable habitat for alewives or shad. If eels are a concern, they have a history of 
negotiating dams that obstruct other species. With the barrier in the Brown's Mill Dam fishway 
Atlantic salmon will continue to have access to the upper reaches of the Piscataquis, where 
there is suitable spawning and nursery habitat for them. The upper river and its tributaries will 
continue to support populations of wild, native brook trout in the absence of a major predator. 
Allowing an invasive species to gain access to the upper Piscataquis watershed or upstream 
over barriers in any Maine river is irresponsible, and contrary to lF&W’s Fisheries and 
Hatcheries Strategic Management Plan which states that PREVENTION IS ALWAYS THE FlRST 
LINE OF DEFENSE. Preventing access by Northern Pike or other invasive species to the upper 
watershed ofthe Piscataquis River should be among the highest priorities for all interests in 
conservation. 
In offering my support for LD 1049 I want to make it clear that l am not opposed to anadromous 
fish restoration in watersheds where Maine's fisheries, and especially native, wild salmonids, 
will not be threatened by non-native invasive species. However, as a fishery biologist anda 
Maine citizen deeply concerned over our natural resources and their future, l cannot support 
any action that has the potential to increase the distribution of invasive fish species in Maine 
waters. MOAs, MOUs and inhouse agreements are temporary, require no public involvement 
in creating or amending them, and have a history of being broken. Enactment of LD 1049 will 
require public notice, the opportunity for public involvement, and Legislative approval for any 
changes that will permit invasive species to move upstream at the six dams included in it. 
Enactment of LD 1049 will send a message that Maine people continue to value very highly the 
natural resources with which we have been blessed, and that we will take all reasonable steps 
to protect them. 
l respectfully urge that you give LD 1049 your serious consideration, and a unanimous ”ought to 
pass" recommendation. 
Thank you very much for this opportunity to speak before your committee. 
Paul Johnson 
35 Hammond Drive 
P.O. Box 512 
Oakland, ME 04963 
465-2074 
the case study around the Belgrade pike introduction determined that nearly half the subsequent 
introductions were bucket bios and half were dispersion. So, every time a new population is 
established, it creates another source for people to move them across the landscape.
Vo1"ac10us predators 
on young salmon 
and trout 
part %
? 
k northern pike
