HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
2 STATE HOUSE STATION
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002
(207) 287-1440
TTY: (207) 287-4469
         Chad R. Perkins
                         POB 251
            Dover-Foxcroft, ME 04426
   Residence: (207) 279-0927
         Fax: (207) 305-4907
        Chad.Perkins@legislature.maine.gov
                                                                                                                                  
23 Apr 23
MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
SUBJECT: LD 1049, An Act  to Protect Maine's Inland Fisheries from Invasive Fish
Committee Chair Senator LaFountain, Committee Chair Representative Landry and distinguished 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife ,
  Thank you for allowing me to submit testimony for LD 1049, An Act  to Protect Maine's Inland 
Fisheries from Invasive Fish . 
   Piscataquis County is known for its sportsmen’s activities, and one of the most important among 
them is the fishing. The economic draw is vital to our communities, and as LD 1049 specifically 
addresses Sebec Lake and Schoodic Lake and the dams in Milo, Lakeview Plantation and Dover 
Foxcroft, all of which are in my constituent district, this bill is extremely important to the protection of 
the ecological and economic resources of Piscataquis County.
   In order to protect this important part of our economy and to protect the delicate ecological balances 
established within our inland waterways, reasonable measures must be taken to arrest the spread of 
invasive species. The most important example of this is the Northern Pike, but could also include 
Catfish and other species. If this bill is not passed, the danger to the native cold water game fish in my 
region is not only possible, but almost guaranteed over time. This would be especially disastrous for 
Sebec Lake, which is one of the four original land locked Salmon lakes in the state, but would also 
destroy the Trout in the upper Piscataquis rivershed. Additionally, any expansion of of invasive species
up the Piscataquis River and into surrounding lakes bring them dangerously close to Moosehead Lake.
House District 31
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville Township, &
Southeast Piscataquis
LD   1049
Page 2
   I thank the committee for their time in considering this testimony and encourage the 
committee to support it with a vote of ‘Ought To Pass’. Please feel free to contact me if I 
can answer any questions, if you would like me to be available for any future work 
session or if I can be of any further service.
Respectfully,
Rep. Chad R. Perkins
District 31
ATT:
CF:
Committee Chair Senator LaFountain
Committee Chair Representative Landry
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife  Committee Members
House District 31
Atkinson Township, Brownville, Dover-Foxcroft, Lake View Plantation, Medford, Milo, Orneville
Township, & Southeast Piscataquis

