Mabel 
WadsworthA 
Center 
Feminist. Local. Independent. 
Statement of Abbie Strout-Bentes, Director of Education and Community Engagement, 
Mabel Wadsworth Center to the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
' 
May 5, 2023 
, LD 494, An Act to Conform State Fimding to the Federal Hyde Amendment, 
Limiting Funding for Some Abortion Services 
LD 771, An Act to Protect a Woman's Right to Withdraw Consent for an Abortion 
LD 1197, An Act to Prevent Coerced Abortion 
LD 1249, An Act to Protect the Quality of Care Provided via Telehealth by Prohibiting 
Physicians from Prescribing Abortion-inducing Drugs or Devices Through 
Telehealth or Other Electronic Commumcation 
LD 1614, An Act to Reqinre an Ultrasound and Certain Counseling Before an Abortion 
Ought Not to Pass 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Joint standing committee 
on Judiciary, my name is Abbie Strout-Bentes, I am the Director of Education and 
Community Engagement at Mabel Wadsworth Center in Bangor Mabel Wadsworth 
Center .is the only independent, not-for-pro ﬁt, feminist health center in Maine. We 
provide comprehensive sexual and reproductive healthcare, including prenatal care, 
abortion care, birth control, STD testing and treatment, cancer screenings, and other 
wellness care. 
I am here today on behalf of our health center to oppose all ﬁve bills being heard this 
mommg.
Let’s be clear, the goal of these bills is to restrict access to abortion care and are part of 
an overall strategy to ban abortion. They are unnecessary and roll back important 
changes that have made access to abortion more equitable in Mame. 
The Supreme Court’s decision last June to overturn Roe v. Wade has ampliﬁed the 
disparities m accessing reproductive health care in the Umted States. Prior to that 
decision, lawmakers opposed to abortion spent decades passing state and federal 
legislation, similar to the bills presented today, that chipped away access to abortion. As 
a result, a pregnant person’s abihty to access the abortion they need depends on where 
they hve and how much money or resources they have. 
At the same time, in Maine, we have followed the clear support of our community 
members by not only protecting access to abortion but also passing laws that expanded 
access to equitable care When I started at Mabel Wadsworth Center, a pregnant person 
had to travel to Portland, Augusta, or Bangor to access medication abortion care, and 
most patients had to pay out-of-pocket for their care. Now people hving in our most 
rural communities can access medication abortion at their local family planning clinic or 
via telehealth with the pills mailed to their homes with the care covered by their 
insurance. These changes have been critical to ensuring that every person in Maine has 
the ability to make decisions about their bodies and their lives 
Abortion is a very common medical procedure and a normal part of reproductive health 
lives. One in four women will have an abortion by the time they turn 45 The science is 
clear: it is safe and life-saving medical carel Additionally, access to abortion allows 
people to build the families they want and contributes to a thriving community. Please 
do not roll back the progress we have made in Maine 
On behalf of Mabel Wadsworth Center, I urge you to oppose these bills. 
Thank you for your time
1 
https //vwwv ansirh orglresearch/research/abort:0ns-can-be-provlded-safely-and-effectiveIy-us|ng-teleheaIt
h
