FEBRUARY 23, 2023DANGEROUS CHINESE TECHNOLOGY 
IN U.S. STATE GOVERNMENT 
SYSTEMS AND RISING EFFORTS TO 
PROHIBIT CONTRACTS SUPPLYING IT STATES OF DENIAL VS. 
STATES OF MOMENTUM: 
EMBARGOED UNTIL FEBRUARY 23, 2023 
REFRESH OF RESEARCH ORIGINALLY PUBLISHED IN MARCH 2020
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:  ............................................................................................................ 2
THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT IS PENETRATING U.S. STATE TECHNOLOGY  
ECOSYSTEMS, BUT STATE MOMENTUM TO STOP IT IS BUILDING  ................................................. 2
THREE KEY FINDINGS  ........................................................................................................................... 3
BACKGROUND: THE STATE-FEDERAL CHINESE TECH DISCONNECT  ................................. 3
WHY DON’T STATES IMPLEMENT RESTRICTIONS?  .......................................................................... 4
PROGRESS IS HAPPENING…  .................................................................................................... 5
MAP: States Taking Action Against Chinese Government-Owned Tech Manufacturers  ................ 6
Lawmakers Must Be Aware of Efforts to Weaken Legislation  ......................................................... 7
…YET STATES CONTINUE TO PURCHASE DANGEROUS  
CHINESE TECH AND DEPLOY IT IN CRITICAL AGENCIES  ...................................................... 8
MAP: U.S. State Spending on Restricted Chinese Government-Owned Tech Manufacturers  .....9
RECOMMENDATIONS TO COUNTER CHINESE TECH THREATS IN STATES  ..................... 11
#1. Restrict Chinese-Owned and Operated Technology  
Companies from Bidding on State Contracts  .................................................................................. 11
#2. Preclude or Close Loopholes to Stop State Purchases through Third-Party Vendors  ....... 12
#3. Grow and Strengthen State Cybersecurity Workforces  .......................................................... 12
#4. Increase Cooperation Between Congress and States to Enforce Export Control Laws  .....13
#5. Broaden Efforts to Include All U.S. Adversarial Nations   ........................................................ 13
BACKGROUND ON SELECT CHINESE TECHNOLOGY MANUFACTURERS  ......................... 14
LENOVO: LAPTOPS, LIES, AND LARCENY   ....................................................................................... 14
LEXMARK: A BACKDOOR FOR MALIGN CYBER ACTIVITY  .............................................................. 15
HIKVISION: A DE FACTO CHINESE GOVERNMENT SPY AGENCY  .................................................. 16
DJI: UNDERMINING AND MANIPULATING U.S. LAW ENFORCEMENT ............................................ 17
APPENDIX A: NASPO-Authorized Lenovo Resellers  ............................................................ 19
APPENDIX B: NASPO-Authorized Lexmark Resellers  ......................................................... 20
Full Compilation of Resources Can Be Found at 
www.StatesStopChinaTech.com
• Revised white paper with links and sources
• State-by-state contract summaries 
• Details of actions taken in Georgia, Florida,  
and other states • List of 2023 pending legislation and sponsors 
• Link to Model Policy adopted by the American 
Legislative Exchange Council 
• Articles, videos, and other materials 
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
1
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: 
THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT IS PENETRATING U.S. STATE TECHNOLOGY 
ECOSYSTEMS, BUT STATE MOMENTUM TO STOP IT IS BUILDING
This paper updates a March 2020 China Tech Threat paper  detailing how 40 U.S. state governments 
had entered into contracts to purchase millions of dollars worth of Lenovo and Lexmark products. 
The revised findings from states presented in this paper will be expanded with data from the 
remaining states in spring 2023. 
This report also spotlights the presence of state contracts with two additional Chinese companies 
which were not covered in the 2020 paper – surveillance equipment manufacturer Hikvision and 
drone aircraft manufacturer DJI. A research report with a state-by-state analysis of DJI and Hikvision 
will come later this year. 
Various U.S. state government bodies – whether offices, schools, or law enforcement agencies – have 
purchased products by each of these companies, and some in substantial quantities. By doing so, they 
have created threats to the American people. As companies either domiciled in China or substantially 
owned by China-based entities, they are bound by Chinese law to do what the Chinese Communist 
Party commands under China’s 2017 National Intelligence Law. Lexmark, Lenovo, Hikvision, and DJI 
can variously collect or steal sensitive personal data or proprietary intellectual property, be deployed 
as conduits for cyberweapons, and conduct surreptitious surveillance on Americans. 
The good news is that there is evidence of a shift at the state level to take these threats more seriously. 
When we published our March 2020 study, only one U.S. state restricted contracts with Chinese-
owned or operated tech manufacturers. Today five states have laws or restrictions governing state 
contracts, with 11 additional states currently considering legislation as of this writing. In sum, states 
have acknowledged the seriousness of this problem and are pursuing solutions.
SAMPLE OF STATE AGENCIES USING TECHNOLOGY RESTRICTED BY U.S. NATIONAL 
SECURITY AGENCIES:
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
2Legislatures in Alaska, Colorado, Kansas, North Carolina,  
New Hampshire, New York, and UtahArizona Board of 
Fingerprinting Delaware Department 
of ElectionsIdaho Military  
Division Masschussets Public 
Safety/Homeland 
Security
THREE KEY FINDINGS
1. Chinese companies that have been banned or restricted from U.S. military and national security 
networks – e.g. Lenovo, Lexmark, Hikvision, and DJI – can still contract with state governments.  
Lexmark and Lenovo can access sensitive personal and financial information held by courts, police 
departments, elections departments, education departments, children and family services, and 
other social service providers and agencies. In the case of Hikvision and DJI, they can also collect 
facial recognition and critical infrastructure data. 
2. Despite escalating threats from China and greater awareness of national security vulnerabilities 
at the state level, state government contracts and purchases from Lexmark and Lenovo have 
continued, and in some cases increased significantly  since China Tech Threat issued its first state 
contracts report in 2020. 
Our latest review of contract information and public databases from 28 states found that states 
have cumulatively awarded a total of $230 million worth of contracts for Lexmark or Lenovo since 
2015, with individual states spending as much as $47 million. 
It is not just the volume of purchases that are of concern, but the types of state agencies 
using them. Numerous state government offices responsible for stewarding sensitive personal 
information have wired products made by Chinese-owned or operated companies into their 
networks. To give a few examples, the Delaware Department of Elections, the Hawaii Department 
of Taxation, and the South Dakota Department of Emergency Management have all used products 
by Lexmark or Lenovo. 
3. Actions such as Georgia Senate Bill 346  and Florida Executive Order 22-216  have inaugurated 
a new wave state government action to ban Chinese ICTS  (information and communications 
technology systems) from state government contracts. 2023 is poised to be a transformative year 
for states tackling Chinese tech threats. 
BACKGROUND: THE STATE-FEDERAL 
CHINESE TECH DISCONNECT
In March of 2022, cybersecurity firm Mandiant reported that hackers 
operating at the direction of the Chinese government had penetrated 
six state government computer networks. Mandiant noted that the 
intruders were able to conduct this cyber breach by exploiting, in the 
words of the Associated Press, “a previously unknown vulnerability in 
an off-the-shelf commercial web application used by 18 states for animal 
health management.”1  It’s clear China is targeting U.S. states through 
ordinary technologies, and not just the six identified by Mandiant. As 
cybersecurity expert Joseph Steinberg commented on the report, “If we 
know that six states were breached by Chinese spies, it means we know 
44 states probably have Chinese spies operating on their network that 
we don’t know about.”2 Huawei says it would 
never hand data to 
China’s government. 
Experts say it wouldn’t 
have a choice
By Arjun Kharpal
MAR 5 2019
https://www.cnbc.com/2019/03/05/
huawei-would-have-to-give-data-to-china-
government-if-asked-experts.html
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
3
State governments should know that Chinese malign actors are 
gaining access to their systems through loopholes in ordinary, 
commercially available technologies, whether they are Chinese-
owned and operated or not. But Chinese companies are especially 
dangerous, because the institution of China’s 2017 National 
Intelligence Law increases the risk of Chinese companies funneling 
sensitive American data to Beijing. Under Article 7 of the law, all 
businesses registered in China are obligated to hand over whatever 
information the Chinese Ministry of State Security demands of 
them – and that could very well include sensitive user, financial, and 
health information. This law requires network operators, including 
all companies headquartered in China, to store select data within the country and allow Chinese 
authorities to do “spot-checks” on a company’s network operations. 
It is for this reason dozens of countries around the 
world have blocked Chinese telecom company Huawei 
from their 5G networks, in spite of Huawei’s denial 
that it would hand over information Beijing requests. 
“There is no way Huawei can resist any order from 
the (People’s Republic of China) Government or the 
Chinese Communist Party to do its bidding in any 
context, commercial or otherwise,” said New York 
University professor Jerome Cohen.3 The same goes 
for other Chinese companies. And any company that is 
a supplier or partner with firms in China could also be 
subject to the law.
Companies controlled by China-based entities such as Lenovo, Lexmark, Hikvision, and DJI have 
proliferated their products throughout state government technology systems. That raises the 
question – why have states allowed it? 
WHY DON’T STATES IMPLEMENT RESTRICTIONS? 
While the U.S. federal government has taken admirable (if imperfect) strides to tackle high-profile 
Chinese tech threats in recent years, states have not kept up. Consequently, a misalignment of federal 
and state policies regarding Chinese technologies continues to grow. For instance, Section 889 of 
the National Defense Authorization Act prohibits the federal government from purchasing or using 
information and communications technology and services (ICTS) items from Chinese companies 
Huawei, ZTE, Hikvision, Dahua, and Hytera. Yet a study done by Georgetown University’s Center 
for Security and Emerging Technology (CSET) has found that “In recent years, nearly 1,700 public 
entities have purchased ICTS covered under Section 889, introducing potential vulnerabilities into the 
networks of public schools, universities, hospitals, prisons, public transit systems, and government 
offices nationwide.”4 1,700
Number of U.S. state and local 
governments that purchased 
Chinese technologies restricted 
by the federal government.Cyber firm: At least 6 
US state governments 
hacked by China
By Eric Tucker
MAR 8 2022
https://apnews.com/article/technology-
business-china-united-states-hacking-ffa21
20239eb687ce1979bf9599dfea5
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
4
Why states have lagged the federal government is mostly a question of money, ignorance, 
and political will. The lack of uniform best practices across U.S. states to mitigate the danger 
from these companies has allowed the threat to go relatively unchecked. State technology and 
procurement officers may believe that products recommended by the National Association of State 
Procurement Officials (NASPO) have legitimacy, but NASPO does not consider security in its vendor 
recommendations, even in an age when states have become more vulnerable. Additionally, state 
governments – many of them acting under tight budget constraints – are disincentivized from 
choosing technologies that are typically more expensive than their Chinese counterparts. “Rip and 
replace” campaigns to eliminate Chinese gear from their systems are also expensive. 
Even in an age where bipartisan consensus about the threat of China continues to grow, few state 
legislators have comprehended the national security implications of Chinese malign activity in their 
states, seeing national security as the preserve of the federal government. In spite of incidents 
like the hack of six U.S. states, threats can also seem abstract. Nor do state legislators – many of 
whom serve part-time – have clear political incentive or the appropriate technical knowledge to 
write effective legislation at the intersection of both technology and procurement rules. But state 
governments must close the federal-state restriction gap, because Sacramento and St. Paul are 
equally ripe targets for the Chinese government as Washington, D.C. 
PROGRESS IS HAPPENING…
Thankfully, some states have started to act. Comprehensive actions in Georgia ( S.B. 346 ) and Florida 
(Executive Order 22-216 ) last year (covered further in the Key Recommendations section) have helped 
raise the profile of the problem and the need for states to follow suit. Louisiana, Texas, and Vermont 
have also taken steps to stop Chinese companies from participating in state contracts. The American 
Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC) likewise adopted model policy  in July of 2022 to help states 
stop using funds to “purchase technology products, and/or services from manufacturers or other 
providers that are owned by, affiliated with, and/or unduly influenced by the People’s Republic of 
China (PRC).”5 While some experts suggest that each of these approaches should be improved, the 
urgency of stopping the Chinese government from gaining further footholds in state government tech 
ecosystems is evident. 
1 1311
2019 2020–21 2022 2023Laws / Executive Orders*
2019: Vermont 
2020–21: Louisiana
2022: Georgia, Florida, 
          Texas
Pending Legislation 
Arkansas, Indiana, 
Kansas, Maine, Mississippi, 
Montana, New Hampshire, 
Oklahoma, South Carolina, 
South Dakota, Virginia
*Sources are: Heritage Foundation, 7/27/22; CSET, 10/22  Number of States with Action  
to Restrict Chinese Tech in 
Contracts as of February 2023
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
5
Momentum will continue in 2023, with lawmakers in nearly a dozen additional states already 
introducing bills in the weeks preceding the release of this report in February 2023:
Laws / Executive Orders 
States Considering Action in 2023 
Vulnerable States (No Pending Action 
// Risky Tech Present)States Taking Action Against Chinese Government-Owned Tech 
Manufacturers
This map reflects legislative efforts as of February 2023
STATE BILL # SPONSOR SHORT DESCRIPTION / PURPOSE
AR TBD Rep. Mindy McAlindonProhibit contracts with companies owned or operated by the 
Government of China
IN SB 477 Sen. Justin Busch“Amends the statute prohibiting the use of public funds to 
purchase equipment or services produced or provided by certain 
prohibited persons determined to be a national security threat to 
communications networks or supply chains to also prohibit the use 
of public funds to purchase communications equipment”
KS TBD Rep. Chris Croft TBD
ME LR 1814 Sen. Lisa KeimAn Act to Prohibit State Contracts with Companies Owned or 
Operated by the Government of the People’s Republic of China.
MS SB 2046 Sen. Angela Burks-HillProhibit “technology-related equipment manufactured within the 
borders of a hostile foreign nation or by a company headquartered 
within the borders of or having significant corporate or political ties 
with a hostile foreign nation”
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
6Georgia’s law is model 
policy now being 
considered in several 
more statesVirginia is 
considering HB 
2385, though it 
is weakened by 
a CFIUS clause
MT HB 602 Rep. Steven Galloway“An Act prohibiting state contracts with Chinese government-owned 
or affiliated technology manufacturers” 
NH NB 86 Rep. Terry Roy“Prohibiting the state from contracting with Chinese government 
owned or affiliated technology manufacturers”
OKSB 43,  
SB 107Sen. Micheal Bergstrom“No state agency shall purchase any goods or services from or 
enter into contracts with any company owned or operated by the 
Government of China”
SC H 3119 Rep. Doug Gilliam“Prohibit certain contracts with certain foreign-owned companies in 
connection with critical infrastructure”
SD SB 189 Sen. Jim Stalzer“Prohibit state agencies from contracting with companies owned or 
controlled by” China and select additional countries 
VA HB 2385 Rep. Emily Brewer“Prohibits state agencies from entering into a contract for goods 
or services with a scrutinized company, defined in the bill as any 
company owned or operated by a foreign adversary” *weakened by 
CFIUS clause exemption  
Lawmakers Must Be Aware of Efforts to Weaken Legislation
Even as lawmakers take on Chinese tech threats, they must be vigilant against corporate lobbying to 
weaken their bills. Both Chinese companies and American resellers of Chinese equipment are looking 
to water down legislation. 
Helpfully, the 2022 Georgia law (S.B. 346) broadly defined scrutinized companies as those “owned 
or operated by the Government of China.”6 This comprehensive definition leaves little room for 
ambiguity. 
In contrast, Virginia HB 2385 provides less stricter standard of scrutiny. That bill only bans equipment 
from “any company owned, controlled, or operated in whole or in part by a foreign adversary, other 
than a company for which the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) has 
determined that there are no unresolved national security concerns regarding the transaction that 
created such ownership or permitted such operation.”7
The CFIUS clause opens  a massive loophole. Many national security policymakers believe that 
CFIUS judgments are not a reliable barometer of which companies are national security threats. For 
instance, Congress and defense and intelligence agencies argued against CFIUS approval of Lenovo’s 
2014 acquisitions of IBM and Motorola business lines.  Writing in 2020 with former Congressman 
Robert Pittenger (the sponsor of 2018 CFIUS reform), China Tech Threat contended that “with the new 
cybersecurity and personal information factors CFIUS must consider, the Lenovo acquisitions would 
not be approved today.”8 In just one cautionary example, the U.S. Air Force decided to rip-and-replace 
hardware because of “security reasons following the sale of IBM’s computer server product line to 
Chinese-owned Lenovo.”9 Tethering state-level restrictions to CFIUS determinations assumes those 
that those determinations are flawless (they aren’t) and also ignores the potential for entities CFIUS 
has previously approved to evolve in to threats (as the case of Lenovo shows). State lawmakers 
would be wise to end contracts with all Chinese-owned and operated companies.
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
7
…YET STATES CONTINUE TO PURCHASE 
DANGEROUS CHINESE TECH AND 
DEPLOY IT IN CRITICAL AGENCIES
China Tech Threat’s original 2020 research found that nearly 40 states had contracts with and 
payments to Chinese government-owned technology manufacturers Lenovo and Lexmark. (See the 
summaries on why both companies are dangerous on pages 14-16 of this paper.) 
Beginning in Fall 2020, we began to re-examine data from each state to determine if the states have 
made payments to either company, for how much, and where those products were deployed.  As of 
February 2023, we verified payments from 28 states totaling more than $230 million since 2015, 
with some states spending as much as $47 million on Lexmark or Lenovo products.  Several states 
appear to have significantly increased spending on Lexmark and Lenovo equipment in the past few 
years, including Arizona, Georgia, Florida, Hawaii, Idaho, Kentucky, Utah, and Wisconsin.
Just as important as the amount of taxpayer money being spent are the state agencies using these 
products. The introduction of Lexmark and Lenovo gear into state tech ecosystems means Beijing’s 
intelligence-gathering operation is better able to access some of these states’ most sensitive pools of 
citizen information. Agencies that have purchased technology from Lexmark and/or Lenovo include 
the Arizona Board of Fingerprinting, Kentucky State Police, Delaware Department of Elections, 
Wisconsin Supreme Court, Ohio Department of Public Safety, the Idaho Military Division, the South 
Dakota National Guard Armory, and the legislatures in Alaska, Colorado, Kansas, and New Hampshire. 
$230 million may sound like an incredible amount of money, but the total states are spending on 
dangerous Chinese technologies may be in fact understated. One important measure currently missing 
from most of our state calculations is payments through resellers. State government agencies do 
not always buy directly from Chinese-owned and operated companies, choosing instead to rely on 
American technology supply firms such as CDWG, Woodward Technologies / TwoTrees, Arey Jones, 
GovConnection, FireFly, Trinity3 Technology, and SHI. The National Association of State Procurement 
Officers has identified dozens of resellers offering Lenovo and Lexmark products and, like NASPO itself, 
these resellers do not consider the security implications of products manufactured by Chinese-owned or 
operated manufacturers. (See lists of NASPO-approved Lenovo and Lexmark resellers on pages 21-22.)
Below is a list of each state’s spending as of February 2023, including a few agencies in each state. 
Much more state-by-state data is available at www.StatesStopChinaTech.com . 
We will post additional state analysis on a rolling basis this spring. 
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
8
Recent Spending on Lexmark &/or Lenovo
Prior Spending on &/or Contracts with 
Lexmark &/or Lenovo *Update underway
No Prior Spending on Lexmark &/or 
Lenovo *Update UnderwayU.S. State Spending on Restricted Chinese Government-Owned Tech 
Manufacturers 
STATE SPENDING YEARS PARTIAL LIST OF AGENCIES 
Alaska $1,273,408 2020-2023The Legislature, Office of the Governor, Department of Labor 
and Workforce Development
Arizona $7,315,675 2016-2023Board of Fingerprinting, Department of Public Safety, 
Department of Education
California $2,910,769 2019-2022Department of Social Services, Department of Water 
Resources
Colorado $4, 702,700 2016-2023 State Legislature, Department of Corrections
Delaware $479,918 2017-2022Justice Information System, State Policy Headquarters, 
Department of State, Office of the Attorney General, 
University of Delaware, Department of Elections
Florida $29,149,590 2015-2022State’s Attorney General, Board of Elections, Department of 
Corrections, Public Utilities
Georgia $47,259,946 2020-2022Bureau of Investigation, Department of Public Safety, 
Superior Court Clerk, Fort Benning and Fort Stewart
Hawaii $15,904,416 2015-2019Department of Human Services, Department of Taxation, 
Attorney General’s office
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
9
Idaho $33,157,990 2015-2022Idaho Supreme Court, Military Division, Lottery, Department 
of Lands
Iowa $1,834,509 2021-2022Department of Public Health, Department of Corrections, 
Department of Education
Kansas $3,626,106 2016-2022Department of Health, Office of State Bank Commissioner, 
Legislature, Department of Commerce, Board of Nursing
Kentucky $5,762,445 2016-2022Auditor of Public Accounts, Judicial Department, Department 
of Revenue, Kentucky State Police
Louisiana $41,241 2019-2023 Attorney General
Maine $5,350,803 2015-2023 Bureau of Informational Services
Massachusetts $10,226,739 2015-2023Office of Public Safety and Homeland Security, State Ethics 
Commission, Supreme Judicial Court
Mississippi $442,109 2018-2022 Supreme Court
Nevada $2,706,054 2019-2022Department of Motor Vehicles, Department of Health and 
Human Services, Attorney General
New 
Hampshire$204,765 2016-2022 Legislative Branch, Treasury Department, Judicial Branch
New Mexico $1,043,136 2018-2022Administrative Office of the Courts, Department of Ethics 
Commission
New York $2,440,090 2018-2022Attorney General, State Police, Legislative Bill Drafting 
Committee
North Carolina $17,896,776 2021-2023Department of Revenue, Administrative Office of the Courts, 
General Assembly, Department of Public Safety, Office of 
State Auditor, Department of Insurance
Ohio $240,194 2016-2022Department of Rehabilitation and Correction, Bureau of 
Workers Compensation, Department of Natural Resources, 
Department of Public Safety
South Carolina $3,854,722 2018-2023Department of Revenue, Education Department, Department 
of Health and Environment
South Dakota $29,808 2016-2022Department of Criminal Justice, Department of Emergency 
Management, Department of Health, National Guard Armory
Tennessee $336,476 2019-2022Department of Education, Department of Finance and 
Administration, Department of Treasury, Housing 
Development Agency, Court System
Utah $34,401,444 2018-2021Utah Legislative Branch, University of Utah, Board of 
Education
West Virginia $482,606 2016-2023Regional Jail and Correctional Facility Authority, Division of 
Motor Vehicles
Wisconsin $4,751,370 2019-2023Wisconsin Supreme Court, Department of Health Services, 
Department of Corrections, University of Wisconsin System
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
10
RECOMMENDATIONS TO COUNTER 
CHINESE TECH THREATS IN STATES 
#1. Restrict Chinese-Owned and Operated Technology Companies from 
Bidding on State Contracts 
Exemplary Action:  Georgia Legislature Passed and Governor Brian Kemp Signed S.B. 346  in May 
2022; Florida Governor Ron DeSantis Signed Executive Order 22-216  in September 2022.
Policy Guidance:  In May 2022, Georgia Governor Brian 
Kemp signed S.B. 346, prohibiting Chinese “owned or 
operated” companies from bidding on state contracts. 
In July 2022, two task forces of the American 
Legislative Exchange Council unanimously adopted this 
law as the basis for  model policy  for U.S. states. As 
of February 2023, nearly a dozen states are currently 
considering legislation which includes elements of the 
ALEC model policy. 
Similarly, Gov. DeSantis’ executive order prohibits 
Florida state and local government entities from 
procuring technology products and services from 
companies owned by, controlled by, or domiciled in 
China. The executive order directs the Department of 
Management Services to promulgate rules and take 
any additional action necessary to ensure commodities 
and services used by state and local governments are 
not susceptible to exploitation by foreign countries of 
concern. 
It’s important that states do not focus legislative 
efforts on banning specific Chinese companies, 
because they are adept at conducting business under 
various subsidiaries or shell companies. As Michael 
Cunningham of the Heritage Foundation has written, 
“For the most part, state legislation related to Chinese 
technology purchases largely follows the federal government’s approach of prohibiting purchases 
from a pre-defined list of particularly egregious Chinese companies… As the legislatures of states 
around the country move to tackle the threats posed by involvement of Chinese companies in public 
contracts, they would be wise to follow the examples of Texas and Georgia in extending their ban 
beyond a negative list of predefined companies.”10“There is the cybersecurity part 
and the acquisitions part. The 
way this is successful is when 
they work in tandem. Setting 
the cybersecurity standards is 
critical.” 
– Pedro Allende,  
Florida DHS Secretary[When companies are] 
“wholly owned by the Chinese 
government we know they have 
a motivation, without a doubt, 
based on their past performance, 
to steal information from the 
United States government, from 
state governments, and from 
individuals and corporations.” 
– GA State Rep.  
Martin Momtahan
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
11
#2. Preclude or Close Loopholes to Stop State Purchases through Third-
Party Vendors 
Certain states have banned contracts with companies owned or operated by China – a helpful 
measure. But state government agencies do not always buy directly from Chinese owned and 
operated companies, choosing instead to rely on American technology supply firms such as CDWG, 
Woodward Technologies / TwoTrees, Arey Jones, GovConnection, FireFly, Trinity3 Technology, and 
SHI. Like NASPO, these resellers do not consider the security implications of offering products from 
Chinese-owned or operated manufacturers; their goals are to win contracts.
See Appendix A  of this report for NASPO’s list of vendors selling Lenovo products. 
See Appendix B  of this report for NASPO’s list of vendors selling Lexmark products. 
Permitting third-party vendors to sell Chinese equipment to state government entities defeats the 
purpose of China-focused ICTS legislation. As scholars at CSET have written, it is often the case 
where “Purchasing a Hikvision surveillance camera directly from Hikvision would be illegal, but 
purchasing the exact same camera from a local vendor would not.”  Georgia’s S.B. 346 includes a 
provision restricting the awarding of contracts to “affiliates of such entities or business associations” 
– meaning Chinese companies.11 But there is concern that it is not sufficient to stop Chinese 
technology from getting into state government systems via third-party sellers.  
While Georgia’s decision to pass one of the first laws in the nation restricting Chinese technology 
contracts is a praiseworthy event, independent reviews by CSET and the Heritage Foundation 
expressed concern that third-party vendors may continue to sell restricted Chinese equipment. 
Policy Guidance:  States must work to close loopholes in legislation that allow states to purchase 
equipment from Chinese-owned and operated companies via third-party vendors. 
#3. Grow and Strengthen State Cybersecurity Workforces 
Exemplary Action:  As part of Idaho Governor Brad Little’s “Leading Idaho” plan, the legislature 
approved $12 million for a new Cyber Response and Defense Fund. 
Policy Guidance:  America’s cyber workforce is not large or skilled enough to address the rate 
and sophistication of cyberattacks. States need to assess their cyber workforce, identify priorities 
and gaps, and recruit and strengthen cyber workers accordingly. In March 2022, Governor Little’s 
Cybersecurity Task Force Report  published 18 recommendations to defend sensitive personal 
and financial information held by courts, police departments, elections departments, education 
departments, children and family services, and ot her social service providers and agencies. Other 
states would do well to take on these recommendations. 
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
12
#4. Increase Cooperation Between Congress and States to Enforce Export 
Control Laws 
1 See, for example, the Wilson Center’s analysis of this phrase. https://www.wilsoncenter.org/blog-post/hurting-
the-feelings-the-chinese-peopleExemplary Action Needed:  In January 2022, two New York members of Congress, John Katko and 
Andrew Garbarino, issued a letter asking the Department of Homeland Security and Commerce 
Department to “support States to ensure they are not unwittingly procuring products that will create 
vulnerabilities at the State level.”12 Governors should exert similar pressure on federal agencies to 
ensure compliance with regulations. 
Policy Guidance:  The federal government employs tools like export controls to protect America’s 
strategic technologies from falling into the hands of adversaries. Mitigating threats at the state 
level requires a cooperative effort by state and congressional leadership to call on federal agencies, 
including the Departments of Commerce, to honor the export control regime. In doing so, they should 
also call for ChangXin Memory Technologies (CXMT) to be added to the Department of Commerce 
Entity List, and an expansion of export controls targeting Semiconductor Manufacturing International 
Corporation (SMIC). 
#5. Broaden Efforts to Include All U.S. Adversarial Nations  
Exemplary Action:  Some critics claim that China-focused national security measures are driven 
by xenophobia, but FBI Director Christopher Wray clearly disagrees: “The greatest long-term 
threat to our nation’s information and intellectual property, and to our economic vitality, is the 
counterintelligence and economic espionage threat from China.”13 China’s strategy for eroding 
American power and economic competitiveness depends in large part on its ability to exploit existing 
technology systems. No adversary has more companies that have already penetrated American 
systems than China (see the background information on Chinese companies of concern below). No 
adversary has the technological prowess of China. And no adversary has more power to compel 
those companies to do its bidding than the Chinese Communist Party. 
Texas SB-2116 wisely precluded state agencies from awarding infrastructure contracts not just to 
China, but Russia, Iran, and North Korea as well. While the bill was drafted to preponderantly address 
contracts with Chinese companies, it has also had the effect of demonstrating a holistic commitment 
to keeping American adversaries away from state government contracts.
Policy Guidance:  Include products from other foreign adversaries, not just China, in technology bans. 
While technologies from China are overwhelmingly the main problem, as Michael Cunningham of the 
Heritage Foundation has written, such efforts will “pre-emptively disprove allegations that laws are 
passed for any reason other than to keep states and communities safe.”14 Legislators should also 
be vigilant against Chinese lobbying efforts which attempt to persuade state legislators that China-
focused actions “hurt the feelings of the Chinese people” – a common phrase Beijing employs to 
forestall action against the Chinese Communist Party’s interest.1 
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
13
BACKGROUND ON SELECT CHINESE 
TECHNOLOGY MANUFACTURERS
LENOVO: LAPTOPS, LIES, AND LARCENY  
Lenovo is the world’s largest manufacturer of personal computers, with headquarters in China and 
a U.S. headquarters in Morrisville, North Carolina. What has become Lenovo today was founded in 
China in 1984 by Chinese computer scientist Liu Chuanzi and ten of his colleagues from the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences (CAS).  According to its own financial filings, a company called Legend Holdings 
owns a 32.5% equity interest in Lenovo. Legend Holdings boasts that it is “ranked in the top 10 among 
the ‘Top 500 Private Enterprises in China’ by the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce.”15 
But Legend Holdings, like all companies in China, is only nominally private.  Legend Holdings lists the 
Chinese Academy of Science Holdings as “a substantial Shareholder,” and in fact CAS owns 63% of 
Legend’s domestic shares and 29% of total issued shares.16 Consequently, the Chinese government is 
Lenovo’s largest shareholder. The venture capital arm of Legend Holdings, Legend Capital, has been 
an investor in the Chinese company iFlytek,17 which has supplied voiceprint recognition technologies 
to the Xinjiang Bureau of Prisons.18
The Chinese Academy of Sciences is not the equivalent of entities like the National Academy of 
Sciences in the U.S. or the Royal Society in the UK. The U.S. government put the Chinese Academy 
of Sciences’ computing division on its Entity List in December 2022, and with good reason. CAS 
is not a normal research institute producing knowledge for civilian application. According to the 
congressional U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, CAS has “connections to 
Chinese military, nuclear, and cyberespionage programs.”19 It supports and owns whole companies 
building technologies for the Chinese military such as hypersonic spaceplanes, robotic submarines, 
underwater platforms and missile technology.20 
Consistent with its strategy to acquire PC, server, and mobile communications divisions from major 
American corporations, Lenovo solidified its position as an international computer hardware leader 
in 2005 with the company’s purchase of IBM’s ThinkPad division. By 2022 Lenovo controlled roughly 
16% of the U.S. PC market,21 and as recently as 2019 boasted of supplying more than 900 state and 
local governments.22 Relatively unknown in the global marketplace before the purchase, Lenovo 
found itself among major players in the technology sphere, relying on the brand and name recognition 
of its newly acquired ThinkPad product line to compete for government contracts. Shortly after the 
acquisition, the United States Department of State moved to purchase Lenovo laptops for employees. 
Congressman Frank Wolf, a critic of the IBM-Lenovo deal, quickly moved to ensure the State 
Department understood the risks associated with using the Chinese-made machines. Eventually, the 
State Department banned Lenovo systems from its classified network in 2006.23 
The Department of Defense also took steps to keep Lenovo products away from its systems. In 
2008, the U.S. Marine Corps in Iraq discovered that Lenovo products altered through the inclusion 
of secretly planted chips were transmitting data to China, forcing the Corps to ditch the company’s 
wares.24 
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
14
“A large amount of Lenovo laptops were sold to the U.S. military that had a chip 
encrypted on the motherboard that would record all the data that was being 
inputted into that laptop and send it back to China….That was a huge security 
breach. We don’t have any idea how much data they got, but we had to take all 
those systems off the network.” 
— Lee Chieffalo, Marine network  
operations officer in Iraq
That incident wasn’t the only incident reflecting the U.S. military’s concern with Lenovo. In 2015, the 
U.S. Navy replaced $378 million worth of its IBM servers after Lenovo purchased them, out of fear 
China could access data on U.S. ballistic missile technology. The Air Force was also forced to ask 
Raytheon to rip-and-replace IBM hardware after the Lenovo purchase,25 and it ditched Lenovo routers 
in 2016.26 
In 2019, the Department of Defense Office of the Inspector General released an audit regarding the 
purchase of Commercial Off-the-Shelf (COTS) items by employees and the security ramifications of 
those purchases. Referenced in that report was the purchasing of Lenovo laptops. The report, which 
called Lenovo products “known cybersecurity risks,” referenced the persisting vulnerabilities present 
in Chinese technology, including the well-known Superfish software that was pre-installed on Lenovo 
laptops sold in the United States in 2014. This software billed itself as a medium for advertisement 
targeting, but in reality served as an information aggregator to identify user trends, surveil user 
credentials, and funnel user data to data storage centers on the Chinese mainland.27 
LEXMARK: A BACKDOOR FOR MALIGN CYBER ACTIVITY
Though nominally an American company with headquarters in Lexington, Kentucky, Lexmark is 49% 
owned by a consortium of companies based in China, including Legend Holdings, the same Chinese 
state-financed company with a large stake in Lenovo.28 Lexmark has long been the subject of various 
reports regarding cyber threats and espionage risk, with the printer company facing allegations 
from various technology experts and conglomerates that the company’s printers could be used 
as a medium for cyber intrusion. Printers, one of the least secure Internet of Things devices, store 
sensitive data on internal hard drives derived from the various printing jobs executed on a day-to-
day basis. This sensitive data can be accessed through various software vulnerabilities in the printer, 
making sensitive documentation visible to adversaries and foreign actors.
As they have done with Lenovo, various federal government agencies have moved to restrict 
Lexmark products from their enterprises. The Social Security Administration, determined to mitigate 
supply chain risks in procurement practices, won its argument in a federal court in 2018 that printers 
manufactured by Lexmark presented “an unacceptable supply chain risk to the government” due 
to the company’s Chinese ownership and ties to the Chinese government.29 Some in the federal 
government clearly worried about Beijing’s access to Americans’ Social Security data, which U.S. 
states no doubt also have on record. 
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
15
Lexmark’s products were also labeled “known cybersecurity risks,” in the 2019 DOD Inspector 
General report examining commercial off-the-shelf products, which found that the U.S. Army and 
Air Force had purchased 8,000 Lexmark printers. The Department of Defense Inspector General 
stated that Lexmark has “connections to Chinese military, nuclear, and cyberespionage programs.” It 
continued: 
The National Vulnerabilities Database lists 20 cybersecurity vulnerabilities for Lexmark, including 
storing and transmitting sensitive network access credentials in plain text and allowing the 
execution of malicious code on the printer. These vulnerabilities could allow remote attackers to 
use a connected Lexmark printer to conduct cyberespionage or launch a denial of service attack 
on a DoD network.”30
Inexplicably, when it comes to Lexmark, the federal government suffers from the same incoherence 
that state governments do. The U.S. government’s General Services Administration has recognized 
Lexmark as a “process and content management solution provider for federal agencies.”31 This 
signals to both federal and state agencies that Lexmark is a perfectly fine supplier – even though 
other parts of the federal government have raised a red flag!
“You can have the best cyber program in your company and you can hire a 
private cybersecurity firm who has the best software, but if your procurement 
and acquisition folks are not part of the team, you will fail...Our adversaries, 
that’s how they get us, through procurement and acquisition programs. 
– Bill Evanina, former director of the National Counterintelligence and  
Security Center (NCSC) in the Office of the Director of National Intelligence
HIKVISION: A DE FACTO CHINESE GOVERNMENT SPY AGENCY 
Hikvision, a manufacturer of surveillance equipment, is a subsidiary of the Chinese state-owned China 
Electronics Technology Group Corporation. The Commerce Department wisely added Hikvision to the 
Entity List in 2019 for complicity in the genocide (the legal term the U.S. government has applied) the 
Chinese Communist Party has perpetrated against Uyghur Muslims in Xinjiang, China. The FCC has 
also added Hikvision to its covered list, meaning Hikvision products are prohibited from accessing 
the American radio frequency spectrum. The Pentagon has also banned Hikvision from its systems. 
In 2019, the federal government was banned from purchasing Hikvision products, and the Treasury 
Department was reported to be considering high-level economic sanctions on the company in 2022.32 
These designations have been made for good reason. In April, surveillance industry trade publication 
IPVM published a video entitled “Hikvision Cameras in My Concentration Camp Cell.” In it, a former 
concentration camp prisoner named Ovalbek Turdakun described how a Hikvision camera watched 
over him and 22 other prisoners held in a cramped cell, with devices even positioned over the toilet. 
When IPVM showed him the Hikvision logo, he instantly said “it is the same logo [of the cameras] 
which is in the cell.”33
The atrocities in Western China conducted with the aid of Hikvision products aren’t the only reason 
the company remains dangerous. Last year, IPVM documented Hikvision’s “top supplier status” for 
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
16
the Chinese military and role in “collaborating on PLA (People’s Liberation Army) research.” The Wall 
Street Journal picked up on the IPVM report, writing:
“According to public documents and online materials found by IPVM, Hikvision sold drones and 
other accessory equipment to the Chinese air force in 2019 and was considered a top-tier supplier 
to the nation’s military in 2014…Hikvision’s website also carried a report on how the company’s 
technology could improve the performance of Chinese missile, tank and other weapons systems, 
citing a study done jointly with commanders and weapons experts from the People’s Liberation 
Army. The study proposed the use of Hikvision cameras to record drills and improve weapons 
accuracy.”34
Yet the United States’ actions to restrict Hikvision products amounts to playing catch-up. Hikvision 
had already captured 12% of the North American surveillance camera market by 2017, including 
750,000 devices in the U.S., and even has even managed to place products in U.S. military bases and 
diplomatic facilities.35 A more recent estimate by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Review 
puts the number of Hikvision cameras in the U.S. at 600,000.36 It often gains penetration through a 
U.S. subsidiary, EZVIZ, whose products Best Buy and Home Depot only stopped carrying in 2021. 
Sadly, U.S. law enforcement agencies have been eager buyers of Hikvision equipment. Police 
departments throughout U.S. states, including those in Massachusetts, Colorado, and Tennessee, 
have used Hikvision products extensively. Shockingly, the city of Memphis, Tennessee received a 
“Homeland Security Award” from Government Security News in 2016 for deploying 600 Hikvision 
cameras as crime-fighting tools.37 IVPM has documented multiple school districts spending hundreds 
of thousands of dollars on Hikvision products,38 and two public school districts in Arkansas have also 
each spent more than $1 million dollars on them.39 These are just microcosms of Hikvision’s reach 
across the United States at the state level, despite a federal government acquisition ban. 
“No company from the People’s Republic of China is truly ‘independent.’ So, 
when these American entities buy this equipment, they should know that not 
only are they supporting companies facilitating repression in China, but that 
the data gathered via this surveillance gear can be shared with the Chinese 
Communist Party… We need to educate Americans, including local government 
entities, on the risks of buying this type of equipment and its moral and security 
implications.” 
– Senator Mark Warner (D-Virginia)
DJI: UNDERMINING AND MANIPULATING U.S. LAW ENFORCEMENT
Founded in 2006 Chinese drone manufacturer Da Jiang Innovations, or DJI for short, has quickly 
become a behemoth, controlling approximately 54% of the global drone market as of 2021,40 and 77% 
of the hobby drone market as of 2020.41 While not state-owned, it has taken investment funds from 
China Chengtong Holdings Group, which is directly administered by Beijing’s State-owned Assets 
Supervision and Administration Commission (SASAC).42 Its dominance in the commercial drone space 
has helped lead many of America’s police and fire departments to turn to DJI as their supplier of 
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
17
choice. In 2020, The Wire China reported that more than 900 U.S. state and local governments and 
emergency services used DJI products.43 Just as Huawei, state-backed chipmaker YMTC, and Lenovo 
have done in their respective industries, DJI prices its products far below its competitors’ in hopes 
of driving its rivals from the space. DJI has also helped carry out in the acts of genocide the Chinese 
Communist Party is perpetrating in Xinjiang by providing equipment to the Xinjiang Public Security 
Bureau, thus landing the company on the Commerce Department’s blacklist in 2021.44
The federal government knows DJI is dangerous. In 2021 the Department of Homeland Security  
warned that DJI is “a national security threat,” and assessed with “moderate confidence” that it was 
“providing U.S. critical infrastructure and law enforcement data to the Chinese government.”45 The 
U.S. Bureau of Customs and Immigration enforcement also issued a warning in 2017 assessing with 
high confidence that “the critical infrastructure and law enforcement entities using DJI systems are 
collecting sensitive intelligence that the Chinese government could use to conduct physical or cyber 
attacks against the United States and its population.”46 In 2018, the Department of Defense banned the 
purchase of all off-the-shelf drone technology, and in 2021 stated that “systems produced by Da Jiang 
Innovations (DJI) pose potential threats to national security.”47 
Despite these clear threats, state governments continue to purchase DJI drones in mass quantities 
(as have the Secret Service and the FBI, reports Axios).48 As of August 2021, 90% of U.S. public 
safety organizations using drones used a DJI-built product,49 with the New York Police Department 
just one law enforcement agency to rely on them.50 DJI and its lobbyists have co-opted the Law 
Enforcement Drone Association advocacy group to defend its interests in Washington, often flying in 
local law enforcement officials from across the nation to beg Congress to stay away from banning 
DJI (and what politician wants to cross the nation’s sheriffs and commissioners?). Writes national 
security expert Klon Kitchen, “DJI’s manipulation and use of local and state law enforcement is 
part of a broader political influence campaign inside of and targeting the United States.”51 Local law 
enforcement officers must be wary that they do not become pawns in the Chinese Communist Party’s 
game. 
“This is the latest example of how the CCP uses the swamp against us...There is 
bipartisan recognition that Congress needs to act to mitigate threats posed by 
DJI drones, but these efforts have been undermined by lobbyists who’d rather 
sell out the country than lose a lucrative contract.” 
- Rep. Mike Gallagher (R-Wisconsin),  
Chair of the House Select Committee on China
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
18
APPENDIX A: NASPO-AUTHORIZED 
LENOVO RESELLERS52
STATE :QUALIFIED NASPO VALUEPOINT 
RESELLERS AS OF 3/22/2021
Alaska CDWG
Arizona CDWG, SHI, Better Direct, QCM Technology, 
Riverside Technologies (RTI), Insight, Key 
Information Systems, All Covered, DHE
Arkansas CDWG, GovConnection, SHI, Next Step, 
Complete Computing
California CDW Government LLC; Datel Systems 
Incorporated; Omnipro Systems, Inc.; PC 
Specialists, Inc. (dba Technology Integration 
Group); Broadway Typewriter Company, 
Inc. (dba Arey Jones) ; Insight Public Sector, 
Inc.; Golden Star Technology Inc.; FireFly 
Computers LLC; Enterprise Networking 
Solutions, Inc.; ConvergeOne, Inc.
Colorado CDWG, DHE, Y&S Technology, Nelowet, 
Insight, Woodard Technologies (dba 
TwoTrees)
Delaware SHI
Devereux 
FoundationCDWG
Florida CDWG, SHI, GovConnection, PCMG, 
Broadway Typewriter Company aka Arey 
Jones, UDT, All Covered, Insight, PC 
Solutions, ProLogic ITS, WWT
Hawaii CDWG
Idaho CompuNet, ConvergeOne, CDWG, Ednetics 
Inc., Core Technologies, Sterling Computer 
Corporations
Iowa EmbarqIT, CDWG
Kansas CDWG, Woodard Technologies (dba 
TwoTrees), SHI
Kentucky CDWGSTATE :QUALIFIED NASPO VALUEPOINT 
RESELLERS AS OF 3/22/2021
Lousiana CDWG, CMA, SHI, Kynetic 
Technology,Woodard Technologies (dba 
TwoTrees), GovConnection, Firefly, Broadway 
Typewriter Company, Inc. (dba Arey 
Jones), General Informatics, LATG, Trinity3 
Technology
Maine CDWG, GovConnection, SHI
Minnesota CDWG, Firefly, TSG
Montana CDWG
New Jersey CDWG, GovConnection, Vcom, SpinCube, 
SHI, TechXtend, Palisades, CSAM, Micro 
Strategies, Insight, MTG IT Professionals
New Mexico CDWG, SHI, QCM, Riverside Technologies 
(RTI),Abba Technologies, Inc., PC Specialists, 
Inc. (dba Technology Integration Group), 
Education Technologies, Inc.
Oklahoma Woodard Technologies (dba TwoTrees), 
Trinity3 Technology
South 
CarolinaCDWG, A3 Communications, SHI, 
Alphanumeric, BridgeTek Solutions, Data 
Network Solution, Pinnacle, Virtucom, 
FireFly, Trinity3 Technology
Tennessee CDWG, SHI, GovConnection, Insight, Unistar 
Sparco
Utah CDWG, SHI, Summit Partner, DHE, Trinity3 
Technology, Firefly
Washington CDWG, ConvergeOne, GovConnection, 
Micro K-12, Ovation Technology, Trinity3 
Technology, Firefly, Jones & Associates
Wisconsin Insight, Vanguard, BusinessIT Source
Wyoming SHI
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
19
APPENDIX B: NASPO-AUTHORIZED 
LEXMARK RESELLERS
STATE :STATE 
CONTRACT #QUALIFIED NASPO 
VALUEPOINT RESELLERS AS 
OF 3/22/2021
California 140601 GovConnection, Inc., Granite 
Data Solutions, Zones, LLC, 
JJR Enterprises Inc. dba 
Caltronics Business Systems, 
PRA International, Pacific 
Office Automation, Fruth Group, 
John Galt Inc. dba Duplicated 
Business Systems, Harris 
Technologies, Inc.
Colorado 140601 GovConnection, Inc., Nelowet 
Business Machines, LTD, Pacific 
Office Automation, Zones, 
LLC, Harris Technologies, Inc., 
Frontier Business Products
Connecticut 140601 American Copy Service Center
Florida 140601 BLM Technologies of Florida 
LLC dba EvolvTec, Zones, LLC, 
RJ Young, GovConnection, 
Inc., Dove Print Solutions, Inc., 
Harris Technologies, Inc., SHI 
International Corp 
Hawaii 140601 Zones, LLC, Trafera, LLC, 
Harris Technologies, Inc., SHI 
International Corp, 
Idaho PADD1054 Allied Business Solutions
Iowa 140601 Marco Technologies LLC, 
M&M Sales Company 
D.B.A. MMIT, Gordon Flesch 
Company
Kansas 12520 CDW Government, Inc., 
Century United Companies, 
Inc, PCMG, Inc, World Wide 
Technology, Inc.
Kentucky 140601 American Business Systems 
Inc., Prosource, Duplicator 
Sales and Service, Electronic 
Business Macines, Inc., 
GovConnection, Inc., RJ 
Young, Trafera, LLC, SHI 
International CorpSTATE :STATE 
CONTRACT #QUALIFIED NASPO 
VALUEPOINT RESELLERS AS 
OF 3/22/2021
Louisiana 406370 Allfax Specialties, Inc., 
Automated Imaging Systems, 
Inc., C.F. Biggs Company, 
Inc., CDW Government, Inc., 
Classic Business Product, 
Dempsey Business Systems of 
LA, Emco Technologies, Staples 
Technology Solutions, WJS 
Enterprises, Inc.
Missouri 140601 Harris Technologies, Inc., SHI 
International Corp
CT202797005 Lakeland Office Supplies, 
Macro Technologies LLC, Harris 
Technologies, Inc.
Nevada 140601 GovConnection, Inc., High 
Sierra Business Systems 
Inc., Zones, LLC, SHI 
International Corp, 
New Mexico 140601 GovConnection, Inc., Harris 
Technologies, Inc., Sparks 
Office Solutions, Pacific 
Office Automation
Oklahoma B27169 Fuzzell’s Business 
Equipment, RK Black Inc. 
Rhode Island 140601 Automated Business 
Solutions Inc., 
GovConnection, Inc.
South 
Dakota140601 Harris Technologies, Inc., 
SHI International Corp
Utah 140601 PCF, Inc., Zones, LLC, 
GovConnection, Inc., Pacific 
Office Automation, Harris 
Technologies, Inc., SHI 
International Corp
Vermont 140601 GovConnection, Inc.
B27169 CDW Government, Inc.
Wisconsin 15-20400-905 CDW Government, Inc., 
Corporate Business 
Systems, Gordon Flesch 
Company
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
20
ENDNOTES
1 https:/ /apnews.com/article/technology-business-china-
united-states-hacking-ffa2120239eb687ce1979bf9599dfea5
2 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9rNOOwC3oCE
3 https://www.cnbc.com/2019/03/05/huawei-would-have-
to-give-data-to-china-government-if-asked-experts.html
4 https://cset.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/CSET-
Banned-in-D.C.-1.pdf
5 https://alec.org/model-policy/an-act-to-prohibit-state-
contracts-with-chinese-government-owned-or-affiliated-
technology-manufacturers/
6 https://legiscan.com/GA/bill/SB346/2021
7 https://lis.virginia.gov/cgi-bin/legp604.
exe?231+ful+HB2385EH2
8 https://chinatechthreat.com/cfius  
9 https://spacenews.com/u-s-military-doubles-down-on-
gps-despite-vulnerabilities/  
10 https://www.heritage.org/sites/default/files/2022-07/
SR259_0.pdf
11 https://legiscan.com/GA/text/SB346/2021
12 https://www.axios.com/2022/01/18/lawmakers-katko-
garbarino-warn-states-chinese-tech
13 https://www.fbi.gov/news/speeches/the-threat-posed-
by-the-chinese-government-and-the-chinese-communist-
party-to-the-economic-and-national-security-of-the-
united-states
14 https://www.heritage.org/sites/default/files/2022-07/
SR259_0.pdf
15 http://www.legendholdings.com.cn/Introduction_en/
index.aspx?nodeid=1043
16  http://ir.legendholdings.com.cn/media/1192/2022-
interim-report-e.pdf
17  https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2021-03/
March_19_2021_Hearing_Transcript.pdf
18 https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-xinjiang-
mit-tech-insight/risky-partner-top-u-s-universities-
took-funds-from-chinese-firm-tied-to-xinjiang-security-
idUSKCN1TE04M
19 https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/Research/
Interos_Supply%20Chain%20Vulnerabilities%20from%20
China%20in%20U.S.%20Federal%20ICT_final.pdf
20 https://www.thebulwark.com/the-chinese-threat-thats-
hiding-in-plain-sight/21 https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-
releases/2022-10-10-gartner-says-worldwide-pc-
shipments-declined-19-percent-in-third-quarter-of-2022
22 https://www.thebulwark.com/the-chinese-threat-thats-
hiding-in-plain-sight/
23 https://www.nytimes.com/2006/05/23/
washington/23lenovo.html
24 https://www.bloomberg.com/features/2021-
supermicro/?leadSource=uverify%20wall
25 https://spacenews.com/u-s-military-doubles-down-on-
gps-despite-vulnerabilities/
26 https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/
how-an-email-sparked-a-squabble-over-chinese-owned-
lenovos-role-at-pentagon/2016/04/22/b1cd43d8-07ca-
11e6-a12f-ea5aed7958dc_story.html
27 https://www.aei.org/technology-and-innovation/
new-pentagon-reports-shows-how-restricted-chinese-
it-products-routinely-make-their-way-into-us-military-
networks/
28 https://chinatechthreat.com/wp-content/
uploads/2020/02/CTT-Report-Stealing-From-States-
Chinas-Power-Play-in-IT-Contracts.pdf
29 https://federalnewsnetwork.com/reporters-notebook-
jason-miller/2018/05/ssa-bid-protest-win-demonstrates-
power-of-acquisition-to-protect-the-supply-chains/
30 https://www.aei.org/technology-and-innovation/
new-pentagon-reports-shows-how-restricted-chinese-
it-products-routinely-make-their-way-into-us-military-
networks/
31 https://www.lexmark.com/en_us/solutions/government/
accessibility-gsa-schedules.html
32 https://www.reuters.com/technology/us-plans-impose-
sanctions-chinas-hikvision-ft-2022-05-04/
33 https://ipvm.com/reports/hikvision-cell
34 https://www.wsj.com/amp/articles/chinese-surveillance-
gear-maker-hikvision-has-ties-to-countrys-military-report-
says-11621941983
35 https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2021/10/
china-america-surveillance-hikvision/620404/
36 https://www.technologyreview.
com/2022/06/22/1054586/hikvision-worlds-biggest-
surveillance-company/
37 https://www.newswire.ca/news-releases/hikvision-video-
surveillance-solution-wins-homeland-security-award-for-
memphis-police-department-569256351.html
38 https://ipvm.com/reports/hik-faye
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
21
39 https://www.axios.com/2022/10/26/governments-chinese-
telecom-bans
40 https://www.reuters.com/markets/asia/dji-is-more-
elusive-us-target-than-huawei-2021-12-17/
41 https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-
security/2022/02/01/china-funding-drones-dji-us-
regulators/
42 Ibid.
43 https://www.thewirechina.com/2020/10/04/are-chinese-
drones-national-security-threat-or-require-for-national-
interest/
44 https://www.theverge.com/2021/12/16/22839970/dji-
chinese-military-industrial-complex-investment-blacklist
45 https://www.axios.com/2021/09/22/federal-law-
enforcement-china-drone
46 https://info.publicintelligence.net/ICE-DJI-China.pdf
47 https://www.defense.gov/News/Releases/Release/
Article/2706082/department-statement-on-dji-systems/
48 https://www.axios.com/2021/09/22/federal-law-
enforcement-china-drone
49 https://www.droneresponders.org/post/dji-domination-
of-public-safety-drone-sector-continues-as-autel-robotics-
surges-to-second-position
50 https://theintercept.com/2021/10/12/nypd-chinese-
drones-surveillance/
51 https://www.aei.org/articles/red-china-backs-the-blue/
52 https://imlive.s3.amazonaws.com/Idaho/ID301139842
186554984703624925615599126585/Lenovo-Reseller-
List-5-26-22.pdf  
States of Denial vs. States of Momentum
22
www.chinatechthreat.comSTATES OF DENIAL VS. 
STATES OF MOMENTUM 
DANGEROUS CHINESE TECHNOLOGY 
IN U.S. STATE GOVERNMENT 
SYSTEMS AND RISING EFFORTS TO 
PROHIBIT CONTRACTS SUPPLYING IT 
James Marks
China Tech Threat
LD 877
Over the course of my military career, I have served our country is a variety of roles, 
including as a senior intelligence officer during Operation Iraqi Freedom in 2003 and 
as Commanding General of the U.S. Army Intelligence School in Fort Huachuca, 
Arizona. Early in my Army intelligence career, I served as a foreign area officer in 
Asia where I was privileged to be able to study Chinese affairs alongside an 
outstanding group of civilian and military analysts. 
Drawing on my decades of observing China’s behavior, I also have the opportunity to 
serve as the principal of China Tech Threat, an organization that studies the problems 
of technology produced by the People’s Republic of China and offer policy solutions 
to protect America’s security and prosperity. 
It is through this role that I submit this testimony in support of LD 877, An Act to 
Prohibit State Contracts with Companies Owned or Operated by the Government of 
the People's Republic of China. Consideration of this bill could not come at a more 
important time as we learn about China’s threat, strategies and intentions highlighted 
by Chinese President Xi Jinping’s meeting with Vladimir Putin this week to discuss 
their shared goals.
I am submitting this testimony to reinforce that China is a threat to America’s 
economic and national security not just at the federal level but importantly at the state 
and local level as well. We remain vulnerable to Chinese influence operations at all 
levels of governance.
Just last month, China Tech Threat released a report analyzing state use of technology 
manufactured by Chinese owned or operated companies that have already been banned or 
restricted at the federal level. Our research revealed that 28 states have cumulatively bought 
a total of at least $230 million worth of dangerous equipment since 2015, with individual 
states spending up to $47 million. The State of Maine has spent $5,350,803 on restricted 
Chinese technology from Lenovo, Inc. These purchases were made by the Bureau of 
Information Services, but the technology has likely been distributed throughout state 
agencies. 
 
This means that technology manufactured by Lexmark or Lenovo, which has been banned by
the Department of Defense, U.S. Intelligence agencies and others due to their connections to 
the Chinese military, is still being plugged into Maine’s state networks. 
 
It is important to specify that unlike other states, Maine does not disclose where purchased 
technology is being used. For example, we know that Delaware Department of Elections, the 
Hawaii Department of Taxation, and the South Dakota Department of Emergency 
Management are just a few state government entities to have purchased these products. That
same level transparency does not exist in Maine. Our February report was released as an 
update to the original 2019 report on state spending, where China Tech Threat was also 
unable to obtain state procurement and purchase information from Maine officials despite 
multiple attempts. I provide this background because it is important that Maine’s leaders fully 
recognize their potential risks and vulnerabilities.
 
The fact that Chinese-owned and operated Lenovo technology is being purchased by the 
state of Maine is so alarming because China's 2017 National Intelligence law mandates 
information sharing between “private” businesses and intelligence agencies, even for Chinese
businesses operating in other countries, like Lenovo. 
 
Fortunately, there is momentum building across in the states to combat this threat. With this 
bill, State Senator Lisa Keim is establishing Maine as an early leader, along with nearly a 
dozen other states who are also considering bills to prohibit contracts with this dangerous 
technology. 
Over the course of my career in the U.S. military, U.S. military planners went from 
assessing China as a second-tier challenge to a “pacing” threat today. The Chinese 
Communist Party is using all elements of national power – diplomacy, economics, 
military development, information flows, and technology – to undermine American 
security, prosperity, and freedom. 
China Tech Threat certainly recognizes that states don’t have the same resources or 
bench of staff expertise to analyze and track these types of technology threats. We 
hope our research and analysis can serve as a resource to help state leaders assess 
their vulnerabilities and what they can do to better protect residents, businesses, 
infrastructure and the vast amounts of sensitive data housed within government 
agencies. If there is a single weak point in our national cyber defenses especially at 
the state and local levels, China will find and exploit it. We are all vulnerable to 
Chinese influence operations.  
With this testimony, I am also uploading a copy of the China Tech Threat report I 
referenced above. 
Thank you for attention to this important issue. 
U.S. Army General (Retired) James Marks

