33 McAlister Farm Rd. 
Suite 102
Portland, ME  04103
info@mainemfg.com
P: 207-747-4406
www.mainemfg.com 
Manufacturers Association of Maine
21 March 2023
Senator Nangle, Representative Stover and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on State and Local Government.  We offer this testimony in 
support of LD 877, An Act to Prohibit State Contracts with Companies Owned or 
Operated by the Government of the People's Republic of China.
The Manufacturers Association of Maine (MAME) is a non-partisan 501(c)6 non-
profit grounded in service to its membership, providing a network of resources 
designed to support the strategic business growth needs of Maine manufacturing 
entrepreneurs.  Maine’s manufacturing businesses are diverse, employing almost 
60,000 individuals in military and defense, aerospace, metal fabrication, paper, 
boat building, semi-conductor, wood products, aquaculture and biotech, medical 
device, composites and bioplastics, as well as the food and beverage industries.  
These businesses represent almost 10% of Maine’s annual GDP and 14.5% of all 
the wages paid in the state on a weekly basis.  MAME’s mission is to help 
manufacturing grow and succeed and supports Maine’s development of future 
manufacturing through a variety of programs.
While we understand this issue in general seems to be aimed at technology 
related industries, this bill appears broader in that it prohibits ANY business 
owned or operated by the government of the People’s Republic of China from 
doing business with the State of Maine directly, or with any entity that receives 
state funding. We support the approach of this proposal.  
The federal government has already taken steps to address the Chinese tech 
threat with passage of the National Defense Authorization Act which prohibits 
the federal government from purchasing or using information and 
communication technology from certain Chinese companies.  
Recently, some states have begun to move in the direction of the federal 
government.  In 2019, Vermont banned state use of technology from several 
Chinese and Russian manufactures.  Last year, Georgia passed legislation that 
prohibits Chinese owned companies from bidding on state contracts.  In Florida, 
Governor DeSantis signed an executive order that prohibits state and local 
governments from procuring technology from companies owned or domiciled in 
China. Currently, Maine is one of nearly a dozen states with pending legislation. 
We believe this bill addresses a concerning issue and it’s important that the state 
and state funded entities are not inadvertently procuring goods or services that 
could unknowingly put them at risk.  We ask you to support the proposal before 
you.2023 Executive BOARD
Chair of the Board 
Judith Borelli
Texas Instruments
Vice Chair of the Board, &
Legislative Chair
Dave Fortin 
Kennebec Technologies
Treasurer & Investment Chair
Samantha Pedersen
Albin, Randall & Bennett
Secretary & Business Svcs. Chair
Neal Prescott
Prescott Associates
Past-Chair & Energy Program Chair
Alan LaPoint
The Strainrite Companies
Executive Director
Mike Roughton
Document1
