 Maine Professional Guides Association 
55 Morrison Hill Road 
Wilton, ME 04294 
 
www.maineguides.org 
 
 
An organization of professional guides dedicated to promoting a quality, ethical outdoor experience. 
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 1319 
An Act to Exempt Certain Boat Operators from Having to Become Maine Guides 
May 1, 2023 
 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and members of the committee, my name is James Cote and I am here on 
behalf of the Maine Professional Guides Association in opposition to LD 1319.  
 
The Maine Professional Guides Association represents approximately 1,000 licensed guides in Maine who lead guests on outdoor 
adventures ranging from paddle board yoga to bear hunting. As we have in the past, we would like to express concern that the 
profession of guiding is weakened every time the Legislature opts to carve out certain types activities. A good example of this was a 
recent carve out for educational trip leaders.  
“Guide”, in Title 12 of the Maine Revised Statutes, means a person who receives any form of remuneration for that person's 
services in accompanying or assisting a person in the fields or forests or on the waters or ice within the jurisdiction of the State while 
hunting, fishing, trapping, boating, snowmobiling, using an all-terrain vehicle or camping at a primitive camping area.   
We believe that this statutory definition was crafted with intention to ensure safe and enjoyable outdoor adventures for residents 
and visitors here in Maine.  
Having said that, the Maine Professional Guides Association also understands that there may sometimes be circumstances in today’s 
world that require thoughtful adjustment and accommodation. If the Legislature decides to pursue an accommodation of this sort we 
would ask for the opportunity to work with the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to ensure that such an accommodation 
is: 
1) as limited in scope as possible;  
2) provides maximum protection to guests, and;  
3) avoids competing with market opportunities for licensed guides to the greatest extent possible.  
Thank you for your consideration.  
 
 
 
 
