 
Richard A. Bennett                                                                                                        3 State House Station  
Senator, District 18                                                                                                  Augusta, Maine 04333  
 
THE MAINE SENATE 
131st Legislature 
Fax: (207) 287-1527 *  TTY (207) 287-1583  *  Message Service 1-800-423-6900  *  Web Site: legislature.maine.gov/senate 
 
 
 
Testimony of Senator Richard A. Bennett 
In Presenting of LD 1319,  
“An Act to Exempt Certain Boat Operators from Having to Become Maine Guides” 
1 May 2023 
 
Good morning Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.  I am Senator Rick Bennett of Oxford, and 
I have the honor of serving 14 communities in Western Maine in the State Senate.  I am here to 
present LD 1319, “An Act to Exempt Certain Boat Operators from Having to Become Maine 
Guides.” 
 
I have submitted this bill because of a narrow issue that came to light within the past months that 
I believe needs statutory attention to rectify. 
 
I represent Maine’s beautiful lakes region, and we have many seasonal businesses who provide 
water skiing and other boating recreational opportunities to tourists and Mainers alike.  This bill 
would allow a person who has completed an approved boater safety education course and is 
certified in first aid to operate a watercraft without a guide license as an employee of a seasonal 
business engaged in instruction in recreational activities.   
 
I understand that for years the Department of IF&W interpreted the statutes that such businesses 
did not need to hire professional guides for this seasonal activity limited to this scope.  The 
Department, however, has reviewed the law and determined that, indeed, such activities must be 
performed by registered professional Maine guides.  This interpretation makes it exceedingly 
difficult, if not impossible, for these enterprises to find help and operate their business. 
 
I have reviewed the testimony of the Maine Professional Guides Association in opposition to this 
bill, and agree with their recommendation that the accommodation provided under this 
legislation should ) be as limited in scope as possible; 2) provide maximum protection to guests, 
and; 3) avoid competing with market opportunities for licensed guides to the greatest extent 
possible.  This bill has been crafted with these goals in mind.    
 
Please note that this bill carries an emergency preamble in the hopes that if this legislation is 
enacted that it will save the upcoming summer season for the businesses who provide these 
services and the people they serve.  I hope you will favorably consider this legislation.  Thank 
you. 
 
