TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
NEITHER FOR NOR AGAINST TO L.D. 1319 
An Act to Exempt Certain Boat Operators from Having to 
Become Maine Guides (EMERGENCY) 
Presented by Senator BENNETT of Oxford. 
Cosponsored by Senator: LIBBY of Cumberland 
DATE OF HEARING: May 1, 2023 
Good morning Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Committee. l am Tim Peabody, Deputy Commissioner at the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, 
speaking on behalf of the Department, neither for nor against to L.D. 1319. 
This bill allows a person who has completed an approved boater safety education course and is certified in first 
aid to operate a watercraft without a guide license as an employee of a seasonal business engaged in instruction 
in recreational activities. 
To provide some background, our understanding is that this bill was brought forth from a business owner(s) in 
the Sebago Lake Region. They are under a time crunch in the spring when hiring students as seasonal employees 
to operate boats that tow water-skiers and train people to water-ski. For years they had operated their business 
believing that if a boater education safety course was taken, they met the legal requirement to "carry 
passengers for hire" as described within Title 12 section 13063. The boat operators could then be paid to teach 
water-skiing or tow water-skiers. Last year the business owners were made aware that the activity in which 
they were engaged, required the boat operators to be recreational guides. The guide testing is more rigorous 
and time consuming than having to take an online boater education safety course. 
We have strong opposition to the bill as written because the exemption is so broad it essentially covers any 
activity that a current recreational guide license would require and exempts that activity if the person takesa 
boater safety education course as well as a first aid course instead. A person who runs a business operating a 
watercraft, instructing water-skiers and other towed water sports is a high-risk activity. 
We would be interested in having a broader conversation with the guiding industry and others who engage in 
“guided” type activities for which the definition of guide may or may not seem to fit. With ever changing 
technology and new outdoor, commercial business ventures, looking at the definition of what constitutes 
guiding and what does not may be warranted. We think there is a compromise between ensuring the safety of 
the public when hiring someone to enjoy the outdoors and continuing to support Maine's business owner’s who 
promote our great outdoors in a responsible manner. 
l would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
