 
Senator Baldacci 
Representative Meyer 
Members of the Committee of Health and Human Services 
 
RE: LD 1440 Resolve, to Increase the Availability of Community Children's Behavioral Health Services by 
Providing Training and Career Opportunities for Behavioral Health Professionals 
 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and members of the Health and Human Services Committee. 
My name is Carrie Woodcock I am the parent of two children with special needs and the Executive 
Director for Maine Parent Federation (MPF), the federally funded Parent Training and Information 
Center (PTI), Family to Family Health Information Center (F2F) and Statewide Family Network. We assist 
families of children with disabilities and special healthcare needs to navigate all systems of care. I am 
submitting this testimony in support of LD 1440 Resolve, to Increase the Availability of Community 
Children's Behavioral Health Services by Providing Training and Career Opportunities for Behavioral 
Health Professionals. 
 
As the parent of a daughter with Down Syndrome we have qualified for and taken advantage of 
Residential and Community Based Supports offered through Section 28. This service is invaluable to our 
daughter as it provides her a Professional who can teach her important skills to be successful in her 
home, community (including school), and in professional environments. It is my belief that access to this 
service will mean in the future Sami will have the same opportunities as her peers like college, 
employment, and independent living. 
 
I do not need to detail for the committee the barriers this service has faced in maintaining federal 
compliance due to long waitlists. Also, you have heard many bills addressing MaineCare rates and a 
livable wage for Direct Service Providers (DSP). I strongly support this bill as I believe it goes further than 
any other bill by addressing additional barriers of training, career advancement, and supervision.  
 
In addition to wages providers express reasons for leaving this profession include a lack of training to 
successfully address the need and a lack of ability to move up the ranks within their careers. The 
creation of course curriculum within our Community College system with Department incentives for 
those pursuing the curriculum is a creative way to address these barriers while including financial 
incentive. Additional training and tools for DSP’s mean more positive outcomes for their clientele and 
themselves. In addition, it provides a pathway to advance within their careers, keeping them in the 
industry.  
 
We have also heard these providers are feeling alone in their work due to a lack of support through 
supervision. The inclusion of guaranteed supervision hours addresses this need.  
 

It is human nature to want to feel valued within our professional careers. Studies have shown us that 
this is lacking within our DSP community. While increased pay is a motivating factor, we need to 
acknowledge that feeling valued goes further than just pay. I believe that this bill successfully addresses 
these additional barriers and can put our state on a pathway to improving our Residential and 
Community Based supports for our families and essential Direct Services Providers.  
 
For these reasons I urge the committee to please support both LD 1440. 
 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
Carrie Woodcock 
Executive Director 
Maine Parent Federation 
cwoodcock@mpf.org  
(207) 588-1933 
 
