Janet T. Mills Mairre Department of Health and Human Services 
(lovernor '& Commissioner's Office 
ﬁn ll State House Station 
Jeanne M. Lanrbrew, Ph.D. ‘ 109 Cﬂlliml Sn-Get 
Commissioner Augusta, Maine 04333~00l l 
' " 
Tel: (207) 287-3707; Fax: (207) 287-3005 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay) 
Testimony of the Office of Child and Family Services (OCF S) and 
the Office of MaineCare Services (OMS) 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Neither for nor against LD 1440, Resolve to Increase the Availability ofCommunily Children ’s 
Behavioral Health Services by Providing Training and Career Opportunities for Behavioral Health 
Professionals 
. 
Hearing Date: April 21, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and Honorable Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Health and Human Services, I am Dean Bugaj, Associate Director for Children ’s Behavioral Health at 
the Ofﬁce of Child and Family Services. I am here today to testify neither for nor against LD 1440, 
Resolve to Increase the Availability ofCon1rnuniIy Children ’s Behavioral Heal/h Services by Providing 
Training and Career Opportunities for Behavioral Health Professionals. 
LD 1440 would require the Department to coordinate in the development of a course curriculum, 
credential, and career path for Behavioral Health Professionals (BHPs) providing services to children in 
the community. The curriculum must be offered through the Community College System or bya 
contracted agency with multiple sites statewide. The cuniculum must lead to a credential that is portable 
and sufﬁcient to satisfy Department licensing requirements for any BHP serving children in the 
community. The Department must also explore options for providing incentives to individuals wishing 
to pursue the curriculum, including grants or free or reduced tuition. The resolve also requires 
MaineCare to establish increased rates for BHPs with the training and requires that BHPs serving 
children in the community receive one hour per week of clinical supervision. 
The Department supports expanding the number of BHPs and the work is already occurring. OCFS hasa 
contract with Woodfords Family Services to provide BHP training at no cost and there is a budget 
initiative to continue that contract. The training through Woodfords is available in various formats, 
including a blended model that is primarily online with one instructor-led live day session. Work has 
also been done to recruit individuals to the ﬁeld. OCFS also supports working with the Community 
College System to implement a curriculum but would defer to them on their capacity and the cost to 
implement such a curriculum. 
The Department is also not opposed to the requirement of one-hour per week of clinical supervision as 
long as the providers believe this can occur within the current rate for the service. Some services that 
utilize BHPs (including HCT, CRCF, and Children ’s Behavioral Health Day Treatment) have clinicians 
involved with the service delivery that would meet the weekly supervision requirement. Section 28 
Rehabilitative and Community Support (RCS) services are not clinical services and do not have 
clinicians overseeing the service. It is likely that requiring clinicians to supervise these services would 
require a major shift in cost and policy.
MaineCare sets rates according to the rate refonn process and principals established last year in LD 
1867, An Act to Codify MaineCare Rate System Reform, which was passed into law as P.L. 2021, ch. 
639. The intent behind that bill was to establish“ . . .a rate-setting system for the development and 
maintenance of MaineCare payment models. . .to be consistent with efﬁciency, economy, and quality of 
care; that are adequate to support MaineCare member access to services; and that are equitable and data- 
driven.” MaineCare recently implemented new rates (effective January 1, 2023) representing a 
transformational investment across the spectrum of behavioral health services. For example, this 
included a median rate increase of 72.3% under Section 28 and 22.0% under Section 65. When 
determining appropriate reimbursement, the Department considered the education and training necessary 
for BHPs to deliver the various services which employ them, taking into account the appropriate mix of 
wages using BLS data. These services will receive annual cost of living adjustments and undergo 
rebasing of the current rates targeted for January 1, 2028. Given OMS’ established process of systematic 
assessment of all MaineCare services to ensure rates are adequate, reasonable, equitable, and incent high 
value provision of care, it would not be appropriate for OCFS to turn its resources to ﬁirther adjustments 
for these rates. 
Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have and to 
make myself available for questions at the work session.
