 52 WATER STREET 
HALLOWELL, ME 04347 
(800) 464-5767 
 
 LEGISLATIVE CONTACT 
Hannah Longley, LCSW, Director of Community 
Programs 
(207) 622-5767  ￿ HannahL@namimaine.org  POSITIONS & POLICY AGENDA 
www.namimaine.org/advocacy 
POSITION STATEMENT IN SUPPORT  
LD 1440 Resolve, to Increase the Availability of Community Children's Behavioral Health 
Services by Providing Training and Career Opportunities for Behavioral Health Professionals  
Presented to Maine’s Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
As the state’s largest grassroots mental health advocacy organization, NAMI Maine supports the passage 
of Resolve, to Increase the Availability of Community Children’s Behavioral Health Services by Providing 
Training and Career Opportunities for Behavioral Health Professionals. As the state’s largest grassroots 
mental health organization, NAMI Maine advocates strongly to work to provide mental heath care 
services to the 1 in 4 Mainers who are diagnosed with a mental health challenge. We also support the 
work in order to increase the capabilities of the state to meet the needs of our young people who have 
increasingly struggled through the pandemic and aftermath. 
Prior to the occurrence of COVID 19, Maine was unfortunately recognized nationally as having a critical 
shortage of mental health providers. Since the onset of the pandemic, the shortage has continued to 
grow. The Health Resources and Services Administration, as well as Mental Health America, identify 
Maine has having significant deficits in the mental health workforce at many levels. Maine also had the 
highest rate of young people diagnosed with anxiety disorders and third highest rate of young people 
diagnosed with depressive disorders in the nation. By providing training and opportunities for workforce 
development within our state, we improve our capacity to address the needs of our young people.  
NAMI Maine would also like this committee to increase even more the opportunities and the pathways 
into the mental health field. Maine has developed strong technical programs, both within the 
community college system, as well as the high school vocational training pathways. Providing students 
with mental health training opportunities leading to certifications would continue to match the mental 
health field with other professions. As a state, we have increased the abilities for young people to 
achieve EMS certifications, Certified Nurses Assistants training, as well as other state certification 
training. Developing a pathway for behavioral health training within the technical schools will increase 
the understanding and abilities of the young people of our state in initiating professional work within 
this field and a future for an ever-expanding career choice.  
NAMI Maine supports the work and initiatives of this committee in ensuring that that the critical 
resources and services are provided in the state. The creation of a robust workforce and reducing the 
barriers to working in a rewarding, although challenging field, will increase the ability to support our 
communities.  
 
ABOUT NAMI MAINE: Incorporated in 1984, the National Alliance on Mental Illness, Maine Chapter (NAMI Maine) is the state’s largest grassroots 
mental health organization. With support from national and regional affiliates, the agency is dedicated to building better lives for everyone 
impacted by behavioral health concerns. NAMI Maine engages with leaders and community partners at all levels to improve the state’s mental 
health system through collaboration and education.   
