 
TO:   Senator Baldacci , Representative  Meyer 
Joint Standing Committee on Health an d Human Services    
FROM:  Dr. Janet Sortor, Vice President and Chief Academic Officer  
RE: Testimony Neither for No r Against  LD 1440, Resolve, to Increase the Availability of 
Community Children's Behavioral Health Services by Providing Training and Career 
Opportunities for Behavioral Health Professional s 
DATE:  April  18, 202 3  
 
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer  and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services , I am  Janet Sortor, the Vice President and Chief Academic Officer  for the Maine 
Community College System , and I am providing testimony NFNA  on LD 1440  on behalf of the Maine 
Com munity College System.   
Adolescence has long been  a challenging time  for a child’s psychosocial development, but then came the 
pandemic.  COVID -19 has had a profound , negative effect on the mental health of the nation  and 
particularly o n its children . Since the onset of the pandemic in 2020,  more people are experiencing  
anxiety, depression, psychosis, loneliness, and other mental health concerns.  Social distancing and 
school closures had a particularly negative impact on school age children, particularly adolescents . 
According to a report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),  more than 37 percent 
of high school students reporte d they experienced poor mental health during the pandemic, and 44 
percent said they persistently felt sad or hopeless the past year  
(https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2022/p0331 ). To address this increase in mental health challenges, 
Maine  needs to expand the educational pipeline for mental health profession als serving children and 
increase the a vailability of services.   
Maine’s community colleges  enrolled  over 500 students this year in associate degree and certificate 
programs in Human Services , prepar ing them  for entry -level positions in community health centers, 
hospitals, schools, social service and mental health programs, and child -care settings . These students are  
also eligible for certification as a MHRT/C (Mental Health Rehabilitation Technician/Community)  
professionals which makes them work ready . In response to the increase in demand for mental health 
professionals during the pandemic, the MCCS Center for Workforce Development  also created and 
funded short -term training  focused on preparing students for MHRT/C certification, creating an 
opportunity for an additional 300 students to enter mental health care positions.  
This pipeline of education and training can also support the development and delivery of curriculum for 
health professionals specializing in children’s behavior health , much like that for adults , and in the 
development of standards for certification like th ose under the  MHRT  umbrella.  The MCCS looks 
forward to partnering with the Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Maine  Care 
Services , and Office of Child and Family Services  in expanding educational opportunities so that we 
may increas e these critical  services  to those most hard hit by the pandemic , our children and adolescents . 
Thank you.  

