Serving the Maine autism community since 1976    
 
 
 
April 19, 2023 
 
Representatives Madigan, Gramlich, and Perry and members of the Health and Human Services 
Committee, I am Lisa Morgan, consultant and advocate for crisis supports for autistic people. I am a 
consultant, Life Coach, and trainer / developer of suicide prevention resources for autistic people. I’m 
writing on behalf of the Autism Society of Maine as a member of the Board of Directors. 
 
I support LD 1440 - Resolve, to Increase the Availability of Community Children's Behavioral Health 
Services by Providing Training and Career Opportunities for Behavioral Health Professionals 
 
As a parent who needed the service of a behavioral health professional for my child, I can attest to the 
importance of having a trained, credentialed service provider.  
 
These individuals are providing important services for our children, a vulnerable population, and 
providing appropriate training will ensure experienced, trained professionals are available to care for and 
support them.  
 
In my own experience of needing a behavioral health provider for a member of my family, we were 
unintentionally harmed due to the lack of training and professionalism of the provider, which was directly 
reflective of the listed requirements of the position.  
 
First, the job requirements allowed them to be hired at a young age, with little to no training. Secondly, as 
a parent, I had no idea about the training, job experience, or credentials of the behavioral health service 
provider to whom I was entrusting the care of my child. My child was not supported in the way they 
needed and deserved. The relationship between the behavioral health service provider and my family 
came to an abrupt end when the service provider took my child from a public place where I was to 
another public place without telling me first. The unfortunate anxiety and angst of not knowing where my 
child was could have been alleviated with proper training for the behavioral health support professional 
who thought it would be ok to just take a child from one place to another with no communication. 
 
I urge you to support this bill, LD 1440, to coordinate the development of a course curriculum, credential, 
and career path for behavioral health professionals providing services to the children in the community. 
 
Sincerely, 
Lisa Morgan M.Ed., CAS 
lisamorganconsulting@gmail.com 
 
72B Main Street, Winthrop, ME 04364
Phone: 207.377.9603 or 
1.800.273.5200
Fax: 207.377.9434
Email: asm@asmonline.org
Web: www.asmonline.org
Lisa  Morgan
Kittery
LD 1440
 

