295 Water Street, Suite 307, Augusta ME 04330 ~ Phone 207.621.8118 ~ Fax 207.621.8362 ~ theAllianceMaine.org  
 Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health Services, Maine  
The unified voice for Maine's community behavioral health providers  
         Malory Otteson Shaughnessy, Executive Director  
 
Testimony in Support of  LD 1440  
"Resolve, to Increase the Availability of Community Children's 
Behavioral Health Services by Providing  Training and Career 
Opportunities for Behavioral Health Professionals " 
Sponsored by Representative Madigan  
April 21, 2023  
 
Good morning  Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer , and esteemed  members 
of the Health and Human Services  Committees.   My name is  Malory Shaughnessy 
and I am the Executive Director of the Alliance for Addiction and Mental Health 
Services. The Alliance is the statewide association representing the majority of 
Maine’s community based mental health and substance use treatment providers , 
providing services to over 80,000 Maine men, women, and children . The Alliance 
advocates for the implementation of sound policies and evidence -based practices 
that serve to enhance the quality and effectiveness of our behavioral health care 
system.  
 
On b ehalf of the Alliance, I am here today to speak in support of LD 1440, 
“Resolve, to Increase the Availability of Community Children's Behavioral Health 
Services by Providing Training and Career Opportunities for Behavioral Health 
Professionals .” This resol ve requires the Department, Office  of MaineCare 
Services , and Office of Child and Family Services to coordinate the development 
of a course curriculum, credential and career path for behavioral health 
professionals providing services to children in the com munity. As committee 
members hear basically every day, Maine has a severe  behavioral health 
profession shortage. This proposal would go a long way to solving that challenge.  
 
Further, t he proposal states that the course curriculum must be offered through 
community college courses around the State or by a contracted agency with 
multiple sites around the State.  This is another smart tool to aid in our workforce 
shortage. Community Colleges are less expensive – and i n some cases free to 
Maine students. Additionally, the resolve directs the D epartment to explore 
options for providing incentives to individuals wishing to pursue the course 
curriculum, including but not limited to grants or free or reduced tuition.  
 
Give n the complexity of the mental health challenges today, we recognize that no 
single  approach or group will solve this; we need a collective answer, a collective 
vision for  the future. We must come together to strategically articulate the short 
term, midter m and long strategies and actions necessary to advance Maine’s 
behavioral health system forward.   
 
This proposal is a vital piece of any forward -looking strategic plan to address the 
behavioral health workforce shortage in our state. I thank Representative  
Madigan for bringing this proposal forward and urge an ought -to-pass vote by 
committee members. Thank you.  
 
 
 
 
~ Officers ~  
 
Dave McCluskey , President  
Community Care   
Greg Bowers , 1st Vice -President  
Day One  
Bob Descoteaux , 2nd Vice -
President  
MaineGeneral Behavioral Health  
Kara Hay , Secretary  
Penquis CAP Inc.  
Ellen Bemis , Treasurer  
Aroostook Mental Health Center  
Eric Meyer , Past President  
Spurwink  
  
~ Board Members ~  
 
Adcare Educational Instit ute 
ARC at Mid Coast Hospital  
Alternative Services, NE, Inc.  
Androscoggin Home & Healthcare  
Assistance Plus  
Catholic Charities , Maine  
Co-occurring Collaborative 
Serving Maine  
Christopher Aaron Center  
Common Ties  
Community Caring Collaborative  
Community Health & Counseling  
COR Health  
Crisis & Counseling Centers  
Crossroads Maine  
Genoa Healthcare & 
Telepsychiatry  
Kennebec Behavioral Health  
Maine Behavioral Health 
Organization  
Maine Behavioral Healthcare  
Milestone Recovery  
NFI North, Inc.  
Northern Light /Acadia  
Portland Recovery Community 
Center  
Pathways of Maine  
Rumford Group Homes  
Brighter Heights Maine  
Sunrise Opportunities  
Sweetser  
TriCounty Mental Health Services  
Wellspring, Inc.  
Wings for Children & Families  
Woodfords Family Services  
 

