vi E 0 0 ’0 
'5 }Ma|ne Chuldren s Allnance Advocating forthe weil—being of all Maine families. 
Testimony of Rita Furlow, 
Senior Policy Analyst, Maine Children's Alliance 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Resolve, to Increase the Availability of Community Children ‘s Behavioral Health Services by 
Providing Training and Career Opportunities for Behavioral Health Professionals 
LD 1440 
April 21, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyers, and members of the Joint Standing Committees on 
Health and Human Services, my name is Rita Furlow. I am the Senior Policy Analyst at the Maine 
Children's Alliance. The Maine Children's Alliance, a statewide non-partisan, advocacy 
organization whose mission is to promote sound public policy and best practices to improve the 
lives of children, youth, and families in Maine. 
l am here today in support of LD 1440 which would provide improved career opportunities for 
Behavior Health Professionals who work with the many children who needs support learning 
how to regulate their emotions and behaviors. l want to thank Rep. Colleen Madigan for 
meeting with parents whose children are receiving those services. A group of parents we work 
with discussed with us and other partner organizations their frustrations relating to accessing 
behavioral services for their children. They were able to meet with Rep. Madigan, who 
graciously agreed to talk with them and ultimately support a policy solution on their behalf. 
The purpose of the legislation is to improve the career path for Behavioral Health Professionals 
(BHP). Parents who have participated in the system feel that too often the job is seen by 
potential applicants as one that doesn't provide opportunities for advancement. They believe 
that by giving BHPs an opportunity to gain college credit, individuals may be willing to serve asa 
BHP while considering other advanced degrees such as a BA in social work. There was alsoa 
desire to see the Department, and perhaps the Community College system, create a curriculum 
that would better serve their children by providing instruction in developmental disabilities 
such as autism and intellectual disabilities. 
Thank you again to Rep. Madigan and to all of you for your consideration. 
331 State Street - 
Augusta, Maine 04330 ~ 
(207) 6234868 - 
wvvvv.mel<ids.org~ mainekids@mei<ids.org
