Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen, members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, my name is 
Judith Meyer. I am the editor of the Sun Journal in Lewiston, the Kennebec Journal and the 
Morning Sentinel. 
l write on behalf of the Maine Press Association in opposition to LD 1789, An Act to Remove All 
Marijuana —related Provisions from the Maine Criminal Code and Expunge All Convictions 
Involving Marijuana. 
=l<** 
This testimony will feel familiar as it matches Maine Press Association's position on LD 1646, An 
Act to Vacate or Adjust Sentences and Expunge Arrests, Convictions and Adjudications for 
Cannabis-related Offenses. 
When the Criminal Records Review Committee was formed and convened in 2021, on whicha 
representative of the Maine Press Association served, we were tasked with coming forward 
with a recommendation on what criminal records, if any, might qualify for expungement, seal, 
vacature, pardon or some other method of shielding the record. 
Top of the list was sealing or vacating criminal records relating to marijuana convictions, a topic 
that consumed many of our meetings. 
l don't recall that we discussed in any detail the concept of removing all marijuana-related 
provisions from the Maine Criminal Code (the provision regarding forfeiture of firearms, for 
example), but we had not been tasked with making such a wide recommendation and focused 
only on the question of vacature, expungement or sealing such records. 
The committee — which included more than two dozen stakeholders in law enforcement, prison 
reform, public access, victim advocacy groups and other interested parties -- met for months 
and came forward with a number of recommendations, but did not settle the question of what 
marijuana convictions should be sealed/vacated and how. Vacate all marijuana convictions 
from all time? Just those convictions since marijuana use was legalized in Maine? Some 
combination of those options? Or, something else entirely? 
We invited experts to talk about options, including what other states were doing, and heard 
from both the Judicial Branch and the Maine State Bureau of identiﬁcation, which collects and
maintains criminal history information, about the process of sealing/vacating/expunging tens of 
thousands of criminal records, and what the cost might be. 
There was robust debate surrounding these issues, including how to manage defendants 
currently serving sentences for marijuana convictions, and while there was some agreement on 
some issues and members of the Criminal Records Review Committee were making progress on 
a recommendation for certain marijuana convictions, we did not have time to complete our 
research and make recommendations in the time allotted for our work. 
Given the amount of research that has already been gathered and the level of discussion that 
has already been held on this concept by members of the Criminal Records Review Committee, 
the Maine Press Association opposes this bill and requests that Judiciary move further 
discussion back to a reconstituted Criminal Records Review Committee for recommendation. 
I invite the Judiciary Committee to take a peek at the records the Criminal Records Review 
Committee has amassed on this topic, and the committee work that has already been 
completed, in hopes you will recognize a great deal of work has already been accomplished in 
advancing recommendations that will address many of the suggestions in this bill, if the 
Criminal Records Review Committee is given the time needed to finish up its work. 
*** 
The Maine Press Association (MPA), founded in 1864, is one of the oldest professional news 
organizations in the nation. Our goals, as spelled out in our charter and by-laws are to promote 
and foster high ethical standards and the best interests of the newspapers, journalists, and 
media organizations of the state of Maine that constitute its membership; to encourage 
improved business and editorial practices and better media environment in the state; and to 
improve the conditions ofjournalism and journalists by promoting and protecting the principles 
of freedom of speech and of the press and the public's right to know.
