 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LDs 848, 1550, 1646, 1789  
Neither For Nor Against  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Carney  
          Representative Matt Moonen  
          Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 848 , An Act to Expunge Certain Nonviolent Drug Crimes  
 LD 1550 , An Act to Authorize the Expungement of Nonviolent C rimes  
 LD 1646 , An Act to Vacate or Adjust Sentences and Expunge Arre sts, Convictions and 
Adjudications for Cannabis -related Offenses  
 
 LD 1789 , An Act to Remove All Marijuana -related Provisions from the Maine Criminal 
code and Expunge All Convictions Involving  Marijuana  
 
 
DA: April 27, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony neither for nor against LDs 848, 1550, 1646, and 1789.     
 
 These bills were not scheduled sufficiently in advance of the hearing date to enable CLAC 
to conduct a full discussion.   Accordingly, our input is limited  to the following general 
observations and recommendations.    
 
 Criminal history record  information  is classified as “public ” or “confidential, ” and access is 
governed generally by the Criminal History Record Information  Act, 16 M.R.S. , Chapter 7,  as well 
as specific statutes th at authorize cert ain persons or entities to have access to confidential  criminal 
history for limited purposes  (e.g., 22 M .R.S. § 4021 —confidenti al criminal history available for 
child abuse, neglect, death investigations) , or that limit the ways in which criminal history record 
information can be used.   (e.g., 5 M .R.S. §§ 5301 -5304 —limiting convictions that can be used to 
make licensing determinat ions) .    The Legislature has considered limiting access  to criminal history  
repeatedly over the past several years, and has done so with respect to both juvenile history (this is 
done separately, in the Juvenile Code) and adult criminal history .   Most recently, the Legislature  
re-enacted and expanded the sealing process for certain  convictions  (Post -judgment Motion to Seal 
Criminal History Record , 15 M.R.S. Ch 310 -A;  PL 2021, c. 6 74; sealed convictions are 
“confidential criminal history  record info rmation ,” with limited access) , and prohibited most 
employers from inquiring about criminal history on initial  employment application forms .  26 
M.R.S. § 600-A, PL 2021, c. 404.   
 
 Any proposed changes should  use the existing processes and terminology for sealing, 
classification  of records , and  access rather than creating new systems that overlap  and conflict with 
 
 existing laws.   Proposals that would authorize vacating convictions or resentencing after   
conviction and sentence have been f inalized ra ise constitutional  issues related to the separation of 
powers (impinging on the  Gove rnor’s constitutional  clemency  autho rity).    
 
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
