 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 104 (NFNA)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 104, An Act to Make It a Crime Not to Report a Death  
 
DA: March 6, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony neither for nor against LD 104. 
 
 CLAC addressed  LD 104 at its March 3, 2023 meeting, in consideration of  the bill’s March 
6 hearing date.   However, t he text of the LD was n ot available to CLAC as of March 3 .  
Accor dingly, CLAC can not provide feedback regarding the specifics of the proposal.    CLAC 
welcomes the opport unity  to review the bill’s language .  
 
 In the absence of specific language , CLAC members made t he following general 
observations.   Maine law rarely criminalize s the failure to act, absent  a clearly articulated  
affirmative obligation to do so.   The parameters of such an obligation would have to be specifically 
identified , including  the ti ming of any reporting  requirement , what persons  are obligated to report , 
to whom a report  must be made, whether persons with speci al responsibilities  have differe nt or 
existing reporting requirements, and the culpable mental state required to give rise to liability .  An 
overly broad law can have  the unintended consequence  of capturing innocent conduct .  
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
