TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 642 
“AN ACT TO PROTECT YOUNG DEER HUNTERS BY PROHIBITING WILD TURKEY 
HUNTING DURING YOUTH DEER HUNTING DAY" 
SPONSORED BY: Representative Terry of Gorham 
CO-SPONSORED BY: Representative Landy of Farmington 
Representative Shaw of Auburn 
DATE OF HEARING: March 20, 2023 
Good afternoon Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am Tim Peabody, Deputy Commissioner at the 
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, in 
opposition to L.D. 642. 
This bill proposes to prohibit hunting of wild turkeys during youth deer hunting day. 
Currently, there are many species that are allowed to be hunted on youth deer hunting 
day, including wild turkey, ruffed grouse, waterfowl, bear, as well as archery hunting for 
deer. The Department is not aware of any significant conflicts between youth deer 
hunters and those hunting for any of these other species or methods. In fact, during the 
2022 season, youth hunters killed 1,570 deer, which is just over a 50% increase in youth 
harvest from the previous 2 seasons and up from a previous 10-year average of 815 
deer. Therefore, this bill will unnecessarily reduce hunting opportunity for wild turkeys 
which could also unintentionally reduce fall harvest of turkeys in Wl\/lDs where the 
Department is trying to stabilize the population. Similarly, if passed as written, this bill 
could likely result in future requests to prohibit hunting for other species on youth deer 
hunting day. 
While youth-only days provide youth hunters with a unique opportunity to participate in 
deer hunting with limited competition, safely sharing the outdoors with a variety of 
other users is a crucial part of the learning experience when becoming a new hunter, 
fisher, trapper, or wildlife watcher.
Additionally, the department reviewed hunting incidents within the past 10 years and 
there was no evidence of a single incident resulting from a turkey hunter on youth deer 
hunting day. 
Unfortunately, the Department is unable to provide each user group their own private 
opportunities in our fields and forests. Instead, we provide appropriate regulations, 
season frameworks and recreational safety education that promotes and supports safe 
use of our outdoor spaces. Therefore, the Department does not believe that there isa 
level of competition between our outdoors users that warrants excluding one user 
group in favor of another, including youth hunters on special opportunity days. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
