HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES ‘* 
31:35“ 2 STATE HOUSE STATIoN 
pi AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Holly Stove, TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
71 Dover Rd. 
Boothbay, ME 04537 
Phone: (207) 633-5979 
Holly.Stover@lcgislature.maine.gov 
April 4, 2023 
Testimony of Representative Holly B. Stover presenting 
LD 1131, An Act to Support Continuity in Perinatal and Emergency Care by 
Requiring Notice of a Voluntary Hospital or Facility Closure or Reduction in 
Services 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services 
Good afternoon, Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer, and colleagues on the Health and 
Human Services Committee. I am Representative Holly Stover and I serve the House District 48 
and the communities of Boothbay, Boothbay Harbor, Edgecomb, South Bristol, Southport, and 
Westport Island. I am here today to introduce a Department bill, LD 1131, An Act to Support 
Continuity in Perinatal and Emergency Care by Requiring Notice of a Voluntary Hospital or 
Facility Closure or Reduction in Services. 
Just a few years ago, my community saw the closure of St. Andrews Hospital in Boothbay 
Harbor. The specter of the closure, let alone the closure itself, incited fear and panic on the 
peninsula about how and where people would access needed care. Our community suffered a 
great loss when the hospital closed most of its services, including 24/7 emergency care, and we 
still feel the ramiﬁcations today. This experience is why I agreed to sponsor LD 1311 for the 
Department of Health and Human Services. LD 1131 would require such a closure of emergency 
services to be accompanied by a closure plan, similar to nursing facilities, that accounts for the 
needs of current patients and makes a system-level plan for the transition to minimize negative 
impacts on patients and the community. 
Health care services are critical to healthy communities, and it is a critical public service to 
ensure that reduction of services or closures are thoroughly planned for to ensure patients are not 
left in the lurch. With that, I will hand off further discussion of the bill to Director Montejo from 
DHHS, though I welcome any questions you have. 
District 48: Boothbay, Boothbay Harbor, Edgecomb, South Bristol, Southport and Westport Island
