Janet T_ Mms Maine Department of Health and Human Services 
Qovemo _ ' 
Licensing and Certiﬁcation r 
ll State House Station 
41 Anthony Avenue 
f]‘:;“b'°“’ PM)‘ Augusta, 1‘/[aine 04333-0011 
Tel.: (207) 287-9300; Toll Free: (800) 791-4080 
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay); Fax: (207) 287-5815 
Testimony of Director Bill Montejo, RN 
Division of Licensing and Certiﬁcation 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services 
In Support of LD 1131 — An Act to Support Continuity in Perinatal and Emergency Care by 
Requiring Notice of a Voluntary Hospital or F acility Closure or Reduction in Services 
Sponsor: Representative Holly Stover 
A April 4, 2023 
Senator Baldacci, Representative Meyer and Members of the Committee on Health and Human 
Services: 
My name is Bill Montejo, I am the Director of the Division of Licensing and Certiﬁcation for the 
Department of Health and Human Services. I am here to help introduce and share our strong 
support for LD 1 131, An Act to Support Continuity in Perinatal and Emergency Care by Requiring 
Notice of a Voluntary Hospital or Facility Closure or Reduction in Services. Thank you to 
Representative Stover for sponsoring this Department bill. 
This bill would repeal and replace the section of statute related to the closure of certain facilities. 
What is new to this section is that a hospital would be required to provide additional notice — 180 
days to the Department and 135 days to patients - for a closure or reduction of services. The bill 
would also require the facility or hospital to develop a closure or reduction plan that ensures public 
notice and a reasonable plan for reducing potential negative impacts on patients, as Well as a root 
cause analysis for the decision. 
Under current law, voluntary closure requires “at least 30 days’ advance notice of the closing 
to the patients therein and to those persons, governmental units or institutions who are primarily 
responsible for the welfare of those patients who are being cared for‘.” 
We can better prioritize public and individual health by giving communities and agencies slightly 
more time to deal with local changes in health care services and systems. The current 30-day 
advance notice requirements are too short for facilities to conduct the needed notice, discharge 
‘ 22 MRSA §l822. Notice of voluntary closure of hospital, sanatorium, convalescent home, rest home, nursing 
home or similar institution. Any person, including county or local government units, who is conducting, managing 
or operating any hospital, sanatorium, convalescent home, rest home, nursing home or institution within the meaning 
of this chapter and who is properly licensed therefor in accordance with this chapter shall give at least 30 days’ advance 
notice of the voluntary closing of such facility to the patients therein and to those persons, governmental units or 
institutions who are primarily responsible for the welfare of those patients who are being cared for by said hospital, 
sanatorium, convalescent home, rest home, nursing home or institution so that adequate preparation may be made for 
the orderly transfer of said patients to another qualiﬁed facility.
planning, record transfer, and alternative care planning for patients to choose where they will 
receive services following the closure. When hospitals and health care facilities close or 
signiﬁcantly reduce their services with little notice, patients, doctors, nurses, and all other staff can 
be negatively impacted. Additional notice will aid Maine’s health providers to honor their 
obligation to ensure a smooth transition and prevent disruption of care for patients. 
Take, for example, the closure of hospital obstetric services. As of April l, 2023, there are 23 
remaining birth hospitals in Maine, with ten hospitals having closed their birthing units since 1998, 
including three in the last two years. Without sufficient notice, people who are pregnant may not 
have time to identify a new provider and hospital. Nearby hospitals may not have time to increase 
staff and identify space to support additional deliveries. Emergency Medical Services in the 
impacted communities need additional training and may be unprepared for transporting people in 
labor or caring for women experiencing an obstetric emergency. There is also the potential fora 
higher number of deliveries to occur in unintended locations such as roadside deliveries due to 
longer driving distances for families to reach a birth hospital, creating a greater risk for poor 
outcomes for the parent and child. In addition, facility closures and service reductions are highly 
emotional events for patients, hospital staff, and communities. 
State agencies, Emergency Medical Services, and communities need adequate time to prepare for 
what the loss of access to clinical services will mean for communities and what alternatives and/or 
plans will be needed to ensure the health care needs of the communities affected by the closure 
can be met. Communication and planning with other providers, patients, communities, and 
emergency transportation is essential, but takes time. 
Under the proposed bill, in addition to a longer notice period, the facility would provide a root 
cause analysis that allows for better understanding of the contributing factors. This would allow 
for engagement with the Department and policy makers prior to closure and consideration of 
whether the closure could be prevented. In the event the closure or loss of service cannot be 
prevented, the increased notice period and planning requirements would improve the preparation 
for the change by the patients, other health care providers, local Emergency Medical Services, and 
others impacted by the proposed closure or loss of service. 
We know that hospitals do not make these decisions lightly, and that economic and workforce 
factors contribute significantly to these tough decisions. The intent of this proposal is to increase 
notice and support, and therefore quality of care, for impacted patience, and provide transparency 
into decision-making to inform policy to keep more services viable in our rural communities. 
I want to thank you for your consideration of this bill. We expect to hear opposition today and 
welcome the opportunity to work through concems with you and stakeholders. I would be happy 
to answer any questions you may have and be present for the work session.
