  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
May 2 , 2023  
 
Senator Joseph Baldacci, Chair  
Representative Michelle Meyer, Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 1361 – An Act to Implement Best Practices Regarding Children's Behavioral and Mental 
Health Care  
 
Senator Baldacci , Representative Meyer, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and 
Human Services:  
 
This letter is to provide information on LD 1361, An Act to Implement Best Practices Regarding Children's 
Behavioral and Mental Health Care . This bill requires the Department of Health and Human Services to 
provide a supplement to MaineCare r eimbursement for behavioral health services that are part of a 
nationally recognized model supported by evidence -based research and delivered with model fidelity. The 
bill also requires the Department of Corrections to contract with providers who provide b ehavioral health 
services that are part of a nationally recognized model supported by evidence -based research and delivered 
with model fidelity when contracting for behavioral health services.  
 
The Department opposes this bill as it conflicts with MaineCar e’s rate reform efforts. P.L. 2021 ch. 639 
created a process for establishing and sustaining adequate and reasonable reimbursement rates for 
MaineCare covered services . The goal of P.L. 2021, ch 639 was in part to move toward more consistent, 
equitable and  data driven rates that create incentives for efficiency and high -quality care for members.  
 
This bill perpetuates a disjointed approach to rate setting by establishing a supplemental payment of 30% 
without any methodology justifying the specific increase.  
 
MaineCare supports enhanced rates where appropriate  to support  evidence -based practices, but a one -size 
fits all approach is not reasonable because  each model has different cost associated with it. It is important 
to note that many of the evidence -based p ractices noted in the bill already have rates established to support 
the specific service. This includes Assertive Community Treatment  (ACT) , Multisystemic Therapy 
(including for problem sexualized behaviors)  (MST and MST -PSB)  and Trauma -Focused Cognitive 
Behavior Therapy  (TF-CBT) . MaineCare is also developing pay for performance measures for adult ACT  
services and will consider including other services for performance measures as appropriate.  
 
It is also important to note that Dialectic Behavior Therapy has its own rate for both the skills groups and 
intensive outpatient service under Section 65. The other services noted do not yet have established 
coverage specific to the evidence -based practice that would warrant an enhanced rate ( eye movement 
desensitization and reprocessing, attachment and biobehavioral catch -up, and the adolescent community 
reinforcement approach). Provider training and implementation for a ttachment and biobehavioral catch -
up is presently supported under the MaineMOM federal g rant and will be expanded under the 1115 SUD 
 
 waiver as a pilot. Should these practices be supported with an enhanced rate in the future, the rate should 
be developed based on a data driven approach while simultaneously creating covered services language 
to supporting fidelity standards which would support the use of an enhanced rate.   
 
If you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

