JL 
E '$ I "\ ll 
r 
4)! J 
;" 
x HOUSE 011 REPRESENTATIVES 
“Q r 2 STATE HOUSE STATION ' 
~L' 
;-%~ ..'= .=i' 
!}‘ AUGUSTA, MAINE O4333~OO02 
Mi 
, (207) 287-1440 
TTY: (207) 287-4469 
Donald J. Ardell 
P.O Box 320 
Monticello ME, 04760 
Residence: (207) 521-1130 
Donald Ardel1@legislature.maine. gov 
F§l?if21_%rY__2.8,2°23 . .. __ 
To the Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government co-chairs Senator Tim 
Nangle and Representative Holly Stover, and esteemed members of the committee, I 
offer my thanks for taking the time to allow me to introduce LD 628, An Act to 
Designate Maine Irish Heritage Day. My name is Donny Ardell, and I represent House 
District 6. 
Most recent U.S. Census data indicates that out of Maine’s approximately 1.4 million 
residents, almost one out of ﬁve Mainers claim Irish heritage. During a critical time in 
early American history, immigrants from Ireland, ﬁrst Scots-Irish from the north, and 
later Irish refugees from the Potato Famine of the 1840s, left their homes in Ireland to 
come to American shores and made Maine their home. While many Irish immigrants 
settled in Portland and Maine’s southern coast to work as longshoremen, the Maine towns 
and cities Bangor, Belfast, Limerick and New Limerick, Newry, and Waterford were all 
named or renamed after their settlers ’ homes and are located throughout the state. As far 
north as Aroostook County, the populations of the towns of Littleton, Castle Hill, Dyer 
Brook, Allagash, and Blaine claim from somewhere over 38% to about 30% Irish 
heritage, and Houlton has an area of town still known as “Paddy Holler” where Irish- 
American families made their homes in the 19“ Century. Irish inﬂuence and history such 
as these are found in practically every town and city in Maine. 
Historically, Maine of the 18"‘ through 20*“ Centuries provided abundant opportunity for 
Irish immigrants and subsequent Irish-Americans, who did more than their part building 
our state by harvesting our timber and crops, laying our roads and bridges, working our 
sawmills and constructing our homes, handling Maine’s trade goods as Portland 
longshoremen, ﬁshing our waters, teaching in Maine’s schools and universities, healing 
and caring for our sick, policing the streets they had built, administering justice in our 
House District 6
courts, ﬁghting our wars, leading our churches, manufacturing our consumer goods, and 
even serving in the Maine Legislature and representing Maine in the U.S. Congress. Of 
Maine’s approximately 73,000 troops that fought in the U.S. Civil War to save the Union, 
a large percentage were Irish immigrants or of Irish heritage. From Kittery to Allagash, 
Mainers of Irish heritage have left their indelible mark on the state of which we are all so 
proud. 
Why the 17th of March? St. Patrick’s Day is already celebrated by parades and traditional 
food and drink as a celebration of all things Irish. In fact, my idea for Maine’s Irish 
Heritage Day came from the 130*“ Maine Legis1ature ’s 2022 Joint Resolution 
Commemorating the Celebration of St. Patrick_ ’s.Day..(attached). . . . , . 
I’ll be the very ﬁrst to say this bill is by no means the most pressing or important matter 
your committee work will address. I do ask, however, for Maine to recognize a single 
calendar day, March l7‘h , not as a day off, but as a day on, in recognition of the Irish 
immigrants, and subsequent Mainers of Irish heritage, who built and continue to build 
Maine, and help make Maine our home. Thank you. 
Sincerely, 
Donny Ardell 
Maine State Representative, District 6 
House District 6
STATE OF MAINE 
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH LEGISLATURE 
SECOND REGULAR SESSION 
SENATE ADVANCED JOURNAL AND CALENDAR 
Tuesday, March 22, 2022 
SUPPLEMENT NO.2 
PAPERS FROM THE HOUSE_ 
Joint Resolution 
(1-1) The following Joint Resolution: 
H.P. 1506 
JOINT RESOLUTION COMMEMORATING THE CELEBRATION OF SAINT 
PATRICK'S DAY 
WHEREAS, on March 17th, during the annual celebration of the Feast of Saint Patrick, 
the Patron Saint of Ireland, Irish-Americans join with men, women and children of all other 
ethnic origins who, for one day, become Irish and celebrate Saint Patrick and the love of Ireland; 
and 
WHEREAS, on Saint Patrick's Day, all who wear the green live for a day in the spirit of 
Saints Patrick, Bridget and Columcille, of whose birth the l,500th anniversary was celebrated 
last year; and 
WHEREAS, Irish immigrants to the United States helped form the cultural foundation of 
the nation, and those of Irish lineage today proudly sing support for Ireland; and 
WHEREAS, we celebrate the establishment of the American Irish State Legislators 
Caucus, Whose aim is fostering and strengthening the long-standing relationship that exists 
between the United States of America and Ireland to the mutual beneﬁt of both countries, with 
leadership in all 50 states; and 
WHEREAS, the songs of Ireland are the tragic songs of love and the joyous songs of 
battle, the nostalgic reveiies of the sorrows and the glories of the Emerald Isle and the 
lamentations of life's myriad travails and the odes to joy and the life eternal; now, therefore, be it 
RESOLVED: That We, the Members of the One Hundred and Tl'll1'lll6'Ell Legislature now 
assembled in the Second Regular Session, pause in our deliberations to commemorate the 
celebration of the Feast of Saint Patrick. 
Comes ﬁom the House, READ and ADOPTED.
