Testimony on LD 682 An Act to Designate Maine Irish Heritage Day 
Chairman Nangle , Chairwoman Stover and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
State and Local Government, my name is Mark Gallagher and I am a resident of Kennebunk and a proud 
Irish American. I am also a Senior Consultant at Drummond Woodsum Strategic Consulting in Portland, 
and although I represent clients in front of this legislature, today I am testifying as a citizen of this state. 
I enthusiastically support this act to designate March 17"‘ as the day in Maine to reflect on the 
contributions Irish men and women have made to the state of Maine, the United States and the entire 
world. Whether it is contributions in the field of literature through James Joyce, poetry through William 
Butler Yeats or dance, music and acting through countless men and women who have achieved world 
acclaim, I think it is a wonderful idea to celebrate these achievements and encourage generations of 
Irish and Irish Americans to strive to make similar contributions. 
I also believe that one of the greatest gifts my ancestors gave to this world was an undying belief in 
justice, liberty and freedom. For 800 years, Ireland was occupied by a foreign entity that, at various 
times in history, engaged in discrimination and violence to secure their grip on the native citizens of that 
island. However, this never deterred the Irish people from expressing their unquenchable thirst for 
sovereignty. 
My hope is that this fact is proclaimed every year here in the state of Maine. My hope is that this 
legislature, this administration, and the Maine people use the example of the Irish to right the wrongs 
that currently exist here in our state. I hope this resolve spurs on others to join the efforts to secure the 
sovereignty of the Native American tribes here in Maine. 
The great Irish poet Seamus Heaney wrote, ”History says, don't hope on this side of the grave. But then, 
once in a lifetime, the longed-for tidal wave ofjustice can rise up, and hope and history rhyme." 
Let's use this resolve as a reminder that we have reached a moment where the Wabanaki people 
deserve to have hope and history rhyme.
