 
 
 
1 Marginal Way | FL 2 | Portland, ME 04101 | t. 207.956.7030 | f. 207.805.1679  
www.maineimmigrantrights.org | FB: @MEImmigrantRightsCoalition | T: @MaineRights | IG: @MaineImmigrantRights  Testimony from the Maine Immigrants’ Rights Coalition regarding:  
LD 628: An Act to Designate Maine Irish Heritage Day  
Sponsor ed By : Rep resentative  Donald  Ardell of Monticello  
Public Hearing: February 28, 2023 at 2:00pm  
 
Dear Members of the  Committee  State and Local Government : 
My name is Tobin Williamson and I live in  the city of  Lewiston, Maine  in Androscoggin County . I am 
the Advocacy Manager with the Maine Immigrants’ Rights Coalition (MIRC), a statewide network  of 
almost 100 member organizations  all work ing to enhance the li ves of Maine’s immigrant communities.  
Speaking personally, a signifi cant part of  my own ancestry comes  from Irish immigrants ; my family tree  
includes Williamsons , Smiths, Russells , and Cochrans , all Scotch-Irish families who made their way to 
the Ozark Mountains of Arkansas  in the 1800s . My in -laws – the Sherburnes of Watervil le and Flanagans 
of Nashua – also come from Irish families who settled  a bit closer to Ireland, here in the Northeast . 
Like those families close st to me, Irish immigrants  and pe ople with Irish heritage  have been at the 
forefront of Maine ’s cultural and  economic  vitality  for generations . From Aroostook County to Yo rk 
County and all points in between, the Irish community have left an indelible mark on our state. They have 
been  farmers, millworkers, shop owners, musicians, and more. In Portland, the Maine Irish Heritage 
Center celebrates those of Irish heritage  while at the sam e time offering event s and spaces that benefits all 
sorts of Mainers , including a new generation of im migrants . Sometimes, Irish-American Mainers  play a 
prominent role  across the A tlantic,  too; consider the achie vements of our former  U.S. S enator,  George 
Mitchell.  Indeed, y ou can hardly go anyw here in Maine  now without seeing a bit of Irish history.  
Like many of the immigrant communities  today,  though,  the Irish of Maine have faced discrimination and 
hatred over the decades , especially during  the “Know Nothing ” era of the 1850s . Again , though, like 
many of the immigrant communities today, the Irish and Irish -Americans of Maine are resilient. They are 
strong. They ha ve endured.  And that i s to be commended.  
Thankfully, it is now widely accepted to celebrate th e Irish community, especially in the month of March.  
Therefore, w e encourage the issuance of a proclamation desi gnating March 17th as Maine Irish He ritage 
Day, with the hope  that someday soon , other cultures  and immigrant  communities  in Maine  will see the 
same level of support.  
Thank you,  
Tobin Williamson  
Lewiston, ME  
MIRC Advocacy Manager  
 
### 
