Linda Deane 
PO Box 76 
Livermore Falls Maine 
(Legal residence Livermore) 
§ter_l_i_i1@.i ‘<)adrunnercom 
207-491-8168 
Opposition to LDl 636 and 1707 
Good afternoon, Senator Tipping, Representative Roeder, and members of the Labor & Housing 
Committee. 
My name is Linda Deane. I’m from Livermore, retired from ND Paper in Rumford a member of the 
Steelworkers Organization of Active Retirees (SOAR), and president of the Western Maine Labor Council. 
Thank you for this opportunity to express my opposition to LD’s 1636 and 1707-- so-called “right-t0- 
work” bills. 
These bills will allow employees who are covered under a collective bargaining agreement the “freedom 
of choice” to opt out of paying union dues. However, the same person who does not pay their union dues still 
reaps the beneﬁts of the bargaining unit; the raises, the workplace safety, and representation if they havea 
grievance with management. Thus, getting all the beneﬁts of collective bargaining without paying for it--- 
"Freeloading ” . This law has nothing to do with protecting anyone’s right to work; but is a way to increase 
company proﬁts by dividing workers, lowering morale, and weakening a union ﬁnancially. Even the Chamber 
of Commerce, which supports right-to-work legislation, mandates its members to pay dues to be part of the 
organization. 
It is important to acknowledge the racist roots of the “right-to-work ” concept. The term right to work 
was popularized in 1936 by a lobbyist from Texas named Vance Muse, who was an openly proud racist, anti- 
Semitic, communist baiter. 
Mr. Muse began his right-to-work campaign in Arkansas in 1944 warning that if the effort failed (this is 
a direct quote,) “white women and white men will be forced into organizations with black African apes whom 
they will have to call brother or lose their jobs.” (As a side note; Mr. Muse is also known for his work 
opposing women’s suffrage and repealing child labor laws.) 
It is no surprise that all the historical slave states are right-to-work states; with higher poverty levels, 
lower income, more consumer debt, higher infant mortality rates, and less access to medical care than non-right- 
to-work states. 
Today’s proponents of right-to-work may use less offensive language to sell their agenda, but the result 
is the same; to weaken the collective voices of working people, make jobs less safe, and suppress wages, health 
insurance, and retirement so that corporations can make more money. 
With union favoritism at an all-time high in the US (71%), and more workers organizing and joining 
unions around the country and in Maine; legislation should be passed to help level the playing ﬁeld of workers 
organizing not hinder them as LD 1636 and 1707 does. 
Thank you.
