 1  
Charles Skold 
59 State Street, Apt. 67  
Portland, ME 04101 
 Phone: (207) 329-3838 
Charles.Skold@legislature.maine.gov HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE  04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
 
 
May 19, 2023  
 
Testimony of Rep. Charles Skold presenting  
LD 885 - An Act to Help First-Time Home Buyers in Maine  
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Transportation 
 
Senator Pierce Representative Gere, and esteemed members of the Joint Select Committee on 
Housing, I am Charles Skold, representing part of Portland in House District 119. I am honored 
to be here to present LD 885 - An Act to Help First-Time Home Buyers in Maine. 
 
The Maine Housing First Home Loan Program has been very successful in helping Mainers 
purchase their first home in a way that makes home ownership more accessible to many. This 
bill is a concept draft that seeks to build on this success with a few changes targeted to helping 
lower-income Mainers take advantage of the program and buy their first home. This bill contains 
three ideas to modify the Maine Housing First Home Loan Program: 
 
Firstly, this bill would increase the cash grant for lower-income Mainers. Currently, those who 
qualify for the First Home Loan Program may also receive an “Advantage” cash grant of $5,000 
to help with closing costs or to increase their down-payment. This bill would seek to increase the 
Advantage grant from $5,000 to $10,000 for Mainers with net-worth in the bottom quartile of the 
state. This would mean that program participants who believe they meet this asset test could 
apply for the $10,000 level grant, subject to confirmation that their net-worth is indeed in the 
bottom quartile of the state. There is currently no asset test to receive this $5,000 grant, meaning 
it is given equally to program participants from the very poor to the very rich. While there is 
some value in current practice, it would benefit the people of this State to offer additional 
support for those with lower net-worth, who find home-ownership even more out of reach. 
 
Secondly, this bill would ask Maine Housing to provide an option for all program participants to 
receive an additional $5,000 value in the form of an interest rate buy-down. The result would be 
that Maine Housing would help borrowers secure a lower interest rate for the lifetime of their 
loan, which is important in times of higher interest rates and would help borrowers save 
thousands of dollars over the lifetime of their mortgage. 
 
Thirdly, this bill would allow Maine Housing to also take into consideration rental payment 
history when approving program applicants. Currently, Maine Housing seeks a minimum credit 

 2 score of 640 to approve an applicant for the First Home Loan Program. This bill would direct 
Maine Housing to also accept applicants with a credit score of between 600 to 639, if that 
applicant can provide proof of 24 consecutive months of rent payment. Often, the monthly 
payments that renters successfully pay do not get captured in their credit score, even though 
one’s rent may be just as much as their future mortgage payments. If someone is consistently 
making monthly rent payments, they should see that reflected in an assessment of their financial 
history and they should be given a small amount of leeway on the credit score needed to be 
approved for the First Home Loan Program. 
 
I hope the Committee will consider these ideas. If you would like to move forward with any of 
these suggested modifications, I would be happy to work with the Committee and your analyst to 
draft bill language over the next few weeks or the next few months if you want to carry it over. 
 
I have included a bullet point summary of the three ideas, below. 
 
Thank you and I’m happy to answer any questions you may have. 
 
Rep. Charles A. Skold 
District 119  
 3 Concept Draft Summary 
LD 885 - An Act to Help First-Time Home Buyers in Maine 
 
 
This bill would modify Maine Housing First Home Loan Program (FHLP) as follows: 
 
1. Increase cash grant 
 
For buyers using FHLP and also receiving Advantage cash grant of $5,000: 
• For those who pass asset test, increase this grant by $5,000, for total of $10,000 
o Asset test should be targeted to State bottom quartile of net-worth 
 
 
2. Add buy-down option 
 
For all buyers using FHLP: 
• Maine Housing will provide additional $5,000 in escrow to buy-down the mortgage 
interest rate 
o Each 1% of purchase price total equates to one “buy-down point” 
o Each point must be exchanged for no fewer than 0.25 reduction in interest rate 
over lifetime of mortgage.  
 
 
3. Allow rent payments to supplement low credit score 
 
When Maine Housing is reviewing applications for FHLP: 
• Maine Housing can also consider rent payments when approving credit score 
qualification (currently 640 minimum)  
• Credit score of 600-639 may be acceptable if applicant provides proof of 24 consecutive 
months of rent payment. 
 
 
 
