    
1 
  
Testimony of 
Erik C. Jorgensen 
Senior Director of Government Relations & Communications 
Maine State Housing Authority 
 
Before 
The Joint Select Committee on Housing 
 
Neither for Nor Against 
LD 885 "An Act to Help First-time Home Buyers in Maine" 
 
Senator Pierce,  Representative Gere, and members of the Joint Select Committee on 
Housing, I am Erik Jorgensen Senior Director of Government Relations and 
Communications at the Maine State Housing Authority (MaineHousing) and I am 
submitting this testimony in  
MaineHousing has been helping Maine people own, rent, repair, and heat their 
homes since 1969. We are an independent state authority (not a state agency) 
created to address the problems of unsafe, unsuitable, overcrowded, and 
unaffordable housing.  We are authorized to issue bonds to finance single family 
mortgages for first time homebuyers and for affordable multi-family housing.   
 
We are also authorized to administer several state and federal programs, including 
rental subsidies, weatherization, fuel assistance, two housing block grants, the low-
income housing tax credit program, and homeless grant programs.  We receive state 
general fund revenue for homeless programs and receive a dedicated portion of the 
real estate transfer tax for the Housing Opportunities for Maine (HOME) Fund. 
 
2 
 This is a bill that seeks to make changes to MaineHousing’s first-time homebuyer 
program. As background, our first home loan programs are aimed at helping people 
enter homeownership in single-family homes or helping them become new landlords 
in owner-occupied multi-family properties.  Participants in the program must not 
have recently owned a home; they must be income-qualified, and they must be able 
to qualify for a mortgage. In exchange, they receive down payment assistance of 
$5,000 (recently increased from $3,000) and receive a mortgage that is on average a 
full point below the current market rate. This saves them tens of thousands of 
dollars over what would be paid by a conventional borrower over the life of a 
mortgage.  In addition, we have recently introduced a program for first-generation 
homebuyers to help people whose families have not owned houses in the past. This 
program offers an even lower mortgage rate and double the amount of down 
payment assistance. Many states offer down payment assistance, sometimes at a 
level far greater than that offered by our program, but in most cases where the 
amount is significantly higher, that amount is simply added to the financing and 
must be paid off over time. MaineHousing’s assistance comes in the form of a cash 
grant.  
 
Last year MaineHousing financed mortgages for 918 Maine families for almost $180 
million. This was up from 725 mortgages the prior year.  This happened at a time 
when the supply of housing stock available for purchase has hovered at record low 
levels. Today, on May 25, there were just 3,153 houses listed for sale statewide.1 
This is around a quarter of what might normally be expected at this time of year.  It’s 
a very difficult market, and we would suggest that the challenge of buying a home is 
absolutely as much a function of the tight market as it is the cost of the unit, though 
that is of course very challenging, especially in southern Maine. Would additional 
 
1 According to Maine Listings 
3 
 down payment assistance help? It could, but those people in the program would still 
be subject to the extreme supply limitations of the current market. 
 
If the committee wished to go forward with this bill, we have specific thoughts about 
its various components and how they would need to be modified in order for it to be 
workable: 
 
1. Increase cash grant using an asset test that should be targeted to State 
bottom quartile of net worth 
Asset tests are very difficult and our bank/credit union partners hated it when 
we had one years ago.  Finding non-cash/non-security assets is always hard 
to do (cars, boats, ATVs, etc). Also, using the state bottom quartile of net 
worth is problematic.  For the reasons noted above, single family underwriting 
(front end ratios, back end ratios, etc) uses gross income.  Any time you go 
net, you are adding things that cannot be proven and often are not “apples to 
apples”. This would be very hard to implement. First time homebuyers tend 
not to have extensive assets.  
 
2. Add buy-down option 
This, from our perspective, is the biggest problem in the bill. If the State were 
to appropriate enough money to us to provide an additional $5,000 to buy 
down mortgages and didn’t tell us how to do it, we could likely find a way to 
make it work. However, by specifying that each 1% of purchase price equates 
to one “buy-down point” and each point must be exchanged for no fewer than 
a 0.25 reduction in rate, the math does not work. No matter what the 
purchase price of the home, a 0.25% reduction in our mortgage rate equates 
to $1,250 less in annual interest payment revenue to us.  So, in 4 years the 
$5,000 is eaten up.  Even if it is present valued, it is gone within 5 years.  So 
every year thereafter MaineHousing would be taking a loss on the loan. The 
state is not able to legislate that we take a loss in our bond indenture.   
 
4 
 We already take the absolute minimum spread needed to run our program, 
which is why we consistently have one of (or very often the lowest) single 
family rate in the country.  We are currently 3/8s of a point lower than the 
rate the IRS allows us to charge based on our bond rates. So we’re already 
giving a bigger benefit than this legislation would make provide if we were 
charging full spread. 
 
3. Allow rent payments to supplement low credit score 
We are already doing this.  Fannie Mae has incorporated allowing 12 months 
of rental history to assist in qualifying applicants.  MaineHousing has 
incorporated rental history as a strong compensating factor when approving 
risk assessments. Basically MaineHousing will consider credit scores below 
620 with strong compensating factors, and rental history is one of the best 
compensating factors. We also don’t have 100% control, as our mortgages are 
insured by RD, VA, and FHA and while they do allow us leeway with our 
compensating factors, we still do have to work with them. 
 
Those are our chief concerns. We would argue that while the addition of state 
funding to this program could offer some benefit to certain households seeking to 
become homeowners, under its current structure the program, which takes place at 
no cost to the state, is accomplishing its goals.  
 
If however the legislature wished to augment this program and could provide 
resources to increase DPA without specificity about how that should occur (see 
comment #1 and #2 above), we would be willing to work with the sponsor and the 
committee to find a path forward. 
 
Thank you.  
 
