_/4/Obfig /\/44Dt€»4"\ PU 
Nadoau Ghlropvaotla Cfﬁm 
3 Health Drive- 
Auguoh, an aim. 
__ /ID 
Dear Committee Members, 2 0 K) 
'5 2 3 O /23/ 
Thank you Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the HCIFS committee. My name is Dr. 
Andre Nadeau. I am a resident of Winthrop and have practiced in Augusta for over 30 years. I ama 
lifelong resident of the State of Maine. l am a past president of the Maine Chiropractic Association, and 
will be testifying on behalf of my patients in favor of LD 706, an Act to improve Access to Specialty 
Health Care Providers by Reducing Copayments. 
in today's world people have become very skeptical of many business dealing because there are so 
many opportunities that things can be misrepresented. The case in point for today's testimony: when 
a patient is told they have insurance to cover chiropractic or PT, they expect to have some financial 
assistance from their insurance company to cover the needed service. Unfortunately, often when the 
patient seeks a service that is cost effective, the copay is actually higher than the cost of the service. For 
example one of my patients has a copay of $50 and has an accepted service charge of $37.98. She 
actually has no financial assistance from her insurance company in the coverage of her service. She has 
to pay all out of pocket for the service. Therefore, this appears to be misleading toclairn to covera 
service for a patient, yet pay nothing and leave the patient carrying the entire financial burden. Yes, this 
is really what happens. 
The logic is understood that primary care providers are a gateway into the health care market. 
Therefore, their copay should be the lowest possible to allow needed access to care. While specialists 
often dictate a higher copay because their fees are usually considerably higher than PCP's. 
What about the specialists who are cost effective providers, doctors of chiropractic, physical therapists, 
acupuncturists are examples of professions whose fees can be less than their patient's copay. in my 
practice, $40 and $50 fees are common and many patients have a $50 to $80 copays. So when they 
come to my office all their payment is out of pocket. They get no financial assistance from their 
insurance. So, do they really have coverage? l don't think so, you should ask them. 
This illusory coverage often acts as a deterrent to care for many people who pay all out of pocket for 
services. They often delay treatment until they need emergency interventions costing considerably 
more. 
LD 706 is a straight forward bill. To recognize the importance of a primary care copay for a portal of 
entry into the health system. Understand when a specialist fee is high, copays need to be elevated 
according to the given" levels. if the specialist fee is less than the copay, the copay should be decreased 
to ensure the patient receives some financial assistance from their insurance company that claims to 
cover the service. 
LD 706 is a not a bill that would allow copays to go below the present PCP copay 1*‘ and foremost. It 
would limit the copay to 50%_of the service being charged. It does not change fees, re-imbursement set 
by insurance companies, and it does not change covered services. 
What it will do is give patients some actual financial assistance from their insurance company when they 
choose to utilize effective and cost effective health care to treat their conditions. 
Again, l ask, if your insurance carrier says they cover a given service and you are forced to pay for 
everything out of pocket, do you really have coverage? Thank you 
%4,. .12;
