MAINE ASSOCIATION 
or 
HEALTH PLANS 
Testimony of Dan Demeritt — March 7, 2023 
Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial Services 
Opposed 
L.D. 706 An Act to Improve Access to Specialty Health Care Providers by Reducing Copayments 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health 
Coverage, Insurance, and Financial Services: 
My name is Dan Demeritt. I am the Executive Director of the Maine Association of Health Plans 
(MeAHP). Our member plans include Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Cigna, CVS / Aetna, 
Community Health Options, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, and United Health Care. They 
provide or administer health insurance coverage to about 600,000 Maine people. 
Our mission as an association is to improve the health of Maine people by promoting affordable, 
safe, and coordinated healthcare. 
L.D. 706 would limit plan design options. Further, the Clear Choice plan designs address 
specialist co-pays for individual and small group plans. 
First, health insurance plans have limited factors they can adjust to provide options to consumers 
and manage premium costs for employers. Cost sharing is one of those levers. Plans must also 
adjust cost sharing to meet actuarial value or AV requirements. Co-pays adjustments are often 
required to help meet AV requirements. 
To the extent that policy makers and stakeholders believe that copayment limitations should 
occur, those decisions should occur Within the development of the clear choice design process 
administered by the Bureau of Insurance. 
Consumers, carriers, health policy experts and other interested parties all have a chance to 
contribute to the clear choice designs. The Bureau of Insurance has indicated it intends to holda 
public meeting for stakeholders to discuss 2024 Clear Choice Plan designs on March 13, 2023. 
Thank you for the chance to speak with you today. We urge the committee to vote ought not to 
pass on this legislation. 
P.O. Box 193, Orono, Maine 04473 (207) 852-2087
