APTA 
A Chapter of the American ' 
Physical Therapy Association 
Testimony Neither For Nor Against LD 706, An Act to Improve Access to Specialty 
Health Care Providers by Reducing Copayments 
HCIFS Committee, March 7, 2023 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry and Honorable Members of the HCIFS Committee: 
My name is Gwen Simons. I am the lobbyist for the Maine Chapter of the American Physical 
Therapy Association ("MEAPTA"). I am a physical therapist myself and a healthcare lawyer in 
Scarborough. The Maine APTA represents over 2500 physical therapists (PTs) and physical 
therapist assistants (PTAs) in Maine. 
This bill will affect physical therapy (“PT”) copays. MEAPTA conceptually supports the notion of 
limiting copays for physical therapy (PT) services to reasonable and affordable amounts, 
particularly since PT services are recurring, but this bill has some serious flaws. 
First, LD 706 requires a minimum copay. Our PT members tell us that some health plans havea 
$0 or $5 for PT services. If those health plans are governed by state laws, this bill would cause 
some copays to increase. Some carriers are starting to experiment with offering $0 copays for 
the first few visits of PT for certain diagnoses (for example — low back pain) because the 
research shows that early PT intervention can result in less need for more costly diagnostic and 
treatment services. Carriers should be able to offer plans that have little or no copay for PT 
services to incentivize early PT intervention as they see fit. Therefore, MEAPTA is opposed to 
the setting of any minimum whatsoever. 
Second, we are concerned about using a formula based on the "allowed amount." Allowed 
amount for in-network or out-of-network services? The allowed amount for hospital-based 
services or private practice services? All of these "allowed amounts" may be different. 
Third and most important — even if 50% of the ”allowed amount" is based on the lowest cost 
setting (private practice), 50% of the contracted in-network "allowed amount” would be over 
$50/visit. Currently, we know of no Maine health plans that have a copay for PT that is over 
$50/visit. Therefore, this bill will do nothing to reduce current PT copays (though it would 
prevent them from rising higher if that is the only intent). 
Patients have difficulty affording a $50/visit for recurring PT services. If the goal is to make 
copays affordable so patients will get the benefits their health plan is supposed to provide, we 
need to make the copay much less than 50% of any allowed amount. Other states have passed
laws that simply state copays and coinsurance for PT services cannot exceed the copay or 
coinsurance amount for a physician or osteopath visit. We believe that approach makes more 
sense and would accomplish the intended goal without creating unintended consequences. 
We will try to provide a summary of other state copay laws for your work session. 
Thank you for your consideration of MEAPTA’s concerns. 
;@' £</444. /£' rr2¢=v,_,<,/T. £37’/’/I" 0:71: F/l//9/‘v1Pl“ 
Gwen Simons, Esq, PT, OCS, FAAOMPT 
Lobbyist, Maine Chapter APTA 
gin/en@simonsassociateslaw.com 
207.883.7225
