I 
HOUSE 0F REPRESENTATIVES 
2 STATE Housn STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 237-1440 3 
TTY: (207) 287-4409 
Joshua Morris 
P.O. Box 246 
North Turner, ME 04266 
Phone: (207) 754-7829 
Joshua Morris@legislature.maine.gov 
Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and esteemed colleagues on the Health Care, 
Insurance and Financial Services committee. My name is Representative Joshua Morris. I 
represent House District 91, the towns of Leeds, Turner and Wayne. 
I appreciate the opportunity to present LD 706, An Act to Improve Access to Specialty 
Health Care Providers by Reducing Copayments. 
As the summary states, this bill limits the amount of the copayment that carriers offering 
health plans in this State may impose for a health care service rendered by a health care 
provider, other than a primary care provider, to no less than the copayment for primary 
care services and to no more than 50% of the allowed among under a carrier’s health plan 
for that health care service. 
LD 706 will help stem the tide of rising out of pockets costs for those seeking treatment 
of specialist health care providers. Many of these practitioners now routinely see patients 
with copays exceeding $75 per visit. This copayment fee is a signiﬁcant burden on 
patients, particularly those with less income. This situation causes many to make 
decisions to avoid care that they need. 
Avoiding care when a medical problem presents itself often leads to the condition 
worsening or causing other related medical issues. All of that can lead to emergency 
room visits and in some cases hospitalization for surgery or other treatment that may have 
been avoided if they had been able to afford less invasive care. 
Thank you for considering this bill. I look forward to working with the committee. I am 
happy to answer any questions but there are others here with more information on this 
issue. 
District 91 Leeds, Turner & Wayne
3-7-2023 
To: Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health Coverage, Insurance and Financial 
Services 
Re: LD 706, An Act to Improve Access to Specialty Health Care Providers by Reducing 
Copayments 
Dear Members of the Committee, 
Thank you Senator Bailey, Representative Perry, and members of the HCIFS committee. My 
name is Dr. Daniel Myerowitz. I am a resident of Holden and a lifelong resident of the State of 
Maine. I am a third generation Chiropractor in my fourteenth year of practice. I am the 
immediate past president of the Maine Chiropractic Association, and will be testifying on behalf 
of my patients strongly in favor of LD 706. 
Co-sponsor. Co-founder. Co-list. Co-write. Co-pilot. Co-owner. Cooperate. Co-exist. All of 
these words indicate two parties working together toward a common goal where both parties bear 
some of the responsibility. The responsibility may not be fully equal, but under no circumstance 
does one party bear the entire weight of their task. 
The preﬁx co- is deﬁned as follows: 
l. When forming nouns: joint; mutual; common 
2. When forming adjectives: jointly; mutually 
Surely, “co-pay” should fall under these same rules where two parties bear responsibility 
together. Unfortunately, this is often no longer the case. 
Insurance plans are being written with ever-increasing co-pays. My ofﬁce has now encountered 
plans with co-pays exceeding $80 per visit for specialist care. While this number may be 
appropriate for a higher-cost specialties, it is not appropriate for low cost specialties that see 
patients multiple times throughout a course of care. These types of providers may include 
physical therapists, occupational therapists, chiropractors, or even osteopaths specializing in 
manipulation. 
Thanks to the efforts of the Maine Health Data Organization and its Compare Maine search tool, 
Mainers now have access to the median reimbursement amounts for commonly performed 
procedure codes across our state searchable by county. The most commonly performed 
procedure by chiropractors, CPT 98941 (3-4 region spinal adjustment), has commercial 
insurance reimbursement ranging from $3 7-$50. If a patient has an $80 co-pay, they would pay 
the reimbursable amount of $37-$50 while the insurer pays nothing at all. This policy shifts the 
entire cost burden onto the patient while the insurer has no ﬁnancial burden despite their 
contractual responsibility to be a participant in a “co-pay.” 
LD 706 seeks to create a level playing ﬁeld in which your constituents are no longer penalized 
for choosing lower cost health care options. This bill seeks to do what many self-insured plans, 
including the University of Maine system, have already done, which is to open greater access to 
treatment for those in need by making low cost conservative care more ﬁnancially viable.
Insurance carriers already process claims with a percentage cost-share for their members. Many 
insurance plans on the health care marketplace currently utilize a 50% coinsurance for 
specialists. Building out the back-end systems to process this insurance beneﬁt should bea 
simple task given that carriers are already processing cost-sharing in a similar way. 
I would like to be clear that this bill does not change the amount of reimbursement for services 
nor does it change any pr0vider ’s scope of practice. This bill would restore the plain meaning of 
the word “co-pay” back to where both parties share responsibility. 
I greatly encourage you all to vote ought to pass on LD 706. 
Sincerely, 
Daniel Myerowitz D.C., Dipl. Ac. (AACA)
