Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
Senator Joseph Rafferty, Chair  
Representative Michael Brennan, Chair  
Cross Building Room 208  
Augusta ME 04333  
 
Dear Chairmen Rafferty and Brennan  and members of the Committee  
 
The American Heart/Stroke Association supports  LD1002, “An Act to Require a Lunch P eriod of 
at Least 30 Minutes for Students and Reduce Food Waste" .  The American Heart Association is 
the largest voluntary health organization fighting to be a relentless force for a world of longer, 
healthier lives.  
 
For almost two decades, the American Heart Association along with other health and food 
security partners have advocated to improve the school meals program at both the Federal and 
State level because we know that proper nutrition  is critical to children’s short - and long -term 
health outcomes. Food insecurity can lead to a variety of negative health conditions, including 
diet-related disease, and has severe consequences on a child’s future health. Schools are a vital 
source of nutr ition and are a bulwark against chronic food insecurity. Food insecurity is at an 
all-time high. This crisis has health, educational, and economic consequences, leaving children 
particularly vulnerable to the long -term impact.  
 
We know that providing nutr itious school meals will give all our kids a chance to thrive and 
succeed. Students who participate in school meals, particularly those who are experiencing 
food insecurity, have better health outcomes, have improved test scores, and are better able to 
concentrate in school  and we know that a hungry child can’t learn , unfortunately  though we are 
not giving enough  time for kids to eat lunch . Research has shown that the last student in line 
has 2 -3 minutes to eat their lunch  and h ealthy choices like raw vegetables take longer to 
consume.  We also know that when there is n ot enough time to eat means more food waste. 
This bill would require Maine schools to allo w at least 30 minutes to eat lunch as part of the 
National School Lunch Program. It also directs districts to allow adequate time for recess and to 
schedule recess before lunch, a best practice that encourages students to sit and eat lunch after 
fresh air and exercise. Districts are given the option to opt -out if a 30 minute lunch period and 
recess before lunch doesn’t fit into their daily schedule. Many Maine schools already allow 30 
minutes for lunch, so we should make this best practice a reality for s tudents across our state .  
 
 
Sincerely,  
Allyson Perron  Drag  
American Heart Association/ Stroke Association  
Government Relations Director , Senior Regional Lead  
Allyson.perron@heart.org  
857-540-9686  
 

