March 21, 2023
Maine State Legislature
Joint Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs
Re: LD 1002
Senator Raf ferty, Representative Brennan and members of the committee,
No Kid Hungry Maine writes in support of LD 1002
“An
Act To Require A Lunch Period of at Least 
30 Minutes for Students and Reduce Food Waste.”
Through our No Kid Hungry campaign, Share Our Strength works with partners such as Full Plates
Full Potential, lawmakers, educators, and businesses to identify and eliminate the barriers that may
prevent children and families from accessing healthy and nutritious meals. Approximately , 1 in 6 
children in Maine could face hunger this year , and school meals play a critical role in reducing food 
insecurity for children and Maine’ s families.
LD 1002 would require Maine schools to allow at least 30 minutes for students to eat lunch as part of
the National School Lunch Program. When kids don’t have enough time to eat, they often leave food
on the tray . This results in more food waste, and students not benefitting from the nutrition included. 
LD 1002 would also direct school districts to allow adequate time for recess and to schedule recess
before lunch, a best practice that encourages students to sit and eat lunch after being outside and
getting exercise. Having recess before lunch enables students to expend more energy and thus be
hungrier at lunch time, as well as prevent students from rushing through lunch for more play time at
recess. Research has shown enabling students to have suf ficient time to eat with longer lunch 
periods (~ 30 minutes) and having recess before lunch increases consumption of the school meal.
1
Again, we strongly support LD 1002, which would ensure Maine students have suf ficient time to eat 
nutritious school lunches. This law supports what we have long understood, that school meals are a 
critical tool for students in their school day enabling them to learn and thrive.
Thank you for your consideration of our comments. Should you have any questions, or need
additional information, please do not hesitate to contact me at (202) 731-8662 or
bdowney@strength.org.
Sincerely ,
Bernadette Downey
Associate Director , Government Relations and Advocacy 
Share Our Strength
1
Cohen, J. F.W., et al. Strategies to Improve School Meal Consumption: A Systematic Review. Nutrients. 
2021.

