 
District  100: Brunswick  (part)  
  
Daniel  J. Ankeles  
7 Beech  Drive  
Brunswick,  ME 04011  
Daniel.Ankeles@legislature.maine.gov  
Cell Phone:  (207)  756-3793  HOUSE  OF REPRESENTATIVES  
2 STATE  HOUSE  STATION  
AUGUSTA,  MAINE   04333 -0002  
(207)  287-1400  
TTY:  MAINE  RELAY  711 
 
 
Wednesday,  March  22, 2023  
 
 
Testimony  of Rep.  Dan Ankeles  
Before  the Joint  Standing  Committee  on Education  and Cultural  Affairs  
Supporting  LD 1002,  An Act to Require  a Lunch  Period  of at Least  30 Minutes  for 
Students  and Reduce  Food  Waste  
 
Senator  Rafferty,  Representative  Brennan  and honorable  members  of the Education  and Cultural  
Affairs  Committee,  thank  you for the opportunity  to testify.  I am Representative  Dan Ankeles,  
and I serve  House  District  100, a central  slice of Brunswick  that includes  our downtown,  
Bowdoin  College,  the former  naval  airbase,  Mere  Point  and the home  of a certain  five-year-old 
who eats … very … very … slowly.  It’s an honor  to submit  testimony  supporting  LD 1002,  An 
Act to Require  a Lunch  Period  of at Least  30 Minutes  for Stud ents and Reduce  Food  
Waste . I regret  that I can’t  be with you in person,  but I am over in Transportation  supporting  a 
number  of Ought  Not To Pass motions.   
 
I was asked  to share  a brief  statement  of support  by one of my constituents  with young  children  
who have  struggled  with finishing  lunch  on time and have  - as a result  - returned  home  hungry.  I 
was happy  to oblige  him, but this same  thing  has also happened  with my own young  children.  I 
thought  perhaps  sharing  my family’s  experience  would  be good  for this committee,  and I also 
think  it’s important  more  generally  for lawmakers  with young  families  to be more  active  and 
visible  in all areas  of policymaking.   
 
A few weeks  ago was Color  Week  at Kate  Furbish  Elementary,  a way in which  our teachers  
encourage  healthy choices  through  the 5-2-1-0 program.  The five in this case is that kids should  
have  five or more  servings  of fruits  and vegetables  each day, and so what  you can do in Color  
Week  is have  the kids try food that is a different  color  of the rainbow  each day. The school  
invited  volunteers  to serve  each day’s  mystery  food at lunch  time,  so I showed  up on a Friday  to 
give all the kindergarteners  some  dragon  fruit,  which  is actually  rather  tasteless  but was probably  
a better  and more  exotic  choice  to represent  the color  purple  than a slice of eggplant.   
 
I was there  for two waves  of lunch.  The waves  went  quickly,  and the kids were  chatty.  Even  the 
hungriest  little ones weren’t  able to finish  by the time they were  all made  to line up and head  out 
into the snow.  There was a pretty  staggering  amount  of wasted  food on each tray, and on the 
ever-popular  pizza  day no less. It made  sense  all of sudden  why both my kids and all their 
friends  kept returning  home  like a pack  of starving  wolves  and eating  us out of house  and home.  
It’s almost  like the apple,  snack  and cheese  and grocery  store  lobbies  have  teamed  up to make  
this happen  on purpose.   
 
But in all seriousness,  whatever  the final language  you all might  come  up with, if you could  find 
a way to give students  more  time to finish , or at least make  some  progress  on their meals,  I think  
it would  improve  both health  outcomes  and education  outcomes.   
 
Thank  you again  for the opportunity  to testify  and for wrestling  with the question  of how we can 
get our kids to eat enough  while  they are at school.   
