STATE OF MAINE  
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION  
23 STATE HOUSE STATION  
AUGUSTA, ME  04333 -0023  
 
 
JANET T. MILLS                                                                                                                                                                    PENDER MAKIN  
              GOVERNOR                                                                                                                                                                              COMMISSIONER  
 
 
OFFICES LOCATED AT THE BURTON M. CROSS STATE OFFICE BUILDING                          AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER  
PHONE (207)  624-6600     FAX:  (207) 624 -6700     TTY USERS CALL MAINE RELAY 711                                     ONLINE:  WWW.MAINE.GOV/DOE  
 
March 22, 2023  
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Senate Chair  
Representative Brennan, House Chair  
Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs  
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and Distinguished Members of the Education and 
Cultural Affairs Committee:  
LD 1002 , An Act to Require a Lunch Period of at Least 30 Minutes for Students and Reduce 
Food Waste  requires  school administrative units ( SAUs ) to provide a 30 -minute lunch break 
separate from recess and requires the SAU to provide a table or other area where students may 
return unconsumed whole food or beverage items that may be provided to other students.  
Daily food service staff statewide work  diligently to produce nutritious high -quality meals for 
Maine students.  Studies show that consistently providing nutritious meals to students positively 
impacts their achievement. It is imperative that students are provided enough time to consume 
their b alanced meals while at school.   
 
Most schools already offer a "share" table for students to be able to return unconsumed whole 
food or beverage items.  The Department , in coordination with the Maine CDC, has developed 
and provides  share table guidance  to SAUs .  A share table is a mechanism for students to return 
unconsumed, whole food or beverage items for others to take.  It is currently a local level 
decision whether to have a share table, and most schools have them.    
 
Federal guidelines found in 7 CFR 210.10 (k) (2)  require “ Adequate lunch periods. ” The Food 
and Nutrition Service (FNS)  encourages schools to provide sufficient lunch periods that are long 
enough to give all students adequate time to be served and to eat their lunches.”  However, t he 
term “lunch period” is not defined within federal guidance; this remains  a local decision. As a 
result, it is unclear how to measure or monitor lunch periods.  If the goal is to consistently ensure 
adequate time to consume a meal, then states may consid er defining “lunch period” by providing 
definitions and expectations for time eating and/or seat time.   
 
The implementation of LD 1002 may require some SAUs to incur additional costs by altering 
daily and master schedules, increasing staffing for student s upervision, and exp anding work 
hours for child nutrition professionals. Additional costs may also be incurred by the Department 
for increased training, communication, tracking, and monitoring to meet the requirements of the 
bill. Maine’s policy on public e ducation in Title 20 -A, Chapter 1, §2 includes the intent that 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 22A14975-EA96-4140-823F-A38B2B9C3B03
public school control and management will be vested in the governing bodies of local school 
administrative units, as long as those units are in compliance with state and Federal statute.  
 
The D epartment will be available to provide additional information on LD 1002 and respond to 
any questions during the upcoming work session.   
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Jane McLucas  
Director of Child Nutrition  
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: 22A14975-EA96-4140-823F-A38B2B9C3B03

Certificate Of Completion
Envelope Id: 22A14975EA964140823FA38B2B9C3B03Status: Completed
Subject: Complete with DocuSign: LD 1002 Informational Letter.docx
Source Envelope: 
Document Pages: 2Signatures: 1Envelope Originator: 
Certificate Pages: 4Initials: 0Danielle Mckay
AutoNav: Enabled
EnvelopeId Stamping: Enabled
Time Zone: (UTC-05:00) Eastern Time (US & Canada)Danielle.Mckay@maine.gov
IP Address: 74.75.212.153  
Record Tracking
Status: Original
             3/21/2023 4:34:27 PMHolder: Danielle Mckay
             Danielle.Mckay@maine.govLocation: DocuSign
Security Appliance Status: ConnectedPool: StateLocal
Storage Appliance Status: ConnectedPool: Maine Department of EducationLocation: DocuSign
Signer Events
Signature
Timestamp
Jane McLucas
jane.mclucas@maine.gov
Security Level: Email, Account Authentication 
(None)
Signature Adoption: Pre-selected Style
Using IP Address: 198.182.163.115
Sent: 3/21/2023 4:36:08 PM
Viewed: 3/21/2023 4:41:30 PM 
Signed: 3/21/2023 4:41:40 PM
Electronic Record and Signature Disclosure: 
      Accepted: 7/8/2022 2:35:12 PM
      ID: e485b0ac-c7dd-4271-bc0d-ebc67ad2d99a
In Person Signer Events
Signature
Timestamp
Editor Delivery Events
Status
Timestamp
Agent Delivery Events
Status
Timestamp
Intermediary Delivery Events
Status
Timestamp
Certified Delivery Events
Status
Timestamp
Carbon Copy Events
Status
Timestamp
Witness Events
Signature
Timestamp
Notary Events
Signature
Timestamp
Envelope Summary Events
Status
Timestamps
Envelope SentHashed/Encrypted3/21/2023 4:36:08 PM
Certified DeliveredSecurity Checked3/21/2023 4:41:30 PM
Signing CompleteSecurity Checked3/21/2023 4:41:40 PM
CompletedSecurity Checked3/21/2023 4:41:40 PM
Payment Events
Status
Timestamps
Electronic Record and Signature Disclosure
ELECTRONIC RECORD AND SIGNATURE DISCLOSURE   
From time to time, Carahsoft OBO Maine Department of Education (we, us or Company) may 
be required by law to provide to you certain written notices or disclosures. Described below are 
the terms and conditions for providing to you such notices and disclosur es electronically through 
the DocuSign system. Please read the information below carefully and thoroughly, and if you can 
access this information electronically to your satisfaction and agree to this Electronic Record and 
Signature Disclosure (ERSD), pleas e confirm your agreement by selecting the check -box next to 
‘I agree to use electronic records and signatures’ before clicking ‘CONTINUE’ within the 
DocuSign system.  
 
Getting paper copies   
At any time, you may request from us a paper copy of any record pro vided or made available 
electronically to you by us. You will have the ability to download and print documents we send 
to you through the DocuSign system during and immediately after the signing session and, if you 
elect to create a DocuSign account, you m ay access the documents for a limited period of time 
(usually 30 days) after such documents are first sent to you. After such time, if you wish for us to 
send you paper copies of any such documents from our office to you, you will be charged a 
$0.00  per-page fee. You may request delivery of such paper copies from us by following the 
procedure described below.  
 
Withdrawing your consent   
If you decide to receive notices and disclosures from us electronically, you may at any time 
change your mind and tell us t hat thereafter you want to receive required notices and disclosures 
only in paper format. How you must inform us of your decision to receive future notices and 
disclosure in paper format and withdraw your consent to receive notices and disclosures 
electron ically is described below.  
 
Consequences of changing your mind   
If you elect to receive required notices and disclosures only in paper format, it will slow the 
speed at which we can complete certain steps in transactions with you and delivering services to  
you because we will need first to send the required notices or disclosures to you in paper format, 
and then wait until we receive back from you your acknowledgment of your receipt of such 
paper notices or disclosures. Further, you will no longer be able t o use the DocuSign system to 
receive required notices and consents electronically from us or to sign electronically documents 
from us.  
 
All notices and disclosures will be sent to you electronically   
Electronic Record and Signature Disclosure created on: 5/20/2019 7:55:28 AM
Parties agreed to: Jane McLucas
Unless you tell us otherwise in accordance with the proc edures described herein, we will provide 
electronically to you through the DocuSign system all required notices, disclosures, 
authorizations, acknowledgements, and other documents that are required to be provided or made 
available to you during the course of our relationship with you. To reduce the chance of you 
inadvertently not receiving any notice or disclosure, we prefer to provide all of the required 
notices and disclosures to you by the same method and to the same address that you have given 
us. Thus,  you can receive all the disclosures and notices electronically or in paper format through 
the paper mail delivery system. If you do not agree with this process, please let us know as 
described below. Please also see the paragraph immediately above that de scribes the 
consequences of your electing not to receive delivery of the notices and disclosures 
electronically from us.  
 
How to contact Carahsoft OBO Maine Department of Education:   
You may contact us to let us know of your changes as to how we may contac t you electronically, 
to request paper copies of certain information from us, and to withdraw your prior consent to 
receive notices and disclosures electronically as follows:  
To contact us by email send messages to: jennifer.l.tarr@maine.gov  
 
To advise Ca rahsoft OBO Maine Department of Education of your new email address   
To let us know of a change in your email address where we should send notices and disclosures 
electronically to you, you must send an email message to us at  jennifer.l.tarr@maine.gov and in 
the body of such request you must state: your previous email address, your new email 
address.  We do not require any other information from you to change your email address.   
If you created a DocuSign account, you may update it with your new email addre ss through your 
account preferences.  
 
To request paper copies from Carahsoft OBO Maine Department of Education   
To request delivery from us of paper copies of the notices and disclosures previously provided 
by us to you electronically, you must send us an  email to  jennifer.l.tarr@maine.gov  and in the 
body of such request you must state your email address, full name, mailing address, and 
telephone number.  We will bill you for any fees at that time, if any.  
 
To withdraw your consent with Carahsoft OBO Maine Department of Education   
To inform us that you no longer wish to receive future notices and disclosures in electronic 
format you may:  
i. decline to sign a document from within your signing session, and on the subsequent page, 
select the check -box indicatin g you wish to withdraw your consent, or you may;  
ii. send us an email to  jennifer.l.tarr@maine.gov and in the body of such request you must state 
your email, full name, mailing address, and telephone number.  We do not need any other 
information from you to  withdraw consent..   The consequences of your withdrawing consent for 
online documents will be that transactions may take a longer time to process..  
 
Required hardware and software   
The minimum system requirements for using the DocuSign system may change o ver time. The 
current system requirements are found here: https://support.docusign.com/guides/signer -guide -
signing -system -requirements .  
 
Acknowledging  your access and consent to receive and sign documents electronically   
To confirm to us that you can access this information electronically, which will be similar to 
other electronic notices and disclosures that we will provide to you, please confirm that you have 
read this ERSD, and (i) that you are able to print on paper or electronically save this ERSD for 
your future reference and access; or (ii) that you are able to email this ERSD to an email address 
where you will be able to print on paper or save it  for your future reference and access. Further, 
if you consent to receiving notices and disclosures exclusively in electronic format as described 
herein, then select the check -box next to ‘I agree to use electronic records and signatures’ before 
clicking ‘ CONTINUE’ within the DocuSign system.  
By selecting the check -box next to ‘I agree to use electronic records and signatures’, you confirm 
that: 
 You can access and read this Electronic Record and Signature Disclosure; and  
 You can print on paper this Electronic Record and Signature Disclosure, or save or send 
this Electronic Record and Disclosure to a location where you can print it, for future 
reference and access; and  
 Until or unless you notify  Carahsoft OBO Maine Departme nt of Education as described 
above, you consent to receive exclusively through electronic means all notices, 
disclosures, authorizations, acknowledgements, and other documents that are required to 
be provided or made available to you by  Carahsoft OBO Maine  Department of Education 
during the course of your relationship with Carahsoft OBO Maine Department of 
Education.  
