Kit Chi So
Portland
LD 1002
Testimony of Kit Chi So
In Support of LD 1002
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and esteemed members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs. My name is Kit Chi So. I am a resident of 
Portland and am a graduate student at Boston College School of Social Work.
Today, I’m submitting testimony in support of LD 1002 “An Act To Require A Lunch Period of 
at Least 30 Minutes for Students and Reduce Food Waste”
As a graduate student of social work, I already hold an MA in Food Studies from New York 
University. I have worked in food access and education for over a decade and understand, 
both theoretically and practically, how important it is for children to have adequate access to 
nutritious food. In my experience, adequate access does not just mean gaining access to the 
tangible resource of food itself but also requires enough time to eat.
There have been numerous studies published that prove that a hungry child cannot learn well
in school, yet research shows that the last student in the lunch line has 10 minutes or less to 
eat their lunch. Not only should having enough time to eat lunch be a right that all people 
have, including children, but many studies show how important it is for mental health 
outcomes for children and adolescents to have time to socialize with their peers in order to 
build strong relationships. Additionally, most workplaces for adults mandate a 30 minute lunch
break, so why do we not offer the same right for students during the school day?
I am proud that Maine has passed the historic legislation to ensure School Meals for All in 
schools but to fully reap the health and educational benefits of this legislation, we must 
lengthen the school lunch period to at least 30 minutes. Making sure students have full bellies
ensures that they are ready to learn and has been shown to reduce behavioral issues in the 
classroom due to hunger and results in fewer trips to the nurses office. Many Mainers are 
also proponents of providing healthier school lunch options for students but healthy choices 
like raw vegetables take longer to consume, and not having enough time to eat also results in
more food waste. Making the school lunch period at least 30 minutes benefits families, 
students, educators and school administrators, as well as the environment. 
I wholeheartedly support LD 1002 “An Act To Require A Lunch Period of at Least 30 Minutes 
for Students and Reduce Food Waste” because I believe that students should have the right 
to accessing adequate nutrition during the school day, and this cannot be realized without 
enough time to eat. Thank you Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and esteemed 
members of the Joint Standing Committee on Education and Cultural Affairs for taking the 
time to read my testimony. I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
