Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth Fr ench Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
Testimony  
In Support of  
LD 1002: An Act to Require a Lunch Period of at Least 30 Minutes for Students and Reduce 
Food Waste  
Mallory Cook , Director of Training and Early Educator Engagement ,  
Maine Education Association  
Before the Committee  on Education and Cultural Affairs  
March  22, 2023  
 
 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and other esteemed members of the Committee on Education 
and Cultural Affairs,    
 
My name is Mallory Cook (pronouns she/her/hers), and I am the Director of Training and Early 
Educator Engagement at the Maine Education Association. I am a certified English teacher and Building 
Administrator. I am writing to provide testimony on behalf of the MEA in support of L D 1002: An Act 
to Require a Lunch Period of at Least 30 Minutes for Students and Reduce Food Waste.  
 
MEA represents approximately 24,00 educators across the state. In 2020, delegates to our Representative 
Assembly, our largest democratic body, resolved to  support a 30 -minute lunch and 30 -minute recess for 
pre-k-12 students, with additional resolutions to afford all staff with duty -free lunch periods of 30 
minutes.  
 
In the United States we have manifested a culture that celebrates a fast -paced, busy lifest yle, with 
reliance on convenience and efficiency; this is especially evident when we look at the time we reserve 
for students and staff to eat in our public schools. In my experiences as a public -school educator, I 
cannot recall ever having more than 23 mi nutes to make my way to the lunchroom, eat, and prepare 
myself for my afternoon responsibilities. So, it is no surprise that when I took my students abroad in 
2017, we were all shocked to learn lunch would be 2 -3 hours. Because we were so unfamiliar with 
reserved time to eat, rest, reflect, and converse, we didn’t know what to do with ourselves, but a few 
days in, we learned the power of this time. We were replenished, recharged, reinvigorated, and ready to 
proceed with our day.  
 
While slowing down and res erving time for our staff and students to prepare for their afternoons will 
help with focus and productivity, it will also help address an essential need – the social and emotional 
needs of our students and staff. While educators are working to embed these  opportunities in their 
curricula, it is essential we build time into our days for organic connections and conversations. In the 
hustle and bustle of modern -day American schools, there is very little time allocated for relationship 
building, which is essen tial in building productive, empathetic community members. Organic  
Maine Education Association  
Grace Leavitt President  | Jesse Hargrove Vice President  | Beth Fr ench Treasurer  
Rebecca Cole NEA Director  | Rachelle Bristol  Executive Director  
 
 
35 Community Drive, Augu sta, ME 04330 | 1349 Broadway, Bangor, ME 04401  
7 Hatch Drive , Suite 2 20, Caribou, ME 04736 | 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME 04106  
 
207-622-5866 | 207 -888-2070 fax | www.maineea.org  
 
 
 
conversations have the capacity to increase compassion, happiness, and resiliency. As for our staff, it 
allows time to connect around the challenges and victories they are experiencing in t he classroom, 
building stronger connections with their colleagues, some of whom are isolated during normal school 
hours.  
 
This bill also addresses the challenges schools experience around food waste. In my experience as an 
educator, I witnessed the requir ement that all students create a balanced plate if they opt for school 
lunch. USDA requires a school to offer five components for each lunch. Students must select at least 
three to purchase their meal. Even if a student refuses one of these options, they m ust put three on their 
plate to make it through checkout. I saw many apples and bags of carrots finding their way to the trash. 
In addition to this, if a student wishes to obtain free milk, they must choose three components, even if 
they just want the drin k. The idea proposed in this bill to add a table or container for unopened or 
unconsumed foods would allow us to share those healthy options with our families who need them most. 
At Hermon High School, a student organization put together snack boxes for ev ery classroom. This 
destigmatized accessing free food and was used by all. Providing a space for this in all schools would 
likely have the same impact and would significantly reduce the amount of food waste happening in our 
schools.  
 
If the committee choo ses to pass this bill, we understand there might be logistical challenges for 
districts; as written, the bill provides a process by which districts can opt out of the thirty -minute 
requirement so long as they put the decision to their governing body. This language is important to 
ensure we do not create additional scheduling challenges; however, we do hope districts will make every 
effort to meet the thirty -minute lunch period, which will have positive impacts on students and staff 
alike.  
 
Thank you for yo ur time and consideration, and I welcome you to reach out with questions.  
 
