 
 
 
Testimony in Support of LD 1002 , 
An Act to Require a Lunch Period of at Least 30 Minutes for Students and Reduce Food 
Waste  
 
Vanessa Berry , NRCM Sustainable Maine Outreach Coordinator  
March 22 , 2023 
 
Senator Rafferty , Representative Brennan , and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Education and Cultural Affairs , my name is Vanessa Berry . I am the Sustainable Maine Outreach 
Coordinator for the Natural Resources Council of Maine  (NRCM) . I appreciate this opportunity to 
testify in suppor t of LD 1002. 
 
My role within NRCM allows me the distinct pleasure of getting to work directly with Maine 
students at every level, from Pre -K to post-secondary, to address sustainability challenges and find 
meaningful solutions that support Maine people and our environment. Our work with schools is 
often rooted in food waste and recycling education, and my role often gets messy as I put on a 
thick pair of gloves and my muck boots to sort through classroom and cafeteria trash bins. This 
part of my work allows me to teach students about the environmental impacts of throwing uneaten 
food and single -use plastics “away” and offer alternative solutions th at can spare these items from 
a permanent home in one of Maine’s landfills.  
 
I’ve learned from years of sorting through countless black trash bags  of broken crayons, spaghetti 
sauce, discarded apples, and missing homework assignments that , when measured by weight, food 
waste typically makes up more than 70 percent of a school’s trash. Within that 70 percent, give -or-
take, are dozens of uneaten apples, unopened bags of carrots, and whole milk cartons. When we 
consider the fact that one out of four Maine stud ents is at risk of going hungry  (Maine DOE ), LD 
1002  feels like a n opportunity for Maine schools to become food waste superheroes and rescue 
this food from an untimely end and give it to those most vulnerable in our communities.  
 
One of the largest barriers in addressing food waste in schools is the limit of time for st udents to 
eat the food on their trays. In many schools, including many of the schools I attended as a child, 
there is only 20 minutes allotted for lunch . These 20 minutes  typically include  the time needed to 
pack up in the classroom, assemble children into  an orderly line  to walk to the cafeteria, waiting in 
another line to be served, and then finding a seat at a table with friends. For many students, this is 
one of the only times during their day to socialize with peers, and many Maine children are still 
just learning how to balance the remaining 10 minutes of lunch between discussions about 
yesterday’s cartoons and taking bites of stuffed crust pizza and carrot sticks before being asked to 
empty their tray and scurry off to outdoor recess.  
 
Extending the l unch time in Maine schools allows students more time to eat  the food on their 
trays, reducing wasted food and ensuring that all students, especially those who rely on school 
meals, have adequate nutrition to power through the day. LD 1002 addresses two lar ge sources of 
food waste in schools by encouraging students to eat the food they take, while also providing a 
designated place for food that is left behind to become a resource for kids in need. Thank you for 
the opportunity to show our support , and I am h appy to answer any questions you may have.  
 
 
