2023 Testimonial LD-1000 Cheryl D. Wentworth, North Berwick 
Greetings, all, 
Thank you, Rep.'l'|ffany Roberts and committee members for sponsoring 
LD-1000 (HP 636) Public Hearing. 
My name is Cheryl D. Wentworth. My address is 246 Randall Road, North 
Ben/vick, Maine. l was born in Maine and have lived here my whole life. 
Of my 69 years, l have lived 48 years on Randall Road in North Bervvick. 
For many years, our family has lived harmoniously, as a neighbor of the Berwick 
shooting range when General Electric Employee Association owned it. 
Within the last three years, shooting has signiﬁcantly increased it’s operations, 
with substantial change due to the use by the Cowboy Action Shooting, Steel 
Challenge, Maine Marshalls, Wild Bunch Championships, and Master Blasters 
who are all associated with the Sanford-Springvale Fish & Game Protectiive 
Association (SSF GPA) Shooting Range. lf you google each of these groups, 
individually, your search will bring you directly to 10 Meter Lane in Berwick. 
Apparently, these groups do not use the other SSFGPA Range in Sanford on 
Rubb Lane, near the airport, in Sanford, ME - WHY? 
Having these competition shooting matches, with loud caliber guns and pinging 
metal targets, in a residential area, is very concerning! Should children be raised 
in an environment of constant shooting? These groups using the range have 
ruined everyday life for people living in this residential areal 
Let it be noted, that three of my neighbors have found projectiles on their 
properly. Local law enforcement were unable to determine where the projectiles 
came from! However, these homeowners are in the direct line of the shooting 
range on Meter Lane in Bervvick. 
We no longer feel safe walking along Beaver Dam Brook, which runs very close 
to the shooting range. And, we don’t feel safe walking in our woods. 
According to the Bervvick Code Enforcement Ofﬁcer, there is nothing they can do 
to help us because there are no laws or ordinances to guide them.
Hard to believe you need a permit to run a daycare, but nothing to operate a 
shooting range. 
Even though Maine Title 17, Particular Nuisances, para. 2 states a Noise 
Nuisance Action can be claimed, if there has been substantial change (which 
there has) ~ would the town do anything about it if they don’t have an ordinance? 
Every town, in the state of Maine, with a shooting range, that 
does not have a shooting range ordinance, is a sitting duck! 
I would gladly volunteer my time and energy towards resolving the 
creation and passage of a new law on gun range ordinances. 
Sincerely, 
ﬂd [Wm §/// 7/513 
Cheryl D. Wentvvorth
