TESTIMONY OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE 
BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON INLAND FISHERIES AND 
WILDLIFE 
IN OPPOSITION TO L.D. 1000 
”RESOLVE, TO CONVENE A FIREARM RANGE SAFETY WORKING GROUP WITHIN THE 
DEPARTMENT OF INLAND FISHERIES AND WILDLIFE" 
SPONSORED BY: Representative Roberts of South Berwick 
CO-SPONSORED BY: Representative Cluchey of Bowdoinham 
Representative Doudera of Cambden 
Representative Mastraccio of Sanford 
DATE OF HEARING: April 19, Z023 
Good afternoon, Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. l am Jim Connolly, Resource Management Director at 
the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, speaking on behalf of the Department, 
in opposition to L.D. 1000. 
This resolve directs the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to convene a firearm 
range safety working group to review firearm range safety and access to firearm safety 
information in the State. This directive also includes a study to determine if firearm 
ranges across the state have access to the most current information and standards for 
safe operations at shooting facilities across Maine. The Department is to report the 
groups’ findings to the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife no 
later than December 6, 2023. 
The Department believes that the formation of a working group of this nature is 
unnecessary and would cause a significant administrative burden, because national 
industry standards are readily available for shooting facility managers and the 
Department provides technical assistance to shooting facilities as part of our Shooting 
Range Access Improvement project.
The National Rifle Association, National Shooting Sports Foundation, the Archery Trade 
Association, and US EPA all have resources available to range managers and the 
shooting public. These resources are considered industry standards and have been fully 
vetted by experts in range safety, range management, environmental stewardship, and 
safe firearms use. 
ln 2012, the Department began developing a comprehensive Shooting Range Access 
lmprovement Program, supported with Pittman-Robertson Grant monies. Under this 
program, the Department provides multiple public services, which includes providing 
technical assistance to private and municipal shooting ranges on strategies for lead 
mitigation, environmental stewardship, as well as range management and safety. 
Additionally, we periodically provide small sub-grants to private and municipal ranges 
for projects that improve safety at their range, improve public access, and increase 
environmental stewardship. To date, the Department has supported 36 separate 
projects for 17 individual ranges for these improvement projects. These projects, in 
addition to our modernized state-owned facilities serve as demonstration areas for site- 
specific examples of techniques implemented to address industry guidelines. Since the 
inception of the Range Access program, the Department has initiated contact with 
nearly every non—commercial range in the State. 
In addition to the support the Department provides for shooting facilities, we also 
provide experiential training to the public as part of the Shooting Range program. This 
hands-on training program is focused on fostering the safe use and handling of firearms 
and archery equipment to users of all experience levels. 
We would like to note that there are several statutes that currently address municipality 
regulatory authority and civil nuisance rights regarding shooting facilities, as well as 
unlawful acts associated with the discharge of firearms. 
I would be glad to answer any questions at this time or during the work session.
