2023 Testimonial LD-1000 Kathy Paradis, North Berwick 
Thank you, Representative Tiffany Roberts, and other members in this workshop today. 
My hope, and the hope of Concerned Citizens of North Berwick and Benivick, is to reach a group 
of people who have the courage to give this matter the full attention that it deserves! 
I will start by referencing the Shooting Range Ordinance of Cape Elizabeth, Effective July 12, 
2017. This is a twelve page document, so l am highlighting what is most pertinent. See below. 
SEC. 24-5-3. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS The Shooting Range License application 
shall include the following information (from Cape Elizabeth): 
2. Occupied Dwelling. For existing shooting ranges located closer than one-half (1/2) mile 
from any existing Occupied Dwelling, shooting range facilities shall not be permitted to 
relocate or enlarge said range to further encroach within said setback, unless they can 
demonstrate that shot containment will be improved and the surface danger zone will be 
reduced in size. 
Kathy: Many of our homes are less than % mile away. According to Sanford-Springvale Fish & Game 
Protective Agency’s Facebook, in April of 2019, SSFGPA held their first Master Blaster’s Event in Berwick. They 
rented out the range, and continue to do so, with more of these large events planned. lfl am reading it correctly, 2019 
April's report showed that as many as 80 people (many non members) from outside of the club responded. No 
permits were required and no oversight by the town of Berwick. These are extremely loud events, running all 
weekend, 8:00 to sunset, with pinging metal targets and constant gunﬁre of many different caliber guns. Since 
2003, this range has enlarged its operations with no regard for its residential neighbors. 
3. Survey. A standard boundary survey made and certified by a licensed land sun/eyor in 
the State of Maine, a copy of the deed for the property and copies of any easements, 
restrictions or covenants. 
Kathy: According to Bervvick's CEO, Irish Griffith, Berwick has no records of surveying or 
permits. l showed her Cape Elizabeth ’s Ordinance. Her comment “lt is nicely drafted." 
lt ended there. Question: lf Cape Elizabeth can draft an ordinance, why can’t Berwick? 
4. Site Plan. A site plan for the entire shooting range to a scale of no less than one (1) inch 
equals one hundred (100) feet. 6. Secure Access. Fencing, gates, and other features used 
by the Shooting range facility to control access to the facility. 
Kathy: Ben/vick ’s is substandard. There are instances where people have “snuck" in. 
7. Hours of Operation. A note shall be added to the site plan stating the hours of operation of 
the shooting range. 
Kathy: SSFGPA, on 10 Meter Lane in Benivick ME, is allowed to be open seven days a week, 
365 days a year, 8:00 am to sunset. The town of Ben/vick has been approached, three times, 
over the past 19 years, by Concerned Citizens, trying to work with the town and the SSFGPA to 
bring on positive change, including reduced hours. Instead, conditions have worsened.
8. Shot Containment. The license application shall include a plan describing how all of 
the bullets, shot or other projectiles or any other debris shall be contained on the 
Shooting Range facility. Structures or devices that shall be installed for shot containment shall 
be shown on the site plan. 
Kathy: Three Randall Road houses in N.Berwick_ in the direct trajectory of SSFGPA’s ﬁring line 
have been struck by errant bullets. Our local police and state police closed all documented 
reports, saying it could not be proven - that it could have been someone else. (Not likely!) 
9. Noise. A plan showing the projected dBA levels at the property line and at the sixty-five 
(65) dBA level prepared by a professional noise expert. For existing shooting ranges, dBA 
levels shall also be provided for any new ﬁrearm with a caliber not currently used or 
ammunition not currently used. 
Kathy: Since it’s ownership,SSFGPA allows and has introduced new and more high caliber 
guns at it’s Berwick campus, esp.more than it allows at it‘s Sanford Location. This Qractice 
continues to go uncheckeci Why? And why is Ben/vick hosting the lion’s share of these huge 
shooting competitions, rather than at their Sanford location, near the Airport, which is a more 
industrial setting? We all agree that a_professional noise expert should be hired to monitor this. 
10. Firearms. A detailed description of the types and uses of ﬁrearms and ammunition 7 
used and proposed to be used at the site. 
Kathy: Should be carefully looked at, especially in residential areas. Google Lots to learn. 
11. Lead. A plan describing how lead will be managed on the site and how that plan complies 
with the EPA lead management guidelines. 
Kathy: Much more needs to be said about this subject-many spent bullets in this preservation 
and wetland area. Ben/vick's Range: SSFGPA’s berm is 50 yards from Beaver Dam Brook. 
12. Warning signs. 13. Maintenance. 14. Safety Design. A description of how the proposed 
shooting range design compares to the design standards in the NRA Range Source Book. 
Kathy: The Berwick range needs improvement on all three, namely, safety 8- noise. 
15. Insurance. Documentation of the insurance coverage of the shooting range facility. 
Kathy: At our combined Select-person ’s meeting on February 23, 2023, questions were asked if 
the SSFGPA had insurance. President, Zach Roberge, wouldn’t give us the name of their 
insurance company, nor tell us what kind of insurance they carried. Cape Elizabeth ’s ordinance 
requires a copy of their shooting range‘s insurance policy. This should be a requirement. 
SSFGPA Zach Roberge’s phone: 207-337-2835 CEO's lrish Griffith: 207-752-6103 
To view a video of the full meeting, go to: , :.;;_- __;,j;_ /Selectmen ‘s Meeting 2/23/23 
Phone number: James Bellimisso 1 , i 
698-1101; Another 
reference: Portland Press Herald, Sunday, March 12, 2023; Our interview by Gillian Graham. 
~; L”’.e' 
<2. //' ..~¢;.-'/i /mt / ﬂ‘ 5/080313 ” S‘/gm/668 ”(/
g_L “Aw _ MRS Title 30-A, §3011._l'< ’ _t§_GU_LATlQliOF SP_Ql§_i'§llOOTING RANGES g _>___ ____ 
5q,_ (em/iu¢)ssFa- PA’: Faqbaok _ 
P435 &!?/vll/<
¢ §30l l. Regulation of sport shooting ranges 55/ni aa.7'°/Yta2 ‘1'¢; at/14 Q//"W-WL _/ 
I. Deﬁnition. As used in this section, "sport shooting range" means an area designed and used for 
archery. skeet and trap shooting or other similar shooting sports and the shooting of rifles, shotguns and 
pistols. 
[PL 1995, C. 231, §2 (NEW).] 
2. Limitation. A municipal noise control or other ordinance may not require or be applied so as 
to require a sport shooting range to limit or eliminate shooting activities that have occurred on a regular 
basis at the range prior to the enactment date ofthe ordinance, as long as the range conforms t 
l§>R 
accepted gun safety and shooting range operation practices or is constructed in a manner not reasonably \/453145 
expected to allow a projectile to cross the boundary ofthe range. 
[PL 2015, C. 433, §s (AMD).] 
3. Expansion of activity. Nothing in this section limits the ability ofa municipality to regulate 
the location and construction ofa new sport shooting range or a substantial change in use of an existing 
range on or after September l, 2016. 
[PL 2015, C. 433, §3 (AMD).] 
4. Maintenance and improvements. A municipality may not restrict a sport shooting range 
established prior to September l, 2016 from performing maintenance or othenvise making 
improvements to the sport shooting range and its buildings, structures and grounds with regard to: 
A. Enhancing public safety and shot containment; [PL 2015, C. 433, §4 (NEW).] 
B. Providing access for persons with disabilities and providing rest room facilities; [PL 2015, 0. 
433, §4 (NEW).] 
C. Otherwise maintaining or improving the habitability of buildings and grounds, if such 
maintenance or improvements are otherwise in compliance with the municipality's generally 
applicable building codes and zoning ordinances; and [PL 2015, c. 433, §4 (NEW).] 
D. Repairing or rebuilding a building or structure damaged by ﬁre, collapse, explosion or an act 
of God, if such repairs or rebuilding is otherwise in compliance with the municipality's generally 
applicable building codes and is completed within 2 years of the loss or damage. [PL 2015, C. 
433, §4 (NEW).] 
[PL 2015, <3. 433, §4 (NEW).] 
SECTION HISTORY 
PL 1995, C. 231, §2 (NEW). PL 2015, C. 433, §§s, 4 (AMD). 
The State of Maine claims a copyright in its codiﬁed statutes. If you intend to republish this material, we require that you include 
the following disclaimer in your publication: 
All c0p_1’rig/its and other rights to statutory text are reserved by the State 0fMaine. The text included in this ptlhlication rejlect.s' 
changes made through the Second Regular Session Q/"the 130th Maine Legislature and is cztrrent through October 1, Z022. The 
text is subject to change without notice. [I is (1 version that has not been of/icia/ly certified by the Secretmjt ‘ ofStr1re. Re/er to the 
Maine Revism' Statutes Annotated and szipplenzentsg/or certified text 
The Ofﬁce of the Revisor of Statutes also requests that you send us one copy of any statutory publication you may produce. Our 
goal is not to restrict publishing activity. but to keep track of who is publishing what, to identify any needless duplication and to 
preserve the State's copyright rights. 
PLEASE NOTE: The Revisor‘s Office cannot perform research for or provide legal advice or interpretation of Maine law to the 
public. Ifyou need legal assistance, please contact a qualiﬁed attomey. 
/t /1’1<%' ,~\ t" /
G . . . 
osigegigbehflz §30l l. Regulation of sport shooting ranges ll 
