2023 Testimonial LD-1000 Paul K. Hafford, North Berwick 
Dear Committee Members, 
My name is Paul K. Hafford. Since October of 2000 my wife and I have resided at 23 Beech Ridge 
Road, North Berwick, Maine. As a former I4-year employee of the General Electric (GE) facility, I was 
very familiar with this shooting range owned by the GE Employees Association, having done several 
electrical equipment repairs at the range. Thus, it was not a great concern when GE sold the range to the 
Sanford and Springvale Fish and Game Protective Association, Inc. (SSFGPA) on April llth 2002, two 
years after my wife and I built our home on 23 Beech Ridge Road .. 
As a military veteran and a Maine hunter I am very accustomed to the noise of discharged ﬁrearms 
especially as hunting season approaches each year. This however is not the deafening noise we have 
been enduring since the SSFGPA has focused the use of this range for fund—raising rapid ﬁre 
competition events such as the Cowboy Action Shooting, Steel challenge, Maine Marshall, Wild Bunch 
Championships, and Master Blasters. 
Since the SSFGPA acquisition of the Berwick outdoor shooting range stray bullets have damaged three 
homes downwind of the shooting range. These homes are on the Randall Road in North Berwick 
approximately 0.4 miles from the range. Per Maine Statute 30-A - Subsection 3011 (Regulation of 
sport shooting ranges) “A municipal noise control or other ordinance may not require or be applied so 
as to require a sport shooting range to limit or eliminate shooting activities that have occurred ona 
regular basis at the range prior to the enactment date of the ordinance as long as the range conforms to 
generally accepted gun safety and shooting range operation practices or is constructed in ll 
manner not reasonably expected to allow a projectile to cross the boundary of the 
range.” 
(See Enclosure #3) 
Yet, we have been unsuccessful to ﬁnd anyone with the qualiﬁcations and jurisdiction to investigate the 
stray bullets crossing the boundary of the SSFGPA range. 
As Craig Gerry, Maine Shooting Range Coordinator of the Maine Dept of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
conveyed to me following his March 08-2023 Summary Report of the SSGPA Range, “Regarding your 
request for a potential investigation of alleged stray bullets and/or mitigation, that really needs to be 
handled by the town code enforcement ofﬁcer or local law enforcement. . .. we don’t conduct 
investigations of ranges nor do we have authority over shooting ranges” . Yet, in his Summary Report to 
the SSFGPA he states, “The Current Range is a Safe Range.” (See Enclosure #2) 
To scientiﬁcally determine the origination of the alleged “bullet leakage” problem requires the skills of 
a competent engineer, surveyor, and/or a ballistic analyst. None of which reside with our two local 
police departments or most Maine municipalities. Therefore the limitation of Title 30-A Subsection 
301 I ,“ . ..as long as the range conforms to generally accepted gun safety and shooting range operation 
practices or is constructed in a manner not reasonably expected to allow a projectile to 
cross the boundary 0f the range” is an unassigned task, which cannot be accomplished as the 
Statue is written. The Statue should assign this task to a qualiﬁed entity such as the forensic disciplines 
of the Maine State Police Evidence Response Team. (See Enclosure #3) 
Respectfully, _\ 
K ...-»1;1;+;@-tr Jr; 5,5 
Paul K. Hafford
L 
,-- -‘=2 
.72, >1-ﬁllgaal" 
gg §3Q11 pm: [Q §3010 Title 30-A: MUNICIPALITIES AND COUNTIES §3012E 
3 0 1, 
1 M S Part 2: MUNICIPALITIES 
H §' 
Subpart 4: ORDINANCE AUTHORITY AND LIMITATIONS 
WORD Chapter 1412 ORDINANCES 
STATUTE SEARCH 
--------- §3011. Regulation of sport shooting ranges 
CH’ CONTENTS 1. Deﬁnition As used in this section, "sport shooting range" means an area designed and used for archery, skeet and trap 
'|' 
m_E 3 Q- A shooting or other similar shooting sports and the shooting of riﬂes, shotguns and pistols. 
[PL 1995, C. Z31; §2 (NEW) 
L T Z. Limitation. A municipal noise control or other ordinance may not require or be applied so as to require a sport shooting range 
‘ST OF ITLES to limit or eliminate shooting activities that have occurred on a regular basis at the range prior to the enactment date of the ordinance, 
M AME LAW & as long as the range conforms to generally accepted gun safety and shooting range operation practices or is constructed in a manner 
not reasonabl e ected to allow a ro' ectile to th bod 1 cross e un aryof the range 
[PL 2015, <;. 433, §3 (AMD).] 
REv:s0R's OFFICE 3. Expansion of activity. Nothing in this section limits the ability of a municipality toregulate the location and construction ofa 
M Al NE LEGISLATURE new sport shooting range or a substantial change in use of an existing range on or after September 1, 2016. 
[PL 2015, c. 433, §3 (AMD).] 
4. Maintenance and improvements. A municipality may not restrict a sport shooting range established prior to September I, 
' 
2016 from performing maintenance or otherwise making improvements to the sport shooting range and its buildings, structures and 
‘ 
grounds with regard ta
W g 1"»/lame E»:~nvega'gnmeni g Visit the State House Fmaii 
Legislature - Executive - Jtxdicial - Agency Rules Tour Guide - 
Accessibility - 
Segziirity Screening - Direciioris & Office of the Revisor oi Statutes
. 
, _.. 
Paziiranc‘ * 
E.m:.l¢$\\l'Q *1l
Q I; Fa’I 
-5‘ 1,;)l’naIl Paul Hafford <haffords.maine@gmail.com> 
RE: B_t_-erwick Maine Shooting Range Inspection Report 
1 message 
3 10341 AM Gerry, Craig l <Craig.l.Gerry@maine.gov> A Mon, Mar 27, 202 at 
To: Paul i--lafford <haffords.maine@gmail.com> 
Cc: "Corcles, Robert" <Robert.Cordes@maine.gov>, South Benivick Rod and Gun Ass‘n <president@ssfgpa.org>, 
"theautol~.ahn@yahoo.com" <theautobal1n@yahoo.com> 
Mr. Haiford, 
l have attached my complete summary report to the Sanford-Springvale Fish and Game Association as you have 
requested. This report is a result of a site visit for technical assistance requested by the Association. All of my 
recommendations to the club are based on NRA guidelines, which are considered nation-wide industry standards for 
ShOOfir.g ranges. 
Regarc lng your request pr a potential investigation of alleged stray bullets and/or mitigation, that really needs to be 
handle} by the town code enforcement officer or local law enforcement. MElFWs range program only provides technical 
assista sce to range owners, we don't conduct investigations of ranges nor do we have authority over shooting ranges. 
Respet: ifully, “_ 
Craig l. Gerry 
Maine mooring Range Coordinator 
Maine ‘K901 Qfinland Fisheries & Wildlife 
Resout ize Management 
353 W; gr 51l’88t - SHS #41 
August ME 04333-9957 
(207) 4 55-4249 
Fax: (I 17) 287-6395 
meﬁsh‘ . ildlife.com facebook | twitter 
Corres sndence to and from this office is considered a public record and may be subject to a request under the Maine 
Freedc: 'l 
of Access Act. Information that you wish to keep conﬁdential should not be included in email correspondence. 
-----Ori. lnal Message---- — 
From: l ‘rien/I Wentvvorth <pemaquid33@gmail.com> 
Sent: Si snday, March 26, 2023 11:09 AM 
To: Pa» Hafford <haffords.maine@gmail.com> 
Cc: Gei "y, Craig I <Craig.l.Gerry@maine.gov>; Kathryn Paradis <klparadis@gmail.com>; Guptill Mike 
<mike§_; :ptill@hotmail.com> 
Subjec Re: Beiwick Maine Shooting Range inspection Report 
EXTEF1 ‘AL: This email originated from outside of the State of Maine Mail System. Do not click links or open attachments 
unless " 
cu recognize the sender and know the content is safe. 
Thanks ?*~aul! 
Sent fr-:. it my iPhone 
> On IV -" 
:1 
26, 2023, at 9:23 AM, Paul Hafford <haffords.maine@gmail.com> wrote:
>
> 
> Hi Ci;
_ 
> I ' '1 rtion of our re ort of the Sanford-Springvale Fish & Game Protective Association (SSFGPA) on Meter Lane savi po yp 
in Berw.=::< and would like to receive a full copy of the report to see what is proposed to determine and mitigate thewape 
Elle-losuiek
4, 4» 
Sanford-Springvale Range 
Berwick, Maine 
R R' 
ange eview 
March 8, 2023 
On March 8, 2023, I met with the President and two officers of the Sanford-Springvale Fish& 
Game Club to do a walk through and review of the Sanford-Springvale Firearms Range in 
Berwick -~ 
I found that overall, the Range was designed and placed very well for the location in regard to 
the residential area surrounding the facility. On a 1-10 scale for an earthen berm, open air 
range, l would scale the range at a 9: due to the direction of fire, the overall heights of the firing 
berms, in relationship to the residential dwelling in the surrounding area. The Current Range is 
ﬂ 5 Q Q_ 
a Safe Range. Below are my findings and recommendations based on the 2012 NRA Range 
Source Book, of which is a standard used across the United States. 
25 Yard Pistol Range - Clean of debris, Excellent Firing Berm height a well as the height of the 
Side Berms. Clearly Defined Firing Line within a Covered Shooting Station. 
50 Yard Range - Clean of Debris, Firing Berm and Outer Section of the side Berm on the right 
side could use some increase in height- (*1). Clearly Deﬁned Firing Line within a Covered 
Shooting Station. 
100 — 150 — 200 Yard Rifle Range — Clean of Debris, Firing Berms height are of good height and 
Side Berms are of good height. Clearly Defined Firing Line within a Covered Shooting Station. 
Vegetation between the 100 Yard Range and the 150 Yard Range should be removed due to the 
chance of deflection of a projectile. 
Cowboy Shooting Ranges - While these ranges are of a short distance the berms are for the 
most part good. All should have an increase of ﬁring berms height as recommended by the 
NRA Range Source Book standards. The last Range on the left should have the tree removed as 
it has been undercut by erosion and gunfire on that given range and may cause a safety hazard 
for the club with damage to the equipment on the range or persons using the range. 
' 
‘R
M.
A 
Notes referring to Recommendations based on the NRA Range Source Book Standards. 
(*1)- Firing Berms should be a least 20 feet in height and sides berms a minimum of 8 feet to 
contain projectiles to the given range. This can be done with increasing the height of the soils 
or a double-sided fence of 4"x 4" posts and 2" hemlock boards filling the void in between with 
sand or rubber pellets. 
(*2) -Vegetation in the firing lane or on the firing berms should be removed due to the chance 
of deflection of a projectile; while the chance of deflection may occur, there is no chance for 
the projectile to leave the range in this case. All ranges should be clear of vegetation and 
stones in the firing lane or impact areas of the Firing Berms. 
** The above review are recommendations are based on the 2012 NRA Source Book of which 
has become the standard for ranges across the United States. ** 
Regard1|1g ’tl'lE'NUise~issues on the range, while covered by the State - Title 30A due to the time 
of the statue and the placement of the range; the Club is covered. ~ 
-I~=-minnows-0 
With this considered, being a good neighbor, I might recommend Planting of firs in the ravine 
beyond the firing berms of the Firearm Ranges and the Shotgun Range. The growth in these 
areas have grown and the cover is at a height that the sounds maybe travel to and then along 
these ravines to the residential areas. In conversation with the officers of the club it was 
stated that a few of the neighbors have stated "the noise has increased over time" . Some of 
this maybe due to the increase height of the tall softwood growth along these ravines of which 
will carry sounds towards the outlets of the ravines. Smaller growth in rows within these areas 
should decrease the noise over time. This can also be done along areas with hardwood growth 
to keep the protection year-round. 
I understand the increase in shooting but, I believe the ”sound transmitted" to the outlying 
areas should be more friendly. 
I have found this to work in many areas ofthe state. Again, this is a recommendation. 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Craig l. Gerry 
MEIFW Range Coordinator 
353 Water Street — SHS41 
Augusta, maine 04333 
207-446-4249)4
Evidence Response Team _ 
The Evidence Response Team examines major scenes to identify and establish the interrelationships of physical 
evidence involved in the scene. This process involves developing, identifying, documenting, collecting, and 
preserving evidence for purposes of identifying suspects and establishing sequence of events possibilities. 
The ERT is comprised of 29 sworn members who are all crime scene certified through the international 
Association for identification as investigators and analysts. These members may have individual forensic 
specialties but are all generalists that maintain a good working knowledge of the various disciplines of forensic 
science. 
There are 20 additional ERT Associate Members that represent an expertise in a broad spectrum of forensic 
disciplines (i.e. pathology, trace, biology, prints, ballistics, anthropology, etc.) and act as consultants who train 
regularly with the team. 
1. 
§gt. Scott BI"yLt — Team Commander 
(207) 624—7‘l O0 
T ‘I 
g; '_“Z'!‘~ 
0 Id
s 
4!?’- -—»d¢-wfe
