v _ HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
1; ‘j 
1.’ 
. 2 STATE HOUSE STATION
‘ _ AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002 
(207) 287-1400 
Tiffany Roberts TTY: MAINE RELAY 711 
35 Buttonwood Road 
South Berwick, ME 03908 
Home: (207) 210-3287 
T1ffany.Roberts@legislaturc.mainc.gov 
April 19, 2023 
Testimony of Rep. Tijfany Roberts presenting 
LD 1000, Resolve, to Convene a Firearm Range Safety Working Group Within 
the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and distinguished members of the Inland Fisheries 
and Wildlife Committee, my name is Tiffany Roberts and I represent House District 149 and the 
communities of North and South Berwick. I am here before you today to present LD 1000, 
Resolve, to Convene a Firearm Range Safety Working Group Within the Department of 
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife. 
This bill aims to provide assistance and a forum to discuss a situation that was brought to my 
attention while knocking on doors in a new part of my district that was added during last year ’s 
redistricting process. The residents I met, regardless of age, party, gender, etc., all had the same 
request: “Please help us with the shooting range.” 
This piqued my interest, so I sought out more information. I leamed that the shooting range 
nearby (within a mile) has been in operation since 1960, having once been operated by General 
Electric, with a relatively small membership. It transferred hands, sometime in the early 2000s, 
to the Sanford Springvale Fish and Game Protective Association, which operates the Berwick 
range and a range in Sanford with a membership that currently stands at around 800. During this 
same period of time, the residential areas surrounding it in Berwick and North Berwick have 
developed more and other traditional non-gun range locations to shoot (gravel pits, etc.) have 
become scarce, likely increasing activity at the range. 
The combination of increased development and increased activity has led to concems. 
Speciﬁcally, the residents I spoke to were upset about the constant noise and concerned about 
their safety. Several police reports from each town had been ﬁled, with stray bullets found on 
properties. There is public land near the range and other locations where shooting could take 
place, making it difficult to know where any stray rounds are coming from. 
As you know, there is not a set regulatory body for gun ranges or speciﬁc regulations and 
municipalities have limited ability to regulate existing ranges. A 2016 law prohibits any noise 
District 149: Part of North Berwick and Part of South Berwick
ordinances regarding shooting ranges, and the safety concems do not fall on the municipality 
unless stray rounds can be directly traced to the range. Much of this is understandable to ensure 
that a long-standing and safe range is not forced to close through excessive regulation. 
For me, the purpose of this legislation is to provide some assurance that not only the Berwick 
range but all ranges are operating in a safe manner as good neighbors. I am not implying that any 
range is operating in an unsafe manner, but my hope is that by bringing experts together, we may 
be able to arrive at a recommendation for a formal process to bring concerns forward, ensure that 
they are addressed and provide peace of mind to all involved. I know that no solution will make 
everyone happy or address all concems, but if there is a way to reassure folks that a particular 
range is operating safely without an undue burden, that seems like the right thing to do. 
I know that some, maybe much, of this, is taking place already. I know that IF&W has conducted 
a site visit there. I would imagine they will furnish their recommendations. These are based on 
the NRA standards and, again, while just recommendations, should give the public a sense of 
what procedures are in place for safety. 
At a nearly 3-hour-long work session between Berwick, North Berwick and the range, the same 
theme was brought up. Being good neighbors. Many ideas were offered that seemed to havea 
positive reception. I am not sure what steps have followed from that meeting or IF&W’s 
recommendations. I am hopeful that that collaboration could be built upon and it could becomea 
model moving forward on how to address issues such as this in the future. 
I have been trying very hard to wrap my head around the fact that we have shooting ranges, the 
majority of which cause no issues but have no good solution to address issues should they arise. 
Abutters or folks living nearby have no good recourse should issues, particularly around health 
and safety, come forward. If any other entity was involved, there would very likely be some 
system in place to address concerns. Again, the goal should be to ensure safety and provide a 
sense of security. 
We seem to be at a point where gathering the stakeholders involved together and ﬁguring out 
what, if anything, can change is necessary. I know this is not an isolated incident and likely will 
increase as residential development grows and the use of ranges grows as well. WhileI 
understand the department has concerns about the need, I would ask, then, what is the answer? 
Finding a solution that ensures safety, puts minds at ease and addresses other concems whenever 
possible seems like a worthy goal that should be pursued. 
Thank you for your consideration, and I would be happy to answer any questions.
