1_"'l)I(L ‘C-O 
Good afternoon. 
I thank you for your time to hear me speak on a topic that is an important concern for me,my 
family and our neighbors who I am representing today. 
The subjects that I will ask you to consider today are: 
1) How do we/you decide if a law is a good and a fair law for all Mainers? 
2)Because someone is passionate about something,does that make it a good and okay law‘? 
3)Because an organization is equipped with money , should that allow them to have a stronger 
voice? 
First let me begin by saying,THlS IS NOT IN ANYWAY TRYING TO MAKE A POINT ABOUT 
GUN USE! WE ARE NOT AGAINST THE SPORT OF SHOOTING,THlS IS A POINT TO 
BE MADE ASKING FOR RESPECT TO BE ALLOWED TO ENJOY OUR PROPERTIES IN 
PEACE, GOOD HEALTH AND SAFETY. 
My husband and I have been blessed by God to live and grow up in Maine all of our Iives.The 
property that we live on has been in his family since the early 1600's and the family still 
occupies that property today. 
I think that it would be fair to say,that we live and get along with our neighbors very well and 
Enjoy our neighbors,as well as our home and property.As I am sure each one of you do. 
We knew when we inherited a part of the family property to build on that there was a small gun 
range located close to us. 
It had maybe one hundred members and on occasion would hold shooting events that would 
maybe last a few hours.The guns that they used were low caliber guns and we could hardly 
hear them.Today that gun range is owned by another business and has members 
Of over eight-hundred (that does not include the visitors that members are allowed to bring in 
with them)and is open seven days a week.Shooting is allowed from 8:00 am to dusk 
Seven days a week. 
When trying to be a good neighbor we got in touch with our Town Manager,James Belissimo. 
He did some investigating and let me know who owned the range now. 
We called the president of the Range and he and the Range’s treasurer came and visited with 
us on our porch.No sooner had they sat down and the ﬁring began at the Range. 
The president looked at us and remarked,"l have to be honest...I was not expecting to hear 
thatl” 
We talked and they were going to take back to the board at the Range three things that we 
Asked for. 
1) They close on Sundays (which they told us if they did this, they would need to hold all 
activities on Saturdays,making 3x the shooting being done on Saturdays 
2) They close down early two nights out of the week 
3) They open at 8:00 am instead of at dawn. 
They have done one out of the three to date. At this time I would need to say,that our request 
Today would be very different because the intense hearing of guns all day into the evening 
Has affected our lives and health tremendously!
As the gun ﬁre truIy,truly intensified we got back in touch with our Town Manager to ﬁnd out 
what the town could do since the Range themselves were not following through and that is 
when we were told that the town could do nothing for us because of how the law read. 
Law? What law? The law that our lawmakers put into effect under S3011. 
Limitation.A Municipal noise control or other ordinance may not require or be applied so as to 
Require a sport shooting range to limit or eliminate shooting activities that have occurred ona 
regular basis at the range. 
And then another under Title 17,Chapter 91 :Nuisances :A person may not maintain a nuisance 
action,including for noise,against a shooting range located in the vicinity of the person’s property 
if the range was established as of the date the person acquired the property.Waitl WaitllI 
believe the Guptill property was there way before this Rangell The property has never been 
Without a Guptill family member living there. 
Who made this law? Who passed this law? Whoever thought ,wrote and voted this law through 
Certainly does not live within a few miles of a gun range and may I say,was not being mindful 
Of those who DO live close to a gun range! 
This is not a fair law! Not for ALL Mainer’sI 
ls this not part of your responsibility for us that voted you in, to watch out for ALL citizens? 
I was recently told by a town ofﬁcial to be aware that people who own guns are very passionate 
About the possessions of their guns. 
I believe that I can understand that and try to respect that.But what exactly does that mean? 
If you have a passion about something does that mean that passion allows you to not be 
Responsible for your passion?Does it allow you to not be kind and thoughtful of others? 
As we have had our lives and property totally interrupted by this gun range all day when having 
Guest over for lawn parties, for an evening ﬁre out at our stone pit,for relaxing by our pool with 
our grandchildren,forjust wanting to sit and read a book on our front porch,from not hearing the 
Songs of birds in our trees,from not enjoying our windows open on beautiful days,from not 
Even being able to be inside our homes to rest because all we hear is gun ﬁre coming through 
the closed windows no matter what room we are sitting in. 
If you think that this is a stretch of what is truly happening on our property,please we welcome 
you to come and visit us and come to your own conclusion of what you will hear. 
In the words of my husband,"We are being held hostage by gunﬁre!" 
We have passions too. We are passionate about living peaceful lives with our family. Being able 
to rest after a long week of working hard at our jobs,to rest a few hours in the evening after 
working all day without hearing gun ﬁre all around us. Not to mention that summer is my 
vacation time! A vacation from your work usually means having time to relax and rejuvenate. 
The intense hearing of guns starting in March through December is not sane for us any 
longer!.The guns that are being used are loud and intense.And I am being told these people are 
passionate about their guns! 
I have to be honest, I think the Second Amendment is being used in a negative way. 
When James Madison added this amendment to the constitution it was about the right to bear
arms.A freedom for Americans to be able to have and own their own guns to defend themselves 
if and when the time comes from the government and other countries.lt was not in my opinion to 
be used to defend gun ranges and allow them to disturb those who have to listen to them enjoy 
Their sport.That is not right or fair! Gun ranges are being allowed to operate using the Second 
Amendment and that amendment is the freedom to own a gun NOT disturb your neighbors. 
Because you can own a gun,that is your freedom,BUT DO NOTuse this amendment to defend 
big expensive guns being shot in a gun range where it is surrounded by homes and families and 
interfering with allowing people to live peacefully. 
Lastly,l have been told that people do not want to go up against the NRA because they are a big 
organization with a lot of money.That it will lose votes for politicians.lt will make them look like 
they're against people who own guns(Just for the record..we have family members that own 
their own guns.). 
Please,l hope that the people that we vote in and represent us will be more fair than that. 
Let me remind you of a quote from Thomas Jefferson, “Whenever any form of government 
becomes destructive of these ends of life,liberty,and the pursuit of happiness it is the right of the 
people to alter or abolish it and to institute new government" . 
You have all been given a beautiful responsibility to represent ALL people in this great state and 
Country and l truly hope that you will see that there has to be an adjustment to all gun ranges in 
the state of Maine.To allow those who want to practice their target shooting(by the way,this gun 
range is holding it for other events and inviting other people to come in and have 
weddings,training which is making it even busier,constant and louder). 
l will end with another quote from Thomas Jefferson, ”The care of human life and happiness,and 
not their destruction,is the first and only object of good government." 
We plead for SWIFT action to consider a way for the ranges to enjoy their sport without 
interfering with our lives and properties. 
Thank you, 
K. . \ 
‘. 
3‘mi\*:...»~\ ‘f" /l~~ .' .-at ‘Y \, ‘L-< _{l""+‘l,~' _i’ 
,. 
if‘ ,5 
‘P1 ,il 
A‘ 
I \L-\,
