WI x Maine Sheriffs ’ Association ’ “One Team, One jllission ” 
Sheriff Dale P. Lancaster, President 
Sheriff Scott Nichols, ls‘ Vice-President, Sheriff William King, 2“d Vice-President — Sheriff Barry Curtis, Secretary- 
Sheriff Todd Brackett, Treasurer — Sheriff Troy Morton, Immediate Past President— 
Sheriff Joel Meny, Past President-at-Large - Mary-Anne LaMarre, Executive Director 
May 4, 2023 
L.D. 1492 — An Act to Increase the Transparency and Accountability of the 
Maine Information and Analysis Center 
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury, and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, 
My name is Ken Mason. I am the Sheriff of Kennebec County and I’m here today on behalf of 
the Maine Sheriffs ’ Association. Maine sheriffs met to discuss this bill and our unanimous 
position is Neither For Nor Against L.D. 1492 — An Act to Increase the Transparency and 
Accountability of the Maine Information and Analysis Center. 
Transparency and accotmtability are ideals that all law enforcement professionals in Maine 
endeavor to achieve. Supporting a bill that proposes to increase transparency and accountability 
in law enforcement should be an easy bill to support, however, to fully explore the impact of this 
bill requires a greater understanding of the Work conducted at the Maine Information and 
Analysis Center. 
The success of Maine’s ranking as the safest state in the country is not by chance. Maine sheriffs 
collectively collaborate with other law enforcement agencies daily. Services and information 
provided by our colleagues at MIAC is often not appropriate for wide dissemination. While we 
embrace and support the concept of transparency and accountability, we urge lawmakers to 
assess what constitutes transparency. If the movement towards greater transparency risks the 
integrity of an operation, we must reevaluate what we hope to achieve by implementing L.D. 
1492. 
Maine’s sheriffs stand united in our support for the Maine Information and Analysis Center to 
remain unchanged as a critical facet of Maine’s success. We urge lawmakers to carefully 
measure how greater transparency and accountability are achieved with this bill, and to consider 
how best to protect conﬁdential information that could jeopardize ongoing investigations. 
Thank you for your consideration. I would be pleased to answer any questions you might have. 
Sincerely, 
Sheriff Ken Mason 
Maine Sheriffs ’ Association
