 
 
 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
LD 1492 – Ought to Pass  
 
An Act to Increase the Transparency and Accountability of the  
Maine Information and Analysis Cente r 
 
Joint Standing Committee on  
Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
May 4 , 2023 
 Senator Beebe -Center , Representative Salisbury and distinguished members of the Joint 
Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, greetings. My name is Michael 
Kebede , and I am Policy Counsel of the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide 
organization committed to advancing a nd preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and 
U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I urge you to support LD 1290 because it would  
strengthen the constitutional rights of people in Maine.  
 If passed, t his bill would  make  the Maine Information Analysis Center  (“MIAC”  or 
“Maine’s Fusion Center ”) more transparent and more accountable . Specifically, it would 
establish an auditor in the Attorney General’s office to conduct systematic, ongoing oversight of 
the Fusion Center. Th e Auditor would be responsible for giving a report to this committee on 
February 15th every year. This bill would also designate materials that the Fusion Center shares 
with private entities as public records within the meaning of Maine’s Freedom of Access  Act.  
 Originally created to improve the sharing of anti -terrorism intelligence among different 
state, local and federal law enforcement agencies , the scope of Fusion Centers’ mission has 
quickly expanded  to cover “all crimes and all hazards.” The types o f information they seek for 
analysis has also broadened over time to include not just criminal intelligence, but also public 
and private sector data . Participation in Fusion Centers  has grown to include not just law 
enforcement, but also other government e ntities, the military and even select members of the 
private sector  – including, in Maine, an agent of Central Maine Power .  
 Fusion centers raise very serious privacy issues at a time when new technology, 
government powers are combining to pose unpreceden ted threat s to Americans’ privacy. There 
are serious questions about whether data fusion is an effective means of preventing terrorism in 
ACLU of Maine -- 2 
 
 
the first place, and whether funding the development of these centers is a wise investment of 
finite public safety res ources. In a democracy, the collection and sharing of intelligence 
information  need to be carried out with the utmost care. That is because more and more, the 
amount of information available on each one of us is enough to assemble a very detailed portrait 
of our lives. And because security agencies are moving toward using such portraits to profile 
how “suspicious” we look. Institutions like fusion centers must be planned in a public, open 
manner, and their implications for privacy and other key values caref ully thought out and 
debated. And like any powerful institution in a democracy, intelligence gathering  must be 
constructed in a carefully bounded and limited manner with sufficient checks and balances to 
prevent abuse. Maine’s f usion center has not conform ed to these vital requirements.  
 A shroud of secrecy cloaks the MIAC. In 2020, the brave act of a whistleblower 
momentarily removed that shroud. #BlueLeaks showed us that the MIAC is not just ineffective, 
but also harmful. We learned from a document titled  “CIVIL UNREST DAILY REPORT”  that 
Maine’s Fusion Center was closely surveilling racial justice and other activists from Portland to 
Presque Isle. In his federal lawsuit against MIAC, State Police Trooper George Loder stated that 
our Fusion Center “has kept  an illegal database of gun owners, illegally conducted surveillance 
on peace activists and regularly circumvented federal privacy laws.”1 Those are the words of an 
eyewitness, a whistleblower. As you all know from your work in criminal justice, it is no small 
matter for a police officer to impugn a policing institution. The MIAC is exactly what watchdogs 
feared it was: a highly secretive th reat to fundamental constitutional rights. Our First 
Amendment rights to assemble, petition our government, and speak freely are among the rights 
threatened by Maine’s Fusion Center. The MIAC has an immigration official in its midst, 
suggesting that it aid s in our country’s profoundly harmful practice of separating families 
through deportation.  
 This bill would safeguard the constitutional rights of people in Maine. I urge you to 
strengthen our civil liberties by voting ought to pass .  
 Thank you for your time and attention.  
 
 
 
1 Matt Byrne, Maine trooper says he was retaliated against for reporting illegal police surveillance of citizens , May 
14, 2020, Press Herald, available at  https://www.pressherald.com/2020/05/14/maine -trooper -says-he-was-retaliated -
against -for-reporting -illegal -police -surveillance -of-citizens/?auth0Authentication=true  
