Testimony of 
DANA A. DORAN 
Executive Director 
Professional Logging Contractors of Maine 
Before the Committee on Transportation in Support of LD 318 — Resolve, to Designate 
the Route 170 Bridge Located in Webster Plantation the Gary “Swampy” Worster 
Memorial Bridge 
Tuesday, February 21, 2023 
Senator Chipman, Representative Williams and members of the Committee on Transportation, my name is 
Dana Doran, and I am the Executive Director of the Professional Logging Contractors of Maine. The 
Professional Logging Contractors of Maine (PLC) is the voice of Maine’s logging and trucking industry. The 
PLC was formed in 1995 to represent independent contractors in a rapidly changing forest industry. 
As of 2017, logging and trucking contractors in Maine employed over 3,900 people directly and were 
indirectly responsible for the creation of an additional 5,400 jobs. This employrnent and the investments 
that contractors make contributed $620 million to the state’s economy. Our membership, which includes 
200 contractor members and an additional 120 associate members, employs over half of the individuals 
who work in this industry and is also responsible for 80% of Maine’s annual timber harvest. 
Thank you for providing me the opportunity to testify on behalf of our membership in support of LD 318- 
Resolve, to Designate the Route 170 Bridge Located in Webster Plantation the Gary “Swampy” Worster 
Memorial Bridge. l would also like to thank Senator Stewart for introducing this bill to honor the life and 
memory of a remarkable individual. 
Gary “Swampy” Worster, is the late husband of Hollie Raymond Worster of Lee, Maine. Hollie is the Vice 
President of PLC Member, T. Raymond Forest Products, a full—service logging, and trucking company that 
has been in business since 1977, employees 21 hardworking individuals in the forests of DownEast Maine. 
After graduating from Lee Academy in the late 1980’s, Swampy joined the team of PLC Member, 
Thompson Trucking, where he was a dedicated employee for the next thirty years. Swampy was also a loyal 
husband and friend and had a true zest for life. He loved his family, especially his wife, Hollie, and his 
friends. He was a true son of Maine and could often be found hunting, fishing from the bridge this bill 
would rename, and on occasion, throwing, “one hell of a party”. 
It was impossible to not be inﬂuenced by Swampy’s bright smile, his contagious laugh, and kind heart. lt’s 
these qualities we remember the most from the times he played in the PLC’s Log A Load for Kids Golf 
Tournament, where he contributed year after year to help kids in the neonatal intensive care unit at 
Northern Light Eastern Maine Healthcare. The 2022 Tournament was named in his honor. 
It is ﬁtting that this bridge will also be named in his honor and we are hopeful that the Committee will 
support this Resolve. Every time someone passes over this bridge or ﬁshes from its railing, folks will think of 
Swampy and all the good he did for everyone in his life. 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide the opinion of our membership before you today and I would be 
happy to answer any questions you may have.
