Senator LaFountain 
Representative Landry 
Members of the IF&W committee 
My name is Bob Parker, owner, and operator of Stony Brook 
Outﬁtters. I am a full-time guide and outﬁtter. Speaking on behalf 
of myself. 
I am opposed to LD 58. 
I own 2 lodges, one in Maine and one in Canada. Instead of 
working on the reopening of my camp for this year’s upcoming 
spring bear hunt, I ﬁnd myself having to write testimony and 
taking a trip back to Maine so I can give testimony on something 
threatening, not only my passion, but also my livelihood. 
I got my Guides license in l98O, that was 43 years ago. Back then 
the bait and dog season started at the same time. Somewhere 
around the late l990’s we started to exceed the IF&W harvest 
goals. We worked with the department and made changes needed. 
One of the changes, as painful as it was, the dog hunters lost the 
ﬁrst 2 weeks of the season, allowing the bait hunters to have2 
weeks of exclusive hunting to themselves. This exclusiveness 
includes no hunting pressure and no sharing of the roads with other 
user groups such as moose hunters, bird hunters, archery deer 
hunters, turkey hunters, etc... while the dog hunters must share the 
woods and roads with all the above. Passage of this bill will give 
the bait hunters exclusiveness of yet another 2 weeks. 
I work hard trying to train and get my dogs in shape in the months 
of July and Aug only to have them laid up for 2 and half weeks 
with the current season dates. These dogs, like all athletes, require 
conditioning and structured exercise to maintain their muscle tone’ 
and stamina. If passed this bill will result in a 4 and a half week 
period (over a month!) in which the dogs are deprived of the ability 
to obtain this required exercise. This is detrimental to my dogs and
my ability to perform a quality hunt. If my dogs are not in shape 
and they are unable to perform, I end up with unsatisﬁed clients. I 
lose future business and Maine loses future revenues. 
The testimony you hear expressing issues with the overlap of the 
seasons is most likely coming from individuals who have no 
experience in dog hunting. I, however, guide both bait hunters as 
well as hound hunters and therefore sees both sides of the coin. 
Many believe that hound hunters intentionally run their dogs off 
from someone else’s bait site. But the truth is — you would be hard 
pressed to ﬁnd a dirt road in Maine that does not have a bait site on 
it and “rigging” off a road where the dog strikes off the truck, does 
not mean that the hound hunter is running off someone’s bait. Ifa 
bear crosses a road or the dog smells where a bear has been 
feeding (whether it be on an ant hill or on a bait site), then no law 
is broken, and that bear is fair game. As you are probably aware, it 
is law that a bait site be at the least 50 yards off a traveled way. 
Also, it is important to remember that a bait site does not give an 
individual ownership of the bear that frequents that site — these 
animals are owned and managed by the State of Maine. 
Another myth is - if a bear is run off a bait - this will ruin the bait 
site. If a good working site suddenly stops working it could be for 
many reasons, such as, bears roam, bears will choose natural feed 
over bait, the bear found another site with better bait, or the bear 
may have died. This has happened to me many times and can be 
very frustrating because there is a lot of work and money that goes 
into establishing a good site. However, I have been rumiing bear 
with hounds for over 43 years and cannot even begin to count the 
number of times I have run off one of my sites and then ran off that 
same site the next morning. Bears simply do not stop coming toa 
bait site just because of some dogs were there!
A bear hunt with hounds is basically a morning hunt where the 
hunt starts ‘/2 hour before sunrise and is generally over by noon, 
unless we are recovering a dog that fell out of the chase. Bait 
hunting, on the other hand, is done in the late afternoon to ‘/2 hour 
after sunset. Given these differences, it is unlikely that a bait 
hunter would see or hear a bear hound around a bait site. 
Hound hunting amounts to about 60% of my income and the 
passing of this bill, eliminating these two weeks, would result ina 
catastrophic hardship for my business. The elimination of 2 weeks 
from a season of only 7 weeks is detrimental. (In some parts of the 
state the season is even shorter than that.) 
In closing, I ask you why are we here working on something that is 
clearly not broken? The current season structure has been working 
for approximately 25 years, the framework that the department has 
in place strikes a good balance between the overlapping seasons, 
and the Commissioner already has the authority to adjust the 
seasons, if necessary, the 10-year big game management plan was 
recently done and this change was not implemented, and the 
current harvest is within the Department ’s harvest goals. This 
requested change is clearly not needed. I would ask that you kill 
this bill and keep the current seasons intact.
