Testimony of Brian Smith of Machiasport to Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries & Wildlife.  
 
In support of LD 58  - Resolve, Directing the Commissioner of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to 
establish seasons that do not overlap for hunting bear over bait and hunting bear with dogs.  
 
Good Afternoon Senator LaFontaine, Representative Landry and distinguished members of the Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife Committee. I am here to support Representative Kenneth Davis’s bill LD-58 
which has been needed for many years. I last testified before this committee when you recommended 
my confirmation to the Inland Fisheries & Wildlife Advisory Council in 2018.  I currently serve on the 
Board of Directors for Sportsmans Alliance of Maine Institute for Legislative Action and The Maine 
Bowhunters Association. I volunteered and raised funds for the last two Bear Referendum fights to 
save our traditional hunt and support all types of legal and ethical bear hunting. I am testifying on 
behalf of many bear hunters who only hunt over bait that have complained to me about interference by 
hound hunters.  I have been bear hunting for over 40 years and hunting over my own baits since 1991. I 
hold out for big mature bears with bow and arrow and my wife Joyce and I maintain a few sites every 
year near our home in Machiasport. She harvested her first big bear last year after of many hours on 
stand.      
 
The current bear baiting season starts the last Monday in August and runs 4 weeks. The bear hounding 
season runs for 7 weeks with the first 2 weeks overlapping with the last 2 weeks of baiting. In recent 
years the bear hound guiding has increased and every year there is more conflict during that 2 week 
overlap. My self and many bait hunting friends have been experiencing more interference with our bait 
hunting in the last 4 or 5 years. Once hounding season starts, our bait sight activity drops off 
dramatically and the bears mostly only visit our baits after dark. We no longer hunt mornings because 
of hounds chasing bears nearby and keeping the bears off our baits. We have seen hound hunting 
guides on our game cameras retrieving their hounds that strayed off state land onto property where 
commercial guiding and hounding is not allowed. Some of these encounters are non-resident hound 
hunters from southern states running their hounds with Maine guides during that two week overlap. 
Last week I spoke with a Washington County bear baiting and hounding Guide who can’t be here 
today. He told me he has been complaining about the 2 week overlap because of the interference from 
dog hunters on his bait sites where paying clients are sitting. He only runs his hound hunts after the bait 
season is over.  
 
In January, I spoke with Wildlife Division Director Nate Webb who advised IF&W has been receiving 
more and more complaints about the 2 week overlap conflict and it needs to be addressed. Out of 
fairness,  I suggest that bait hunters get a 5 week season and hound hunters get a 5 week season after 
the bait season ends. This would eliminate the current conflict and help to achieve the IF&W goal of 
harvesting more bears. The success rates of bait hunters greatly drops off when hound season begins. 
When I served on the IF&W Advisory Council we were told every year that more bears need to be 
harvested to meet management goals. An extra week of bait hunting with no interference from hound 
hunters would help meet that objective. We realize that some hound hunting guides will have clients 
booked for this year, thus are recommending changes beginning in 2024. Now that Commissioner 
Comuso has authority over bear seasons and bag limits we are hoping she can work to resolve this 
increasingly prominent issue. We urge you to support this resolve and vote “Ought to Pass” this bill. 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today and your work on behalf of hunters in Maine.   
 
Respectfully Submitted;  
Brian Smith – Machiasport -  Tel # 255-1000 – Email: Bowhunter@mgemaine.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
