LD 58:”Resolve, Directing the Commissioner of lnland Fisheries and Wildlife to Establish Seasons that Do Not Overlap for Hunting Bear over Bait and Hunting Bear with Dogs" 
Good morning. My name is Brittany Currier and l am here representing the Maine Sporting Dog Association. We are here today to oppose changing the overlapping seasons of hunting bear over bait and hunting bear with dogs. 
Currently there is a 2 week overlap in the different methods of bear hunting. Eliminating this 
overlap will result in a loss of opportunity for either bait hunters, houndsmen or both. The current overlap is during prime bear hunting season and allows everyone a fair opportunity to harvest bears. The hunting with dogs season currently extends about 4 weeks beyond the bait 
hunting season, but many years those last two weeks can be difﬁcult to ﬁnd bears to hunt as they are becoming less and less active as winter approaches. 
Houndsmen can train their dogs starting July 1“ until 3 days before the bait hunting season starts. For the next two weeks they are not allowed to run their dogs on bear. During the 
training season countless hours are spent getting these dogs conditioned to be able to 
effectively hunt bears. lt is already hard to have to let the dogs rest for two weeks between training season and hunting season. lfthe overlap in bait hunting and hunting with dogs was eliminated it would likely cause a bigger chunk of time between the dog training season and the dog hunting season. This would result in dogs losing their conditioning that was gained during the training season. 
One common complaint we hear about the overlapping season is that dogs run bear out of the areas of the bait sites that bait hunters have established. l can tell you, from experience, that 
this is not the case. Baits can be placed in the woods at the end of July and many houndsmen, including myself, use these baits to start a bear with dogs through the end of the training 
season. During this time, we check a bait site, check the camera, and if a bear has visited, we let 
the dogs start theirjob to track the bear. This often ends with the bears climbing a tree and the dogs at the base of it barking until we can get there. We then leash our dogs and leave the 
woods, bear unharmed. Often, we go back to the bait the following day and the same bear has been back there for a snack, unphased by the fact that it was run off by dogs the day before. 
The Maine Sporting Dog Association believes that every hunter deserves equal and ample 
opportunity to harvest a bear, regardless of their method of choice, and that is why we oppose LD 58. 
Thank you
