Maine Sporting Camp Association (MSCA) 
126 Western Avenue, Box 153 * Augusta, Maine 04330 * 207-888-3931 
Testimony in Opposition to 
L.D. 58 
“Resolve, Directing the Commissioner of Inland Fisheries and 
Wildlife to Establish Seasons That Do Not Overlap for Hunting 
Bear over Bait and Hunting Bear with Dogs". 
TO 
Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (IFW) 
Monday, April 24, 2023, at 10:00 AM 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry, and members of theloint Standing 
Committee on Inland Fisheries and Wildlife my name is Dana Valleau from Liberty, 
and l am Director of Associate Members for the Maine Sporting Camp Association 
(MSCA) testifying in oggosition to L.D. 58. MSCA represents commercial sporting 
lodges from Rangeley Lakes Region to Lubec and from Belgrade to Allagash. 
MSCA members oppose the elimination of overlapping seasons for bear hunting 
over bait and with dogs for several reasons. 
Combination hunts during overlapping weeks are popular among families and 
groups when older or handicap hunters require use of ground blinds or stands 
over bait, but other members enjoy the action and physical challenge of dog 
hunts. All get to share the hunting experience and the non-hunting time together. 
Some may even choose to hunt in the morning with dogs and evening over bait. 
The first two weeks of bear season are the most popular for booking bait hunts. 
Having the flexibility to hunt over bait or with dogs provides the rationale for 
clients to book a hunt during the less popular weeks, hence providing a positive 
economic benefit for the lodge and community. Some lodges only offer bear over 
bait hunts during the first two weeks of the season, so eliminating overlaps is not 
critical.
Lastly, MSCA members have not identified overlapping weeks as a problem. And, 
on balance the overlap is good for clients and the economy. Issues identified asa 
result of the overlap should be resolved by means other than Legislation. 
Thank you. 
The Maine Sporting Camp Association (MSCA) was founded in 198 7 by a group of camp owners 
to preserve the sporting camp ’s uniqueness in the Stare of Maine. By working closely with other 
groups and exchanging ideas and information, the members of MSCA continue the tradition of 
providing high quality recreational experiences to individuals and their families, a quality 
experience that visitors will remember long aﬂer they return home. The MSCA is a 5 01 C (6) 
non-proﬁt organization that is led by a board of directors. Maine Sporting Camp Association 
126 Western Avenue, Box I53, Augusta, Maine 0433 0, info@mainesportingcamps.com, Phone." 
(207) 888-3931
2 
Maine Sporting Camp Association, 126 Western Avenue, Box 153, Augusta, Maine 04330
