Maine Professional Guides Association 
55 Morrison Hill Road 
Wilton, ME 04294 
wwwmaineguides. org 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 58 
Resolve, Directing the Commissioner of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife to Establish Seasons That Do Not Overlap for 
Hunting Bear over Bait and Hunting Bear with Dogs 
April 24, 2023 
Senator LaFountain, Representative Landry and members of the committee, my name is James Cote and l am here today 
on behalf of the Maine Professional Guides Association and approximately 1,000 members in opposition to LD 58. 
Per the summary, this resolve directs the Commissioner of lnland Fisheries and Wildlife to establish, prior to the 2024 
bear hunting season, seasons that do not overlap for hunting bear over bait and hunting bear with dogs. 
While MPGA appreciates efforts to reduce user conflicts, this legislation would have the effect of upending a current 
bear season framework that, on balance, works well and accommodates hunters using bait, bear trappers, those hunters 
that use dogs, still—hunters, and those that do all of the above. 
Additionally, we would urge the committee to oppose this legislation for these other reasons: 
1. DIFW ﬁnalized the State's Big Game Management Plan in 2017 with the input of a range of stakeholders, which 
includes a comprehensive section on bear management. This plan did not include a recommendation to 
establish seasons that do not overlap. We should continue to support the gold standard work that was put into 
the development of this plan. 
2. The Big Game Management Plan included a recommendation that the Legislature should grant the 
Commissioner the authority to make changes to bear hunting season framework, which was subsequently 
passed by the 129"‘ Legislature. The Commissioner already retains the authority to make changes as necessaw 
to achieve publicly developed goals and outcomes. Statutory changes now will only invite more statutory 
changes in the future and create an unpredictable and political process for setting season dates. 
3. ln 2004 and 2014 Maine voters resoundingly supported the principle that we should allow DIFW, biologists and 
game wardens, to manage Maine's bear population, which is exactly what is happening under the Big Game 
Management Plan's architecture. 
4. Changing the season framework could disproportionately harm bear hunters in northern areas of Maine where 
it is not atypical for bears to go to dens earlier than in other areas of the state. There is only so much time in the 
fall, and the current framework allows all bear hunters opportunity before denning begins. 
The current season framework has worked well, on balance, for over 30 years. While we recognize that on occasion 
conflicts do happen in all types of hunting, we would urge the committee to vote ought not to pass and allow DIFW to 
continue to make decisions on how best to achieve Maine's bear management goals under the plan that had significant 
input from biologists, landowners, the hunting community and general public alike. Thank you for your consideration. 
An organization of professional guides dedicated to promoting a quality, ethical outdoor experience.
