Testimony of Joyce Smith of Machiasport to Joint Standing Committee on Inland Fisheries & Wildlife. 
 
In support of LD58 – Resolve, Directing the Commissioner of Inland Fisheries & Wildlife to establish 
seasons that do not overlap for hunting bear over bait and hunting bear with dogs.  
 
Good afternoon Senator LaFontaine, Representative Landry and distinguished members of the Inland 
Fisheries & Wildlife Committee. I’m here to support Representative Kenneth Davis’ bill LD58. 
 
I’ve been an outdoor enthusiast and nature lover since childhood, but hunting, to me, was a “guy thing” 
until I met my husband. While I supported hunting, my schedule was full with no time or energy for 
anything else. In August 2018, after caring for my mother for over ten years in our home, she died. As I 
grieved I realized that now had time for other things, like hunting. After completing a Hunter Safety 
class I began deer hunting with my husband in November.  
 
After retiring from DHHS in May 2019 with over forty years of service, I could spend more time in the 
woods with my husband. I loved it but wish I’d started decades earlier. In June we went on a New 
Brunswick bear hunt, the first time I’d seen a live bear in the woods. I shook like a leaf but was 
hooked. In the fall I sat with my husband on private property behind a locked gate with landowner 
permission as he harvested a bear the first week. In 2020 on another bait, behind two private properties 
with locked gates and landowners permission, we saw one old boar slip across the trail into the woods 
just as legal light faded. Friends were having the same issue with bears not coming until after dark. In 
2021 I began hunting separately in order to maximize our chance of success. One day we noticed tracks 
from a different vehicle and learned hounders had been there, without landowners permission, and 
taken a bear. In 2022 I was finally able to harvest my first bear before the end of the first two weeks of 
the season. The hounders returned, again without landowners permission.  
 
The hounds don’t know or care whose property or bait they’re on or if they’re chasing a big boar or 
terrifying a sow with cubs. Their handlers are indifferent to this issue. But, it’s a real problem for the 
many hunters like me that just want to sit quietly, minding our business and have a chance to harvest a 
bear for the table without interference.  
 
Eliminating the season overlap is simply a matter of fairness. On paper, the baiters have four weeks of 
hunting and the hounders have seven weeks. The reality is baiters have two weeks while the hounders 
have seven because after two weeks of baiting the hounds start running and scent up all the baits 
causing the bears to go nocturnal. Is that fair? It’s very discouraging for me and many others including 
guided paying customers, youth, and new hunters that have their hunts ruined by hounds. It seems an 
equitable solution would separate the two seasons equally without any overlap. This would be fair and 
a welcome change to many bear hunters like me, likely result in an increased harvest and eliminate the 
issue of hounds on other peoples baits. Seems like a win, win. 
 
I urge you to support this resolve and vote “Ought to Pass” this bill. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today and your work on behalf of hunters in Maine. 
 
Respectfully Submitted, 
 
Joyce L. Smith 
Machiasport 
Phone: 255-1000 – Email: bjsmith41286@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Joyce Smith
Machiasport
LD 58
I am in favor of this bill.
