Edited Testimony  
 
I am a registered Maine guide and a lifelong hound hunter. I graduated from Unity College with a degree 
in Wildlife Biology, I have worked in the wildlife field in several states across the country. For the past 10 
years I have been guiding for various outfitters and lodges across Maine. While conflicts do occur 
between hound hunters and bait hunters, during the two week overlap, I believe there are already 
enough laws in place to properly enforce the current conflicts.    
The state of Maine reports that, on average, between 80 and 90% of the bear are harvested before the 
end of September. Allowing Bait hunters 4 weeks of hunting without hounds would unjustly favor one 
user group over another. The following information was gathered from the State’s Bear harvest reports 
for five years from 2021 to 2017. Even with the current overlapping seasons, the bait hunters average 
69.2% of the harvest while hound hunters average 21% of the annual harvest. Bear hunters know that 
harvest numbers are closely tied to the availability of natural feed in the forest. There is a general 
cyclical trend of abundant food one year followed by the lack of natural feed the next year. In 2018 the 
state reported that there was a record low harvest due to the lack of natural feed. Bear denned early 
resulting in a greatly reduced harvest.  If the bait hunters had 4 weeks of hunting the hound hunters 
would be left searching for the few remaining bear that aren’t denned. This would result in a major 
financial blow to guides and Maine businesses because hunters would avoid booking those October 
weeks on off food years. To show the importance of timing in the fall bear hunting season one only 
needs to look at the harvest numbers for bear in the November deer season. Despite the November 
woods being inundated with deer hunters the bear harvest remains fairly constant at about 1% for late 
season bear harvested. The point I wish to make is that as the season progresses there is an 
exponentially lower and lower number of bear due to food availability and denning.  
Hounds are an easy target for many hunters, if a bear stops coming to a bait site and there have been 
hounds in the area, often the hounds are blamed for the absence of bear activity. Hound hunters will 
generally agree, we run the same bear off the same bait site daily during training season. We spend 
thousands of dollars leasing and baiting these sites to run bear all training season and hunting season. 
Running hounds in an area does not cause bear to leave the area. The most common cause of decreased 
bear activity, at a bait site, is due to seasonal changes in food availability. Bear will forage on ants and 
larvae in rotten wood, roadside clover and wild strawberries, then they move to raspberries, 
blueberries, and blackberries. Jewel weed, sassafras, hazel nuts winterberry in the bogs as well as 
sedges. Apples, corn and choke cherry are favorites. If there is a heavy mast crop during the fall the bear 
will move into the nuts. If you don’t have any acorns or beech ridges in your lease the bear will leave. 
There are very definite patterns of seasonal movement by bear to available food sources, in one week 
they may move miles away. By following our hounds with the use of GPS collars and baited sites with 
game cameras, we know exactly where the bear has traveled in a given amount of time. I have seen 
years when  a 4 hour old bear track is 100 yards away and then I have seen years when a 4 hour old 
track is 20 plus miles away. Depending on the seasonal timing and availability of food, bear can cover 
great distances in a 24 hour period. I have always had a great working relationship with abutting lease 
holders,  we often share information on particular bear. It isn’t uncommon for a bear in 24 hours to visit 
several different bait sites. If a bear disappears from a hunter’s site, it very well may have been killed by 
another hunter on his or her site and the disappearance has nothing to do with hounds in the area.  
I believe the current management plan and seasons work, overall there are very few conflicts across the 
state considering there were 12,500  bear hunters in the woods in 2021 . I urge the legislators not to 
support any changes to the current bear hunting season. Hound hunters, in good faith, have worked 
hard with landowners and state officials to alleviate conflicts. I urge you all to give the system time to 
work, the answer is not more laws that will further divide one user group from another. Game wardens 
now have the tools they need to prosecute trespassers and further laws will only hurt law abiding 
hunters. Thank you for your consideration and time. 
Mark Dufresne 
