Maine Education Association 
Grace Leavitt President I Jesse Hargrove Vice President I Beth French Treasurer' 
Rebecca Cote NEA Director I Rachelle Bristol Executive Director
1 
Testimony 
In Support of 
LD 955 An Act to Address Shortages of School Support Staff by Increasing the Minimum Hourly 
Wage for Those Staff, and 
LD 974 An Act to Establish Minimum Pay for Educational Technicians and Other School Support 
Staff, and 
LD 1237 An Act to Establish a Minimum Hourly Wage for School Support Staff, and 
Neither For Nor Against 
LD 1314 An Act to Establish a Minimum Salary for Educational Specialists, Educational 
Technicians and School Teaching Professionals 
Grace Leavitt, President, Maine Education Association 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Education & Cultural Affairs 
April 20, 2023 
Senator Rafferty, Representative Brennan, and members of the Education and Cultural Affairs 
Committee, 
My name is Grace Leavitt. My pronouns are she, her, hers. I am serving as President of the Maine 
Education Association while on leave from teaching Spanish in MSAD 51. I have over 43 years of 
classroom teaching experience with 20 years as a National Board Certiﬁed teacher. The MEA represents 
nearly 24,000 educators in our Maine system of public education in pre-K-l2 schools as well as in our 
institutions of higher education, both the University of Maine System and the Maine Community 
College System, along with students in teacher prep programs as well as many retired educators. 
I am here to testify on behalf of MEA in support of the following proposals: LD 955 An Act to Address 
Shortages of School Support Staff by Increasing the Minimum Hourly Wage for Those Staff (as 
amended), LD 974 An Act to Establish Minimum Pay for Educational Technicians and Other School 
Support Staff, LD 1237 An Act to Establish a Minimum Hourly Wage for School Support Staff, and 
Neither For Nor Against LD 1314 An Act to Establish a Minimum Salary for Educational Specialists, 
Educational Technicians and School Teaching Professionals. 
In 2009 an NEA member in Indiana produced a video, “A Day Without ESP”1 . The primary purpose of 
the video was to make the essential roles of our Educational Support Professionals, our ESPs, in our 
schools more visible to all--the bus drivers who safely transport our students, the custodians and 
maintenance staff who keep the buildings and grounds clean and safe, the food service personnel who 
prepare and serve nutritious meals, the educational technicians who work directly with students to 
support their learning, often with students with the greatest challenges, and of course, the administrative 
assistants who are the experts in multitasking and yet know every student’s name and often know their 
parents as well. The video also helped emphasize the need for greater respect for these important staff 
and for pay commensurate with the work that they do, without which our schools cannot meet the needs 
of our students, cannot provide the education and the learning environment our students deserve. 
35 Community Drive, Augusta, ME Oli33[] I 13149 Broadway, Bangor, ME OM01 
7 Hatch Drive, Suite 220, Caribou, ME 014736 I 29 Christopher Toppi Drive, South Portland ME OM06 
207-622~586é I 207-888-2070 fax I www maineeacrg
More than a decade later, the need to address the low pay, lack of respect, often difﬁcult working 
conditions for these ESSENTIAL Support Professionals is ever so much greater. The challenges of the 
last few years exacerbated the critical shortages of these important staff that we are encountering across 
the state. Faced with low pay——l0wer than you may receive at many other jobs requiring less education 
or expertise or training- —added to being stretched beyond your assigned duties to cover for the many 
vacant positions and then on top of the fact that in many cases these staff must work with students with 
very challenging behavioral needs, it is not surprising that many simply leave their positions in our 
schools to seek employment elsewhere, which of course only worsens the problem. 
Data published recently by The National Education Associationz recently shows that in 2021-2022 44% 
of our full-time ESPs in Maine earned under $25,000—and of those, just under half earned less than 
$15,000. 6% are below the poverty level, and another 13% are at or just above it. With approximately a 
third of our ESPs at or very near retirement age there are likely to be additional shortages of these key 
staff. 
Should the adult who helps support our students in their learning, may have to provide assistance with 
toileting when necessary, may work with a student who is unable to control their own behavior —should 
this adult not be able to afford to provide for their own children at home? Should they have to work 
multiple jobs to do so? Should any of our ESPs be expected to continue in this position? 
LD 955 will establish a state minimum hourly wage for these important positions, one that is equal to 
125% of the state minimum wageqwhich would be $17.25 this year since the state minimum wage is 
now $13.80. 
LD 974 will establish the same increase in a state minimum hourly wage for support staff, but an 
additional 8%--133% of the state minimum wage or $18.3 5—for educational technicians. 
LD 1237 will establish a dollar amount of $1 7 for the minimum hourly wage beginning in June 2024 
which will increase a dollar each year for the next several years, then will increase by the cost of living. 
MEA supports any and all of these three proposals and encourages their passage. 
LD 1314 provides for a salary equivalent to 200% of the state minimum hourly wage, however it is 
unclear how the term ‘salary’ would be applied to staff who are hourly wage earners. lf this were to be 
amended to address that, then MEA would certainly support the proposal for 200% of the state minimum 
wage becoming the hourly Wages for education support staff. Other parts of LD 1314 that we have 
questions about are 1) some of the positions referred to in LD 1314 are included on most if not all of the 
negotiated salary schedules for certiﬁed positions and should not be included in this proposal; and 2) it is 
unclear which positions are included in the term ‘school teaching professional ’ . For these reasons we are 
neither for nor against LD 1314 with the current wording, but would likely support an amended version 
that would address these points. 
lt is imperative that these essential staff are ﬁnally recognized and respected for the critically important 
roles that they play in educating our students. It is of the utmost importance that this recognition and 
respect at least be clearly demonstrated in the compensation they receive. lt is time.
MEA urges your support for these improvements to the hourly wages of education support professionals 
in Maine.' 
lhttpsi \\'\\'\l.\HHlLll1C.CUl11\\t1lUl1'.)\* ’Xd\q§2}‘ .f_/is __ p ____ W _ _ “M __>_____ )u% 
ZNEA ESP Data Book: A Work Force Proﬁle of Education Support Professionals; December 2022, 
National Education Association
