Senator Ra1'l‘ crty., Representative Brennan and other tnembers of the Education and Cultural AlTairs 
Committee, 
Good afternoon and thank you for allowing me the time to address your committee. My name is John 
Soifer and l am a lairly recently retired special education teacher from Winslow .lunior High and 
Skowhegan Htgh. I am here today to testili y in support of Ll) 955. 974. 1237 and 1314. 
l began my career in education at the age of-l5 as an ed tech to a special education program at Winslow 
Junior High. It was a career change l chose in order to help children by teaching after careers entirely in 
the private sector ol‘ owning and managing small and large businesses. ()ne of the major obstacles in 
making the decision w as trying to ﬁgure out. with my wife. how to support our family of ourselves and 
two boys in 7th and 9th grades on an ed techs salary at that time. 
We made the commitment to my new career while l worked as an ed tech and took the necessary 
education courses to begin teaching as a special education teacher in 1995 lor S23.(l()(). Fortunately li 
or 
teachers. as a result ofthe hard work of legislators like yourselves. are doing much better today. Now no 
future Maine teacher will need to start with such ﬁnancial challenges as a result oi‘ the statewide base 
salary youi ve supported. 
Sadly. the enormously valuable but ignored/undcrvaltied ed techs and other essential school personnel 
who work tirelessly to make the educational system work better lor Maine students have been taken for 
granted and taken advantage of by the system; Until Now! 
The education system is about people and families. That is why it is so sad and contradictory to what is 
said by the system when support staff are paid as poorly as they are. They are either at or barely above 
the poverty level whether they live with other wage-earners or alone. 
These people are absolutely critical to the positive t’unctioning oi‘ the educational system. The loss of ed 
techs in the system is another critical piece to retaining all the other educators as well. They are the 
unseen and minimally recognized backbone oi‘ the educational system supporting both regular and special 
educators who rely so critically on their integrity and work. 
Special educators are both teachers and case managers. A little known fact is that they often do not 
actually have students on their caseloads in their classrooms. They rely on the ed techs to implement the 
students l.F..P.“ s for them and keeping the special education case manger.s knowledgcably informed on 
how the students are doing. 
As a sy stem. we ask and expect so much from all these support personnel that help our children grow and 
learn to become strong. healthy and educated adults and positive members of our communities. However. 
we pay and treat them as disposable employees. You have the opportunity to change that situation now!l 
do understand you‘ re considering several diitereiit bills to raise the wages. Please. please. please do 
something substantial and significant to help these educators and support personnel and thereby the 
educational system for Maine‘ s students and our communities. 
l thank you li 
or your time and sincerely hope and trust you will rectify this wrong to these hard working. 
caring and intelligent people of Maine. 
John Soill er 
South China. Me. 
john.soil' er@gmail.com
