131st Legislature 
Senator Donna Bailey 
Se 3 State House Station 
Augusta, A/[E 043 3 3 ~00O3 
0 f M aing Office (207) 287-1515 
Senate District 31 
Testimony of Senator Donna Bailey introducing 
LD 1631, An Act to Establish the Gas Tax Fairness Credit 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
May 9, 2023 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Taxation, my name is Donna Bailey, and I proudly represent Senate District 31, 
which includes Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and Saco. Today, I am pleased to introduce IQ 
_l_Q1l, “An Act to Establish the Gas Tax Fairness Credit.” 
Across the district, my constituents have been asking for ﬁnancial relief, and I am proud of the 
relief programs that Maine lawmakers have worked on. After the worst of the COVID-19 
pandemic, the Legislature sent disaster relief payments to Mainers. Just this winter, the 
Legislature passed LLQ and sent relief to Mainers who were struggling with the high costs of 
heating their homes and paying their electric bills. Currently, the Health and Human Services 
Committee is looking at funding SNAP beneﬁts, which were recently reduced. Meanwhile, the 
Housing Committee is looking at funding an Emergency Rental Assistance Program because the 
Federal program ended — but rent remains high. In this committee, I know that all of you are 
working to strengthen the Property Tax Stabilization Program, which will help Mainers age in 
place and stay in their homes. We work on these programs so that people can eat, have a roof 
over their heads, and keep their homes warm and the lights on. But we haven’t offered relief for 
another daily expense that really adds up: gas. 
Last year, four oil companies had total sales of $1 trillion. Some companies — including Chevron, 
ConocoPhillips, Exxon, and Shell - had record proﬁts in 2022. In fact, Shell reported its highest- 
ever proﬁt in its 115 years of existence; and Exxon became the third-most-pro ﬁtable company 
behind Apple and Microsoft. That same year, Maine consumers had to ﬁll their vehicles with 
gasoline that set records at the pump. In the U.S., the average price of gas was more than $5a 
gallon. We know that these oil companies are price gouging the Maine consumer. The 
Legislature doesn’t have the power to require oil companies to lower the price of a gallon of gas 
or reduce their record proﬁts. But we could offer some ﬁnancial relief to the Maine consumer 
with a Gas Tax Fairness Credit. 
LD 1631 would establish this credit, which is based on the Sales Tax Fairness Credit. Even 
better, the credit would not take money from the Highway Fund, which we use to ﬁx our roads 
and bridges. As drafted, the credit is valued at $125 for single individuals and $175 for 
individuals ﬁling joint returns or as heads of households. In order to claim the credit, the
1
taxpayer is required to have a motor vehicle registered in Maine for at least 6 months of the tax 
year for which the credit is being claimed. We all know the pain at the pump. Maine is a rural 
state with few public transportation options, so Mainers have to own vehicles. They have to 
drive, sometimes long distances, whether it’s to go to work, pick up the kids from school, or see 
the doctor. With the Gas Tax Fairness Credit, I hope that we can offer Maine consumers some 
ﬁnancial relief. 
I thank you for your time, and I would be happy to answer any questions. 
Donna Bailey 
State Senator, Senate District 31 
Buxton, Old Orchard Beach, and Saco
