1 
 TESTIMONY OF 
MICHAEL J. ALLEN, ASSOCIATE COMMISSIONER FOR TAX POLICY 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Taxation 
Hearing Date: May 9, 2023 
  
LD 1631 – “An Act to Establish the Gas Tax Fairness Credit” 
 
 
 Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation 
Committee – good afternoon, my name is Michael Allen, Associate Commissioner 
for Tax Policy in the Department of Administrative and Financial Services.  I am 
testifying at the request of the Administration Against LD 1631, “An Act to 
Establish the Gas Tax Fairness Credit.” 
For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2023, the bill establishes the 
refundable gas tax fairness credit (“Credit”) for certain Maine residents and part-
year residents who own a motor vehicle, as defined by Title 29-A, section 101, 
subsection 42, that was registered in the State for at least 6 months of the taxable 
year.  The amount of the base credit is $125 to $225, depending on the taxpayer’s 
filing status and number of dependents claimed for purposes of the federal child 
tax credit.  For part-year residents, the Credit is prorated based on Maine-source 
income.  The Credit is phased out for taxpayers whose income exceeds $20,000 for 
taxpayers filing single, $30,000 for taxpayers filing as heads of household, and 
$40,000 for married taxpayers filing jointly.  The Credit is not available to married 
taxpayers filing separate returns, individuals who are “safe harbor” residents 
treated as nonresident individuals because they reside outside Maine for significant 
periods of time, and individuals that may be claimed as a dependent on another 
person’s income tax return.   
2 
 The Credit is structured similar to the sales tax fairness credit (“STFC”) 
except that the base credit amounts and the income threshold amounts related to 
the phaseout are not adjusted for inflation.   
The bill creates another refundable tax credit that is very much like an 
existing refundable tax credit.  Simply increasing the current Sales Tax Fairness 
Credit would be a much better solution. 
For tax year 2023, the refundable STFC, as adjusted for inflation, is a 
maximum credit up to $255, depending on the number of qualifying children and 
dependents on the Maine income tax return.  The income phaseout begins at 
$23,300 for single filers; $34,950 for heads of households; and $46,600 for married 
filing jointly or qualifying widow(er).  The STFC may be claimed by a taxpayer 
that is a Maine resident for any part of the tax year, is not claimed as a dependent 
on another person’s income tax return, and whose filing status is single, head of 
household, married filing jointly, or qualifying widow(er). 
The Administration notes that MRS does not currently have the resources to 
confirm motor vehicle ownership and timing of vehicle registrations to determine 
if taxpayers meet the Credit requirements.  Taxpayers would be required to submit 
documentation supporting ownership and registration of a motor vehicle to MRS. 
The Administration also notes the following technical concerns: 
• The Credit is not extended to taxpayers who lease, rather than 
purchase, a motor vehicle.  However, despite the bill’s title, the Credit 
could be allowed for the registration of an electric vehicle owned by 
the taxpayer. 
• The bill does not address who may claim the Credit in the case of 
motor vehicles owned and registered by more than one person or 
3 
 whether the same motor vehicle may be used to claim the Credit by 
more than one taxpayer in the case of a sale or transfer during the 
taxable year. 
• The bill should clarify whether the Credit may be claimed for each 
vehicle owned and registered by the taxpayer. 
• The bill will provide an additional tax benefit for taxpayers who have 
already reduced taxable income by the amount of fuel used for 
business purposes. 
• Unlike the STFC, the bill does not provide for annual inflation 
adjustments applicable to the base credit amounts and the income 
phaseout amounts under 36 M.R.S., § 5403. 
The estimated revenue impact of the bill is not available at this time. 
The estimated administrative costs are $198,836 for fiscal year 2024 and 
$247,690 for fiscal year 2025.  Two Tax Examiner positions, effective October 1, 
2023, will be required to process affected income tax returns and perform desk 
audits to review eligibility of the tax credit.  Additional one-time computer 
programming costs will be needed to add an additional line to the individual 
income tax return Form 1040ME, to update check stub messages and notices, to 
make federal tape changes, and to perform systems testing. 
The Administration looks forward to working with the Committee on the 
bill; representatives from MRS will be here for the Work Session to provide 
additional information and respond in detail to the Committee’s questions. 
