  
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Office of MaineCare Services  
11 State House Station  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -2674 ; Fax  (207) 287 -2675  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine  Relay)  
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
 
March 20 , 202 3 
 
Senator Craig Hickman , Chair  
Representative Laura Supica , Chair  
Members, Veterans & Legal Affairs  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re:  LD 985 – Resolve, to Require the Department of Health and Human Services to Provide 
Additional Reimbursement to Maine Veterans' Homes  
 
Senator Hickman , Representative Supica , and Members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans & Legal Affairs : 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments in opposition  to LD 985, Resolve, to Require 
the Department of Health and Human Services to Provide Additional Reimbursement to Maine 
Veterans' Homes . This resolve requires the Department of Health and Human Services to amen d 
its rules governing MaineCare program reimbursement in order to provide additional 
reimbursement to the Maine Veterans' Homes by ensuring that the Maine Veterans' Homes 
nursing facilities are reimbursed a per patient daily rate for services to residents . 
 
The care provided by the Maine Veterans ’ Homes, and nursing and residential care facilities 
across the state, is important and high quality. That said, the Department has concerns about this 
bill. First, it is important to note that the 130th Legislature  allocated $2,442,200 in fiscal year 
2022 -23 (LD 2001) to the Maine Veterans’ Homes to offset budget shortfalls. This funding is in 
the Governor’s proposed biennial budget as an ongoing initiative to provide funding for ongoing 
annual operations at Maine V eterans’ Homes, and received unanimous support of the Health and 
Human Services Committee in their report to the Appropriations and Financial Affairs 
Committee.  
 
The rate reform system established last year in PL 2021 , Ch. 639 created a process for analyzi ng 
and prioritizing rates paid to providers. The Department is in the midst of rate reform efforts for 
Nursing Facilities and Residential Care Facilities, including Maine Veterans’ Homes, which 
should be completed by the end of 2023 , be ready for considera tion by the Legislature in 2024 , 
and ready for January 1, 2025 implementation.  
 
The goal of P.L. 2021, ch 639 was in part to move toward more consistent, equitable and data 
driven rates that create incentives for efficiency and high -quality care for member s. LD 985  
seeks to carve out an exception for one group of long -term care providers . These facilities 
already receive a per patient daily rate, but what LD 985  does is mandate that the daily rate cover 
costs  that would result in provider -specific rates with no incentives for cost control or quality.  
 
 
 This bill is particularly problematic because it requires that the rate calculation include “the full 
cost of operating a veterans home, including fixed and vari able operating costs, capital 
replacement, geographic differences and facility size.” This is beyond just the portion of costs 
required to serve MaineCare members only. Federal law requires that Medicaid only cover 
expenses related to the  costs of providin g services to Medicaid members.  
 
We wanted you to be aware of the above information as you consider this bill going forward. If 
you have any further questions, please feel free to contact me.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
Michelle Probert  
Director  
MaineCare Services  

