MAINE VETERANS ’ HOMES 
C52‘ /“ii .1/2 g‘ fer it/5:055 it/rfyri .§£’i“Z./66! 
LD985, Resolve, T0 Require the Department of Health And Human Services to Provide 
Additional Reimbursement to Maine Veterans ’ Homes. 
March 20, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica, and other distinguished members of the Veterans and Legal 
Affairs Committee; my name is Sharon Fusco and l am the Chief Executive Officer of the lV|aine 
Veterans ’ Homes. It is a pleasure to be with you again today to testify on behalf of LD985, Resolve, To 
Require the Department of Health and Human Services to Provide Additional Reimbursement to Maine 
Veterans ’ Homes. On behalf ofthe Maine Veterans ’ Homes Board of Trustees, our employees and the 
veterans and families we serve, I want to thank Senator Farrin for sponsoring this bill. 
This bill is critical to the future of l\/laine Veterans ’ Homes. lt provides the financial stability we need to 
safeguard the system of care we have built across the state, providing a full range of resident care in six 
locations across the state. 
As I have shared with this committee previously, the nursing home industry is approaching a state of 
crisis. Inflation coupled with workforce shortages that cause reliance on temporary staffing which adds 
exponentially to rising costs and inflation, and reimbursement rates which fail to keep pace with these 
changes are crippling the system. Maine Veterans ’ Homes is not immune, and in fact, our situation is 
more tenuous as we must meet additional state and VA requirements, as a home designated for 
Veterans and their families. These requirements are outlined in the report and add an estimated 
minimum of $2.4MM annually to our budget. 
Annually, BerryDunn estimates that we face a $15.5lVll\/l gap between reimbursements and costs. 
Through leveraging of funds, we are able to close this gap to $1O.3lVll\/l. This bill provides $3.4Ml\/l in 
state funds which is matched with $6.9|\/ll\/l of federal funds, closing an estimated $1O.3MM gap 
between reimbursement rates and costs to deliver services. 
To calculate this rate, we calculated the gap between reimbursements for lVlaineCare residents and the 
cost of caring for those residents. The assumptions used include the following: 
0 Costs included in the calculation were those pre—pandemic. The $1O.3lVll\/l gap does NOT include 
pandemic-related costs of care. 
0 Wage inflation is included in the calculation. With increased funding, our goal is to increase 
wages. 
Q While temporary staffing costs are high, the calculation assumes we will significantly decrease 
our reliance on temporary staff. However, with the shortage of workers, our assumption does 
include some use of temporary staffing. 
0 The calculations are based on lvlVH achieving pre-pandemic census levels of 93% occupancy, 
reducing the fixed cost per person. 
0 The only gap we are seeking to fill with this funding is the gap for those residents on MaineCare. 
We are pursuing federal advocacy to fill gaps due to lagging VA stipend and prevailing rates as 
well as Medicare rates. 
1|~ ;\
i 
ll 
;l 
ll 
ll 
Ii 
l? 
12 
l:
i 
,.. 
l
l
l 
ll 
my 
ll
, 
ii
3
5,
Time is of the essence. Our reserves which fund our future are being depleted at an alarming rate. We 
cannot wait for another legislative cycle to address this issue. 
The Stakeholders Group was clear in their charge for the Maine Veterans ’ Home board to wor|< with the 
legislature to ﬁnd a funding solution. We have a system of care worth saving. This bill is the solution that 
will allow us to honor the commitment we made to our veterans.
2I
