Testimony before the Joint Standing Committee for 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
Regarding 
LD 1150 
' 
April 3, 2023 
Resolve, Requiring the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry to 
Document, Disclose and Publish All Best Management Practices Regarding the 
Use of Noise Devices to Control Birds at Orchards 
Good morning Senator lngwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the Joint 
Committee for Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry. 
My nameis Tony Lyons and l am President of the Maine Winery Guild,"the associationi 
organized to advance the prosperity of the Maine wine industries, the farms that support 
them, and the community they serve. The Guild has a membership of about 40 g 
wineries, cideries and meaderies spread across Maine that open their tasting rooms to 
visitors each year. _, 
_. 
I am also a vineyard and winery owner with about 8‘ acres of cold hardy grape varieties 
in Leeds, Maine, called WillowsAwake Winery; we also operate a year round ClassA 
restaurant on our vineyard property. . 
The Guild is here today to offer our experience to the Department as it researches Best 
Management Practices for Bird Control at Orchards. _ 
_ I_ 
Our members source their fruit from a wide variety of orchards and vineyards, some 
owned by members whereas others purchase fruit from commercial growers.g 
Orchards and vineyards use a variety of bird control measures including propane scare 
cannons, netting, sound based deterrent systems, lasers, balloons, ribbons and 
tubemen and foliar deterrent sprays. Each has advantages and disadvantages whichl 
am certain the study by the department will document. 
Many vineyards use netting to exclude and prevent bird predation, and while netting is 
perhaps the most preferred practice, it requires the most labor and cost to purchase, 
install, maintain and store. 
1lPage
We planted our vineyards in 2018 and in 2021 and were faced with the decision as to 
what bird deterrent we would use. We have about 7 miles of trellis; netting purchase 
cost was estimated to be about $8000 without installation, maintenance and storage 
costs included. 
We chose to utilize a sound based deterrent system called Bird Gard that utilizes the 
natural survival instincts in birds to effectively repel them. Digital recordings of 
distressed and alarmed birds, along with the sounds made by their natural predators are 
broadcast through high ﬁdelity weather-resistant speakers. This triggers a primal fear 
and flee response. Pest birds soon relocate to where they can feed without feeling 
threatened. . 
A microprocessor randomizes the order of the sounds, the time off intervals and the 
relative pitch of the sounds to give the impression there are many different birds under 
attack from many different raptors. Birds leave and don’t come back. 
We have used Bird Gard units for the past two years with success. installation of each 
unit (each covers about a 300 foot diameter area) and takes about 20 minutes per unit, 
currently we have two units with plans to add another two. The sounds are natural and 
non-invasive to a listener with very positive feedback from our restaurant guests. 
This is just one example of experience with noise deterrents, we would be willing to doa 
field demonstration if the Department so wishes. 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today, again the Maine Winery Guild is 
willing to assist the Department in any way with its study over the coming weeks. 
Tony Lyons 
WillowsAwake Winery 
10 Leeds Junction Road, Leeds, Maine 
207-518-8076 
2 I P age
