/ii S Natural Resources Council of Maine 
3 Wade Street Q Augusta, Maine O43_3O e (207) 622-3101 Q Fax: (207) 622-4343 e www.nrcm.org 
Testimony in Opposition of LD 425 and LD 572, 
Legislation to Repeal Maine’s Ban on Single-Use Plastic Bags 
and the Fee on Other Bags Offered at~Retail Stores 
Sarah Nichols, NRCM Sustainable Maine Director 
March 1, 2023 
Senator Brenner, Representative Gramlich, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Environment and Natural Resources, my name is Sarah Nichols, and I am the Sustainable Maine 
Director for the Natural Resources Council of Maine (N RCM). I appreciate this opportunity to 
speak to you in opposition of LD 425 and LD 572. _ 
In 2019, the 1296‘ Legislature voted to adopt LD l532, which made Maine the fourth statelin the 
nation to promote the use of reusable shopping bags by curbing the unlimited distribution of 
single-use plastic shopping bags. LD 1532 received overwhelming public support, including 
from the Maine Grocers and Food Producers Association and the Retail Association of Maine. 
NRCM Worked closely with each of these organizations to develop the legislative language that 
was signed into law. In 2021, this Committee considered several bills to repeal this legislation, 
and we remained uniﬁed in our position to preserve the law then, and we continue to be united in 
opposition. today. _L 
NRCM encourages the Committee to continue to protect Maine’s plastic bag reduction law, 38 
MRSA §l6l l, and vote ought-not-to-pass on both bills: 
0 If LD 425 were enacted, Maine would no longer have a statewide policy, which means- 
that retail establishments throughout the state would revert to administering a patchwork 
of existing local laws.2 This inconsistency would create administrative burden on our 
retail community and worsen over time as more Maine people demand more local action 
on plastic pollution; and Q 
0 The emergency preamble in LD 572 claims that removal of a ﬁve-cent fee on paper and 
reusable bags should be done as soon as possible to protect residents from the economic 
burden of the fee; Butit fails to recognize that any person wanting to avoid the fee can 
D 
already do so by bring their own bag to the store or not using a bag at all. The point of the 
mandatory fee is to encourage the reduction and reuse of bags.~
‘ r 
Eight states—Calif0rnia, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Maine, New York, Oregon and Vermont—have banned 
single-use plastic bags. \~
. 
2 Maine towns and cities with plastic bag policies include (* indicates fee instead of ban): Portland* , South 
Po1tland* , Brunswick, Topsham, Camden, Rockport, Rockland,'Bar Harbor, York, Falmouth* , Freeport, 
Kennebunk, Saco, Cape Elizabeth, Belfast, Bath, Manchester, Blue Hill, Damariscotta, Newcastle, Southwest 
Harbor, Waterville* , Biddeford, Tremont, and Mount Desert.4
.
NRCM ﬁrmly believes that the reasons why the Legislature enacted the existing law remain as 
valid today as they did then; and maybe even more so as our society continues to leam about the 
devasting impacts of our irresponsible misuse of plastic,3 which unjustly burdens our most 
vulnerable communities.4 Plastic carry-out bags are among the low-hanging fruit of unnecessary 
uses of plastic since they cause much more harm throughout their life cycle than any momentary 
usefulness of transporting goods home from the store. Before the ban went into effect, people 
collected far more than could feasibly be re-used at home;5 despite the existence of ﬁlm 
recycling bins, less than 6 % of plastic bags were recycled;,6 and education programs aimed at 
trying to reduce the use or recycling of plastic bags were not effective.7 Further, plastic ﬁlm isa 
primary source of contamination in Maine’s recycling programs and often tangles in recycling 
equipment, costing time, money, and other resources.V 
For all these reasons, Maine’s plastic bag reduction policy was, and still is, a policy supported by 
people throughout the state of Maine. We urge you to reject these bills and any other proposals 
that would move Maine backwards. Thank you for your consideration of these comments, andI 
would be happy to answer any questions that you have. _ 
3 
https://www.nrcm.org/programs/sustainability/plastic-pollution/ , 
4 litt;:~s:i,/swim".nrem.0rgfblog£un_§ust~disproportionate-healthimpacts-wastesystemi 
5 38 MRSA §l61l allows people to continue to purchase plastic bags who wish to use them for lining garbage pails, 
collecting kitty litter, or other uses. 
6 According to the EPA's 2009 Municipai Waste Characterization Study, the recycling rate for plastic HDPE ﬁhns 
(plastic bags, sacks, & wraps) was 6.1%. Plastic bags are only a small portion of that. 
7 In 2009,~under legislative directive, there was l4~member working group to explore creating a voluntary program, 
as opposed to a statewide ban or fee on disposable bags, which resulted in the Got Your Bags, Maine? Campaign, 
which was proven ineffective. When Portland was considering their ordinance in 2014, an NRCM volunteer visited 
43 stores and found not a single one featured the Got your Bags campaign message.
