Alicia Wilson
Clinton
LD 1614
Good morning, and thank you for reading my testimony. I am here to speak in favor 
of LD 1614, to require an ultrasound and counseling before an abortion. Nine years 
ago I aborted my baby at 7 weeks. Nothing prepared me for the years of grief that 
would follow that day. After suffering inexplicable sorrow for about five years I 
sought counseling through a pregnancy resource center. There I found comfort and 
healing from much of that pain. In talking with counselors I recognized how 
unprepared and uninformed I was during my abortion appointment. I was given a 
"counseling" session prior to the procedure which consisted of me violently sobbing 
to the counselor that I did not want to go through with aborting my baby. Her 
response was to hand me a box of tissues and tell me she would wait until I was 
ready. I quickly learned that I was expected to leave that room in agreement with 
going forward. There was no informed consent regarding the procedure, at least not in
terms I would expect as someone who works in the medical field and is expected to 
provide patients with a complete list of options, and expected outcomes. There was no
counseling to offer alternative options. The rest of the appointment consisted of 
several workers confirming to me that I was making the right choice. I understand 
they were under the assumption that they were helping me to move forward with a 
decision I had already committed to. I was not allowed to see the ultrasound, and was 
told it would all be over soon and I could go on my way. I later learned that 90% of 
women who are able to see their baby on ultrasound prior to an abortion will change 
their mind. This statistic highlights the importance of true informed consent. Without 
recognizing and agreeing the entirety of what they are about to do, so many women 
are stuck in a place of deep grief and regret after an abortion that they are unable to 
process or heal from. We often focus on the pain of the women seeking an abortion, 
understandably, as they are certainly dealing with trauma. Unfortunately we have 
forgotten about the women after abortion and do not understand how an uninformed 
decision produces trauma of its own that does not simply dissolve. As a society we 
will likely never agree on the topic of abortion, but if women are given the chance to 
be informed about the choice they are making, to view their ultrasound, and to 
process the decision with a counselor; perhaps the ensuing grief will be lessened. LD 
1614 will give women the right to informed consent, to acknowledge and understand 
the choice they are making, and be given the chance to speak to a counselor to process
their decision prior to its finality, before it is too late to reconsider. Please support LD 
1614.
