Senator Carney and Representative Moonen, Honorable members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary. 
My name is Christina Ouellette and I live in Bradley. I am here today m support of all five bills 
before you, and I am here to speak specifically m support of LD 1614. 
I 100% agree that an ultrasound should be performed before an abortion @ be performed 
Even now in 2023, women are often led to beheve that the baby growing mside them is nothing 
but a clump of cells or tissue. An ultrasound would confirm to the mother the truth, whether or 
not she chooses to look at the results. Some women Wlll base their choice of whether or not to 
move forward with the pregnancy on the results of an ultrasound; others will not. But not 
allowing her all of the information available to make a choice should be unacceptable. 
When a person is diagnosed with a severe illness or disease that reqiures surgery or some other 
type of mtervention, would it be appropriate for a physician to convuice the patient to Just do 
what he or she says without giving proof of the diagnosis? Of course not. X-rays, lab tests and 
other tests would be performed and presented to the patient, who would then be able to make an 
informed decision of how to proceed with any type of treatment. How often are we told to 
request a second opinion so we can be positive we have as much mformation as possible? 
Shouldn’t pregnant women be afforded that same opportunity? 
I have volunteered at a pregnancy center m the past, and I can tell you that an ultrasound is an 
invaluable tool to the women who present with a pregnancy. Can we please allow pregnant 
women to be treated with dignity and respect? Give them the opportunity to have all of the 
necessary mformation needed to make the best decision for themselves I urge you to vote 
ought to pass on LD 1614 and the other bills you are considermg today. 
Thank you for allowmg me to speak at this hearing 
Christina Ouellette 
19 Highland Avenue 
Bradley ME 04411 
207-951-3168
