 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
 
 
 
 
 
Erik N. Steele, DO, President I Paul R. Cain, MD, President-Elect I R. Scott Hanson, MD, MPH, Chair, Board of Directors 
                Andrew B. MacLean, JD, CEO I Dan Morin, Director of Communications & Government Affairs 
 
 
• SUPPORT Maine Physicians • ADVANCE the quality of medicine in Maine • PROMOTE the health of all Maine 
people 
 
TO:   Committee on Judiciary 
 
FROM: Dan Morin, Director, Communications and Government Affairs  
 
DATE:  May 5, 2023  
 
RE:  OPPOSED – LD 1614, An Act to Require an Ultrasound and Certain Counseling 
Before an Abortion 
 
The Maine Medical Association is Maine’s largest professional association representing over 
4,300 current and future physicians from all specialties in all practice settings.  
 
Leadership of the MMA cautions legislators from overstepping their impact on medical decision-
making by dictating the nature and content of patients’ interactions with their physicians.  
 
They believe certain legislative proposals inappropriately infringe on clinical practice and 
patient–physician relationships, crossing traditional boundaries and intruding into clinical exam 
rooms without regard to established, evidence-based guidelines for medical care. 
 
LD 1614 falls under the umbrella of proposed laws in Maine and nationwide that require 
physicians to discuss specific practices that may not be necessary or appropriate at the time of 
a specific patient appointment, according to the physician’s best clinical judgment.  
 
They fail to recognize the complexity and uncertainty involved in medical care. MMA leadership 
considers end-of-life care for the aged population, heart surgery, end stage renal disease, and 
abortion no differently.  
 
 
 
The Maine Medical Association is a statewide volunteer organization formed in 1853, serving more than 4,300 
current and future Maine physicians in all clinical specialties, organizations, and practice settings.  
  
Laws are blunt instruments. The practice of medicine, like health care in general, changes at 
unprecedented speed. Medicine is a highly complex profession with times of uncertainty. 
 
Legislative mandates regarding the practice of medicine do not allow for the infinite array of 
exceptions — cases in which the mandate may be unnecessary, inappropriate, or even harmful 
to an individual patient. 
 
The MMA urges committee members to consider and respect patient autonomy, individual 
needs, values, and preferences, and vote LD 1614 ONTP. 
 
Thank you for your attention to our comments. 
 
