Joanne Russell
North Yarmouth
LD 1614
An Act to Require an Ultrasound and Certain Counseling Before an Abortion, LD 
1614
 
Position: Support 
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee. 
My name is Joanne Russell, from North Yarmouth, ME. I submit this testimony in 
writing today to speak in Support of LD 1614, An Act to Require an Ultrasound and 
Certain Counseling Before an Abortion.  
This should be your easiest vote today. Informed consent is a complete no-brainer 
with regard to good medical care and coverage. Just like no good doctor, dentist, or 
medical healthcare provider would ever perform a procedure unless he or she knew 
exactly what it was they were treating, and was very clear as to what the desired 
outcome of the procedure would be; no patient should ever enter into a medical 
procedure or consent to medical treatment unless they are adequately informed as to 
what exactly their condition is, and what exactly is to be done with regard to the 
medical intervention to which they are consenting. 
Not only is this truly informed consent on behalf of the patient reasonable, rational, 
and humane; it is the only just manner in which to approach any medical procedure. 
This informed consent becomes is even more important in the case of performing a 
surgical abortion or prescribing pills to perform a chemical abortion. The reason for 
this is clear, an abortion is a medical procedure that is a final, irreversible, and 
completely voluntary procedure that ends another human beings life. 
There are countless numbers of women who find out exactly what an abortion 
procedure entails, as they stare down at the tiny body of their now deceased child 
having passed it into a toilet alone at home, often with no one they can turn to in their 
pain, shame, and grief. We see the tragic result of this in the rising numbers of drug 
abuse, alcohol abuse, suicides, and so on. They are all interrelated. Women must 
know what they are consenting to when they agree to an abortion. They must see their
child via ultrasound before they agree to the procedure that will end its life, and they 
must be given adequate counseling and information as to what exactly will happen if 
they chose to proceed with the procedure. This is true for any other medical procedure
and is even more so in the case of an elective abortion procedure.
 For these reasons, I ask the committee to vote: Ought to Pass on LD 1614.
Thank you! God bless.
