 
43 Gabriel Drive, Post Office 
Box 587 Augusta, ME 04332-
0587 
 t: 207.622.7524 | f: 
207.622.0836 
www.MaineFamilyPlannin
g.org 
info@MaineFamilyPlannin
g.org 
 
 
 
Maine Family Planning 
Testimony in Opposition to 
LD 1614, An Act to Require an Ultrasound and Certain Counseling Before an Abortion  
May 5, 2023 
 
 
 Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Judiciary, my name is Evelyn Kieltyka, I am a family nurse practitioner and the senior vice president of program 
services at Maine Family Planning, and I am testifying today in opposition to LD 1614, An Act to Require an 
Ultrasound and Certain Counseling Before an Abortion. 
  
 Maine Family Planning provides comprehensive sexual and reproductive health care, including abortion care, 
via telehealth and at 18 locations statewide. Every patient who comes to Maine Family Planning receives the 
comprehensive information and support they need to make decisions about their pregnancy, whether that’s 
continuing the pregnancy towards parenting or adoption, or having a procedural or medication abortion. Every 
patient receives care according to rigorous, evidence-based, national standards. Maine Family Planning’s dedicated 
healthcare professionals treat all patients with dignity, compassion, and respect. This bill does not. It imposes 
medically unnecessary requirements and demeans patients by casting doubt on their ability to make informed 
healthcare decisions. 
 
 Medical experts agree that an ultrasound is not medically necessary for most people seeking abortion care . 
Our healthcare providers are able to assess, on a case-by-case basis, what procedures and tests are necessary before 
an abortion. Ultrasound requirements are onerous for providers and patients alike, especially in a vast, rural state 
like ours, and they do nothing to improve a patient’s experience or health outcomes. Recent large-scale research that 
included Maine patients demonstrated that history-based screening is sufficient for the vast majority of medication 
abortions up to 11 weeks since last menstrual period . Roughly two-thirds of abortions at Maine Family Planning fall 
in that category. Blanket ultrasound requirements are rooted in anti-abortion stigma and reproductive coercion.  
 
 If the ultimate goal of this bill is to reduce the number of abortions, we know how to do that – fund and 
require K-12 comprehensive sexuality education, make contraception free and easily accessible, and invest 
dramatically in public programs that ease the financial strain of parenting. Requiring ultrasounds before all abortions 
just stigmatizes essential reproductive health care and erects barriers to care.  
 
 For all these reasons, on behalf of Maine Family Planning patients and providers, I urge the committee to 
reject LD 1614 and vote Ought Not to Pass. Thank you.  
 
