Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee, I am Martha Moyer, of 
Waterville, Maine. I support all these bills before you today. 
L.D. 494, “An Act to Conform State Funding to the Federal Hyde Amendment, Limiting Funding 
for Some Abortion Services,” 
L.D. 771, “An Act to Protect a Woman's Right to Withdraw Consent for an Abortion,” 
L.D. 1197, “An Act to Prevent Coerced Abortion,” 
L.D. 1249, “An Act to Protect the Quality of Care Provided via Telehealth by Prohibiting 
Physicians from Prescribing Abortion-inducing Drugs or Devices Through Telehealth or Other 
Electronic Communication,” 
L.D. 1614, “An Act to Require an Ultrasound and Certain Counseling Before an Abortion,” and  
L.D. 1809, “An Act to Prohibit Health Care Services Without Parental Consent.” 
 
These Bills represent protective measures to ensure women are treated with dignity and are 
well informed about decisions that need to be made when faced with an unplanned pregnancy.  
Also they ensure the unborn baby is considered in the decision process. 
  LD 494  I support the proposal that Funding for abortions should conform to the Federal Hyde 
Amendment.  Unfortunately, although some abortions are necessary, many are not.  Therefore,  
I object to Maine paying for procedures I believe are not necessary and  thus takes a life of a 
baby. 
  LD 771, LD1197, and LD 1809   address unethical practices in regard to decisions that women 
face when struggling with the decision to abort or not.  Women should have the right to change 
their mind right up to the moment their abortion was to be done., and be given information to 
make an informed decision. Especially LD1809 ensures parents have a voice in the decisions of 
their minor daughters.  I have three daughters and know I would like to know if my daughter 
had to face that decision, and have an opportunity to give counsel.  I would not like a law that 
would interfere with my parental rights.  There are provisions for teens who are in an abusive 
situation. 
LD 1249  I support this bill, because  providing abortion drugs and devices through Telehealth or 
other electronic assumes no complications will happen. Abortion related complications are four 
times more likely during a chemical abortion than a surgical abortion, and 20 percent of women 
will experience some complications. 
LD 1614 is an important bill because it seeks to be sure a woman has full information needed to 
make a decision that affects her health and well-being.  This decision is not just between her and 
her doctor. It is a procedure that not only affects her life, it is a decision that could terminate 
another life.    
  This last Monday an historic gathering of prolife supporters gathered at the capitol.  Please 
consider the voices of that day that advocated for the baby.  These bills being considered today 
also advocate for the mother’s health. 
 
I ask the committee to vote Ought to Pass on LD 494, LD 771, LD1197, LD 1249 & LD1614.  
 
 Thank you! 
 
 
