Mireille Desrosiers
Linneus
LD 1614
LD 1614 - An Act to Require an Ultrasound and Certain Counseling Before an 
Abortion
Position: Support
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee. 
My name is Mireille Desrosiers, from Linneus, ME. I am submitting testimony in 
Support of LD 1614.
Some claim the unborn do not possess a soul until a specific point in time, however, 
this notion not only contradicts science but also undermines the teaching of the Bible 
and the Catholic Church. Professor Emeritus of Human Embryology of the University
of Arizona School of Medicine, Dr. C. Ward Kischer, affirms that “Every human 
embryologist, worldwide, states that the life of the new individual human being 
begins at fertilization (conception).”(acpeds.org). Moreover, in Genesis, it says that 
man was created in the image and likeness of God. In Psalm 51: 5, David states "In 
sin, my mother conceived me,". David refers to himself as a person since conception. 
Thus, children are persons at the moment of conception. To even insult another 
human being, much less kill them, James emphatically preaches against in James 
3:10: “ From the same mouth come blessing and cursing. My brethren, this ought not 
to be so. In a similar way, God proclaims the preciousness of humans through the 
prophet Isaiah, “Because you are precious in my eyes and honored, and I love 
you,”(Isaiah 53: 4) Therefore, since the unborn are true persons, made in the Image 
and likeness of God and beloved by God, ought not his existing children in the world, 
who are his imitators, endeavor with all their heart to protect the lives of the 
vulnerable including the unborn? 
In addition to the crime of murdering a child and unjustly retaining his/her’s 
inalienable right to life granted by the Constitution, abortion, and contraception harm 
the mother, father, siblings, and other individuals involved in the life of the pregnant 
woman. When Magaly,  a testifier for life on Priests for life.org, was a teenager, her 
mother had an abortion, and Magaly, despite pleading life for her sibling, 
accompanied her. Afterward, Magaly suffered severe emotional effects from this 
abortion. Unconsciously she became angry at her mother, endeavored to spell out her 
worth by achievements, and even attempted to kill herself in response to her mother’s 
abortion. More information about Magaly can be obtained here: 
https://www.priestsforlife.org/testimonies/1842-the-value-of-life. Not only do 
abortions harm the mind, but also the aborter’s body. Abortion and contraception 
distort a woman’s body and prevent the natural and good from occurring. As a result, 
abortion and contraception do not solve a problem, but deny the blessing of life and 
harm the mother and all involved in her life emotionally and physically.
For the sake of the exploited unborn, I beg the committee to pass  LD 1614. Thank 
you!

