 
 
 
 
Maine Department of Health and Human Services  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
11 State House Station  
286 Water Street  
Augusta, Maine 04333 -0011  
Tel; (207) 287 -8016 ; Fax (207) 287 -9058  
TTY: Dial 711 (Maine Relay)   
 Janet T. Mills  
Governor  
 
Jeanne M. Lambrew, Ph.D.  
Commissioner  
 
May 5, 2023  
 
Senator  Anne Carney , Chair  
Representative  Matt Moonen , Chair  
Members, Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333 -0100  
 
Re: LD 1614 - An Act to Require an Ultrasound and Certain Counseling Before an Abortion  
 
Dear Senator  Carney , Representative  Moonen , and Members of the  Committee  Judiciary : 
 
This letter is to provide information about  LD 1614, An Act to Require  an Ultrasound and 
Certain Counseling Before an Abortion, and the potential impact of the proposed legislation , if 
enacted.  
 
The Maine Center of Disease Control and Prevention (Maine CDC)  opposes this bill  and offers 
the following comments  for your consideration . 
 
LD 1614  requires a health care professional to ensure that a pregnant person  undergoes an 
ultrasound and receives information about alternatives to abortion, including parenting the child, 
at leas t 48 hours before they can have an abortion. The existence of a medical emergency 
eliminates the 48 -hour waiting period.  The bill defines ‘medical emergency’ to mean a condition 
that, on the basis of the good faith clinical judgment of a health care profes sional complicates the 
medical condition of a pregnant person to necessitate aborting the pregnancy to avert that 
person’s  death or to avoid a delay that would create serious risk of substantial and irreversible 
impairment of a major bodily function.  
 
The Maine CDC  defers to best practices and standards of care established by professional 
organizations regarding recommendations for medical procedures. It asserts these decisions 
should be made  between a provider and their patient , taking established standard s into account. 
While many states have established requirements for abortion providers , including educating 
patients on alternatives  and reviewing ultrasound  images with the patient  prior to an abortion , 
before passing restrictive laws , it is important to take into account  individual circumstances  (i.e. 
medical, social and economic influences)  existing for patients seeking abortion service s. The 
addition of a 48-hour waiting period provides an inequity of care for  the patient given the 
availability of providers, the distance they may have to travel and the costs  associated with 
needing multiple appointments.  
 
According to the American Co llege  of Obstetrics and Gynecology, laws that require physicians 
to give, or wi thhold, specific information when counseling patients, or that mandate which tests, 
procedures, treatment alternatives or medicines physicians can perform, prescribe, or administer 
 
 are ill -advised.  Abortion providers —like all medical providers —are ethicall y bound to provide 
patients with information about options, procedure details and any other information a provider 
deems pertinent after assessing each patient’s unique health needs and circumstances. Providers 
are also required to obtain informed consent,  which means they must verify that patients possess 
the capacity to make decisions about their care, that their participation in these decisions is 
voluntary, and that they receive adequate and appropriate information1. Additionally, routine 
ultrasound is  not considered medically necessary as a component of a first -trimester abortion ; 
under Medicaid, Maine  will not receive federal match  for a service that is not deemed medically 
necessary.  
 
In summary, the Maine CDC respectfully recommends this bill  ought  not to pass  as the 
requirements outline in  this bill are not within nationally recognized standards of care.  In Maine, 
health care providers perform abortion services effectively under the current regulations  and we 
do not see the need for State  laws requiring all pregnant people  to undergo an ultrasound , which 
may be not medically necessary , or that  remove s a person’s choice whether  to have their 
providers deliver onto them information about abortion alternative s and parenting  before they 
can have  an abortion procedure  completed .  
 
Thank you for your consideration of this matter. T he Maine CDC is available to provide 
additional details for the Committee’s consideration .  
 
 
Respectfully , 
 
Nancy Beardsley, Acting Director  
Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention  
 
 
1 Guttmacher Institute , (Jan. 2020); https://www.guttmacher.org/evidence -you-can-use/mandatory -counseling -
abortion  

