1* ~44 
To Chairpersons Anne Carney, Matt Moonen, and the members of the Judiciary Committee 
My name is Bruce Blackmer from Dedham Maine. 
I am on the Executive Committee of the Greater Bangor Apartment Owners and 
Managers Association, GBAOMA. , 
I am also a member ofthe Legislative Council representing landlords and property 
owners in, but not limited to, Waterville, Augusta, Portland, South Portland, Lewiston, 
Auburn, and the Bangor areas. 
I have been a landlord since 1972. I have owned a 50-unit trailer park , multi-units, and 
single-family homes. At one time, I managed 65 units. I have mostly provided I 
affordable housing to low-income tenants. 
I do not believe a landlord who is practicing due diligence in screening a prospective 
tenant, for the protection of the other tenants, from a potentially disruptive tenant, 
should be presumed guilty of discrimination, for refusing to rent to them. My motto is 
that I have never evicted a good tenant. . 
I am a typical Mainer. I am independent, honest, hard-working, and treat people fairly. 
As an independent Mainer, I do not like being told how to run my business, especially 
when the suggested changes only put a strain on the landlord/tenant relationship. 
Landlords usually don't earn a lot of money from rentals. Hopefully, the value of the 
buildings increase, evictions are at a minimum, and eventually the buildings are sold for 
a long-term capital gain, and the landlord can retire. 
Because of the eviction moratorium in 2020, when a tenant voluntarily left, I let the unit 
remain vacant. I was afraid I wouldget a bad tenant and I would not be able to evict 
them. Meanwhile, I may lose good tenants because of the bad tenant. In order to make 
up for the loss of rental income, I actually went back to driving a school bus. Yes,I 
would rather deal with 50 kids, than be stuck with a bad tenant. You see, school buses 
have rules. If a child misbehaves on a bus, he or she gets a warning and then if the child
continues to misbehave, the child is not allowed to ride the bus for a week or more. This 
is in sharp contrast to a misbehaving tenant. The child learns that they must change their 
behavior and obey the rules in order to ride the bus. With a tenant, l have to serve a 30- 
day notice, wait for a court date, and deal with Pine Tree Legal to help mediate the 
problem, only to evict the tenant after a long, drawn-out process. Unfortunately, many 
tenants feel that they have a right to housing, and the rules do not apply to them. 
Therefore, they feel they are the victims in an eviction and refuse to change their 
behavior. 
I grew up poor. I shared a bedroom with four older sisters and no indoor plumbing. I 
understand tough times. I don't mind giving someone a helping hand. However, too 
many people today want a hand-out. They have been paid not to work. If they are 
unemployed, they are not required to look for a job while they collect unemployment. 
Covid has changed numerous things including housing. However, the solution to the 
housing shortage is not to make war on landlords, and take away their rights to run their 
business, protect their property and the other tenants. Let's go back to pre-Covid times! 
I do not feel that it is discrimination against an evicted tenant, if it is discovered that the 
tenant was evicted for a just reason, and they may not have learned from the 
experience. . 
So, if you haven't guessed, l am here to ask you to OPPOSE LD 557, as well as LD 45, 
LD 558, LD 691, LD 701, and LD 804 when they come up for review. 
Thank you for allowing me to voice my opinion. I would be happy to answer any 
questions. 
Bruce Blackmer 14 Enterprise Drive Dedham ME 04429 
email: antsblack1@gmail.com phone: 207-735-56587
