Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Joint Standing
Judiciary Committee:  my name is Cate Blackford. I have the pleasure of serving as the public
policy director for the Maine People’s Alliance and am here today to testify in support of LD 557.
MPA supports An Act to Decrease Discrimination Based on Evictions in Housing Applications.
Evictions are a direct cause of homelessness. They cause extreme disruption of household
stability and security and make it exponentially harder to navigate an expensive, limited housing
market. Landlords often assess an eviction on potential tenants’ records as a sign of high risk,
regardless of their current ability to afford rent and uphold their responsibilities of a lease
because of the powerful impact evictions have on our housing crisis. This is even more true for
tenants who use vouchers or other forms of assistance, as many landlords do not accept
Section 8 and/or price their units above HUD fair market rents.
1
As evictions in Maine are on the rise, it is of the utmost importance that we disrupt this vicious
cycle. In 2022, Maine saw nearly 5000 eviction filings.
2
Individuals, families and the entire community all benefit when people have stable housing that
they can afford. Health and mental health outcomes improve; educational attainment rises;
stress levels decrease; social ties improve and incidents of domestic violence decrease;
economic and civic engagement increase while use of public supports decrease.
3
Laws that stabilize rents, prevent unjust evictions, and prohibit discriminatory rental admission
policies directly address the underlying causes of housing instability and homelessness. LD 557
is one piece of the housing puzzle we face as a state.
Even without being able to use eviction history as a screening tool, landlords still have multiple
factors they may use for determining whether or not to rent to potential tenants, including their
income level and work history. I can share that personally, as a small landlord, my partner and I
do not use eviction history in our application process and it has not had a negative effect on our
ability to find great tenants.
I urge you to vote Ought to Pass on LD 557 and remove eviction data from the application
process. This will decrease discrimination and barriers to housing for households facing an
increasingly impossible housing market.
Thank you for your time and consideration. I am happy to take any questions.
3
https://www.usich.gov/resources/uploads/asset_library/Housing-Affordability-and-Stablility-Brief.pdf
2
https://www.pressherald.com/2023/01/19/evictions-in-maine-shot-up-during-2022-with-filings-growing-27/
1
https://homelesslaw.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/ProtectTenants2018.pdf

