March 6, 2023
Testimony in OPPOSITION to LD 557 An Act to Decrease Discrimination Based on Evictions in Housing 
Applications
To the Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary:
The Central Maine Apartment Owners Association (CMAOA) is a landlord membership organization of over 
650, as well as a cooperative team member of other landlord associations across the State of Maine including: 
Southern Maine, Lewiston Auburn, Greater Bangor Area, and Augusta Area.  We provide educational events, 
sponsor community events, provide access to discounts on supplies and industry needs like fuels, flooring 
materials and paint. Our overall goal is to support Landlords in providing safe and affordable housing in 
collaboration with the valuable good renters in our area.  CMAOA and the other organizations are neutral, 
nonpartisan, member led groups that have the common goal of keeping the rental housing industry safe, 
educated, and competitive.  
We are asking you to oppose LD 557: An Act to Decrease Discrimination Based on Evictions in Housing 
Applications
A successful rental is not just that the tenant pays.  Our membership tells us time and time again that a good 
tenant is worth their weight in gold.  The ability to screen a tenant by looking into their rental history, 
including evictions, is an integral part of choosing the best fit for a building’s excellent existing residents.  In 
practice, if this bill were to pass and a landlord is checking references by contacting the owners of previous 
addresses and one discloses that they formally evicted the applicant, how does a landlord “unhear” that 
information?  Would they have to ignore that implications of that information?  How do they ignore such 
valuable information when it could mean the difference of placing a risky tenant alongside your existing good 
tenants.  There are plenty of landlords that will overlook an eviction if the applicant is honest about it and 
talks about steps they have taken (or public assistance programs that are in place) to prevent it from 
happening again.
This bill will have detrimental effects to good tenants that want their landlords to screen new residents based 
on the same criteria that happily placed them in their homes.  We urge you to oppose LD 557.
Board of Directors of Central Maine Apartment Owners Association, Waterville, Maine  
Click Here for CMAOA Website and Contact Information 
