T E' 
H 
LAW QFFIGE 
W "DAN1EL].BERN11=;R 
LLC 
March 1, 2023 
To The Distinguished Members of the Judiciary Committee 
From Daniel J. Bernier, representing the- 
Central Maine Apartment Owners Association working in conjunction with the Rental 
Housing Alliance of Southern,Maine, the Greater Bangor Area Owners’ and Managers ’ 
Association, the Capital Area Housing Association, and Lewiston Auburn Landlord 
Association. 
Re: LD 55 7 An Act to Decrease Discrimination based on Evictions and Housing 
Applications 
I am submitting this memo in opposition to this legislation. Apartment owners provide 
housing. We are in a housing crises. We need to increase the supply of housing to end this 
crisis. The way to end this housing crises is to work with apartment owners, not against them, 
and encourage them to invest more in housing. The way you get people who have prior 
evictions, coming out of homeless shelters, or with criminal records housed is to have housing 
case workers who have credibility with the apartment owner community. We have seen this 
work in the area of mental health where many landlords are often happy renting as they havea 
case worker who will help them if there are problems. Tenants need to understand they 
have rights and responsibilities; telling tenants they have rights without reminding them 
they have responsibilities just increase homelessness.' 
Whether or not someone has been evicted is very relevant to how good of a tenant they 
would be. Landlords have a right to do background checks on people before letting people 
move into a property owned by the landlord. This is a very basic property right. Bad 
tenants can do tremendous property damage and scare good tenants away. Landlords 
also have a duty to their other tenants to do tenant screening for the safety or the other 
tenants. In our current situation we need to encourage investment in real estate to increase the 
supply of housing. Landlords must already comply with the Maine Human Rights Act for how 
they screen tenants. In the case of housing, because of the Fair Housing Act, the Maine Hmnan 
Rights Act is probably stricter on landlords than other business entity._ 
Tenants can avoid most evictions by paying their rent on time, not damaging the 
premises, and not disturbing other tenants. Tenants can avoid all evictions and get any 
eviction case against them dismissed by simply moving out prior to the hearing date. If the 
tenant moves out prior to hearing date, surrenders the keys to the premises, and notiﬁes the 
Page 1 of2 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Waterville, Maine 04901 * t 207.877.8969 * dan@bemierlawof ﬁce.com
landlord they have moved out, the landlord must dismiss the case as they can no longer satisfy 
the elements of the cause of action. For many years, a lot of tenants would move out prior 
to the hearing date. Then probably around ﬁfteen (15) years or so ago tenants started to 
be advised that they did not have to move out by the hearing date, that they got at least 
nine (9) days after the hearing date before they had to move out. The trouble with that 
advice is it came with a consequence they had an eviction on their record. Many eviction 
cases settle on some tenns which leaves the tenant without an eviction on their record. If you 
pass this legislation, I suspect fewer cases will settle. There will no longer be any risk or 
consequence to tenants if they force frivolous trials. 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
Very truly yours, 
9.
\ '_..-" f/I///ii 
anielrnier 
DJB/hb 
Page 2 of2 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Waterville, Maine 04901 * t207.877.8969 * dan@bemierlawof ﬁce.com
