CrossWay LLC
  #1 Water Street, Newport, Maine 04953
 (207)368-6221 
emergencies (207)487-3680
crosswayrentals@gmail.com
March 1, 2023
State of Maine- 131ST LEGISLATURE
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
Re:  OPPOSITION to LD 557:  An Act to Decrease Discrimination Based on Evictions in 
Housing Applications
Dear Valuable Representatives of the People of Maine serving on the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary,
I am writing as a person with a small investment in rental property in opposition of LD 557:  An 
Act to Decrease Discrimination Based on Evictions in Housing Applications.  Someone’s 
eviction history is integral to whether they are a good risk for further rental.   The process for 
eviction is so lengthy and allows for MANY opportunities to be resolved or dismissed that a 
person that has chosen to go through the entire process (and the landlord that has chosen to spend 
all that money in loss of time, rent and/or legal representation) is NOT likely to be a great 
candidate to rent to.  However someone who has been honest with me and discusses the specific 
circumstances surrounding the eviction may indeed be someone I would “take a chance” on.  For 
example, if a building sold and the tenant couldn’t find a place or their medical bills forced them 
to get behind on rent, in those circumstances we would look at the other factors in the application 
(rent as a percentage of income, references, length of rental desired, community supports, etc.) 
and may consider them for a tenant.  If LD 557 passed it is another way that we are creating 
power differentials between the landlord and tenant that erode open and honest communication- 
which I value above all else.  
Additionally, should this bill pass, are we creating a potential constitutional amendment deeming 
legal history a protective class?  The Fair Housing Act (Act) prohibits discrimination of 
protected characteristics.  A formal eviction, when granted, has already been tested by a Judge as 
proper.  Should this bill pass we would be creating a post de facto protected class.  
Please oppose LD 557.  
Donna E. Hodges
CrossWay LLC 
