19 Community Drive  Augusta, Maine 04330  (207) 622-7501  Fax: (207) 623-3590
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS  
12781773.1Testimony in Opposition of LD 557 (“An Act to Decrease Discrimination Based on 
Evictions in Housing Applications”)
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®
March 6, 2023
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Andy Cashman. I am the Founder of Resolve 
Government Relations and we represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a 
professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. 
REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members 
represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate 
transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing 
agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine 
Association is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the 
largest trade association in the country. 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® opposes LD 557. The bill prohibits a property 
owner from asking a potential tenant about eviction history.
Eviction history is a critical component in assessing the viability of a tenant. Property 
owners who lease their units are operating Maine businesses. They provide safe and 
decent housing and tenants pay a monthly rent that covers the cost of providing this 
housing. This bill puts property owners at potential risk for damage or loss of rental 
income due to a lack of essential information related to tenant history and credibility. 
Without this complete due diligence research, property owners are facing increased 
liability exposure and may put neighbors or other tenants at risk. Prohibiting a property 
owner from asking about eviction history is similar to prohibiting a lender from 
checking a potential borrower’s credit score or foreclosure history before lending. In 
both instances, such prohibitions withhold critical information to determine whether 
the transfer of a valuable asset (housing or loan proceeds) can be safely made. 
Eviction history is essential to protect the safety of existing tenants as well as allowing 
property owners to safeguard their assets.
For these reasons, we respectfully urge you to vote Ought Not to Pass on LD 557. 
Thank you for your time and consideration.
