Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Joint Standing Judiciary
Committee, my name is Jamie Beck. I am the Executive Director of Dignity First, and I am writing to express
my strong support for LD 557.
Dignity First, a Bangor-based nonprofit, is working to create and sustain a village of no-barrier, recovery-
oriented, permanent supportive housing for unhoused people and intentional neighbors.  Because
evictions are a significant direct or indirect factor when people become unhoused, Dignity First supports
An Act to Decrease Discrimination Based on Evictions in Housing Applications. The extremely competitive
and pricey housing market, compounding stress, and household disruption associated with an eviction,
create insurmountable difficulties for low-income people. While conducting applicant screening and risk
assessment, landlords often view any court eviction filings on an applicant’s record as grounds for
immediate denial without knowing the reason behind the filing or the outcome. Further, wealth disparity
issues and discrimination are magnified and the cycle of houselessness is perpetuated if the applicant
cannot afford rental units above HUD fair market values or require a Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher to
afford housing.
In 2022 alone, there were 4,965 eviction filings in Maine.  Over the past 10 years, there have been a total of
52,831 eviction filings, an average of 4,400 per year.2  Even if the filings did not result in judgment against
the tenant, the past 10 years has seen permanent court record filings against roughly the same number of
people as the populations of Lewiston and Augusta combined.  Particularly since cessation of the
moratorium on evictions during the COVID-19 Pandemic, houselessness and the cost of rental housing has
seen a sharp increase while the availability of affordable housing has decreased to nearly non-existent in
many areas of the state. In combination, the housing crisis in our state has swelled, as evidenced by the
roughly 27,000 on the waiting list for Section 8 vouchers according to Maine Housing. 
As it is written, LD 557 is missing a valid means of enforcement and corresponding consequences which
would ensure compliance.  Viable enforcement options might include: 3rd party screening through the
state where a landlord would receive applications and meet with potential tenants. If the landlord is
interested in moving forward, they would submit the tenant’s application to the State or State’s agent. The
State or State’s agent would receive all applications for rental units and provide the results of a non-biased
and non-discriminatory background check within 72 hours to the landlord and applicant according to the
Fair Credit Reporting Act, taking screening responsibility out of the landlord’s hands. Additionally, it would
reduce the number of private landlords who have access to tenants' private information. 
Another option could be for the State to mediate application discrimination complaints. With the institution
of a State of Maine Rental Housing Board, a statewide rental registry, and mandated licensure for landlords
and property managers, application criteria would be submitted to the Board by all landlords. If a
discrimination complaint is filed by an applicant, the Board would investigate and mediate the complaint. 
 Violations would result in a fine based on # of units or sanction of licensure for repeated violations. These
measures would provide actionable avenues for renter protections and ensure that all residents have
access to safe and affordable housing.
As stated before, LD 557 alone will not realistically independently solve the housing crisis our state faces. 
 However, it is one strong component in establishing more equitable rules and systems which uphold
housing as a basic human right.  Coupled with other bills such as LD 691: An Act to Reduce Barriers to
Housing by Prohibiting Tenant Application Fees and LD 330: An Act to Ensure Legal Representation for
Residents Facing Eviction, legislation proposed and reviewed during this 131st session could make a
significant impact on housing stability, reduce housing discrimination and improve the equitable care of
low-income households in our state. I urge you to support LD 557. 
Thank you,
Jamie Beck
March 9, 2023
109 State St. Ste 6, Bangor, Maine 04401-5343ADDRESS PHONE
 (207) 331-4489 info@DignityFirst.MEEMAIL
Jamie Beck
Bangor
LD 557
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and honorable members of the Joint 
Standing Judiciary Committee, my name is Jamie Beck. I am the Executive Director 
of Dignity First, and I am writing to express my strong support for LD 557.
Dignity First, a Bangor-based nonprofit, is working to create and sustain a village of 
no-barrier, recovery-oriented, permanent supportive housing for unhoused people and 
intentional neighbors.  Because evictions are a significant direct or indirect factor 
when people become unhoused, Dignity First supports An Act to Decrease 
Discrimination Based on Evictions in Housing Applications. The extremely 
competitive and pricey housing market, compounding stress, and household 
disruption associated with an eviction, create insurmountable difficulties for 
low-income people. While conducting applicant screening and risk assessment, 
landlords often view any court eviction filings on an applicant’s record as grounds for
immediate denial without knowing the reason behind the filing or the outcome. 
Further, wealth disparity issues and discrimination are magnified and the cycle of 
houselessness is perpetuated if the applicant cannot afford rental units above HUD 
fair market values or require a Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher to afford housing.
In 2022 alone, there were 4,965 eviction filings in Maine.  Over the past 10 years, 
there have been a total of 52,831 eviction filings, an average of 4,400 per year.2  Even
if the filings did not result in judgment against the tenant, the past 10 years has seen 
permanent court record filings against roughly the same number of people as the 
populations of Lewiston and Augusta combined.  Particularly since cessation of the 
moratorium on evictions during the COVID-19 Pandemic, houselessness and the cost 
of rental housing has seen a sharp increase while the availability of affordable housing
has decreased to nearly non-existent in many areas of the state. In combination, the 
housing crisis in our state has swelled, as evidenced by the roughly 27,000 on the 
waiting list for Section 8 vouchers according to Maine Housing. 
As it is written, LD 557 is missing a valid means of enforcement and corresponding 
consequences which would ensure compliance.  Viable enforcement options might 
include: 3rd party screening through the state where a landlord would receive 
applications and meet with potential tenants. If the landlord is interested in moving 
forward, they would submit the tenant’s application to the State or State’s agent. The 
State or State’s agent would receive all applications for rental units and provide the 
results of a non-biased and non-discriminatory background check within 72 hours to 
the landlord and applicant according to the Fair Credit Reporting Act, taking 
screening responsibility out of the landlord’s hands. Additionally, it would reduce the 
number of private landlords who have access to tenants' private information. 
Another option could be for the State to mediate application discrimination 
complaints. With the institution of a State of Maine Rental Housing Board, a 
statewide rental registry, and mandated licensure for landlords and property 
managers, application criteria would be submitted to the Board by all landlords. If a 
discrimination complaint is filed by an applicant, the Board would investigate and 
mediate the complaint.  Violations would result in a fine based on # of units or 
sanction of licensure for repeated violations. These measures would provide 
actionable avenues for renter protections and ensure that all residents have access to 
safe and affordable housing.
As stated before, LD 557 alone will not realistically independently solve the housing 
crisis our state faces.  However, it is one strong component in establishing more 
equitable rules and systems which uphold housing as a basic human right.  Coupled 
with other bills such as LD 691: An Act to Reduce Barriers to Housing by Prohibiting
Tenant Application Fees and LD 330: An Act to Ensure Legal Representation for 
Residents Facing Eviction, legislation proposed and reviewed during this 131st 
session could make a significant impact on housing stability, reduce housing 
discrimination and improve the equitable care of low-income households in our state. 
I urge you to support LD 557. 
Thank you,
Jamie Beck

