   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Lee Webb, Ph.D., Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Barbara Burt, Vice -chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lucy Van Hook  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
 
Dear chairpersons Carney and Moonen, and all members of the Judiciary committee:  
 
My name is Josie Phillips, and I am representing Maine Center for Economic Policy. I am 
testifying in favor of LD 557, “An Act to Decrease Discrimination Based on Evictions in Housing  
Applications,” because it prevents previous evictions from continuing to unfairly threaten renters’ 
ability to find the stable housing they need to thrive.  
 
I have testified before to this committee on the threa ts that evictions pose to the wellbeing of 
Maine families .1 To summarize, experiencing evictions can severely damage people’s health, 
safety, and financial security, in both the short and long term, especially to children who need 
stability to flourish in  adulthood . This also has implications for Maine’s economic wellbeing, as 
people are less able to provide for the ir families  or contribute to the state’s economic prosperity 
when they do not have a safe place to call home.  
 
I have also testified on how the burden of evictions follow the all -too-familiar lines of 
discrimination that can be traced throughout our society, with Black and Latino renters in Maine 
being substantially more likely to have evictions filed against them relative to White renters .2 
 
Today, I would like to talk about how eviction filings can go on to haunt afflicted renters for the 
rest of their lives. When an eviction is filed, it becomes a matter of public record unless it is 
sealed. These court records may have inaccuracies and often do not reflect the cause of 
eviction or even the outcome of the eviction case .3 Despite the information being inaccurate or 
incomplete, some landlords continue to use eviction records to screen applicants .4 Thus, 
prospecti ve renters may be denied the safe, affordable housing they need for reasons entirely 
outside of their control.  
 
Even when considering prospective tenants who have previously been evicted for just cause, 
landlords may unfairly deny people housing for issues  they no longer have. For instance, a 
person who was previously evicted due to an inability to pay rent may now have a better paying 
job. If a landlord uses their prior eviction as a reference, this prospective tenant may be denied 
housing they could easil y afford. For another example, consider someone who was previously 
evicted due to behavioral issues stemming from mental illness or substance use. This person 
may have gone on to receive treatment and is now substantially recovered. If a landlord relies 
on their previous eviction for screening, the renter may be denying someone housing for a 
reason that is not currently an issue.  In both of these cases, the renters would be subject to all 
the dangers that come with housing insecurity, even though they have resolved the problems 
that led to their initial evictions.   
 
 
1 https://legislature.maine.gov/backend/app/services/getDocument.aspx?doctype=test&documentId=167143  
2 Ibid.  
3 Center for American Progress, “ Eviction Record Expungement Can Remove Barriers to Stable Housing .” 
https://www.americanprogress.org/article/evictio n-record -expungement -can-remove -barriers -stable -housing/  
4 National Low  Income Housing Coalition, “ New Research Shows Eviction Record Inaccuracies Can Skew Eviction 
Rates and Harm Renters .” https://nlihc.org/resource/new -research -shows -eviction -record -inaccuracies -can-skew -
eviction -rates -and-harm -renters  
 
   
 The information that landlords need to effectively evaluate appli cants can be found in other 
ways, such as through background checks or income verification. Because of their potential 
inaccuracies, incompleteness, and inability to reflect present -day realities, prior evictions are an 
unfair, ineffective way for landlord s to screen their prospective tenants. LD 557 would prevent 
landlords from using this flawed, unjust screening mechanism, and in doing so, it would help 
protect the wellbeing of renters who are looking for a stable home. Because of this, I urge the 
committ ee to vote yes on LD 557.  
 
 
