RE: LD 557  
Members  of the Judiciary  Committee , 
I’m wri ting to OPPOSE LD 557 . Discrimination and evic tions should not be in the same sentence . A 
person’s rental history is a great  predictor of  whether  they will be a successful  tenant.  If it were not the 
case , the industry would not use it.  In most  cases tenants  are evicted for extreme  lease violations : 
failure to pay,  threatening behavior to nei ghbors, and substantial  damage to bui ldings. If a te nant did 
these things in the past, wh at would have  changed to p revent them from doing this ag ain?  
What  is next ? Will you ban banks from checking credit scores when they issue mortgages  and car loa ns? 
Those are great predictors or someone ’s ability to pay their de bts, just like eviction history is a good 
predict or of successful  tenants.  
Placing problematic  tenants  is the costliest  mistake you can make in rental housing. Evictions cost  
thousands  of dollars.  Building damage is also extremely  expensive. Since this law will increase the cost o f 
rental housing, we’ll need to increase rents on our successful  tenants to subsidize  the losses  forced upon 
us by this law. Additionally , this will slow the pace of us getting new housing online , which ultimately will 
keep more people unho used.  
What a bout  neighbors  in multi -family situations ? What if a tenant was evicted for being violent  and/or 
ruining the lives of their nei ghbors ? Do you want me to place that per son next  door to Gra ndma or a 
single mom and her kids  to ruin their  lives as well?  
What is the point of t enant screening if the government want s landlords to take anyone regardless of 
how  good or bad a tenant  they are . It is not rental housing provide r’s duty to p rovide hous ing to all . I 
teach high school and I t each my students t here are consequences in life for one’s actions.   Is this not 
the case anymore ? 
If rental housing providers cannot use eviction history,  they will need to rel y on other met rics instead. 
For example, some tenants  have terrible credit  scores, but have never been evicted and always pay their 
rent. If this law passes , rental housing  providers will need to increase their credit score  and income  
requirements  preventing good tenants  from getting housed.  
We are working to put more units online every day . We rehab old bui ldings a nd make them great places 
to live. I  am growing tired of the con stant attacks in the form of new laws from Augusta that wish to 
make it harder for us to provide rental housing. You are not solving  any problems by writing the se laws. 
We need to get more rental units online  to house the  great  people of Maine.  Work with rental  housing 
providers to let us meet this task .  
 
Justin Giroux  
Fairfield, ME  
Manager  
Habitat F or ME LLC  
