 
“Providing Emergency Food & Shelter to Homeless and Displaced Persons in central Maine”  
“Founded b y the Interfaith Council in 1990”  
  
19 Colby Street  
Waterville  
 Waterville , ME 
04901   
MID-MAINE HOMELESS SHELTER  & SERVICES  
DR. KATIE SPENCER WHITE,  CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER  
(207)  872-8082   (207)  872-6550   FAX: (207)  872-0834  
shelter@ ShelterMe.org   www.shelterme.org  
 
 
 
March 9 , 2023  
Judiciary  Committee  
Legislative Information Office  
100 State House Station  
Augusta, ME 04333  
 
Re: Testimony in Support of LD 557 An Act to Decrease Discriminatio n Based on Evictions in 
Housing  Applications  
 
Dear Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and Honorable Members of the Committee:  
 
My name is Dr. Katie Spencer White,  and I am the President & CEO of the Mid -Maine 
Homeless Shelter & Services in Waterville, Maine. We serve people experiencing homelessness 
primarily from Kennebec and Sommerset Counties through our 65-bed low-barrier shelter, as 
well as a range of programs and services designed to prevent  people from becoming homeless 
and to quickly rehouse them if they do.  We also operate 11 permanent sup portive housing units 
for youth aged 18 to 24 – the states first and only site -based Housing First progr am specifically 
for young adults.  
 
We understand eviction both as a dvocates and as landlords. We understand this is a complex  
issue. We know the challenges of housing people with challeng ing h istories and of dealing with  
difficult tenants. It is because we have experienced both sides of this issue that w e are in support 
of this legislat ion.  
 
Our core business is help ing transition people from homelessness back into perm anent housing . 
This is a core tenant of Housing First, which you may have hear d Governor Mills endorse las t 
month in her Sta te of the State address. Decades of research indicates that housing is the key to 
individual and c ommunity wellbeing. People  who are unhoused are more likely to experience 
adverse health and  have a much shorter lifespan . According to the US Interagency Council on 
Homelessness, people  who ha ve experienced homelessness  live 30 years less than the average 
American. And according to the CD C, children who experience homelessness are m ore likely to 
have poor he alth and experience higher rates of abuse and neglect.  
 
Ensuring peopl e have access to housing is th us a critical policy consideration for this committee.  

 
“Providing Emergency Food & Shelter to Homeless and Displaced Persons in central Maine”  
“Founded b y the Interfaith Council in 1990”  
  
Eviction  is one of the primary causes of homelessness in Maine. According to the Eviction Lab 
at Princeton University, in 2018, there were 5,400 ev iction filings in Maine, which represents a 
2.8% filing rate. It is impo rtant to clarify who this rate represents  and who is most at risk o f an 
eviction filing . I am a renter in Brunswick,  but  I am not at risk.  When we disaggregate  the total 
population of renters, we quickly find that the peo ple most at risk are  the poor, the elderly, 
people with disabilities, people of color, and low-income  households with children , in particular  
female  headed households with children  under five . So while the state average is 2 .8% of all 
renters, it is a much higher percentage if you fal l into one of these categories , categories which, I 
note, hold protected class status under the Fair Housing Act  and the Maine Human Rights Act .  
 
Most landlords want to screen applicants for tenants  to weed out problem tenants  and to find 
good tenants.  Screening falls into two broad  catego ries: economic stability and behavioral issues. 
Historically, landlords  have asked for proof of income, rental h istory, and references. Today, 
technolo gy has revolution ized this process  giving landlords access to a range of information 
including criminal his tory, cre dit scor es, civil judgements, and evictions. Research demonstrates 
that this kind of automated scree ning leads to automation bias – landlords routinely deny anyone 
with any adverse history without making further inquir ies as to disposition or len gth of time 
since the adv erse incident occurred . In addi tion, r esearch shows that up to 25% of all records in 
tenant screening databases is inaccurate or comp letely wrong. Nor are there protecti ons for how 
long this information  is retained o r used to  screen out prospective tenants.  
 
If we continue with “business as usual”, we will continue to push people into housing instability 
and homelessness . Our homeless syste m increasingly  has no outflow, leaving more and more 
people with no other option but to sleep in cars or in tents or in other places not fit for habitation . 
This results in housing inequality with  people otherwise protected by the Fair Housing Act 
shouldering most of the burden of our policy decisions. This is not good for renter s, this is not 
good for communities, and this is not good f or our state.  
 
We fully understand th e challenges faced by landlords. We know that finding good tenants is 
critical to  the good management of an important asset. But we should not rely on practices that 
require th ose who can afford it least to carry the burden for those who can find a better way to 
achieve the same outcome .  
 
With LD 557, Maine has an opportunity to address  growing  housing inequality  and 
homelessness . I therefore encourage the committee to support  this bill. 
 
Kind regards,  
 
 
 
Dr. Katie Spencer White  
Chief Executive Officer  
Mid-Maine Homeless Shelter & Services  

