    
PO Box 7860 Portland, ME 04112 (207) 774-5444 www.aclumaine.org    TESTIMONY OF MEAGAN SWAY, ESQ.  LD 557 – Ought To Pass  An Act to Decrease Discrimination Based on  Evictions in Housing Applications  Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  March 9, 2023 Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and distinguished members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary, greetings. My name is Meagan Sway, and I am Policy Director for the American Civil Liberties Union of Maine, a statewide organization committed to advancing and preserving civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our members, I urge you to support LD 557, legislation that would ensure that more Maine people find shelter and safety.  If enacted, this bill would ban landlords from asking prospective tenants about previous evictions and from discriminating against prospective tenants on the basis of their history of eviction. We are in the middle of a surge in evictions. Last year, evictions were up 27% from the previous year.1 The end of federal rental assistance, rental arrearages built from the pandemic’s lockdown period unemployment, skyrocketing property prices leading to property sales to new investors who evict tenants, and an historic influx of new residents willing to pay big city rents have all conspired to push Maine’s most vulnerable residents out of housing and into the streets.   Our eviction crisis is intertwined with racial inequity and other forms of discrimination. Unhoused people are disproportionately people of color and people with disabilities. In 2022, for example, although Black and African American people made up less than 2% of Maine’s population, they made up 35% of the state’s unhoused population.2 A vastly disproportionate share of people experiencing homelessness also suffer from a mental illness, which is just one of the disabilities  1 Megan Gray, Evictions in Maine shot up during 2022, with filings growing 27%, Jan. 19, 2023, Press Herald, available at https://www.pressherald.com/2023/01/19/evictions-in-maine-shot-up-during-2022-with-filings-growing-27/?auth0Authentication=true  2 2022 Point in Time Count, Maine Housing, Maine State Housing Authority, at 2, available at https://www.mainehousing.org/docs/default-source/housing-reports/2022-point-in-time-survey---statewide.pdf?sfvrsn=1aa68615_7.  
   
2  that people experiencing homelessness disproportionately suffer. And, women in abusive relationships are disproportionately evicted for creating nuisances by calling the police in an attempt to secure their safety. All of these groups are more likely to be shut out of the rental market because of prior evictions on their records.  An eviction filing, regardless of the outcome of the case, follows a renter for years. For many tenants, eviction can have a domino effect of devastating consequences, including job loss, health issues, marital hardship and even homelessness. This bill would help ensure that a history of eviction does not have quite such a devastating effect and does not prevent marginalized populations from securing housing. We urge you to vote ought to pass.  
