LD 557’Testimony of Michael Beck of Bangor, Maine on March 9, 2023 M 
Good Afternoon Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee. 
.. 
._ 
My name is Michael Beck, and I am a tenant living in Bangor, Maine. 'l’m providing testimony today in support 
of LD 557. Evictions not only disrupt your current living situation; it brands you with what some call a “ScarIett 
E” , telling future landlords to deny your application without even considering how the eviction came to pass. 
I know this, because it happened to me. In 2014, my wife and I secured a rental property in Georgia while living 
in Michigan. When we arrived with our kids and dog after a 20 hour trip, we couldn't wait_to set them free in the 
fenced in yard while we waited for help to arrive and unload the truck. However, when we inspected the yard, 
we discovered thousands of shards of broken glass from the recent remodel and the fence gate missing. 
Additionally there were holes in the basement door whichlet rodents in the house. Confused and frustrated, we 
contacted the property manager.'
* 
Over the next few months, they promised several times to resolve the issues. The back door eventually got 
fixed, but the fence and glass were never addressed. Our children and dog weren't able to play outside 
because it was too dangerous._ 
Repeated broken promises put my family at risk, so we notified the property manager of ourintention to 
withhold rent until the issues were resolved. Instead of following through on their promise, they.retaIiated by 
filing for eviction. The court thankfully helped us file a countersuit. On the date of our hearing, we were offered 
a deal by the property manager’s lawyer: If we dropped the countersuit, they would not pursue the eviction. 
They offered to let us out of the lease without penalty, give us 30 days at no charge to vacate the premises, ‘ 
and refund our security deposit in full. My wife and I accepted the deal. 
However, our search for new housing quickly became the new nightmare. Applications asked if we had been 
evicted. We assumed because there was no judgment against us, wel could answer “no” . We soon learned that 
because an eviction was filed in court, it showed up on our background check. The outcome of the filing didn’t 
matter to prospective landlords. We had a recent eviction on our record. That was all they needed to know. 
Panic and stress weremounting as door after door seemed to close in our faces, compounded by news which 
should have been exciting — we were expecting another baby boy. We were extremely fortunate my wife's 
parents in Maine let us move in with them temporarily before time ran out. If they had not thrown us that 
lifeline, my family would have become unhoused.
) 
It took months to find a landlord in Maine who would allow us to give our side of the story about the eviction on 
our record and secure housing. 
I can’t help but think about other people in Maine who have no lifeline like we have, especially those who are 
now experiencing homelessness because they cannot secure housing after an eviction. That is unfair, as no 
two eviction stories are the same. A situation that leads to an eviction for one tenant could be nothing more 
than a resolved misunderstanding between a landlord and another tenant. Evictions are subjective and using 
them as a basis to deny housing is discriminatory. 
I urge this committee to approve LD 557. 
Thank you.
