 
 
 
 
March 9, 2023  
 
 
Testimony in Opposition to LD 557  
An Act to Decrease Discrimination Based on Evictions in Housing Applications 
 To the Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on the Judiciary:  
 
The Executive Directors of the Housing Authority of the City of Bangor, the Housing Authority of the 
City of Brewer, the Housing Authority of the City of Old Town , and the Moun t Desert Island and 
Ellsworth Housing  Authorities  hereby submit this written testimony in OPPOSITION  to LD 557.  
 There are about  20 housing authorities in Maine serving thousands of persons of low income. 
Collectively, our  housing authorities own and manage more than 1,000 public housing units and 
manage nearly 600 more residential units in a variety of  other subsidized and unsubsidized  programs . 
Our housing authorities also  collectively  administer more than 1,000 Section 8 vouchers.  
 Housing authorities are unique creatures  of law  that are subject to a patchwork of laws and regulations. 
Housing authorities are public bodies created by our local city councils pursuant to Title 30 -A if there 
is a demonstrated need for safe and sanitary rental units for persons of low income . Once created, our  
statutory mission  is to provide decent, safe, and sanity dwelling accommodations.  We aim to serve all 
who are eligible.   
 
Housing authorities are  primarily funded by the United States Department of Housing and Urban 
Development  (HUD). HUD pro vides housing authorities with  operating subsidy that supplements the 
rents we receive. If we did not have this funding source, we could not operate , maintain , and insure our 
public housing  units , pay our staff,  and further our mission . 
 But, as with all t hings in life, HUD funding comes with strings . To receive funding, we have  all signed 
Annual Contributions Contracts (ACC). The ACC basically provides that HUD will provide funding in 
accordance with Congressional appropriations and other laws, but only if  the housing authority follows 
the law, including federal  regulations issued  by HUD.  
 
HUD regulations are found at Title 24  of the Code of Federal Regulations. These regulations  govern , 
among other things,  a public housing authority’s admissions policies and criteria and the contents  of 
its lease and more.  HUD also reviews and approves those policies on an annual basis.   
 
The most important regulation for present purposes is found at  24 C.F.R. §  960.204 (a), which provides 
that a public housing authority “ must prohibit admission of an applicant to the PHA’s public housing 
program for three years from the date of the eviction if any household member has been evicted from 
federally assisted housing for drug -related criminal activity.” That section goes on to p rovide the limited 
circumstances when a prior eviction for drug -related criminal activity is not subject to this automatic 
disqualification.  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary  
March 9, 2023  
Page 2 
 
 
  
 
The language of 24 C.F.R. §  960.204(a) is clear . Housing authorities are required to  deny applicants 
who , in the last three years, were evicted from federal housing for drug -related criminal activity ( i.e., 
the illegal manufacture, sale, distribution, use, or possession with intent to manufacture, sell, 
distribute, or use, of a controlled substance ). 
 The only wa y that we can comply with §  960.204 is to ask  applicants to disclose prior residences, 
including whether they’ve previously lived in federally subsidized housing  and for us to check their 
residence history  and history of evictions . If, when we conduct a ch eck, we see a qualifying eviction, we 
deny the application . We do not possess the discretion to do otherwise. Thereafter, the denied applicant 
can request  a hearing pursuant to our grievance policies, which allow for an independent review of the 
denial. This process applies to all applicants who have been denied admission for any reason.  At that 
time, the applicant could present mitigating evidence or evidence th at one of the limited exceptions to 
denial exists . If the denial is upheld,  the applicant could seek judicial review in the Superior Court.  
 If LD 557 becomes the law, a public housing authority would be forced to choose between complying 
with Maine law and federal law. LD 557 would prohibit us asking about prior qualifying evic tions and 
from denying an applicant  with a qualifying eviction. If we choose to comply with Maine law, we would  
be in breach of our ACC  and put our funding at risk .  
 Each of us  has seen  the effects of the pandemic on  people and on  housing and the barriers that many 
people face to attaining safe and stable housing.  While the aims of LD 557 are laudable , in that it seeks 
to level  the playing field for those attempting to access affordable housing, it paints with too broad a 
brush and  fails to recognize the ramifications of enacting such a law. LD 557, as applied to housing 
authorities, would be bad law and should be rejected.  
  
Michael Myatt  
 Michael Myatt  
Executive Director  
Housing Authority of the City of Bangor  
 Laurie Miller  
 Laurie Miller  
Executive Director  
Housing Authority of the City of Old Town  
 
Charlotte Perkins  
 Charlotte Perkins  
Executive Director  
Housing Authority of the City of Brewer  
 Duane Bartlett  
 Duane Bartlett  
Executive Director  
MDI & Ellsworth Housing Authorities  
 
  
 
