Pinette, Susan 
From: Peg Olson <ptpeg2014@gmai|.com>" 
Sent: Wednesday, March 8, 2023 5:27 PM 
To: JUD 
Subject: LD 557 
This message originates from outside the Maine Legislature. ‘ _ ‘’ 4 ' 
‘" 
. 4'
~ 
Dear Committee Members,i 
-'” 
.5 57 
One of the reasons people become 
and remain ‘houseless is because they have an eviction in their rental histories. 
When they are honest and check the box on a rentalapplication stating they 
have an eviction on their record, they most frequently become ineligible for 
the property or unit. Currently, Maine does not have a mechanism to separate 
a no-fault eviction, the case where the renter is not causing the eviction, i.-e. 
when a landowner decides to have the tenants vacate the premises so it can 
have something done to it, from at-fault eviction where the renter has failed to 
pay rent after being repeatedly reminded to do so or willfully damaged the 
property. 
I support this bill because it upholds the dignity of individuals seeking housing 
by not automatically eliminating their application for housing because of 
checking this box. It is supported in the baptismal vows I revisit several times 
a year, calling us to strive for justice and respect the dignity of every human 
being. Losing my home for no fault of my own and then having it be held 
against me without having the chance to explain is not just. Landlords have 
other avenues to find out whether a potential tenant is a chronic non-payer of 
rent or destroyer of property. Employing a checkbox to automatically exclude 
anyone who has a history of eviction is an unjust and arbitrary method of 
discrimination.
1
"Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere." Martin Luther King, 
Jr. 
"Privilege is not in and of itself bad; what matters is what we do with privilege 
We have to share our resources and take direction about how to use our 
privilege in ways that empower those who lack it." bell hooks 
"We need one another. We rely on one another. When we 
bind together, our hope is both deep andW 
u nbro ken . " 
Catholic Worker, July 2019
2
