Testimony of The Maine Real Estate Managers 
Association  
 
In opposition of LD 557 An Act to Decrease 
Discrimination Based on Evictions in Housing 
Applications  
 
March 3, 2023  
 
Representative Rana , and all members of  Joint Select C ommittee on 
Housing , my name is  Alyssa Dean -Littlefield , and I am writing to you as  Co-
Chair  of the Maine Real Estate Managers Association  (MREMA)  Legislative 
Committee .   
 
Our organization is a nonprofit which represents over 80 professional 
property manage ment companies providing  16,000 units of affordable and 
subsidized housing throughout the state.  It is our mission to promote the 
availability of safe, decent affordable housing in Maine.  Our manage ment 
members  are both for -profit and nonp rofit  landlords  that believe in this 
mission.  
 
As a membership organization we support our members in their policies of 
fair and equal access to our housing through the application process. In 
these processes, we do ask about a potential resident’s evictio n history but  
having an eviction  on their record does not necessarily preclude them from 
obtaining housing with our members . 
 
Many of our members have standard  appeal processes applicants can utilize 
to overturn a denial for housing. These processes review each applicant’s 
circumstances case -by-case to determine if the denial was warranted. 
Examples of this would be if a household has extensive positive landlord 
history, and one bad experience with a landlord  for something th at is not 
the applicant’s  fault, their denial could be overturned through th is review. 
These reviews include reaching out and hearing each specific applicant’s 
experiences  to help decide  in getting the family housed.  
 
The other tool landlords utilize when  reviewing applications for housing is a 
Resident Selection Plan. This plan is approved by Maine State Housing 
Authority and for apartments that have specific preferences or 
requirements of the applicant. In thi s Resident Selection Plan, there could be 
statements about waiving specific criteria to reduce barriers to housing for 
populations. Examples of this might include waiving credit or eviction history 
for a currently homeless household if the property has a specific preference 
or requirement to ho use pe ople who are currently unhoused.  
Alpha Management Corp  
Auburn Housing Authority  
Avesta Housing  
Bangor Housing Authority  
Barkan Management Co.  
Bath Housing  
Brewer Housing Authority  
C & C Realty Management  
C. M. Cimino Realty Inc.  
C. S. Management, Inc  
C.B. Mattson, Inc.  
Caleb Foundation, The  
CMHI Property Management Inc  
Community Housing of Maine  
DBH Management  
DC Management  
Deanna Morse Property 
Management Inc  
Deering Pavilion  
Dover -Foxcroft Housing Dev Corp  
Downeast Community Partners  
Eagle Point Management, LLC  
Ellen M Leach Memorial Home  
Evernorth  
Federal Management Co., Inc  
Foothills Management  
Foreside Real Estate Mgt  
Gary Buck Property Management  
Guilford Development Corp  
Hallkeen Management, Inc  
Harbor Management  
Harborview Management LLC  
Hillside Apts  
Housing Authority City of Old 
Town  
Housing Foundation, The  
Kathryn Hughes Associates, Inc.  
L & L Management  
LaBrecque Property Management  
Laplante Apartments  
Lewiston Housing Authority  
Madison Avenue Associates  
Maine Development  
Mary Young  
Matthew Sherman Mem Apts  
MEMBERS  

MREMA members all share a common mission  of preserving and maintaining affordable housing for 
Mainers. In this mission, we want to house as many applicants as possible, but we are also  bound to 
protect the safety and securi ty of current residents in our properties. This is the reason we ask about 
eviction history; to prevent safety and security issues for our community  members and staff.  
 
Due to the reasons above, MREMA Supports  opposes  LD 347557.  Thank you for your consideration, and 
please do not hesitate to contact me with any questions.  
 
Legislative Co -Chairs,  
 
Alyssa Dean -Littlefield      Sherrin Vail  
adeanlittlefield@wishcamper.com    svail@evernorthu rs.org  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 Field  Code  Changed
