Writing testimony for LD557  “An Act to Decrease Discrimination Based on Evictions in 
Housing Applications.”
Hello Chair Carney, Chair Moonen, and distinguished members of the Judiciary committee. 
My name is Shukri Abdirahman, I live in Lewiston Maine, and I work at Maine Youth Power as a Co-
Director. As a young Mainer and someone who works with youth across the state of Maine. I am here 
today to ask that you support Representative Rana’s bill,  LD557 “An Act to Decrease Discrimination 
Based on Evictions in Housing Applications. 
I am here to show my support for LD557 because I believe that in order to receive better housing, 
there needs to be no barriers to people simply applying for housing because it is a human right. Also, 
people should not be discriminated against on the basis of inequality and to simply apply for housing. 
Being from Lewiston Maine, I have witnessed many people get discriminated against based on their 
prior or previous housing application. It is common to see housing evictions in Lewiston Maine, and it 
saddens me to know we allow discrimination based on evictions in the State of Maine. 
There are many reasons why I stand with Representative Rana and I am here today to deeply ask that 
you stand with young Mainers and ensure that people are not discriminated against based on 
evictions in housing applications. I am Shukri Abdirahman and I am supporting LD557 and making 
Maine a better place to live. 
Thanks, 
Shukri 
Shukri Abdirahman
Lewiston
LD 557
Writing testimony for LD557  “An Act to Decrease Discrimination Based on 
Evictions in Housing Applications.”
Hello Chair Carney, Chair Moonen, and distinguished members of the Judiciary 
committee. 
My name is Shukri Abdirahman, I live in Lewiston Maine, and I work at Maine 
Youth Power as a Co-Director. As a young Mainer and someone who works with 
youth across the state of Maine. I am here today to ask that you support 
Representative Rana’s bill,  LD557 “An Act to Decrease Discrimination Based on 
Evictions in Housing Applications. 
I am here to show my support for LD557 because I believe that in order to receive 
better housing, there needs to be no barriers to people simply applying for housing 
because it is a human right. Also, people should not be discriminated against on the 
basis of inequality and to simply apply for housing. 
Being from Lewiston, Maine, I have witnessed many people get discriminated against
based on their prior or previous housing applications. It is common to see housing 
evictions in Lewiston, Maine, and it saddens me to know we allow discrimination 
based on evictions in the State of Maine. 
There are many reasons why I stand with Representative Rana, and I am here today to
sincerely ask that you stand with young Mainers and ensure that people are not 
discriminated against based on evictions in housing applications. I am Shukri 
Abdirahman and I am supporting LD557 and making Maine a better place to live. 
Thanks, 
Shukri 

