$ 
, STATE OF MAINE HOUSE or REPRESENTATIVES 
HOUSE REPUBLICAN OFFICE ' 
AUGUSTA. MAINE 04333-0002 
Office: (207)287-1440 
AMYB./XRATA CeIl: _ (2(l7)333-ISI7 
ASSISTANT HOUSE REPUBLICAN LEADER Fa XI ( 3 0 7 I 3 3 7 -1449 
E - Ma i I 1 Am}".Ara1a(§I ‘legislaturemaine g0\ 
March 9, 2023’ 
Testimony in opposition to LD 701 
An Act to Increase the Notice Period for Rent Increase 
Sen. Carney, Rep. Moonen, and members of the Judiciary Committee, my name is Amy Arata and I'm 
from New Gloucester. And I'm here to testify in opposition to LD 701. 
I've been a landlord since 2007 and I've only had one tenant say he was moving out due to a rent 
increase. I increased it by $1 per week, so I don't think that was the real reason. I try toincrease rents 
a little bit every year to keep up with inflation, yet I still have some apartments that are $500 below 
market rate. 
Like me, most of my landlord peers are reluctant to increase rents very much for our valued tenants. 
However, there are times when a skyrocketing utility bill or other emergency would require rents to go 
up more quickly so that we can pay our bills. For example, I once had a tenant who didn't tell me his 
toilet was running, so I didn't know about it until my quarterly water bill had gone up by $1100. Many 
landlords wouldn't be able to afford this extreme increase without quickly raising rents. In that case,a 
45-day notice would be difﬁcult, but a 90-day notice of rent increase could cause the utilities to be shut 
off if the landlord couldn't cover the bill without more help from the tenants. . 
I believe the intent of the bill is to mitigate the impact of large rent increases, "( 
such as could occur ifI 
were to sell my property with the rents that are $500 below market rate. I care about my tenants andI 
don't want this to happen to them . either. However, the existing 45-day notice is working for the 
reasonable rent increases that most landlords have.' 
If the law is to be changed, I suggest something similar to California's new rent increase law. California 
is possibly the most tenant-friendly ‘state,i' n the nation. In fact, the law has become so extremely one- 
sided that many investors are leaving that market. In California, a 30-day notice is required for a rent 
increase unless the increase is over 10%. If the rent increase is over 10% within a year, a 60-day notice 
must be given. This may be a solution the sponsor of LD 701 would be satisfied with. 
A 90-day notice for any rent increase is excessive. I've considered investing in other states and have 
researched properties and rental laws all over the country, but have yet to find such a long notice 
period. Most states require a 30-day notice. If this bill passes as written, Maine would be even more of 
an outlier. With such a high demand for housing in Maine, we certainly don't want to discourage 
apartment developers in Maine. 
Thank you for your time. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have. 
Amy Arata 
State Representative
l
