ANDREW SCHOENING
Waterville
LD 701
March 8, 2023
To Whom It May Concern:
I write in response to the upcoming legislation affecting landlords. 
I am a 76 year old, fully disabled, Vietnam veteran; retired child protective 
caseworker and geriatric social worker.  My wife and I have lived at the same address 
in Waterville for the past 26 years.
Nearly four years ago my wife and I purchased a true duplex, each side of which is a 
mirror image of the other.  Since we are both retired we had the opportunity to 
purchase the property with the intention that it would supplement our income in our 
later years…which now happens to be present time.  To date this has not worked out 
and with this new proposed legislation it appears to be even less likely.  
Upon the purchase of the property, we completely updated the first vacated  unit, 
costing many thousands of dollars.  We did this because, unlike what we have heard 
from a very select few undesirable landlords, “don’t worry about it ‘cause you don’t 
have to live there”….our approach has been and still is “I would live there”.
Fortunately, we have an excellent, stable tenant on that side of the property for almost
a year and project that they will likely remain for at least several years, if not longer.  
However, the prior tenant on that side of the property severely damaged the property 
and left behind one and one-half tons of trash.  It cost us in the neighborhood of 
$4,000 to repair the damage.  
On the other side of the property the first tenant caused Many thousands of dollars of 
damage for which we received no compensation, i.e., ‘you cannot get blood out of a 
rock’.  We then spent $12,000 completely updating that side of the property as we did
the other, including new appliances.  Though we checked the tenant out thoroughly, 
she moved another individual into the apartment without our knowledge.  This 
individual was unstable and very destructive.  We have already spent a considerable 
sum of money on the eviction process.  The damage to the apartment is 
incomprehensible, i.e., many large holes in the walls; doors destroyed or with holes 
punched in them; fixtures broken and/or damaged; exterior doors kicked in splintering
the door and door jamb; animal feces throughout and likely another large dumpster of 
refuse and unclaimed items.  The individual who caused the damage will very likely 
walk free of any criminal charges and since he is historically unemployed, there is 
little to no chance that we will be able to seek recompense.
Unfortunately, these experiences are not atypical.  It is for this reason that I oppose 
the proposed legislation that appears to be a solution looking for a problem.  
LD 557  would prevent another landlord from renting their property to the individual I
referenced above even though he is responsible for thousands of dollars of damage.  
How does that make sense in any reality with which we are familiar?
LD 558  Having to give a prospective tenant a written document delineating the 
reasons that a prospective tenant might be rejected is entirely asinine.  Referring back 
to LD 557, if a landlord were to tell the prospective tenant that they would not be 
accepted due to the fact that they destroyed their past three rentals, it would be 
discrimination.  Thereby, setting-up the landlord for a lawsuit.
LD  701 is simply insanity on parade!  With the erratic nature of energy costs this bill 
will, in all probability, cause landlords to pre-emptively raise their rents thus further 
exacerbating the lack of available affordable housing.  
LD  804  This will simply drive single property owners, many comprised of retirees, 
out of the market.  They cannot absorb 90 days with no rent or possibility of 
recompense in the real world.  This will further depress the affordable housing 
market.  
Sincerely,
Andrew W. Schoening
11 Burleigh Street
Waterville, ME  04901  207-680-8895

