March 6, 2023
Testimony in  OPPOSITION to LD 701: An Act to Increase the Notice Period for Rent Increases
To the Distinguished Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary:
The Central Maine Apartment Owners Association (CMAOA) is a landlord membership organization of over 
650, as well as a cooperative team member of other landlord associations across the State of Maine including: 
Southern Maine, Lewiston Auburn, Greater Bangor Area, and Augusta Area.  We provide educational events, 
sponsor community events, provide access to discounts on supplies and industry needs like fuels, flooring 
materials and paint. Our overall goal is to support Landlords in providing safe and affordable housing in 
collaboration with the valuable good renters in our area.  CMAOA and the other organizations are neutral, 
nonpartisan, member led groups that have the common goal of keeping the rental housing industry safe, 
educated, and competitive.  
We are asking you to oppose LD 701: An Act to Increase the Notice Period for Rent Increases. 
Our membership is primarily smaller landlords that have a couple units or buildings as part of their retirement 
plan while being employed elsewhere.  Our rental income must at least cover the costs and protection from 
the liability of owning the property.  A 90-day notice is not what we get when the cost of oil changes 
overnight.  Additionally, typically a tenant who decides they are not going to accept a rent increase will 
immediately give notice to move and MOST tenants do not pay rent again after they give their notice.  We are 
limited in what we can require for move in costs- current law would not cover 90 days of rent and potential 
damages.  Should this bill pass, many of our landlords have expressed that in order to meet their expenses and 
the potential for expenses to increase, they will not be willing to negotiate lower move in costs, lower monthly 
rent (which many currently do to get or keep a good tenant), will spend less on unnecessary improvements, 
and will increase their consideration to get out of the business by selling and recouping the equity they have 
built over the years of ownership.   Less small, local resident owned properties will only add to even higher 
rents because a new owner will have a higher mortgage/financial investment that needs to be covered.  Lastly, 
there is a significant concern that a 90 day notice may significantly delay the purchase and sale of all property 
by extending closing dates, lowering the value, and encouraging corporate ownership with deep pockets of 
our rental stock.  
We urge you to oppose LD 701.
Board of Directors of Central Maine Apartment Owners Association, Waterville, Maine  
Click Here for CMAOA Website and Contact Information 
