Cheryl Harkins
Homeless Voices for Justice
LD 701
LD 701 An Act To Increase the Notice Period for Rent Increase
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Judiciary Committee, good 
afternoon.  My name is Cheryl Harkins.  I live in South Portland.  I'm an Advocate with both 
Homeless Voices for Justice and Homeless Advocacy for All.  I'm also on the Boards of the 
Statewide Homeless Council and Maine's Continuum of Care.  I am here today to ask for your
help.  I don't have to explain the lack of housing in our state to any of you.  Evictions are 
happening across the United States to people from all walks of life.  It is estimated that 
roughly 2/3 of current evictions are people who are experiencing homelessness for the first 
time.  It's a terrifying situation to find yourself in.  Due to the pandemic many homeowners got 
far behind  on mortgage and property tax payments.  Some face the possibility of losing their 
properties. They got as far behind as their tenants.  They have had to find ways to catch up.  
Many have to raise rents.  It's understandable with the costs of living skyrocketing.  The 
current notification time of 45 days for a rental increase is not sufficient in this current fiscal 
atmosphere.  A time of 90 days will give the tenant the time to shuffle budgets and to find 
extra employment if need be.  The 90 day notice time would allow the tenant to find the extra 
money necessary to ensure the stability of their home.  Most landlords are responsible and 
want to keep tenants in their units.  They do this by keeping their properties safe and up to 
code rules.  They work with their tenants, not against them.  Unfortunately there is also the 
completely opposite type.  These are the landlords who want the absolute most out of a 
tenant without offering the safety and consideration the tenant deserves.  These people are 
strictly "in it" for as much money as they can accumulate and give as little as possible in 
return.  Many landlords simply serve you with a "no fault" eviction so they don't have to 
actually repair unsafe conditions.  Many will actually do cosmetic repairs to hide problems so 
potential tenants won't know of the need for larger repairs.  These landlords try to get a tenant
out the door as soon as possible.  Landlords who try to pressure tenants to pay costs they 
honestly do not owe should be penalized and required to reimburse the wronged tenant.  
Tenants definately need the cushion of extending the 45 day notice of rent increase notice to 
90 days.  I am urging the Committee to vote to pass LD701.  Thank you for your time.

