34 Wing Farm Parkway  |  Bath, Maine 04530  
P 207 -442-7963  |  1 -800-221-2221 (toll -free)  |  F 207 -443-7447  
Midcoast Maine Community Action is an Equal Opportunity Employer  
 
  
 
 
 
 
Testimony of Claire Berkowitz  
to the  Judici ary Committee  
regarding LD 701: An Act to Increase the Notice Period for Rent Increases  
 
 
Good afternoon , Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the 
Committee on Judiciary. I am Claire Berkowitz, President/CEO of the Midcoast Maine 
Community Action  (MMCA) and I am submitting testimony regarding LD 701: An Act to Increase 
the Notice Period for Rent Increases . 
 
MMCA is one of ten community action agencies in the state  providing programs and services to 
in communities along the midcoast,  from Brunswick to Belfast. Our mission is to empower  
people to build better lives for stronger communities. The agency connects the community with 
resources that promote health and quality of li fe, education,  and economic independence. 
MMCA supports regional activities which encourage economic sustainability and social equity 
within the midcoast area.  
 
The housing crisis in Maine is particularly hard on renters. Ren t has  been increasing 14% year 
over year , and with the exp iration of support programs like Emergency Rental Assistance (ERA) , 
40% of Maine  tenants are  left “cost -burdened” (spending greater than one -third of their gross 
income on rent), and 20% of those being “severely cost -burdened" (spending greater than one -
half of their gross income on rent). In addition,  no statewide limit on rent increases  means  
tenants could see their rent as much as double , with only 45 days to make it work.  Families that 
are already financially burdened  need more time to secure affordable housing.  
 
For many Mainers living paycheck to paycheck or on a fixed income, an increase in rent means 
facing a big decision . Renters need time to restructure their budgets , seek additional 
employment , and/ or look for  different, more affordable housing . Doing all these things, on top 
of trying to make ends meet  every day, takes a lot of time and energy.  For some  families , a rent 
increase could result in homelessness.  Extending rent increase notices to 90 days prior would 
go a long way in ensuring that Mainers have time to access the support they need and make 
secure arrangements for themselves and their families . 
 
 
 
 

34 Wing Farm Parkway  |  Bath, Maine 04530  
P 207 -442-7963  |  1 -800-221-2221 (toll -free)  |  F 207 -443-7447  
Midcoast Maine Community Action is an Equal Opportunity Employer  
 
 An increase in rent, for some, means eviction. Because unstable housing makes maintaining 
steady employment incredibly difficult , evictions trap families in poverty . In addition, evictio n is 
linked to ps ychological trauma and ha s been identified as a risk factor for suicide. Those evicted 
have a 63 % higher risk of losing Medicaid  coverage  and a more difficult time keeping 
prescriptions filled and stored properly. Furthermore, the psychological impact of housing 
instability is wide ly documented and researched . Giving Mainers more time to make life -
altering decisions is what’s best for  renting families.  
 
The stress and trauma caused by  housing instability  deeply impacts all renters, including their 
children. A single housing change in childhood can lead to half a year lost in school ; three or 
more forced moves in childhood generally lead to l ess educational attainment and lower 
earnings . Unstable housing makes children more likely to be truant and/or drop out of school 
entirely. Children with unstable housing are also at higher risk for developmental delay, 
depression, anxiety, and behavioral disturbances.   
By increasing the notice time of rent increases from 45 days to 90 days, many of the adverse 
effects  of housing instability can be mitigated , allowing  renters  more time to make safe, 
financially feasible decisions a bout what to do in the event of a rent in crease beyond their 
means.  Typically, landlords only raise their rents once a year or at the end of a lease term, so 
extending notice time does not harm them; the y are able to plan ahead  as they are controlling 
the commodity.  Organizations like MMCA are designed to help Mainers access the help they 
need , but that help takes time , a luxury that those struggling to secure housing cannot afford.  
 
Thank you for your time  and service.  
 
 
Claire Berkowitz
Midcoast Maine Community Action, Bath
LD 701
Attached please find my written testimony for LD701. I will not be able to testify in 
person or via Zoom. Thank you.
