TH' 
E 
LAW QFFIGE 
DANIEL]. BERNIER 
March 3, 2023 
To The Distinguished Members of the Judiciary Committee 
From Daniel J. Bemier, representing the 
Central Maine Apartment Owners Association working in conjunction with the Rental 
Housing Alliance of Southem Maine, the Greater Bangor Area Owners’ and Managers ’ 
Association, the Capital Area Housing Association, and Lewiston Auburn Landlord 
Association. _ 
Re: LD 70] An Act to Increase the Notice Period for Rem‘ Increases 
I am submitting this memo in opposition _ to this legislation. Maine for many decades had 
a thirty (30) day notice of rent increases and then in 2003 that switched to a forty-ﬁve (45) day 
notice of rent increases. Now we are facing legislation that would seek a ninety (90) day notice 
of rent increases. 
Will this make landlords quicker to raise rent‘? For example, let say they are predicting a 
major increase in heating oil prices. Will landlords start to raise rent based on predictions 
rather than waiting to see if rates actually go up? If the landlord waits for them to actually go 
up, they will have to eat three (3) months of losses before they can raise the rent under a ninety 
(90) day notice. This legislation forces landlords to anticipate cost increases rather than wait 
for them to actually happen. 
Are oil companies going to have to give landlords a ninety (90) day notice before they 
increase oil prices that the landlords pay‘? Are building material suppliers going to have to give 
the landlords a ninety (90) day notice before they increase building material costs‘? Landlords 
are constantly buying building materials to repair their buildings. If you have an elderly 
landlord who lives in a two (2) family, counting on the rent from the other unit to pay your 
bills, is the grocery store going to have to give that elderly landlord a ninety (90) day notice 
before increasing the price of groceries? I wonder how many bills in the Maine Legislature are 
dealing with the broader problem of inﬂation rather than targeting speciﬁc groups. What 
happens if inﬂation gets a lot worse? Do we then just saylandlords need to give a 365-day 
notice of rent increase and watch them go out of business ‘? 
We need to be encouraging people to invest in real estate so we increase our housing 
stock here in Maine. How is making it harder to increase rent going to encourage people to 
invest especially in the current inﬂationary enviromnent? We need to be careful that we do not 
Page 1 of2 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Waterville, Maine 04901 * t 207.877.8969 * dan@bemierlawof ﬁce.com
do things that make the housing crisis worse by discouraging investment. Thank you for your 
time and consideration.‘ 
Very truly yours, 
:7 'f/ 
/'\u 
Daniel (I75 ier 
DJB/hb 
, Page 2 of2 
179 Main Street, Suite 304 * Watewille, Maine 04901 * t207.877.8969 * dan@bemier1awof ﬁce.com
