Debora  Keller
Bath
LD 701
Bath Housing owns and manages 175 apartments in Bath, Maine.  We have been a 
landlord and property manager since 1969.  Our strategic priorities revolve around the
people we serve -- helping connect them to stable housing and keeping them housed.  
This gets more difficult by the day with the changes in the rental market.  
We wholeheartedly support LD701.  It is a reasonable and fair step -- albeit a small 
step -- to give tenants a chance to plan in the face of a rent increase.  And we see no 
negative impacts a landlord.  In fact, it allows the landlord to plan ahead as well.  
I understand that Bath Housing may be different from many landlords.  But we do not
submit this testimony lightly.  We have consulted with landlords and landlords 
representatives that we work with and they agree that there is no detrimental impact 
on landlords.  
But there is a positive impact on tenants.  And it involves what we call "soft 
landings".  If a tenant is facing a steep rent increase, they deserve a working chance at
finding alternate housing in a tight climate.  And 30 or 45 days is just not enough 
right now.  This housing market we are in disproportionately effects renters and 
makes their plight even more difficult. Rents in Maine are increasing more than 14% 
year to year.  In Bath, we have seen rents double in six years!  Given this, renters need
tools to succeed. 
LD701 is one such tool.  All people deserve a fair chance and ample notification of 
significant costs increases -- whether that is time to understand how to pay increased 
property taxes, utility bills, or even cable rates.  So what is reasonable?  In this 
housing market, 90 days is reasonable.  Tenants need time to figure out if they can 
change the spending of their limited income to pay the increase, to decide whether 
they need to find an additional job, and/or to decide they cannot afford the rent 
increase and look for another home that is affordable. All of these things take time, 
and all of these things are benefited by having more time.  
Thank you for your consideration.
