CrossWay LLC
  #1 Water Street, Newport, Maine 04953
 (207)368-6221 
emergencies (207)487-3680
crosswayrentals@gmail.com
March 1, 2023
State of Maine- 131ST LEGISLATURE
Joint Standing Committee on Judiciary
Re:  OPPOSITION to LD 701: An Act to Increase the Notice Period for Rent Increases
Dear Valuable Representatives of the People of Maine serving on the Joint Standing Committee 
on Judiciary,
I am writing as a person with a small investment in rental property in opposition of LD 701:  An 
Act to Increase the Notice Period for Rent Increases.  Currently 45-day notice is required.  As a 
landlord, I typically only increase rent during vacancy and after repairs and renovations.  
However, when an unusual individual circumstance such as a tenant who wants to have 50-
gallon tropical fish and double the electric usage typical for that unit, any rent increase would be 
after a discussion about the situation well before the formal “45” day notice.  I want to keep a 
good tenant!  If they want their expensive fish tanks, then we communicate together and 
negotiate what works for both of us.  Additionally, a “45” day notice means the tenant has that 
document IN HAND giving them a minimum of 14 days to choose to accept, negotiate, or give 
proper notice to move.  A rent increase that is based on actual inflation, cost increase often hits 
the owner of the building before the rent increase takes effect and is NEVER retroactive.  Even 
in the circumstances of rent increases that have been more frequent the last couple years because 
a building has sold and the previous owner had a low or no mortgage payment and the new 
owner has a large(r) one, most tenants are aware for well over 45 days that the building is on the 
market.   When they don’t know it is usually because a large, outside of Maine/REIT buys a 
complex.  Do we want to discourage investment in our State?  Perhaps we should be looking at 
proper notice given to tenants BEFORE a complex gets marketed.  
Doesn’t this bill just kick the issue of increased rents down the road by 45 days?  Then what, is 
the tenant still looking after 90 days for a cheaper rent?  Isn’t the real problem rent increases?  If 
so, what can we do to keep rents down and in line with income in this state: control expenses.  
Please oppose LD 701!  
Donna E. Hodges
CrossWay LLC 
