19 Community Drive  Augusta, Maine 04330  (207) 622-7501  Fax: (207) 623-3590
- is a registered mark which identifies a professional in real estate who subscribes to a strict Code of Ethics as a member of the NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF REALTORS  
12781773.1Testimony in Opposition of LD 701 
(“An Act to Increase the Notice Period for Rent Increases”)
J. Andrew Cashman on behalf of the Maine Association of REALTORS®
March 6, 2023
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Judiciary, my name is Andy Cashman.  I am the Founder of Resolve 
Government Relations and we represent the Maine Association of REALTORS®, a 
professional trade association established in 1936 with over 6,500 members statewide. 
REALTORS® grow Maine’s economy and build Maine communities. Our members 
represent buyers and sellers involved in both residential and commercial real estate 
transactions. Our membership also includes industry affiliates, such as lenders, closing 
agents, title agents, appraisers, building inspectors, surveyors, etc. The Maine 
Association is chartered by the National Association of REALTORS® (NAR), the 
largest trade association in the country. 
The Maine Association of REALTORS® opposes LD 701. The bill would increase the 
notice period for rent increases from 45 days to 90 days. 
We understand that a rent increase can put an unexpected strain on household 
finances, but that argument applies to both tenants and property owners.  We also 
appreciate that a rent increase may incentivize a renter to search for new housing. 
That being said, placing additional burden or limits on property owners could result in 
the sale of property or removal from the rental market.   A property owner needs to be 
able to increase revenue (rent) to at least match expenses (property carrying costs 
and administration).  By increasing the notice from 45 to 90 days, it may make the 
market unfavorable for prospective property owners to want to enter the rental market 
or continue renting their property, thus putting more strain on an already limited 
housing supply.  We believe the current 45 day notice period is an adequate amount 
of time and properly balances the needs of the tenant and the property owner. 
Although the current housing market can make finding new housing a challenge, 
markets will change and permanent statutory changes in response to temporary 
conditions are inappropriate.  Moreover, this applies to tenancy-at-will situations 
where neither the property owner or the tenant has committed to the other for the long 
term which provides both with flexibility and both parties understand that the 
agreement can end at any time or terms can change.  We believe this is an 
appropriate balance and should not be expanded upon.
We respectfully urge you to vote Ought to Not to Pass on LD 701. Thank you for your 
time and consideration.
