   Mailing: PO Box 437  
  Street: 1 Weston Court, Suite 103  
  Augusta, ME 04332  
  207.622.7381  
  mecep.org  
 
Board of Directors  
Lee Webb, Ph.D., Chair  Sandra Butler  Stacy Mitchell  
Barbara Burt, Vice -chair  Maulian Dana  Matt Schlobohm  
Pamela Cox, Treasurer  Marcus Hutchins  Lucy Van Hook  
Ben Chin, Secretary  Jessica Maurer   
 
 
Dear chairpersons Carney and Moonen, and all members of the Judiciary committee:  
 
My name is Josie Phillips, and I am representing Maine Center for Economic Policy. I am 
testifying in favor of LD 701, which would update the required notice prior to rent increases from 
45 to 90 days. By providing more notice before a rent hike, this bill  would help provide an easier 
transition to renters struggling to find affordable housing in Maine’s ultra-competitive housing 
market.  
 
I have already testified before this committee that stable housing is fundamental to human 
wellbeing .1 When safe, affor dable housing is scarce, Maine’s families and state economy suffer. 
Unfortunately, due to decades of poor policy choices, housing — particularly housing affordable 
to people earning below the median income — is extremely difficult to find in Maine. We are 
facing a statewide shortage of between 20,000 to 25,000 affordable housing units ,2 and the fair 
market rent for a two-bedroom apartment is considered unaffordable for the median renter in 
every single Maine county .3 For every 100 renters earning 30 percent of the median income — 
approximately $21,000 per year4 — there are only 51 units considered affordable .5 Mainers 
earning 30 percent or less of the median income represent 39,716 households, or one in every 
four renter households.  
 
It’s no surprise, then, that the news is full of stories of people struggling to find housing, often 
settling for cramped, antiquated, or otherwise poor quality housing at a rate they can barely 
afford. In the words of one woman cited in the Portland Press  Herald this month, “It’s all 
garbage .”6 
 
In short, finding housing in Maine is difficult. LD 701 would not solve the affordable housing 
crisis or give anyone a place to live, but it would guarantee a three month search period — a 
period that I personally  needed — for everyone facing an imminent rent increase. It would give 
renters time to figure out how they’ll afford the new rent or where they’ll move to if they can’t 
afford it. Because of the sorely needed time and flexibility this bill extends to rente rs, I urge this 
committee to vote yes on LD 701.  
 
 
1 https://legislature.maine.gov/backend/app/services/getDocument.aspx?doctype=test&documentId=167143  
2 Portland Press Herald, “Scenes from the affordable housing crisis.” 
https://www.pressherald.com/2023/02/1 2/scenes -from -the-affordable -housing -crisis/  
3 Maine Housing, “Housing in Maine: An Overview.” https://legislature.maine.gov/doc/8866  
4 St. Louis Federal Reserve Economic Data, Median Household Income in Maine, 2021. 
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/MEHOINUSMEA646N  
5 National Low Income Housing Coalition, “Housing Needs by State – Maine.” https://nlihc.org/housing -needs -by-
state/maine  
6 Portland Press Herald, “Scenes from the affordable housing crisis.”  
