Testimony of Kara Hay in Support of LD 701
Before the Committee on Judiciary
In support of LD 701: An Act to Increase the Notice Period for Rent Increases
March 9, 2023
Senator Carney, Representative Moonen, and distinguished members of the Committee on 
Judiciary, I am Kara Hay, President and CEO of Penquis, a large community action agency in 
central/northern Maine that serves between 3,500 and 5,000 struggling Mainers every, single 
day. We provide roughly fifty services aimed at ensuring Mainers have access to safe and 
affordable housing, early childhood education, transportation, family supports and programs 
that build financial stability.  I am here today to provide testimony in support of LD 701: An Act 
to Increase the Notice Period for Rent Increases.
At Penquis, our phones are always ringing because many of our community members are 
struggling and need our help.  In the last year, though, the number of people who are calling for 
our help, specifically around housing needs, has been unprecedented.  With an incredible 
shortage of available housing units, with ever increasing rental housing costs, and with the end 
of the emergency rental assistance program, many Mainers don’t know where to turn.  The 
stories that we hear are that people simply can’t afford or find available housing.  Many of 
those who have been in rentals, even though they are working full time jobs, are no longer able 
to afford to stay in them due to incredible rental increases that have occurred over the last few 
years.  We hear that often times these rental increases happen very suddenly, with only 45 days 
notice provided.  As you can imagine, this leaves struggling families and individuals in a very 
difficult place.  Often times, they can’t afford the rental increases that have been put into place 
and they also can’t find any other rental units that they can afford and that are available in such 
a tight timeframe.
With such a significant lack of available housing in Maine, the more time a renter has when 
their rent is going to increase, the better off that renter will be.  Many Mainers live paycheck to 
paycheck, and many others, especially older Mainers, live on fixed incomes.  When these 
Mainers find out that their rent is increasing, they need time to figure out if they can change 
the spending of their limited income to pay the increase, to decide whether they need to find 
an additional job, and/or to decide they cannot afford the rent increase and look for another 
home that is affordable. All of these things take time, and all of these things are benefited by 
having more time.  That is why this bill is so important. It will ensure that renters are given 
enough time to take appropriate action and make decisions regarding their home when their 
rent increases, by giving them 90 days’ notice of the increase in rent.  
This bill is also important because having adequate time to plan and make decisions will help 
some avoid falling into homelessness, which we know is the worst possible outcome for these 
individuals and families.  Right now in our state, it is incredibly hard for unhoused individuals 
and families to find a shelter bed as most of our homeless shelters are full.  Waiting lists for 
beds have also continued to grow, eliminating homeless shelters as an option for many.  
Allowing these vulnerable individuals time to plan and transition is a critical prevention step to 
homelessness.
It must be noted that, in contrast, the impact of increasing the notice requirements on 
landlords is relatively modest.  Unlike their tenants, landlords have an opportunity to plan 
ahead.  Also, many landlords currently raise the rent once a year or at the end of a lease term 
and providing 90 days notice of these planned rent increase and providing increased notice to 
the tenant does not harm the landlord in any way.
To address the housing crisis with which we are currently faced, we need a multi-faceted 
approach that addresses housing availability, housing affordability, eviction prevention, 
discrimination and enforcement of existing laws, and support services this legislative session. 
All five of these areas are critically important and interconnected when it comes to increasing 
housing stability for renters.  This LD is an essential part of that needed, multi-faceted 
approach.  
Thank you for your time and consideration.
