STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE AND FINANCIAL SERvIcEs 
V W 
BUREAU OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND LOTTERY OPERATIONS 
8 STATE HOUSE STATION 
l. 1.0 F .,, AUGUSTA, MAINE 04330-0008 
KIRSTEN LC FIGUEROA 
COMMISSIONER 
GREGORY R. MINEO 
JANET T. MILLS- 
GOVERNOR Testimony of DIRECTOR 
Gregory R. Mineo 
Director, Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages and Lotteiy Operations 
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Veterans and Legal Affairs 
LD 1378 — “An Act Regarding Liquor Service by Catering Services for Special Events at Licensed 
Wineries, Small Wineries, Breweries, Small Breweries, Distilleries and Small Distilleries ” 
April 10, 2023 
Senator Hickman, Representative Supica and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Veterans and Legal Affairs, my name is Gregg Mineo and I am the Director of the Bureau of 
Alcoholic Beverages and Lottery Operations. I am providing the following testimony neither for 
nor against LD 1378. 
This legislation would allow a qualiﬁed caterer to provide liquor at functions or events held on 
the licensed premises of the manufacturer. This provision would widen the availability of alcohol 
products at a winery, brewery or distillery during a catered event on its premises, beyond the 
manufacturer ’s products as currently allowed. For example, a brewery would be allowed to have 
a caterer provide spirits and/or wines for the event, as well as providing the brewery’s 
manufactured products. 
Currently under law a licensed qualiﬁed caterer may only provide alcohol products at an event at 
a location that does not have a liquor license and a manufacturer is limited to only serving products 
that are manufactured by the brewery, winery or distillery. There is no limit set as to how many 
events a manufacturer could hold on its premises. Without stated guardrails limiting the frequency 
of these catered events on the premise of a manufacturer, the result may be a business practice 
" 
that resembles a chapter 43 "or associated restaurant "licensed area, which is already provided within 
1355-A. While not opposed to LD 1378, the Bureau would suggest inserting a limit to the number 
of events at which a qualiﬁed caterer is allowed to provide alcohol not manufactured by the 
premises. 
Thank you for allowing me to testify before the Committee today. I am happy to answer any 
questions, and of course will be available for the work session. 
Page l ofl
