 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 1519  (Opposed)  
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 1519, An Act to  Amend the Laws Gov erning Operating Under the Influence  
 
DA: April 18, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 1519.    
 
 CLAC opposes t he proposal to establish two different alcohol levels for purposes of the 
statutes prohibiting and related to operating under the influence .    Such an approach would lead to 
inconsistent treatment of persons with  the same a lcohol level, depending only on which test each 
perso n is administered.    Establishing a legal limit of . 09 would make Maine an outlier in the 
United States , as other jurisdictions within the U.S. set the legal lim it at .08.    In addition, s uch an 
approach may also jeopardize highway safety and const ruction funding . 
 
 CLAC t akes no  position on the policy of reducing suspensions or modifying conditions 
applicable to reinstated li censes, but notes that the proposal in section 12 could result in disparate 
treatment premised only on where a person  lives.    
 
  
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practition er with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court administration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislatur e’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
consultants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to other statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
