  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. M organ  
 
Treasur er 
Walt er F. McKee 
 
Secretary  
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph M ekonis 
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swans on 
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXEC UTIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642  
Portland, ME 04112 -8642  
(207) 523-9869       
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
April 14, 2023  
 
Senator Anne  Beebe -Center, Chair  
Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public  Safety  
100 State House Station Room  436  
Augusta, ME 04330  
 
RE: LD 1519--  An Act Amending the Laws Governing  Operating Under the 
Influence   
Dear Senator Beebe -Center , Represe ntative  Salisbury, and Mem bers of the Crimin al 
Justice and Pu blic Safety Committee:  
 
MACDL  is neither for nor against  LD 1519  as it oppose s section  1-10 but supports  
sections 11 and 12 . 
 
This bill would  allow the use of inaccura te, “self-contained  breath  alcohol  apparatus 
tests,” commonly known as  portable breath test de vices (PBTs ), to test level s of 
breath alcohol  and be 100% admissible in Maine  court s and at BMV . These devices 
are a far cry from the Into xilyzer machines that have been the mainstay of OUI testing 
for over 40 years. PBTs have been  roundly criticiz ed as having the po tential to show 
breath alco hol levels that are in exc ess of a person ’s true al cohol level.  Among their 
many problems, PBTs also do not have  the key components  in Into xilyzer tests that 
screen for residual  mouth alcohol, a known  contributor  to inaccurate  tests. Moreover, 
PBTs also do not screen for elements that “look” like alc ohol but are in fact the 
byproduct of exposure to paint  thinne rs and ot her su bstances.  Under this bill , “results” 
from these inaccurate devices could  be fully admitted i n evidence  in a criminal case 
where a person is facing years in prison , not to mention years of license suspension.  
 
Since these devices, like Into xilyzer machines, would  require regular maintenance and 
certification , there are no provisions in this bill to address the DHHS’ obligations to 
certify  each PB T as accurate. A fiscal note of significant proportions  will need to be 
applied to this bill so that DHHS has the extra staff to maintain and certif y each PBT 
as accurate  and reliable . 
 
There is also no standard for just what constitutes  a “self-contained  breath alcoh ol 
apparatus  test.”  Devices like  these are sold at convenience  stores for as little as $ 8.99. 
The $8.99 devic e is a “self-contained  breath  alcohol  apparatus  test” and yet we can all 
agree that a test like this has no pla ce when it comes to presumptive  admissibility  in a 
criminal  court or at BMV.  
 
Section  11 of the bill would  allow a person serving  a 3 year license  suspension  for 
second offense  OUI to be allow ed the opportunity to drive after servi ng 2 months  of 
the suspension , so long a s they only drive with an ignition  interlock  device. This is  a 
change from the current law that allows a person to drive in these circumstances after 
having  served 9 months  of the 3 year suspension.  In a ru ral state l ike Maine  with 
limited  public tr ansportation, this provision  in the bill would  be fair an d allow a 
person to go to work, take kids to school, and do all of th ose many important tasks 
that people d o every day and wh ich require  a license .  
 
The same goes with section 12 of the bill, which  would  allow BMV t o take a look a t 
a person’s individual situation  and potential  hardship  when it c omes to ignition  
interlock devices . As it sta nds now these  hardships are impossible  for BMV to 
consider as under current  law there can be no exceptions  for medical or g eographic 
hardships  when it comes to ignition  interlock device s. 
 
Thank you for the opport unity  to address this bill.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Walter F. McKee  
Chair, Legi slative Committee  

