Statement for Court Pertaining to Jeffrey Zabik 
By Amanda Box 
It has been almost three years since the night I found out that Jeff was taking videos of me and my 
children during our private times. At first, It was very hard to believe that Jeff, who was a family 
member that we loved and trusted, was lying to us and invading our personal privacy. I was so horrified 
that night when Samantha said he was filming her, that I took my kids to my neighbor's house where we 
spent the night for protection. I realized I did not know this man and he could be dangerous. I 
requested that he leave my house before morning, which he did. Over the next 24 hours, I learned 
about spyware. I had no idea that clocks, smoke detectors, car fobs and even pens could take videos. It 
was a very upsetting feeling that anything around me could be a recording device. For weeks, 
Samantha, Andrew and I were not comfortable in our home. We did not know if Jeff would come back 
unexpected, if he was dangerous, and ifthere was spyware installed someplace that we had not found. 
We did not eat much or sleep. I had to use sick and vacation time at work, because I was exhausted and 
unable to keep my emotions controlled. Samantha and Andrew went to their Dad's house whenever 
they could. They struggled to focus and keep up with schoolwork. Andrew cried daily and begged to say 
goodbye to Jeff, who he viewed as a stepfather. There was an emptiness that was left in our lives 
without Jeff. We had to change some our routines. For example, we stopped eating at the dining room 
table which was always a family fun time. 
Jeff had lots of belongings at my house that had to be moved. I did not want him to come inside the 
house in fear he would somehow place more spyware. So, I had to move his stuff out to the garage and 
set up times for him to come and retrieve it when Sammy and Andrew were not home. I also had to be 
sure family or friends could be there with me for protection as I guarded my house. It was very difficult 
emotionally to see Jeff or even communicate with him because he appeared to be the person I loved. 
He wrote letters and e mails to me that were full of lies about the accusations I had made regarding him 
spying on my daughter. Eventually, he sent letters full of apology and excuses for his behavior. He tried 
to make me feel bad for his situation. At times I felt empathy about what he must be going through, but 
I realized that I did not truly know him and would then become angry that he had caused so much upset 
for me and my children. I also worried that he could be physically dangerous, especially to my teenage 
daughter and her friends, one of whom he contacted via social media. During that time, I had to make 
some very difficult phone calls to other parents. Close friends of my children often stayed at our house 
on weekends and during school vacation. Sammy's closest friend often stayed with us for weeks ata 
time. I was sure that these children had been filmed due to the clock device in the bathroom, but I was 
not sure what Jeff did with these videos or if he had sexually abused any ofthese kids. 
In hindsight, I absolutely believe that he would sexually exploit young girls if he were able to get them to 
comply. Jeff seemed to adore Samantha from the moment he met her when she was 9 years old. She 
was 10 when he moved into our house. She was 11 or 12 when he put the clock that filmed in the 
bathroom. He slowly became more and more attentive to Samantha and her friends. There was a slow 
progression of his behaviors to gain Samantha's attention. It started with him becoming interested in
her music and watching her tv shows. He moved on to buying her gifts and then eventually he would 
take her and her friends to concerts and special events that I could not afford. He was very focused on 
her personal hygiene and health. He bought her moisturizing lotions and acne creams. He gave her 
educational handouts on dental hygiene and even how to do self breast exams. I spoke to him several 
times about how he was being inappropriate with the health handouts and personal health products. 
He would stop for awhile, but would eventually try to give her some kind of information again, and he 
would explain that he was just concerned about her health. He often complained to me that Samantha 
would not hug him or allow physical contact and he felt like she should treat him more as a close family 
member. He did not give Andrew the same attention or interest, which I often commented on. He 
would say that he just understood Samantha and her friends better and wanted to make her happy. 
Jeff's behaviors with the bathroom were a problem for me, that we fought about often. That alarm 
clock facing the toilet was something I disliked from the start. I moved it out and put a battery 
controlled clock on the wall instead, since he insisted that he needed a clock in the bathroom. But 
eventually he moved the alarm clock back in and claimed he liked it better and needed to be able to 
view it while he was using the toilet, so that he would not be late for work. At some point he started 
leaving pens, keys, even his wallet in a pile in the bathroom. I found SD storage cards all the time on the 
washing machine and sometimes on the floor. He told me that they were work related and that he 
often had them in his pockets. I would often get annoyed and clean up all his random stuff and put it on 
his bureau, but it always made it back to the bathroom. At one point, he took the shade off the 
bathroom window and said it was old and had mildew. Sammy wanted the shade, so I bought a new 
one and put it up. He took it down and put a film on the window so that we could not see out the 
window at night. I later learned that the film allowed a clear view at night when looking in from outside. 
Jeff also kept taking down the shower curtain and leaving just a clear liner. He said it gave him more 
light when he took a shower and he claimed that the other curtain kept getting dirty and needed 
cleaning. I didn't want to look at the tub and liked the shower curtain, so I bought a couple more, so 
that there was always one hanging. At one point, Jeff changed all the light bulbs in the bathroom to 
super bright LED bulbs. He said it was too dark in there. About two months before he was forced to 
move out, he put in a new custom-made toilet seat that had empty space in the front. He said it was 
more comfortable for him and gave him more room when using the bathroom. However, I assume the 
seat was made to allow for more graphic videos recorded by the clock spy device. I think that the only 
reason, Jeff got caught is because he started using larger equipment for recording. Samantha noticed a 
large black box with a light in the bathroom when she took a shower the night when we realized what 
was going on. 
The police process of investigation was not familiar to me at all. I thought that Jeff would be arrested 
right away since he clearly is a threat to children. Since it has been so long and he is free, I fear that he 
has joined another family and I worry that he has successfully groomed a young minor girl. lam 
disappointed that his current charges do not come with more of a punishment. I absolutely believe he is 
a threat to children and should be labeled as a sex offender. 
At this point, Andrew will not talk about Jeff and leaves the room if he comes up in conversation. 
Sammy becomes emotionally upset when he is mentioned. I am angry that he did what he did tomy
family and wili get away with it probably without spending time in jail. I am left with major trust issues 
and have been keeping male friends at a distance for safety.
