I am Beverly Stevens, 
(Spouse of Shawn Box and Step~Mother to Samantha and Andrew Box) 
Samantha's life direction has changed. When l met Sammy as a vibrant 9 year old, she 
was outgoing and unafraid of life. At age 16, she found the camera in the bathroom left 
by Jeff. With in hours to weeks she learned all the other hiding places he had for 
cameras to see her (and her friends) naked. Since then I have seen her not pursue 
interests unless they are very safe. Not even going to known beaches with friends. 
Anything that feels like it is could be somewhat out of Sammy's control feels frightening 
to her. I am so sad and angry about what Jeff has taken from her: her independence 
and agency in her own life. 
Sammy is smart, when I say smart, l mean brilliant. She has final grades above 100, wins 
almost every contest she enters: creative and academic. She would be welcome at any 
college across the world. Prior to age 16, Sammy routinely talked about interest in elite 
colleges in New England and eastern Canada. Now, it has been a huge effort to get her 
to consider colleges beyond UMA. We now have got her thinking UMF would be okay, 
as both of her parents and her bonus Mom attended undergrad school there. 
I worry that this will be her life now. A young woman with the potential to change the 
world around her, huddling in a subconscious, or very conscious, cloak of fear. 
Andrew is also brilliant - getting A+ in high school math class while still in 8th grade. 
However, his impact looks different to me. He needs lots of reassurance that he is loved 
and connected to family. He wants to be in physical contact with his Dad, lots of hugs 
and wanting to hold hands while on a family hike. Shawn tries to give Andrew the 
contact and reassurance, while at the same time trying to help both Andrew and 
Samantha to continue to be connected to the world and not just to him and their core 
family. 
On the surface, both Samantha and Andrew look okay, honor roll and extra curricular 
activities. However, the subtle changes are obvious. As a school principal I have known 
several hundred students, and as a parent of one child about to graduate college and 
one with special needs (autism and anxiety), I have noticed both Samantha and 
Andrew, but especially Samantha, exhibiting socialization issues since the night that she 
found Jeff's hidden camera in their bathroom. The tragedy of the situation is that they 
are so high functioning that their struggles and their challenges remain hidden to those 
not closest to them. 
Sammy and Andrew push through, wanting to make their parents and family proud. 
But, I can see the struggle, as can Amanda and Shawn. They independently talk about 
"being there" for each other. Their world is about to change and that daily support 
between them is about to fracture as Samantha moves on into adulthood. Whatever
1
happens to Jeff today, they will be dealing with this for years to come as will all their 
current and future family around them.
2
