Kent Avery, Chair
Adam Silberman, Secretary-Treasurer
Shira Burns
Elizabeth Coleman
Amanda Doherty, ex-officio
Melissa Martin
Matthew Ruel
March 3, 2023
Re: L.D. 115 – An Act to Protect Minors from Exploitation by Adults for Violation of Privacy
Senator Beebe-Center, Representative Salisbury and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Criminal Justice and Public Safety:
I am writing on behalf of the Sex Offender Management and Risk Assessment Advisory Commission 
in opposition to LD 115.  The bill as written would cause a new and fundamental change in the nature 
of the Maine Sex Offender Registry (“SOR”) and cause unintended consequences which will have a 
considerable collateral effect on those convicted of this newly proposed subsection.
Although the commission takes no position on whether sub-section E should be enacted, we do object 
to a conviction being defined as a Tier I offense pursuant to SORNA 2013, 34-A M.R.S.A. §11271-
§11304.  In addition to our substantive objections below, it should be preliminarily noted that per the 
language of SORNA 2013, any Class C offense is defined as a Tier II offense (25-year registration) and 
cannot be defined as a Tier I offense (10-year registration) without altering the basic definitions and 
structure of SORNA 2013.  It should also be noted that any additions of registerable offenses to 
SORNA 2013 should also be made to the other currently operative registry statute, SORNA 1999, 34-A 
M.R.S.A. §11201-§11256, which is not included in the language of the current bill.
Historically, Maine’s Sex Offender Registry has been limited to those convicted of sex offenses.  LD 
115 would transform Maine’s registry from strictly a sex offender registry to a hybrid registry 
containing non-sexual offenses, running the risk of stigmatizing those convicted of non-sexual offenses 
as sex offenders, potentially for 25 years.  Although other states have such hybrid registries, Maine 
never has, and if it is now being considered should be studied before being enacted into law.  Although 
there have been some recent attempts in the past few years to add non-sexual offenses to the current 
registry, or create separate new registries, all have failed.
STATE OF MAINE
SEX OFFENDER MANAGEMENT AND RISK 
ASSESSMENT ADVISORY COMMISSION
To give an example of a non-sexual violation that would result in sex offender registration, under LD 
115 if a student or parent were to commit a civil trespass to listen in on the opposing high school 
team’s locker room to get team plays and overheard someone who was 15 years of age, they would 
have to register as a sex offender.  For further context, one should keep in mind that unlawful sexual 
touching (touching of breasts or buttocks) is not registerable under any circumstances.
Finally, the commission feels that the exclusion for violators that are less than 5 years older than the 
victim is not justified in this context and should be eliminated.  If it were to remain, an 18-year-old high 
school senior could observe or surveil a 14-year-old high school freshman without violating the statute.
The commission is happy to assist the committee or the sponsor in drafting more workable language for 
this bill and will be available for any work sessions.  If it’s the intent of the sponsor to protect the 
public from both sexual and non-sexual invasions of privacy, the commission recommends that the 
language in sub-section E be broken down into two subsections, one sexual (registerable) and one non-
sexual (not registerable).  The difference being that to commit the sexual offense, the perpetrator must 
have committed the offense “for the purpose of arousing or gratifying sexual desire.”  This language is 
currently used in other sex offense statutes.  See 17-A M.R.S.A. §256 (visual sexual aggression against 
child); 17-A M.R.S.A. §251 (definitions of “sexual act”; “sexual touching”); 17-A M.R.S.A. §506 
(harassment by telephone).
In closing, the commission does not object to the overall purpose of the bill, but rather to those 
provisions which seek to make non-sexual offenses registerable pursuant to SORNA as well as other 
technical and language changes that are necessary to improve the bill.
Kent Avery
Chair, Sex Offender Management and Risk Assessment Advisory Commission
