 
 CLAC MEMO RANDUM/TESTIMONY  
LD 115 (Opposed ) 
 
TO:   Senator Anne Beebe -Center  
          Representative Suzanne Salisbury  
          Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
FR: Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)  
 c/o laura.yustak@maine.gov     
 
RE: LD 115, An Act to Protect Minors from Exploitation by Adults for Violation of Privacy  
 
DA: March 6, 2023  
 
 
 The Criminal Law Advisory Commission (CLAC)* respectfully submits the following  
testimony in opposition to LD 115 .     
 
 In general, CLAC recommends against increasing the classification of crimes absent a 
demonstrated need that criminal sanctions currently applicable  to the conduct do not provide a 
sufficient response to address the seriousness of the crime .  The conduct described in the proposal is 
currently punishable as a Class D crime , punishable by incarceration of up to 364 days, 17-A 
M.R.S. § 1604 ; a fine of up to $2,000, 17-A M.R.S.  § 1704; and probation of up to one year , 17-A 
M.R.S. §§  1802, 1804.   Most  CLAC members opposed the bill b ecause CLAC had no information 
that such sanctions are not sufficient .   
 
 Whether the age of victim warrants increased classification  of a crime is an important policy 
question  for the  Legislature  to consider .   It may be helpful  to compare the sanctions under this 
proposal with sentences  currently applicable to crimes that prohibit  physical acts, contact and 
touching of the victim , for example,  see 17-A M.R.S. § 253 (gross sexual assault); § 254, sexual 
abuse of minors, § 255-A (unlawful sexual contact); and § 260 (unlawful sexual touching); as well 
as other sex crimes against children that do not involve physical contact, § 256 ( visual sexual 
aggression against a child —includes visual surveillance of uncovered body parts of children ); § 258 
(sexual misconduct with a child under 14) , in order to keep the classifications logically related to 
how serious the Legislature considers the conduc t to be.    This calls for the Legislature to weigh the 
relative seriousness of these crimes  in relation to each other , not just in isolation .    
 
 Whether the conduct underlying a conviction is appropriate for SORNA registration is 
obviously also an important policy consideration.   The Sex Offender Management and Risk 
Assessment Advisory Commission , 34-A M.R.S. §§ 1140 1-11405, has relevant expertise  in this 
area.    
 
*CLAC  is an advisory body established by the Legislature.   17 -A M.R.S. §§ 1351 -1357.    It 
consists of 9 members appointed by the Attorney General.  Our current members include current 
defense attorneys, prosecutors, Maine  Bar Counsel , and a retired practitioner with experience as 
defense counsel, prosecutor and in court admini stration.    In addition, three sitting judges and one 
retired practitioner, appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Judicial Court, and, by statute, 
the Co -Chairs of the Legislature’s Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, serve as 
 
 consult ants.  The Supreme Judicial Court’s Criminal Process Manager serves as liaison from the 
Court to CLAC.   CLAC advises the Legislature on matters relating to crimes in the Criminal Code 
and in other Titles, the Bail and Juvenile Codes, and with respect to o ther statutes related to criminal 
justice processes.    
