 
 
 
 
PO Box 7860  
Portland, ME 04112  
(207) 774 -5444  
www.aclumaine.org  
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL KEBEDE, ESQ.  
 
LD 115 – Ought  Not To Pass  
 
An Act to Protect Minors from Exploitation by Adults  
for Violation of Privacy  
 
Joint Standing Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety  
 
March 6 , 202 3 
Senator Beebe -Center, Representative Salisbury and distinguished members of the 
Joint Standing Committee on  Criminal Justice and Public Safety, greetings. My 
name is Michael Kebede , and I am Policy Counsel  for the American Civil Liberties 
Union of Maine, a statewid e organization committed to advancing and preserving 
civil liberties guaranteed by the Maine and U.S. Constitutions. On behalf of our 
members, I urge you to oppose LD 115, legislation that creates a new, redundant 
criminal offense.  
 
This bill creates a ne w criminal  offense that would apply when  one person violates 
another’s privacy and the person subjected to the violation is under sixteen years 
old, with certain exceptions if the violator is less than five years older than other  
person. That new offense i s also, per this bill, subject to the Sex Offender 
Registration and Notification Act.  
 
This bill increases criminal penalties for behavior that is already criminalized. The 
behavior described in this bill is already criminalized in the rest of Maine’s violation 
of privacy statute (17 -A M.R.S. § 511) . Similar behavior, when enacted against a 
child  under the age of 12 , is also already subject to more severe penalties in Maine’s 
“visual sexual aggression against [a] child” statute. 17 -A M.R.S. § 256( 1)(C), (D) . 
 
All children deserve to be safe and free from sexual victimization. Harsher 
punishment for already criminalized behavior does not deter abhorrent behavior 
and instead swells the ranks of failed systems. This is especially  true when the 
punishment i ncludes  placement on the sex offender registry. There is no evidence 
that sex offender registries  work  to protect children  (or adults ) from sexual 
victimization . Research shows that most sex crimes against children are committed  
by family, acquaintances, or others known to the child.1 Compelled registration does 
not actually prevent victimization of children, and makes it harder for people to 
 
1 Howard N. Snyder, Sexual Assault of Young Children as Reported to Law Enforcement: Victim, 
Incident, and Offender Characteristics  (Bureau of Justice Statistics, NCJ 182990, 2000).  
  
 
2 
 reintegrate into the community safely . As with other criminal punishment,  it is also 
likely t o disproportionately harm  people of color. A 2018 study found that Black 
people are more likely to be compelled to register , even though there is no evidence 
showing they are more likely to commit the predicate offenses.2 This bill would, 
therefore, create new harm s and impose a penalty that does not achiev e its end 
goal. 
 
We urge you to vote ought not to pass . 
 
2 Alissa R. Ackerman & Meghan Sacks, Disproportionate Minority Presence on U.S. Sex Offender 
Registries, Justice Policy Journal, https://narsol.org/wp -content/uploads/2020/06/Disproportionate -
Minority -Presence -on-U.S.-Sex-Offender -Registries.pdf (2018).  
