Statement for Court Pertaining to Jeffrey Zabik 
By Shawn Box 
PROCESS STATEMENT: 
Dear Law Enforcement and Legal System, 
I'm not sure why we are here today discussioning "|nvasion of Privacy" . Peeping Tom laws are 
intended to warn away individuals from spying on strangers, neighbors, people at the beach. 
This is an individual LIVING with the family he was victimizing. I find it hard to believe that if Jeff 
were a teacher performing these same spy activities in an elementary school that we would be 
sitting here watching the court discussing a misdemeanor. lf that is true, then I am shocked at 
the gap in legal determination in an age where electronic surveillance makes it easy for sexual 
deviants to start down the path that could, and most likely would have, lead to physical abuse. 
l find it appalling that he would even dare to plead "Not Guilty" with the preponderance of 
evidence directly connecting him to his actions. lam saddened by the fact that he will not make 
a sex offender registry and that future families will be put at risk. This is being discussed 
seemingly without considering that he may have never stopped these activities as he owns 
rental properties and may have them wired up to capture unsuspecting underage nudes. 
It is my hope that these charges are a result of a gap in established law, as it does not take 
contact or distribution to make an individual a sexual predator. The filming of minors while ina 
position of authority as parent (married or otherwise) is clearly for no other reason than sexual 
self gratification and should be on par with any other sexually predatory behavior. 
I hope that the court will recognize the intent of Jeff in stalking and attempting to establish an 
inappropriate relationship with my daughter, not to mention all of her female friends that were 
undoubtedly filmed as well, is well beyond invasion of privacy. I hope the court will at the very 
least establish that this behavior within a home by someone who is supposed to be withina 
person's most trusted circle is unallowable. l would hope that the court not only find Jeff Guilty 
of the charges presented, but sentences him to the full extent of the law with no reduced 
sentencing, no bypass of available incarceration within the law, and with all financial penalties 
enforced. 
I have no doubt that Jeff has no remorse. 
lam sure that anything short of full sentencing will be validation to Jeff that the years of sexual 
perversity he achieved at the expense of others would be seen as fair payment for his actions.
I am confident that anything short of fuli enforcement of the maximum sentences will be 
permission for Jeff to repeat this behavior in the future. 
Shawn Box 
1339 Westbrook St. 
Portland, ME, 04102 
207-322-0140
Statement for Court Pertaining to Jeffrey Zabik 
By Shawn Box 
PERSONAL STATEMENT:' 
Hi, My name is Shawn Box and l am the Father of Samantha and Andrew Box. 
The most difficult thing l have ever done in my life is get Divorced. It puts you in a position 
where you have to rely on the judgment of others, with no ability to negotiate. It puts you ina 
position where you are not able to protect your family and the ones you love every day. It puts 
you in a position to receive a call like the one l received. 
l received a call that informed me that the man who had lived with my children was spying on 
them in the shower.| received a call that stopped my world and required me to go to Windsor, 
enter a home l had not set foot in for years, and to scour that house for spy devices used to film 
my children. Children that were recorded as young as 11 and 15 and certainly younger. 
When I arrived, Amanda and our neighbor Jane were present. They presented me with the 
device that Amanda had confiscated and it was immediately apparent that it was a fake key fob 
with a camera and a memory slot. Based on the size it was a MicroSD and l asked Amanda and 
Jane to search the house and see if they could find any more. l did not think they would, as Jeff 
had an entire night to scour the house and remove all evidence. But, they did. l put the sd card 
into my phone and was immediately able to identify pictures of my kids. l determined the 
movie ﬁle was a MOV. From there, l asked Amanda ifJeff had any PCs still in the house. He did. 
She had the password, given to her freely by Jeff, and with a quick explorer search for MOV files, 
hundreds of additional recordings going back years were evident.. 
The next action was to start looking for proof that Jeff has procured any of the devices that 
might be, or were, in the house. We started our search in the basement where we found boxes 
addressed to Jeff with a SpyCamera Picture Frame, amongst other things. We found additional 
spy devices and memory sticks and set them all aside for law enforcement. It was during this 
search that Jane mentioned that she remembered that Jeff had also replaced fire detectors in 
the house. I started with Andrew's room and found the same fire detector that was there when 
I lived there. l then went to Samantha's room where I found a "Fire Detector “ detector over her 
bed. In opening the case, it was a fake fire detector that would take a camera. The Camera was 
gone. Over the port where the camera would be was a black putty. This putty was also present 
in stick/packaging form in Jeffs computer cubicle space in the basement. It was very clear that
his actions were planned, implemented, and maintained over a significant span oftime and 
focused on my daughter. 
ln hindsight, there were various ‘warning’ signs that Jeff had an inappropriate interest in my 
daughter, especially as she entered her teens. He would hover over her at school events where 
we were both present, he would advocate on her behalf about things that neither Amanda orl 
had requested jis opinion on, and he would go out of his way to transport Samantha and her 
friends to events that l also attended; including Concerts in Portland. Unfortunately in the 
moment, it seems inconceivable that the person living with your children would be a sexual 
predator and so you attribute these actions to other reasons. 
What this has meant for me personally, is watching my children go through stages of shock, 
grief, coping, anger, and attempts to return to normalcy. 
Andrew became physically attached to me. So much so that, having experience working with 
sexually abused children, that l was afraid that he had been groomed and habitualized to sexual 
closeness. And that in Jeffs absence it was traferred to me. 
l hoped this attention seeking was not in response to abuse, but his fear that he would lose his 
real father. He lost what he considered his step-father and if you can lose one parent 
unexpectedly then there is fear you will lose another. It took him over a year to reach a place 
that when he shows up at my house thet he is not immediately seeking reassurance that l am 
still in his life. I've seen his social maturity slow as he disconnected himself from people he felt 
might be at risk of leaving his life. I've seen my child struggle in a way no child should have to. 
Samantha and I have always been close. First born daughter and father. We rock climbed 
together, did handstands at the park, and could always find a way to have fun on weekends and 
vacations. 
Since this event, Samantha has been withdrawn. She used to have friends down to Portland a 
few times a year, and she no longer does. She used to be in the front of the line at shows or 
events and wanted to be in the thick of things. Now she holds back, is cautious of the people 
around her. She would not hug me for over a year. Then it was leaning in shoulder hugs. Only 
in the last couple months, after all the years in between, did I get a real hug from my daughter. 
My daughter is 18 now, and I have had years of closeness stolen from me by the person on trial 
today. 
My family, our blended families, our neighbors, our friends, our children's friends, our 
children's friends parents, will be affected by this for the rest of their lives. Decades and 
Decades of no longer being able to trust even those closest to you. One person has negatively 
affected the lives of over a dozen people who will never forget the pain inflicted upon them and
will have to live with that pain and loss. We also have the weight of future victims on our 
conscience. If we walk out today, and after the undoubted series of appeals, Jeff does not serve 
a day in jail, we will have to live with the fact that no one cares about our children other than 
ourselves and that somewhere at sometime, another child will be subjected to the same 
behavior. 
l have no doubt that Jeff has no remorse. 
I am sure that anything short of full sentencing will be validation to Jeff that the years of sexual 
perversity he achieved at the expense of others would be seen as fair payment for his actions. 
I am confident that anything short of full enforcement of the maximum sentences will be 
permission for Jeff to repeat these behaviors in the future. 
I would hope that the court not only find Jeff Guilty of the charges presented, but sentences 
him to the full extent of the law with no reduced sentencing, no bypass of available 
incarceration within the law, and with all financial penalties enforced.
