  
2022-2023 
OFFICERS  
 
President  
Amber L. Tucker  
 
President -Elect  
Jeremy Pratt  
 
Vice Presiden t 
Matthew D. M organ  
 
Treasure r 
Walt er F. McKee  
 
Secretary 
Sarah  E. Branch  
 
2022-2023 
DIRECTORS  
 
Dyla n R. Boyd  
Andrew Edwards  
Devens Hamlen  
Scott F. Hess 
James Mason  
Harris Mattson  
Joseph M ekonis  
Stacey  D. Neumann  
Neil Prendergast  
Luke  S. Rioux  
Adam P. Sherman 
Adam Swans on 
Robert T. Van Horn  
 
EXECUTIVE 
DIRECTOR  
 
Tina Heather  Nadeau  
  
MAINE ASSOCIATION OF CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS  
P.O. Box 17642 
Portland, ME 04112 -8642 
(207) 523-9869      
mainemacdl@gmail.com  
 
 February 16, 2023  
 
 
Senator Anne  Beebe- Center, Chair  
Representative S uzanne Salisbury 
Committee on Criminal Justice & Public  Safety  
100 State House Station Room  436 
Augusta, ME 04330 
 
RE: LD 115 --  An  Act to Protect Minors from Exploitation by Adults for 
 Violation of Privacy  
 
Dear Senator Beebe- Center , Representative  Salisbury, and Mem bers of the Crimin al 
Justice  and Public  Safety Committee:  
 
MACDL opposes  LD 115. 
 
There is no need for a new felony crime of violation of privacy.  As with many bills 
that MACDL will testify on this sess ion, the inc rease of a crime from  a misdeme anor 
to a felony is a very serious  matter.  Only in situations where a judge has indicated 
that 364 days in jail is not enough for a particular crime should this Committee even 
consider elevating a crime from  a misdem eanor to a felony.  While violation of 
privacy  is a ser ious crime , and that much more so when it involves victims who are 14 
or 15 y ears of age, the law already fully and completely addresses this issue by 
making the particular co nduct a crime for which there are already serious 
punishments.  Making someone a felon, and one that would actuall y have to register 
on the Sex Offender Registry no less, is unnecessary. 
 
Additionally , sex offender registration  for someone who engages in violation  of 
privacy is improper.  There is nothing to suggest that violat ion of this particular crime 
means that s omeone is so dangerous that they need to be put on a registry.  Indee d, the 
research about the recidivism of sex  offenders, the very re search that the registry 
system is founded upon, has long since been reconsidered, and the prev ailing wisd om 
now is that the rate of reci divism of 95% of sex offenders is  no greater than for any 
other crime. Put another way,  only 5% of se x offe nders -sexually fixated pedophiles  -
have a high risk of re -offense , whereas all of the others have no greater likelihood of 
re-offen se as car  burglar s or trespasser s.  
 
Sex offender registration for the new Paragraph E here also w ould result in persons 
being convicted  of this crime  and yet there being no sex aspect to it whatsoever.  
Simply looking at all of the other  provisions of the  crime of violation of privacy will  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
show that they do not necessarily involve any sexual behavior at all  and can include 
simple recording of otherwise nonsexual , nonintimate behavior.  Absent there being a 
particular sexual component, the convicti on for this crime should never require one to 
register as a sex offender. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to address this issue. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Walter F. McKee  
Chair, Legi slative Committee  

