Shannon Sears
Drew Plantation
LD 49
Joint Standing Committee on State and Local Government
Testimony in support of LD 49 -An act authorizing the Deorganization of Drew Plantation
Presented by Shannon Sears, Town Administrator for Drew Plantation
Senator Nagle, Representative Stover and distinguished members of the State and Local 
Government Committee.  My name is Shannon Sears. I am the current Town Administrator 
for Drew Plantation. I am here today to testify in support of LD 49, a bill that authorizes the 
deorganization of Drew Plantation. My husband and I moved to Drew about two years ago, 
with the hope to live in a small town where we could establish a farm and live a simpler life. 
My family is originally from Maine so the state holds a special place in my heart. We were told
by the realtor that Drew was already unorganized and part of the UT. Within the first few 
months of living here we sadly learned that wasn't the case. When we experienced our first 
town meeting it was brought to light just what kind of desperate  shape this little town was in. 
Not only was there an aging administration running the town, they were having a difficult time 
keeping up with basic municipal requirements and any municipal changes that would occur. 
More of the full time residents started to notice this as well and voiced their concerns. In 
January of 2022 a new administration was elected. The new administration has definitely had 
a learning experience, and while it may be difficult at times we all have the same goal in mind 
and that is the deorganization of Drew. Simply Drew is just too small to sustain itself as a 
town. We do not have enough residents who want to do the work needed to run the town. The
swing in our small town mill rate makes it hard for anyone who lives on a fixed income. And 
with the way the economy is these days we are all living on a fixed income, and most of the 
residents have to drive over an hour or more for work. You don’t see Drew on the up and 
coming towns list, and we don't have any kind of solid revenue. We can barely run on the 
revenue we do bring in from the collection of property taxes. More and More of Drew’s 
residents are leaving to be closer to employment, or to move to an area that is more 
affordable, or age & health issues are taking them. We can’t grow and sustain Drew as a 
town with all these factors. So we respectfully ask that all those factors be taken into 
consideration and allow this deorganization to happen. It truly is what’s best for Drew & its 
residents. Thank you for your time and understanding.
Kindly
Shannon Sears
Town Administrator

