 
 
Testimony of the Maine Municipal Association  (MMA)  
 
In Support of  
LD 1060, An Act to Support Municipal Public Safety by Increasing Municipal Revenue Sharing 
to 7 Percent   
 
March 30, 2023  
 
 
Senator Grohoski, Representative Perry, and members of the Taxation Committee.  My 
name is Kate Dufour, and I am offering testimony in support of LD 1060 on behalf of the 70 
municipal leaders who were elected by their peers to serve on the Association’s Le gislative 
Policy Committee and directed to establish MMA’s position on bills of municipal interest.   
While municipal officials support an increase in the amount of state sales and income tax 
revenue distributed via the state/municipal revenue sharing prog ram, they raise two significant 
concerns with LD 1060.  
The first is the  bill’s intent to target the additional revenue toward the provision and 
funding of a particular program or service, rather than leaving it to the local legislative body 
(e.g., council  or town meeting) to decide how best to invest those revenues.  The attachment of 
strings to revenue that is used to reduce the burdens placed on property taxpayers, as well as to 
help fund the services the community desires , is an erosion of local level d ecision -making 
authority .   To put a finer point on the issue, municipal officials are concerned that the bill will 
establish a troubling precedence, fueling additional amendments to the existing law providing 
members of the Legislature greater  discretion to decide what is best of a community over the 
objections of the individuals who live in municipality and pay  the property  taxes necessary to 
fund services.  
Second, municipal leaders are concerned that the two percent increase may have very 
limited impact s in many communities, and therefore not yield the additional revenues necessary 
to support  the delivery  of public safety services.  For example, the increase would generate $4 
million in Bangor and $3,500 in Seboeis Plantation.  Municipalities that do not receive large 
amounts of revenue sharing would have very little options to fund public safety programs,  
raising additional questions  with respect to how those funds would be invested.   
For communities that would benefit from the investment proposed in LD 1060, the 
concern is different, but equally troubling.  As illustrated during the years  spanning 2006  to 
2021 , when $800 million in revenue sharing was diverted to state coffers, nothing is s acred .  
Even this historic partnership program is subjected to the whims and the needs of each newly 
elected Legislature. The potential future loss of the 2% share coul d result in an increase in the 
mil rate to keep created  or expanded  public safety programs operational or the reduction in or the 
elimination of programs and services that residents have grown accustomed to receiving.   

It is for these reason s that municip al officials are cautiously appreciative of the increase 
proposed in LD 1060 and look forward to discussing opportunities for sharing broad based state 
taxes with municipal government partners.  
Thank you for considering the municipal perspective on this i ssue.  If you have any 
questions about the Association’s position on this bill, please do not hesitate to contact me at 
kdufour@memun.org  or 1-800-452-8786.  
 
