v 
' 
STATE or MAINE 
DEPARTMENT or AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION & FORESTRY 
OFFICE or THE COMMISSIONER I 
22 STATE HoUsE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333 
JANET T. MILLS AMANDA E. BEAL 
GOVERNOR COMMISSIONER 
TESTIMONY BEFORE THE JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, 
CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY‘ 
A A _ g IN _SU _P_PORT OE LD 315H 
LD 315, An Act to Provide Funding for Drought Relief and Other Programs Beneﬁting Maine 
Farmers 
P 
February 13, 2023~ 
Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry, my name is Craig Lapine, and I am the Director of the Bureau 
of Agriculture, Food and Rural Resources. I am speaking on behalf of the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry (DACF) in support of LD 315, An Act to Provide Funding for Drought 
Relief and Other Programs Beneﬁting Maine Farmers. 
This bill was originally a concept draft. Since the public hearing for LD 3 l 5 was scheduled, the 
sponsor shared draft language with interested parties. The amendment implements the 
recommendations of the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry ’s January 2023 report, 
Findings and Recommendations for Streamlining Permitting New Sources of Water for Irrigation in 
Maine. These recommendations came out after the Governor ’s budget was proposed, which already 
includes $2M with $300,000 ongoing to help establish the fund to help farmers adversely affected by 
drought conditions. I I Ow 
The amendment establishes and provides ongoing funding for three full-time, permanent positions: one 
within the Land Use Planning Commission; one within the Department of Agriculture, Conservation 
and Forestry/ ’s Bureau of Agriculture, Food and Rural Resources ’ Division of Agricultural Resource 
Development; and one within the Department of Environmental Proteetion ’s Water Withdrawal 
Program. 
These positions will serve as important vehicles across two agencies to assist agricultural producers in 
making sustainable, environmentally sound irrigation improvements to their farms. It is anticipated that 
the combination of increased drought conditions in the growing season and funding to support Maine 
farmers in addressing drought relief will result in the need for more irrigation Water source 
development. Likewise, the agencies will receive increased demand for technical assistance and 
permitting requests. DACF and DEP staff must be available and ready to meet these needs without 
18 Erms LANE cansewaﬂﬂn FAX: (207) 287-2400 
AUGUSTA, MAINE A 
1 
8, §:m-est,-Y WWW.MAlNE.GOV/DACF _» DRPARTMQNT OF 
HARLOW BUILDING Agﬂtuiture PHONE: (207)287-3200
delay, directing farmers to available funding, assisting in necessary technical evaluations, and guiding 
the completion of permit application forms. Overall, these staff resources complement the goal ofthe 
Farmers Drought Relief Fund by ensuring critical technical and regulatory support and guidance. 
Multi-agency farm visits for technical assistance are very effective in evaluating options for and 
streamlining the permitting of new water sources. With current staffing, the State cannot form similar 
multi-agency response teams. New employees dedicated to this critical effort will ensure responsive, 
effective assistance to producers who seek to implement sustainable water resource management 
projects on their farms. Building state staff resources now is a pragmatic and proactive effort to assist 
our farmers in planning for and meeting the challenges of climate change. Without them, DEP and 
DACF will lack the capacity to effectively meet the needs of our farming community now and in the 
future_ . . .. .. . . .. .. .. .. 
I’d also like to take this opportunity to advise the Committee on what the Department is doing to set up 
the Farmer Drought Relief Fund program. We are using the $75,000 in funding from LD 1998 to work 
with Dr. Rachel Schattman at the University of Maine to conduct a three-phase assessment of Maine 
agricultural constituents ’ drought and irrigati.on support needs. Dr. Schattman and her team are 
reviewing the Department ’s irrigation fund program from the early 2000s to understand its design, 
administration, and impact. They will then assess current water resource development needs and costs 
by analyzing the Maine Agriculture Drought Survey. They will also conduct numerous focus groups 
with agricultural stakeholders on stakeholder priorities for the fund. Dr. Schattman will present the 
team’s ﬁndings and recommendations this spring. DACF will leverage these to build out the Drought 
Relief program through rulernaking this fall.e 
DACF anticipates that the program will financially address farmers’ technical assistance needs to 
ensure sustainable water resource development (such as assistance in irrigation water management 
planning) and infrastructure projects. . . . _ . , . , 
We appreciate Senator lngwersen moving these important recommendations forward, and [’d be happy 
to answer questions. We will also have staff available at the work session.
