Testimony of Donald E. Flannery, Executive Director, Maine Potato Board to the 
Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Committee 
February 13, 2023 
LD 315 — An Act to Provide Funding for Drought Relief and Other Programs 
Beneﬁting Maine Farmers 
Senator Ingwersen Representative Pluecker and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry; I am Donald Flannery, 
Executive Director of the Maine Potato Board (l\/IPB) and here today to speak in favor 
of LD 315: An Act to Provide Funding for Drought Relief and Other Programs 
Beneﬁting Maine Farmers I would also like to thank Senator Ingwersen for submitting 
LD 315 in support of Maine farmers. 
For over twenty years, the MPB has been involved in working to improve 
access to water for irrigation at the same time providing our growers with the resources 
to make sound and sustainable investments as it relates to irrigation infrastructure. We 
have worked closely with the Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation and 
Forestry (MDACF) Water Management Board, the Maine Department of 
Enviromnental Protection (DEP) and the USDA Natural Resource Conservation 
Service to ensure all involved understand agricultures needs regarding irrigation. The 
MPB has committed ﬁnancial resources to this effort in providing technical assistance 
to growers; we have an agricultural engineer on staff that develops water management 
plans, pond designs and layouts for irrigation systems. With our limited resources we 
can only provide these services to potato growers in Maine. The need for these same 
services exists across all sectors of agriculture in Maine therefore; LD 315 will help to 
provide technical assistance to Maine farmers that don’t currently have access to the 
resources necessary to plan and implement irrigation systems to support their farming 
operations. 
In January of 2023, the MDACF presented to the Committee a report: Finding 
and Recommendations for Streamline Permitting New Source of Water for Irrigation in 
Maine Pursuant to LD 1998. This report outlined the needs for technical and ﬁnancial 
assistance to support the sound and sustainable development of irrigation for Maine 
farmers. LD 315 addresses two of the recommendations of this report; funding for
necessary changes to LUPC permit application and positions within LUPC, MDACF 
and DEP to support Maine farmers move forward to develop sustainable water sources 
and invest in irrigation to mitigate risk with a changing climate and help secure our 
food supply. 
The positions created in LD 315 will provide technical assistance in all three 
departments; this assistance will be to help farms improve and develop sustainable 
water sources and implement sound irrigation practices. We believe this is a move in 
the right direction; state agencies become proactive on this important issue not reactive 
by having to undertake enforcement actions to solve issues that arise because the 
resources were not available to the farmer early on in the development of irrigation. 
We encourage you to support LD 315 and give the MDACF, MDEP and LUPC 
the resources to help Maine farms. We look forward to our continued Work on water 
source development and development of irrigation in Maine, and Working with all these 
agencies to support Maine farmers. I am happy to take any questions and will be 
available for any work sessions.'
