Page 1 of 3Amendment to LD 315 - 
An Act To Provide Funding for Drought Relief and Other Programs Benefitting Maine 
Farmers
Presented by Senator Ingwersen
Public Hearing scheduled February 13, 2023
Amend the bill by striking everything after the enacting clause and inserting the following:
Sec. 1. Appropriations and allocations. The following appropriations and allocations are 
made.
AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY, DEPARTMENT OF 
Land Use Planning Commission 
Initiative:  Provides a one-time appropriation of $35,000 in SFY 2024 to hire a consultant to review 
and overhaul the current applications to improve water withdrawal permitting.
Notes:  LUPC should conduct a rigorous review of its Shoreland Alteration Application Form and 
Non-residential Development Forms and create a new, separate application specifically for 
agricultural surface and groundwater extraction to reduce the time and intensity of applying for 
this regulatory review. LUPC staffing constraints are such that outside assistance is necessary to 
make this application overhaul a reality.
Sec. 2. Appropriations and allocations. The following appropriations and allocations are 
made.
AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY, DEPARTMENT OF 
Land Use Planning Commission Northern Regional Office
Initiative:  Provides an ongoing appropriation for a full-time, permanent ES II position in 
LUPC's Northern Regional Office to provide more technical assistance to farmers needing to 
complete permit applications for new water sources.
• ES II (LUPC) – Step 3 = $83,859 in first year; Step 4 = 83,859 in second year
*According to DACF, the department will need to conduct rulemaking to create the 
grant/fund so the fund would be launched in Q4 at the earliest (still need to confirm). 
Notes:
If the number of applications increase (such as in conjunction with irrigation 
infrastructure funding), the existing staff, already carrying a high workload burden, could not 
provide the necessary assistance to ensure a smooth, efficient process. Also, more pre-
application assistance is needed to assist farmers with evaluating permittable options in the 
field, customizing application submissions to match each project, and guiding farmers to 
available technical resources and assistance. 
Page 2 of 3Sec. 3. Appropriations and allocations. The following appropriations and allocations are 
made.
AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY, DEPARTMENT OF 
Bureau of Agriculture, Food and Rural Resources’ Division of Agricultural 
Resource Development
Initiative:  Provides an ongoing appropriation for a full-time, permanent Public Service 
Coordinator I position in DACF’s Bureau of Agriculture, Food and Rural Resources' Division of 
Agricultural Resource Development. This position would be responsible for supporting the 
Farmer Drought Assistance Fund, assisting the Agricultural Water Management Board, and 
providing technical and policy expertise regarding water management and irrigation to producers 
and across DACF staff and programs.
• Public Service Coordinator I – Step 3 = $106,833 in first year; Step 4 = 112,618 in 
second year
*According to DACF, the department will need to conduct rulemaking to create the 
grant/fund so the fund would be launched in Q4 at the earliest (still need to confirm). 
Notes:
Given the ramifications of climate change to Maine agriculture, it is critical that DACF 
has the technical expertise to advise on policy and programs that meet the needs of producers as 
they adapt to changing climate dynamics. DACF does not currently have the professional staff 
available to work directly with producers regarding sustainable water resource management. 
Sec. 4. Appropriations and allocations. The following appropriations and allocations are 
made.
ENVIRONMENATAL PROTECTION, DEPARTMENT OF 
Water Withdrawal Program
Initiative:  Provides ongoing an appropriation for a full-time ES III Water Withdrawal 
Program Manager at DEP. There is a new and growing workload related to water withdrawal 
issues for agricultural irrigation due to drought and changes in agricultural practices that have 
significantly increased the use of irrigation. There have been many significant documented 
impacts to waters of the state due to these issues. This is largely, but not exclusively, in 
Aroostook County.
• ES III (DEP) – Step 3 = $93,676 in first year; Step 4 = 94,890 in second year
*According to DACF, the department will need to conduct rulemaking to create the 
grant/fund so the fund would be launched in Q4 at the earliest (still need to confirm). 
Notes:  Climate change is expected to exacerbate these issues. It has become apparent in 
the last three years that there is insufficient staffing at DEP to properly manage these 
requirements. A new ES III in DEP’s Northern Maine Regional Office (NMRO) would manage 
all aspects of water withdrawal, including requests for alternative flow evaluations, education 
Page 3 of 3and outreach, technical assistance, compliance, and enforcement. The position would also 
research and help pursue federal and state grants to aid the agricultural community in drought 
resilience projects (some of which may also provide climate benefits consistent with the Maine 
Climate Action Plan's strategy of promoting natural climate solutions and increasing carbon 
sequestration on working lands). The position would coordinate with DACF on its new Maine 
Healthy Soils program. The position would also coordinate with the NMRO Manager, who is the 
department representative on the Agricultural Water Management Board and Bureau of Water 
Quality technical staff as needed. It is expected that these job duties would be 60-80% of the 
position's workload. Additional time would be used for industrial stormwater compliance and 
technical assistance inspections, and to support Non-Point Source grant projects to reduce 
discharges to waters of the state, with a focus on agricultural projects to minimize soil loss.
SUMMARY
This amendment strikes and replaces the bill, which is a concept draft.  The amendment 
implements the recommendations of the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry 
January 2023 report, Findings and Recommendations for Streamlining Permitting New Sources of 
Water for Irrigation in Maine.
The amendment provides a one-time appropriation of $35,000 in SFY 2024 in order for the 
Land Use Planning Commission to hire a consultant to review and overhaul the current 
applications to improve water withdrawal permitting.
The amendment establishes and provides ongoing funding for 3 full-time, permanent positions: 
one within the Land Use Planning Commission; one within the Department of Agriculture, 
Conservation and Forestry’s Bureau of Agriculture, Food and Rural Resources’ Division of 
Agricultural Resource Development; and one within the Department of Environmental 
Protection’s Water Withdrawal Program.
