Chair, Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry Committee * Health and Human Services Committee  
State House (207) 287 -1515 * Fax (207) 287 -1585 * Toll Free 1 -800-423-6900 * TTY 711  
Henry.Ingwer sen@legislature.maine.gov  * legislature.maine.gov/senate   
 
Henry L. Ingwersen  
Senator, District 32  THE MAINE SENATE  
131st Legislature  3 State House Station 
Augusta, Maine 04333
 
Representative Pluecker and Esteemed Members of the Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry 
committee. I’m Senator Henry Ingwersen, and I represent District 32, which includes the York 
County municipalities of Arundel, Biddeford, Dayton, Hollis, and Lyman.  I’m before you today to 
introduce and speak in favor of my bill LD 315, “An Act to Provide Funding for Drought Relief and 
Other Programs Benefiting Maine Farmers”  
Maine has abundant water resources, but not necessarily enough in the right place or at the  right 
time. In addition, Maine’s changing climate is making water availability more unpredictable. Of 
Maine’s four most recent droughts, three of them have occurred in 2020, 2021, and 2022. Many 
agricultural commodities experienced significant drought in  2020, with dry conditions beginning in 
mid-May, but rapidly worsening in June. The 2020 rainfall deficit, which was extreme in northern 
Maine, resulted in occasional record low stream flows, with some farmers futilely attempting to save 
their crops throug h excessive water withdrawals from streams and rivers. The Maine Department of 
Environmental Protection (DEP) received over 100 citizen complaints related to farm water 
withdrawal, which included fish kills, low stream flows, destruction of beaver dams, fi lling of 
wetlands, and other issues. In March 2021, river flows were already below normal, and some areas of 
the state received inadequate rainfall until July.  
It has been well documented that these weather extremes will continue. The University of Maine’s  
2020 Maine Drought and Agriculture Report indicates that climate change is leading to changes in 
temperature and precipitation, and that climate scientists anticipate that these changes will intensify 
in coming decades. Suffice to say, Maine farmers face a very uncertain future when it comes to 
sufficient water for crops.  
Because of this, the 130th Legislature passed LD 1998, “An Act to Establish a Fund for Farmers 
Adversely Affected by Drought Conditions.” The bill established two major goals. One was to  
establish a Drought Relief Grant Program, which the Mills Administration has requested $2 million 
for in the upcoming biennial budget, and $300,000 per year thereafter. The second part of LD 1998 
was for the DACF, the DEP, and the LUPC to submit a report with findings and recommendations 
for streamlining permitting new sources of water for irrigation in Maine. This report, titled Findings 
and Recommendations for Streamlining Permitting New Sources of Water for Irrigation in Maine,  
was submitted to the Agri culture, Conservation, and Forestry Committee in January. If passed, LD 
315 will implement these recommendations.  
To summarize, this bill will provi de a one -time appropriation in FY 2024 in order for the Land Use 
Planning Commission to hire a consultant t o review and overhaul the current applications to 
improve water withdrawal permitting. The bill also establishes and provides ongoing funding for 3 
full-time, permanent positions: one within the Land Use Planning Commission; one within the 
Department of Ag riculture, Conservation and Forestry’s Bureau of Agriculture, Food and Rural 
Resources’ Division of Agricultural Resource Development; and one within the Department of 
Environmental Protection’s Water Withdrawal Program.  
The detailed additions to the orig inal bill language are attached. I’m happy to take your questions 
and hope those that follow this testimony will have expertise to  answer your questions as well.  

