  97 Main Street, Belfast, ME 04915                    207.338.6575                              mainefarmlandtrust.orgWritten testimony of Shelley Megquier, Policy & Research Director, Maine Farmland Trust, to 
the 131st Legislature’s Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry
February 13, 2023
Good afternoon Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker, and members of the Joint Standing 
Committee on Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry. My name is Shelley Megquier and I am providing 
a written statement on behalf of Maine Farmland Trust (MFT) in support of LD 315 - An Act To Provide 
Funding for Drought Relief and Other Programs Benefitting Maine Farmers.
MFT is a member-powered statewide organization that works to protect farmland, support farmers, and 
advance the future of farming. Since our founding in 1999, MFT has helped to permanently protect 
more than 330 farms and keep nearly 60,000 acres of farmland in farming. In 2022 alone, MFT 
supported 48 farm businesses with workshops, technical assistance, and grants – delivering over 680 
hours of technical assistance and $309,000 in business and seed grants to help businesses grow their 
profitability. Our main program areas are Farmland Protection, Farmland Access, Stewardship, Farm 
Business Planning, PFAS Support, Climate Resilience, and Policy and Research. In response to the needs 
we are hearing about from farmers, MFT is actively expanding MFT’s Climate Resilience Program. We 
are broadening the reach of our current programming to expand the services we provide to include 
assisting more farms with on-farm soil health research, creating climate adaption plans, and providing 
farms with technical assistance and funding to adopt climate-smart practices and infrastructure projects. 
Maine farmers are already experiencing climate change impacts, and are needing to adapt to the 
increasing frequency of extreme weather events, including excessive precipitation and drought.1  
Increased drought coupled with increased frequency of heavy precipitation has already and will 
continue to negatively impact crop and livestock production in the Northeast.2  The State’s updated 
climate action plan makes clear that “[w]arming temperatures and increasingly variable precipitation, 
including droughts and extreme weather events, are causing damage to farm livelihoods, impacting 
farmers, workers, crops, and livestock.”3 In a University of Maine survey of agricultural producers about 
their experience with the 2020 drought, over half of farmers surveyed reported that they did not have 
sufficient water to meet their farms’ needs during the drought. Farmers reported an interest in adjusting 
their water use, including expanding irrigation and investing in new water ponds and wells. The resulting 
report from this survey notes the need for additional information, technical assistance, and financial 
assistance for practices such as water quality assessments, soil moisture monitoring, navigating surface 
and groundwater regulations, measuring the volume of water needed for agricultural purposes, and 
ensuring sufficient water access to meet production needs.4
1 News Center Maine, “ Maine’s changing climate could intensify droughts and heavy rains, hurting dairy farmers” (August 15, 2022); Portland 
Press Herald, “ Drought intensifies, threatening crops and groundwater supplies” (September 24, 2020)
2 Wolfe, et al. “Unique Challenges and Opportunities for Northeastern U.S. Crop Production in a Changing Climate.” Climatic Change, (2018), 
146: 231-245, available at: https://www.fs.usda.gov/research/treesearch/56681
3 The Maine Climate Council, “Maine Won’t Wait: A Four-Year Plan for Climate Action,” (Dec. 2020), 25, available at: 
https://www.maine.gov/future/sites/maine.gov.future/files/inline-files/MaineWontWait_December2020.pdf
4 Schattman, R. E., Goossen, C., and Calderwood, L. “The 2020 Maine Drought and Agriculture Report.” University of Maine, Orono, (2021), 4, 
available at: https://umaine.edu/climate-ag/2021/04/29/2020-maine-drought-and-agriculture-report/
2Given the importance of drought support for farmers, we deeply appreciate the recommendations 
contained in the Department of Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry January 2023 report, Findings 
and Recommendations for Streamlining Permitting New Sources of Water for Irrigation in Maine. We 
fully support LD 315’s inclusion of funding for a short-term consultant and 3 full-time, permanent staff 
positions within the Departments of Agriculture, Conservation, and Forestry and Environmental 
Protection. 
Increased capacity within key state agencies will ensure that the State is able to assist in the effort to 
provide farmers with the technical assistance and support they need as they consider permitting options 
for new water sources, apply for vital funding through the Farmer Drought Assistance Fund, and 
implement new water management systems. Producers critically need this support as they grapple with 
the impacts of climate change on their operations and livelihoods. MFT is also supportive of the link 
between the proposed position in the Department of Environmental Protection’s Northern Maine 
Regional Office and the nascent Maine Healthy Soils Program, which MFT has been a strong supporter of 
since its inception. 
Thank you for the opportunity to share comments in support of LD 315. 
