  
 207-568-4142 • www.mofga.org            PO Box 170, Unity, ME 04988 
 MOFGA Testimony In Support Of LD 1770 - An Act to Improve Pesticides Sales and Use Data Collection and Accessibility by the State May 1, 2023  Good morning Senator Ingwersen, Representative Pluecker and members of the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry. My name is Heather Spalding and I am deputy director of the Maine Organic Farmers and Gardeners Association (MOFGA). I’m speaking in support of LD 1770 - An Act to Improve Pesticides Sales and Use Data Collection and Accessibility by the State.  A broad-based community, MOFGA is creating a food system that is healthy and fair for all of us. Through education, training and advocacy, we are helping farmers thrive, making more local, organic food available and building sustainable communities. MOFGA certifies 535 organic farms and processing operations representing roughly $90 million in sales and we are working hard to create opportunities for Maine’s next generation of farmers. Each of these farmers is a Maine businessperson for whom economic health and environmental health are interdependent.  MOFGA has been advocating for stronger regulations of pesticide sales and use for more than 50 years. Since our beginning we have advocated for policies that reduce all farmers' and homeowners' reliance on pesticides, and all citizens' exposures to pesticides in their diets and in the air and drinking water. We believe that the dramatic increases since the 1950s in childhood and adult cancer rates, as well as abnormalities of the endocrine, immune, nervous and reproductive systems, are directly related to the toxins that increasingly contaminate our environment and threaten the very existence of the pollinators on which our food systems rely.  Many times we have come to this committee seeking support for Maine’s Board of Pesticides Control so that it can fulfill its directive of helping Maine minimize its reliance on pesticides. We have advocated for safer alternatives to some of the most hazardous chemicals used in agriculture such as organophosphates including chlorpyrifos, neonicotinoids, and herbicides such as glyphosate and dicamba. We have called for bans on aerial spraying of pesticides and the use of plant-incorporated pesticides in crops grown in Maine. While we are very happy about the progress made during the last Legislature, which banned chlorpyrifos, reduced the use of neonicotinoid pesticides for residential landscaping purposes, reformed the composition of the Board of Pesticides Control (BPC) to reduce conflict of interest, banned glyphosate and dicamba use on school grounds, and addressed concerns about PFAS in pesticides, these changes are baby steps and we remain committed to systemic change in the use of synthetic chemicals for pest management.  We know that the BPC registers roughly 12,000 pesticide products each year and product registration fees (now $210 per product) fund the Board’s work. The BPC reports that roughly 
 1,300 of those products have PFAS intentionally added to the product formulation. We know that the BPC has spent two years transcribing pesticide sales and some application data from 2018 through 2021 and we appreciate the effort. It must have been sheer drudgery as the data came to the BPC from dealers and commercial applicators mostly in various forms – some handwritten, some digital. The BPC acknowledges that the data is limited as it excludes growers applying pesticides to their own land.  LD 1770 addresses nearly all of the concerns that stakeholders have raised over the years, and it is designed to help all stakeholders carry out what BPC rules already require. In addition to helping Maine get back on track with pesticide data reporting, it will prompt Maine to live up to its stated policy of minimizing reliance on pesticides. This bill creates a convenient and efficient system for dealers and applicators to do the record keeping that the BPC requires. Further, it will provide a wealth of information to help policy makers, agency officials, researchers, municipalities, and many other communities make informed policy decisions.  Maine’s Policy of Minimizing Reliance on Pesticides  LD 1770 provides a roadmap for getting back to the original intent of our stated pesticide policies. In 1997, Maine enacted what is now Maine Title 22, Chapter 258, §1471-X.1  “State policy; public and private initiatives to minimize reliance on pesticides. It is the policy of the State to work to find ways to use the minimum amount of pesticides needed to effectively control targeted pests in all areas of application. The agencies of the State involved in the regulation or use of pesticides shall promote the principles and the implementation of integrated pest management and other science-based technology to minimize reliance on pesticides while recognizing that outbreaks of disease, insects and other pests will necessitate fluctuations in pesticide use. These agencies, in cooperation with private interest groups, shall work to educate pesticide users and the general public in the proper use of pesticides and to determine other actions needed to accomplish the state policy.”  How can Maine know whether it is minimizing reliance on pesticides if it doesn’t know how much of what is used to treat what problems, where, how and by whom? We believe that you can’t manage what you don’t measure. LD 1770 will help Maine policymakers gauge how the state is doing with its clearly stated pesticide policy.  Getting Back on Track with Pesticide Data Reporting  Also in 1997, Maine enacted Maine Title 22, Chapter 724, §1471-M, sub-§7.2   1 State policy; public and private initiatives to minimize reliance on pesticides. 2 An Act to Implement the Recommendations of the Joint Standing Committee on Agriculture, Conservation and Forestry Relating to Review of the State Board of Pesticides Control Under the State Government Evaluation Act. 
 “Data collection; annual report. The board shall implement a system of record keeping, reporting, data collection and analysis that provides information on the quantity of product and brand names of pesticides sold. The board, in cooperation with the University of Maine Cooperative Extension Service, shall study ways to improve pesticide information data bases and to optimize the useful analysis of reported information.  No later than October 1, 1998, and each year thereafter, the board shall publish an annual pesticides report containing the quantity of product, sorted by the name and United States Environmental Protection Agency registration number, of all pesticides sold in the prior year, with the data further sorted by sector of use wherever possible.”  While early attempts to comply with the data collection and reporting law were heroic, they didn’t last long and the Board asked the Legislature for leniency. In 2002 the BPC suggested narrowing the requirement to annual reporting for in-state dealers’ sales data along with commercial agriculture application data. The BPC received that data in hard copy form, presenting an arduous workload for anyone trying to quantify sales and use trends, even for that subsection of overall pesticides sold and used in Maine.  The BPC’s recent report on sales and commercial applicator use between 2018 and 2021 is appreciated. No comprehensive reporting has been published in more than twenty years, though a special 2011 report indicated a 700% increase in home owner use of pesticides. The BPC no longer stands by the report but allows that the trends generally provide an accurate picture.  Convenient Record Keeping System For Dealers and Applicators  Pesticide sales and use record keeping rules and laws have been in place for decades and haven’t kept pace with the incredible advances in technology. Adding pesticides sales and use record keeping to the functionality of the BPC’s database is logical and would provide a great service to the people who already are required to keep records, even if they haven’t had to submit those records to the Department. LD 2021 would make recordkeeping requirements, as laid out in Chapter 50, much easier for the regulated community, and much more useful to the BPC staff, the scientific community, and policy makers. Maine would not be the first state to require reporting on every agricultural pesticide application. In California, applicators are required to report to the County Commissioner of Agriculture, detailed information on every application, within seven days of the application. Maine’s future pesticide sales and use database should be considered an amenity, a service, for all stakeholders working to embrace the true definition of integrated pest management.  Providing Information for Informed Policy Decisions:  MOFGA knows that the BPC staff and board members work incredibly hard to provide oversight of pesticides used in Maine. We also know that lack of data analysis creates a 
 challenge for decision-making. During the last Legislature, examples presented themselves in discussions about how extensively the organophosphate chlorpyrifos, neonicotinoids, glyphosate and other herbicides were used in Maine. And now the BPC has been unable to report how extensively PFAS-containing pesticides are used and how these forever chemicals could be exacerbating the farmland contamination crisis. Maine law requires reporting of PFAS pesticides but we don’t have a dataset showing the quantities of PFAS pesticides actually applied to the land, how often, for what purposes and where. Clear and consistent data about PFAS pesticide spraying over time would be very helpful to the state agencies trying to assess the extent of the PFAS problem. Let’s use data technology to help solve this problem.  Addressing Concerns of the Regulated Community:  • Confidentiality – Some general use applicators mentioned that they were worried about protection of business information and possible threats against their property. LD 1770 provides for pesticide applicators to maintain confidentiality in reporting. • Demands on time from record keeping/reporting requirements – Pesticide applicators already are required to keep records of every pesticide application. This database would provide a convenient record keeping option and would obviate the need for annual summary reporting from dealers, restricted use and commercial use applicators because the data already would be entered. • Limited broadband access in rural Maine – the BPC will need to create options for ensuring ease of reporting by those who have limited or no broadband access at this time. • Sales data only? - BPC staff member Pam Bryer stated that pesticide sales and use data don’t line up. It’s especially difficult to track data when so many exemptions already are in state rule and law. Further, sales data don’t provide information about how much of what is used to address what problem, where and when.  I would like to acknowledge again the great efforts that the BPC has carried out in consideration of a pesticide sales and use database. I’ve attached to my written comments a list of benefits of the database that makes it a bit easier to see at a glance.   This bill creates an opportunity to get Maine back on track toward minimizing reliance on pesticides while providing clear and easy record keeping opportunities. We urge you to vote ought to pass.  I would be happy to answer questions if you have any. 
Benefits of Having a Maine Pesticides Sales and Use Database  1. Data collection and analysis will allow Maine’s Board of Pesticides Control (BPC) to assess whether Maine is meeting its stated policy of minimizing reliance on pesticides. 2. Maine’s legislative committees working to promote a vibrant agricultural future, a healthy population, a sustainable environment, and an innovative and thriving green economy will understand how pesticide use affects long-term planning and policy development. 3. Scientists in state agencies, academic institutions and the private industry sector will have data to inform research about pesticide sales and use. 4. Data will inform BPC decision making about variance requests for using pesticides in conflict with product labels. 5. Sales and use data will be a logical and essential component of the existing BPC database that tracks product registration, dealer and applicator licensing, and enforcement. 6. Records will provide critical information in the event of: a. overspraying (drift) of sensitive areas likely to be occupied b. occupational exposure and poisoning c. human illness clusters d. groundwater contamination e. soil contamination f. crop contamination g. adverse impact on endangered species and other wildlife 7. The BPC will have a better understanding of how applicators are embracing Integrated Pest Management and upholding the BPC motto, “Think First, Spray Last.” 8. The BPC will be able to generate regular reports on pesticide use by pesticide product, crops and other sites, geography, application methodology and various time intervals. 9. Licensed dealers and applicators will have a convenient way to do the record keeping that they’re already required to do. 10. There will be no need for annual summary reporting by the dealers and applicators because the data already will be entered. 11. Currently, annual summary data collected by the BPC excludes records from farmers, foresters, nurseries, greenhouses, cannabis producers, and others. The database will provide a much better picture of pesticide quantities being sold and used because all licensed applicators, not just restricted use and commercial use applicators, will be able to carry out their required record keeping in the database. 12. A well-designed database will standardize reporting and eliminate disparate data sets. It will enhance data quality and minimize the need for BPC staff to transcribe sales and use reports. For example, it should prevent spelling errors and inconsistencies in reporting through dropdown menus with standard choices. 13. BPC staff will be able to use the data, sorted by geographic area to determine where testing may be required, i.e., wells, groundwater, surface water, etc.   Prepared by Maine Organic Farmers and Gardeners Association – May 2023 
